Kazakov and Eusea win titles for the Eagles

JOHNSTOWN -- The Thompson Valley wrestling team made all the right moves to bring home the first place trophy Saturday night, but the ending wasn't written the way it had hoped.

The Eagles were in position heading into the finals of the Roosevelt Invitational by sending 10 wrestlers into headline matches. However, they converted only three of those matchups into wins, which allowed Rocky Mountain to pull away from the neck-and-neck competition the two teams had all night long.

The Lobos finished the night with a 13.5 edge that sent Thompson Valley home with silver.

"I thought we had a good day of wrestling. I think each and every one of them had some moments of glory; we just didn't finish in the finals," Thompson Valley coach Dave Juergensen said. "Our goal is to win the whole thing. When you have a finals like that you're not going to get it done."

Six Eagles entered into the main No. 1 versus No. 2 seeded battles, and two of them walked away with first-place finishes. Vlad Kazakov won the crown in the 106-pound weight class with a 6-1 decision over Rocky Mountain's Logan Newman.

"I knew we were going the whole way and that I was in for a six-minute match. I just had to fight through it, do what I could, prepare my shots, play my game. It always feels good to get a win, and it helps me stay driven for state," Kazakov said.

And he wasn't the only one on his team using Saturday as a measuring test for the state championship tournament. David Eusea was responsible for Thompson Valley's other title with his victory at 182.

Advertisement

Eusea executed the way that he plans on using to make a run with in the postseason by getting out to an early lead and doing everything to hold onto it. He jumped out in front of Castle View's Hudsen Marker by four points at the end of the first period of their final match. Marker was quick to answer with two of his own on a takedown, but Eusea ran away with the match in the final two minutes that ended in an 8-2 decision.

"I knew I couldn't just let myself go out and coast," Eusea said. "Coach (Juergensen) is always telling me to let it fly and the score will take care of itself. It was pretty nerve-racking going in, but I had to do what I could to let it fly like it ended up doing."

Despite playing host, Roosevelt sent only one wrestler into the final round of the tournament. The RoughRiders were represented in the 126 weight class by senior Tylar Francis, who was nearly flawless on the night with only three points scored against him. Francis posted a major decision and technical fall victories on his way to a 4-3 decision win over Thompson Valley's Sage D'Ambrosia.

"I feel like my individual performance today went really well, but we can definitely do better overall as a team," Francis said. "I noticed a big difference in competition going into that last one. He's a strong kid and I had to use a lot of my strength just to hold him down."

Thompson Valley wrapped up the tournament with 171 points overall. According to Juergensen, competing with Rocky Mountain is something that his team does well and uses for the opportunity to improve.

"I think we're moving in the right direction. We got a lot of guys in (the final round); we just need to seal the deal. We go back and forth with Rocky Mountain all the time, we see them all season long and they make us better just like I hope we do for them," Juergensen said. "Especially in a tournament like this one where there are a lot of great teams competing, second place is not good enough but we'll take it."

Quentin Sickafoose can be reached on Twitter @QSickafoose

2013 Roosevelt Invitational

At Roosevelt HS

Team results: 1. Rocky Mountain, 184.5; 2. Thompson Valley, 171; 3. Valley, 149; 4. Discovery Canyon, 132; 5. Montrose, 91; 6. Prairie View, 81.5; 7. Eaton, 75; 8. 73.5; 9. Castle View, 73; 10. Holy Family, 66; 11. Fort Morgan, 59; 12. Roosevelt, 50; 13. Loveland, 13.

Championship results --



106 — Terrell Banuelos, Montrose, dec. Justin Lien, Castle View, 9-5; 113 — Vlad Kazakov, Thompson Valley, dec. Logan Newman, Rocky Mountain, 6-1; 120 — Sam Turner, Discovery Canyon, dec. Ruben Lucero, Valley, 9-4; 126 — Tylar Francis, Roosevelt, dec. Sage D’Ambrosia, Thompson Valley, 4-3; 132 — Rusty Lohr, Eaton, dec. Tanner Fetzer, Platte Valley, 10-4 ; 138 — Danny Murphy, Rocky Mountain, dec. Julian Prieto, Holy Family, 4-3 ; 145 — Joseph Prieto, Holy Family, fall Parker Simington, 2:55 ; 152 — Roman Ortiz, Rocky Mountain, UTB Tyler Oberg, Discovery Canyon, 4-3; 160 — Konnor Schmidt, Rocky Mountain, fall Nick Nira, Thompson Valley, 3:52; 170 — Adrian Mack, Discovery Canyon, dec. Jackson Wright, Valley, 7-2; 182 — David Eusea, Thompson Valley, dec. Hudsen Marker, Castle View, 8-2 ; 195 — Luiz Perez, Rocky Mountain, fall Alex Weber, Discovery Canyon, 5:43 ; 220 — Toby McBride, Fort Morgan, dec. David Traynor, Discovery Canyon, 6-4; 285 — .Jesus Casillas, Montrose, dec. Dorian Richard, Valley, 4-2.