THE BOTTOM LINE Now it’s someone else’s turn to represent the hardworking people of the 3rd District. I don’t know who that will be, but I hope whomever it is will consider this advice.

Nearly 16 years ago, I stood for the first time on the floor of the U.S. House of Representatives, took my oath, and became a member of Congress. My eyes were wide, my head brimming with ideas, my hair brown.

I’ve decided to leave the House at year’s end to become a silver-haired “recovering congressman.” It’s time to pursue new passions and develop new interests. I loved writing a satirical novel about Washington, and I’d like more time to devote to my second novel.

Now it’s someone else’s turn to represent the hardworking people of the 3rd District. I don’t know who that will be, but I hope whomever it is will consider this advice.

Constituents first. It’s easy to get caught up in the glamour of Washington: speaking with the president, pontificating on national TV, having phone calls returned. But those are called trappings of power for a reason. They can trap you. What is important is what’s happening at Long Island diners — listening to people and finding out how you can help. Remember who pays your salary. I’m most proud to have secured $8.3 million in back pay for veterans. Too many constituents who served have been shunted aside, stifled by bureaucratic red tape. I’d meet them to deliver a long overdue medal or retroactive pay, and many would say my office restored their faith in government’s ability to get it right — late, but right.

Compromise. I am leaving one of the most polarized environments Congress has ever seen. Shortly after I was elected, 9/11 happened, and I won’t forget standing on the Capitol steps, holding hands with my colleagues in a moment of unity. Now we have shutdowns, dozens of fruitless bills to repeal Obamacare, and relentless efforts to defund Planned Parenthood. None of that helps New Yorkers worried about their paychecks, jobs and college tuition.

You can break through the nonsense by finding someone on the other side of the aisle and cooperating when you can. I did that with Rep. Peter King (R-Seaford) on Sandy relief funds, with Rep. Tom Cole (R-Okla.) on Israel, and with Rep. Roscoe Bartlett (R-Md.) to help veterans transfer education benefits to spouses and children.

advertisement | advertise on newsday

You are as good or bad as your staff. Virtually every day, a constituent would thank me for helping to solve a problem. I didn’t handle every case. My staff did. Don’t hire political operatives. Hire problem solvers. Mine worked nights and most weekends. I often told them: “You won’t change the world; just try changing it one constituent at a time.” They have, many times.

Bring lots of reading material. I sat on many flights listening to the pilot say, “We’re 14th in line for takeoff,” or “We’re on a ground stop because of delays at LaGuardia Airport.” Evidently there’s a new meteorological phenomenon that creates flight-canceling thunderstorms only between Washington and New York, only between April and August, and only on days when members of Congress are flying home.

Focus on the middle class. America was strongest when its middle class was largest. Lately, the middle class has declined, creating massive anxiety across America. Focus on rebuilding an economy that creates 21st-century careers rather than teeters on 20th-century paychecks, and that includes making education more affordable. I’ll give you some hints: There is great potential for New York to become a world-class center for neuroscience research and, also, cyberprotection.

Sign up for The Point and go inside New York politics.

Don’t listen to what the former congressman tells you. Be your own person. As long as you reflect the values and priorities of those you are privileged to represent, you will do well.

Finally, have a sense of humor. I look forward to commenting on the farce of politics by writing about it, with my tongue planted firmly in my cheek. I love writing, especially when I can poke fun at Washington. It’s not that hard.

Rep. Steve Israel is a Democrat from Huntington.