iStockphoto.com/Peter Spiro

Apollo Global Management’s investment in community hospital operator RegionalCare Hospital Partners Inc. may have broken a dry spell for private equity investments in large for-profit hospital deals.

But private equity investors say the transaction is unlikely to unleash a flood of new deals in the space.

“There are some opportunities in the hospital sector, but there continues to be reimbursement pressure and some of the Obamacare enrollment figures have been disappointing, which has had somewhat of a downdraft on valuations more recently in the sector,” said Dean Mihas, a managing director at Chicago-based buyout shop GTCR.

Hospital operations are undergoing a sea change under the Affordable Care Act, which seeks better quality of care at a lower cost. Optimization of procurement and procedures, coupled with increased insurance coverage, means hospitals are more profitable and record fewer losses from treating uninsured patients.

IBISWorld expects average profitability among hospital managers to rise to 9.1% in the next five years from the current level of 8.8%. But the Affordable Care Act shifts patients away from higher cost settings like hospitals, to lower cost settings such as hospice and palliative centers, upending a traditional profit model that relied heavily on filling hospital beds.

“The intense regulatory scrutiny around hospitals that are merging is driving many hospitals to create partnerships or joint ventures,” said Jeff Black, a partner in the health-care vertical at ​consultant ​Mercer LLC. “We anticipate this trend to continue, creating an additional challenge for PE investors looking to enter the hospital space.”

Dr. Ralph de la Torre, founder, chairman and chief executive of Steward Health Care System LLC, which was launched in 2010 with backing from Cerberus Capital Management, said ACA presents an opportunity for hospital operators “to change the game, [by changing] the payment model, not just in isolated hospitals, but for entire health systems.”

“This requires new expertise from integration to care management to IT, and may be difficult to fund in the debt market,” he said.

Still, Apollo isn’t daunted. “Hospitals did not trade up to the same degree as other segments of health-care services,” said Apollo Partner Matthew Nord. “The sector had traded up after the Affordable Care Act was passed, but more recently, stocks have corrected when people realized their assumptions were too aggressive.”

The contrarian investor in RegionalCare said hospital investors need to put “real capital” behind hospital deals to facilitate purchases in periphery service providers and build an integrated health-care system. Armed with fresh capital from the $18.4 billion Apollo Investment Fund VIII LP, raised in 2014, Apollo plans to do exactly that.

Write to Amy Or at amy.or@wsj.com.