WASHINGTON, DC. - U.S. Rep. Richard Hanna today lashed out at his Tea Party-backed opponent in the June 24 Republican primary, saying he won't agree to debate someone who consistently distorts his record.

Hanna made his comments about state Assemblywoman Claudia Tenney, R-New Hartford, in a live online Q&A on Syracuse.com about the GOP primary race in the 22nd Congressional District.

"I'm not interested in debating someone who is incapable of a forthright debate about the reality of my record," said Hanna, R-Barneveld. "We have heard nothing but distortions about virtually everything I have done in one way or another."

Tenney has accused Hanna of having a liberal voting record, claiming the two-term congressman has abandoned his conservative principles. Tenney mounted a primary bid after Democrats decided not to challenge Hanna this year.

Asked by one reader if he would consider switching parties or joining the Democratic caucus, Hanna said flatly, "The answer is no."

Tenney answered questions on Syracuse.com in the same live online format on Tuesday.

In a wide-ranging online Q&A today, Hanna said he supports imposing term limits for members of Congress. He also reiterated his opposition to the Affordable Care Act, the Patriot Act and gun safety reforms including the New York SAFE Act.

Here's a recap of what Hanna had to say:

On the Patriot Act

Asked about government spying through the National Security Agency and his position on the Patriot Act, Hanna said he has consistently stood for protecting the privacy of American citizens.

"I'm one of approximately 26 (House) members who voted AGAINST renewing the Patriot Act and I have been consistent on this issue," he said. "My opinion on this was only made more firm through what we saw from the NSA spying. I do believe there are opportunities to have a secure society and that the Patriot Act desperately needs to be amended. I chose not to support it precisely because of the lone wolf provision, roving wiretap provision and business record issues."

On gun control and the NY SAFE Act

Hanna said he is "unequivocally opposed" to the SAFE Act. "I find it disgraceful that our state can't pass a budget year in and year out on time, but can take away our personal rights in a matter of hours," he said.

Hanna noted that as a federal representative he can't vote to change the SAFE Act. But he emphasized that he is endorsed by the National Rifle Association and the union representing employees at Remington Arms in Herkimer County.

"The company will have been in New York for 200 years in 2016," Hanna said. "My job is to keep them here for another 100 years and beyond."

On drones and privacy

Hanna said he shares safety and privacy concerns with local residents about unmanned aerial vehicles, or drones, that may fly out of Griffiss International Airport in Rome.

Griffiss is part of the Syracuse-based NUAIR consortium that the Federal Aviation Administration designated as one of six national test sites for integrating drones into commercial airspace.

"The purpose of these sites are to test the effectiveness and ability of drones to work in our national airspace, most of them having to do with agriculture, but I very much appreciate your concerns over privacy and share them," Hanna said. "I'll continue to work to ensure the personal freedom and privacy of all Americans are protected."

On term limits

On term limits

Hanna said he supports imposing term limits on members of Congress.

"The longer I'm in Congress, the more I believe in them," he said. "I support a bill to implement term limits. After three years in Congress, my opinion on term limits has only hardened. The Founding Fathers never intended for members of the House to serve for very long. It was the idea of average people with a background and experience to go, impart their knowledge and wisdom and leave some day."

On why he's the best candidate for the economy

Hanna noted that he ran his own business (a construction company) for 35 years.

"I've never been in politics until this job," he said. "I built a business from nothing and employed hundreds in our community. I've watched New York state's steady decline and I've watched young people leave for opportunity other places."

Hanna emphasized his educational background is in economics, and his service in Congress on the Joint Economic Committee and as the only member in the majority on the House Transportation Committee.

On the Affordable Care Act

Hanna said he has never supported the Affordable Care Act, and suggest claims by Tenney that he voted for Obamacare were misleading.

"In fact, I voted almost 50 times to repeal, replace or defund it," Hanna said. "And that is a matter of record."

On the Keystone XL pipeline

Hanna said he wants to see the proposed pipeline built as soon as possible to carry oil from Canada to refineries on the Gulf Coast of the United States.

"I think one of the true embarrassments of President Obama's presidency is his failure to lead on Keystone," he said. " It is a complete and utter mystery why we are not building it, and it has been over six years."

On the Veterans Affairs health system

Hanna, the son of a Marine combat veteran, said he met with the Syracuse Veterans Affairs Medical Center and immediately called for the resignation of VA Secretary Eric Shinseki after several critical reports about the agency came to light this spring.

"While he is a decorated hero, clearly he wasn't capable of dealing with the massive VA bureaucracy," Hanna said of Shinseki. "The circumstances that we learned about the VA are a national disgrace and embarrassment. The disservice to our veterans cannot be overestimated."

Hanna said veterans' issues account for the largest amount of his office's case work.

Contact Washington Correspondent Mark Weiner at mweiner@syracuse.com or 571-970-3751. Follow him on Twitter @MarkWeinerDC