Sarah Portillo of Loveland will distribute gift bags flash mob style to mothers Saturday who have children staying at Children's Hospital Colorado

Loveland mother Sarah Portillo with her 12-year-old daughter, Lily Rodrigues. Portillo organized an effort to make sure all of the mothers who are with their kids at Children's Hospital Colorado in Aurora received a gift basket on Saturday in honor of Mother's Day at the hospital along with a flashmob dance. Little did she know that she would be staying at the hospital with Lily, who has a metabolic condition, on Mother's Day as well. ( Special to the Reporter-Herald )

For details Visit the Facebook group at www.facebook.com/groups/MD2015LZAttack or the campaign at https://fundrazr.com/campaigns/2yMe9.

Loveland resident Sarah Portillo wanted other mothers to get the thrill she got Mother's Day 2013 when she received a gift basket at the hospital.

Portillo's daughter, Lily Rodrigues, now 12, was at Children's Hospital Colorado in Aurora getting treatment for an infection, and Portillo was staying with her. Portillo vowed to pay her gift forward.

"I wanted to pamper moms who are staying with their children on Mother's Day weekend," Portillo said. "It would be good for them to feel remembered and loved."

Portillo partnered with Ride to Give, a medical fundraising nonprofit based in Nyack, N.Y., to set up a campaign on the crowdfunding fundraising website FundRazr.com. She collected financial donations, generating $3,005 on the site and a total of $7,000, to pay for 100 gift bags.

Portillo distributed the gift bags at Children's Hospital in a flash mob at 2 p.m. Saturday for "Mother's Day Weekend 2015, A Lily & Zach Attack." The public was invited to participate in the mob and the practice sessions beforehand.

Zach, the son of Portillo's friend, Rachele Chrismer, died Mother's Day 2013, and, like Portillo, she gives gifts to mothers at hospitals on Mother's Day and Christmas through Remembering Zach Attacks.

Advertisement

Portillo's gift bags included a handmade blanket, a coffee tumbler, an inspirational book, gift cards, nail polish, toiletries and jewelry. Portillo started collecting the items, some of which were donated directly and some purchased through the fundraiser, in summer 2014 to put in brand-name bags.

"Hopefully, moms will understand that I understand what they're going through," Portillo said.

Portillo's daughter has a metabolic condition, glutaric acidemia type 1 disorder, that resulted in her being unable to walk, talk or eat on her own and to experience difficulty in breathing. She's undergone multiple hospitalizations, surgeries and illnesses since she was a baby.

"She really exudes a lot of personality with her facial expressions. She communicates with her eyes," Portillo said.

Portillo originally had the gift bag idea while she was in the hospital with Lily over Mother's Day weekend 2008 after Lily had her first major surgery.

When she received the gift Mother's Day 2013 from a group of her friends, it reignited her goal to do the same for other moms. She plans to continue the gift bags every year on Mother's Day weekend.

"For anybody in the local hospital, it's so good to remember moms are there and could use the pampering and care," Portillo said. "When you're staying in the hospital, it can feel like the rest of the world is moving around you. It's easy to feel forgotten. ... It's an opportunity to recognize them in a special situation and let them know they're not forgotten and are loved."

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm