Approved by board, new guidelines will go to City Council; existing signs will be grandfathered in

Permanent banners, such as these on Sun Rose Cafe at 379 Main St, are permitted under the new sign design guidelines being proposed by the Longmont Downtown Development Authorty. (Lewis Geyer/Times-Call) ( LEWIS GEYER )

LONGMONT -- If the Longmont City Council agrees with the Longmont Downtown Development Authority, new signage design guidelines will soon be coming to the downtown.

The LDDA created the new guidelines as part of its efforts to transform downtown into a formal Arts and Entertainment District. City code already has its own sign guidelines, but the new ones are much more specific to the downtown district and more detailed in what will and won't be allowed.

Current city code deals primarily with things such as how many signs a business can have, how large they can be, and where they can be located, senior planner Brien Schumacher said.

The signage on Brown's Shoe Fit, 373 Main St., was added when owner Jason Wetzel spent about a million dollars renovating his building in 2006. (Lewis Geyer/Times-Call) ( LEWIS GEYER )

"It doesn't necessarily get into what the signs look like in terms of visual appeal," he said. "This is looking at more like the quality of the sign; the visual appeal of the sign."

Having stricter design standards was a hot topic at the LDDA board's retreat in February, but the idea for drafting specific guidelines goes back further than that. When it announced plans for the A&E District in 2011, the LDDA formed several volunteer committees, including a "placemaking" committee.

According to the A&E District's strategic plan, "Key to the development of an Arts and Entertainment District are the places that provide opportunities for activities, events, public gatherings and socializing." Identifying and highlighting those places is part of the charge of the placemaking committee, and signage plays an important role in that, according to Kimberlee McKee, the LDDA's executive director.

Advertisement

"I think it is a lot about a sense of place," McKee said. "When you enter the district, knowing that you've entered a different place, and then feeling a difference when you leave."

In 2012, she said, the placemaking committee walked every block of the LDDA's area to do an assessment. Signs came up a lot, she said, then and at the February retreat.

"(Signage guidelines) was almost a unanimous thing, that it was something that needed looked at," she said.

Mike O'Shay's Restaurant & Ale House recently added new signage as part of its facade renovation. (Lewis Geyer/Times-Call) ( LEWIS GEYER )

Assistant City Manager Shawn Lewis attended that retreat as the city manager's office's liaison to the business community. He had just started his job in January.

"I came here and was just very concerned, just from an outsider looking in," Lewis told the LDDA board Wednesday at its monthly meeting.

He added that developers he had talked to were concerned about downtown's appearance, causing them to think twice about investing there. Signage downtown was a big part of that, he said.

Creative signs such as this one on Rabid Rabits Gallery, 319 Main St., will be encouraged under the Longmont Downtown Development Authority's new sign design guidelines. (Lewis Geyer/Times-Call) ( LEWIS GEYER )

Lewis said he did some digging into the city's sign code and found several instances where businesses were out of compliance. The problem, he said, was that the city's code enforcement department enforced violations only if they received a complaint. Lewis said he talked to McKee about enforcing all the violations immediately; McKee asked that they hold off until the new design guidelines could be drawn up. Lewis agreed, and McKee said she immediately made that a priority.

"The enforcement was going to happen regardless of what we were doing, but now we're able to give some guidance on what we'd like the district to look like in the future," McKee said.

McKee assembled a signage committee consisting of downtown business owners, city representatives and community members. They studied sign guidelines from such places as Niagara Falls, N.Y.; Glenville, Ill.; Winchester, Ky. -- where the entire downtown is on the National Register of Historic Places -- Fort Worth, Texas; and just down the road in Louisville.

This week, the committee released a 25-page draft of the new guidelines. The LDDA board voted unanimously Wednesday for it to be sent to the city council for adoption.

"The thing that hit me as I read through (the new guidelines) is, the designs really point toward classiness," said board member Larry Stauss.

LDDA hopes incentives will lead to upgrades

McKee said one thing the committee did not look at were any changes to the city sign codes. Under the new proposed rules, a business must meet city codes first, then the LDDA guidelines.

If approved by City Council, any new business locating within the LDDA will have to meet the new sign design guidelines.

Existing business owners who have signs that don't meet the new guidelines will be grandfathered in, McKee said. They won't be required to get a new sign immediately. For example, "cabinet" signs, those that are box-shaped and backlit with plastic fronts, will not be allowed under the new guidelines. But the several that are in place now within the LDDA can continue to be used, up until the business closes or changes use.

"If they put that cabinet sign up and they had a permit and everything was fine, it would remain fine," McKee said.

However, McKee said the LDDA is offering incentives to businesses whose signs don't meet the new guidelines, in hopes the businesses will be inspired to upgrade them.

In 2011, the LDDA allocated $1.1 million of its tax increment financing funds to incentives for downtown businesses. Of that, $500,000 was allocated specifically to help establish the A&E District, and it's that pot of money from which the new signage incentive dollars will come.

The incentives will only go to things that stay with the building -- such as light fixtures or support apparatus for a sign -- and not the actual signs themselves, McKee said. But they will still help defer the cost of the business owner's investment, she said. Details regarding incentives will be discussed by the LDDA board at its monthly meeting next month.

The new sign guidelines were also discussed at regular block captain meetings over the past several months and two "all-merchant" meetings, McKee said.

"I think they all got it and I think they all understood that it was important," she said, adding that the business owners appreciated the LDDA was only coming up with guidelines, not dictating business to business what their signs should look like.

"The committee talked a lot about coordinated signage versus signage that all looks exactly the same," McKee said. "And we never wanted the signage to all look exactly the same."

The guidelines also identify the different parts of the A&E District, because signage appropriate for Main Street may not work as well for some of the side streets in the district.

"We're looking at pedestrian-oriented signs (for Main) but we realize that won't work for everywhere in the DDA," McKee said.

Tony Kindelspire can be reached at 303-684-5291 or at tkindelspire@times-call.com.