Besides more money, what other perks do employees really want? To answer that age-old question, Accountemps recently surveyed 320 employees and 2,100 CFOs across 20 of the largest US cities. The results were unexpected.

Almost half of the CFOs (41 percent) who responded to the survey said their employees wanted better benefits. Only 19 percent thought their employees wanted more vacation time.

But, surprisingly, 30 percent of employees surveyed said they preferred having more time off.

“Employers might assume that with the passage of the Affordable Care Act and healthcare benefits being front and center that [better benefits] is the most in-demand perk,” said Bill Driscoll, district president for Accountemps, a division of Robert Half that specializes in providing temporary staffing services for accounting, finance, and bookkeeping professionals. “However, managers shouldn’t assume they know what their employees want.”

Driscoll advises managers to ask their team members about which workplace perks are most meaningful to them.

“If you’re not offering those incentives that rank highest on their wish list, your efforts to motivate or retain workers could fall flat,” Driscoll said.

Trending {{item['sft-title']}}

With the economy and job market improving, certainly for accounting and finance professionals, Driscoll said more companies are offering additional vacation days and paid time off.

“Many companies evaluate their compensation, benefits, and perks to remain competitive, as the economy improves and the war for talent heats up,” he noted. “Offering additional vacation time shows employees that you’re committed to helping them achieve greater work-life balance.”

As a manager himself, Driscoll said he tries to set a good example for his employees. He’s already planning a vacation this year to Italy with his family, and he is encouraging his employees to make sure they are using their vacation time to recharge their batteries.

“Vacation days allow employees to take much-needed breaks from work to relax, recharge, and come back with renewed energy and enthusiasm for their job,” Driscoll said. “Both employees and companies benefit when workers are happy and well-rested.”