Readers sound off on a bill requiring transgender people to use restrooms according to their birth-certificate sex.

Letters to the editor: letters@tennessean.com (Photo: The Tennessean.com)

Questions unanswered on trans students

"60 Minutes" had an excellent segment Sunday night about a Harvard student who had transitioned from the women's to the men's swimming team. Scars resulting from breast removal were clearly evident.

The young man even mentioned that he had not had bottom surgery and that it was possible he might conceive and bear a child someday.

What was not mentioned is the same thing that has not been clarified in the local transgender milieu, namely this: Will preoperative transgender students use open bay showers with the opposite sex?

No one seems to know. Taxpayers are entitled to know.

Gene A. Russell, Nashville 37201

What bathroom to use?

I would like to ask all those who are opposed to the so-called "bathroom bill" currently being considered by the Tennessee legislature a question: If a 14-year-old person, born a male, walked into your daughter or granddaughter's school dressed as a female and stated that he/she was a girl, which restroom would this person use?

Think about it.

Jim Hitt, Goodlettsville 37070

Bathroom bill leaves people unprotected

Re: “Transgender bathroom bill advances over businesses’ opposition,” April 5.

One point mentioned for the bathroom bill states that the bill is placed as a protective measure to ensure that no one will violate the gendered bathrooms as a means of sexual assault, but in other areas that has not exactly happened at all.

Connecticut, for example, has had anti-discrimination laws in place and the government is unaware of any sexual assault cases that have involved public restroom violations since the bill’s passing.

In addition, for the worry about transgender individuals being sexual predators, they are the ones who have a 50 percent chance of being sexually assaulted in their lifetime. That leads to the train of thought of what might happen to the women forced to use the men’s restroom because of their biological sex, and the possibility of them being unsafe in that setting.

The point of the law, as expressed by Rep. Mark White, is “to protect the children” and the people in public restrooms, but by protecting one group of people from the possibility of a crime that has not been a problem in other places, the bill places transgender women at possible risk for sexual assaults.

So who is the bill really protecting this way?

Paige Hurley, Franklin 37069

Reject corporate tyranny

Threatening states with economic reprisals is nothing short of corporate tyranny.

If the voters and their representatives believe that people of faith need protection in faithfully living their convictions, it is malicious arrogance for such corporations to attempt to force their values on those citizens. I hope that Tennessee legislators (and those of other states) do not succumb to this insolent blackmail.

Tom Oglesby, Ashland City 37015

DNA gives us answers

Why all the confusion about which restroom to use, better known as the “bathroom bill"?

The answer is in the DNA. Regardless of surgery, shots, hormones and pills, our DNA cannot be changed. For over 30 years we have been using this genetic blueprint to distinguish who a person is in courts, lawsuits, paternity suits and even to identify the remains of a body.

The evidence is in the DNA. All the hype and ideology prove nothing. We have the scientific proof, what more do we need? The evidence remains the same; it is in the DNA.

Brenda Bradley, Mt. Juliet 37122

Gitmo and Obamacare co-ops (Photo: Cagle Cartoons)

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1S89DYd