Topics: AlterNet, Bill Nye, Creationism, ken ham, Michele Bachmann, Obamacare, Pat Robertson, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet . This article has been corrected since it first published.

1. Pat Robertson: Voice of reason?

Truly, we must have entered the end times. The day after creationist Ken Ham denied reality for several hours in a “debate” with Bill Nye about evolution and the age of the earth, Pat Robertson implored Ham to shut-up, because he’s making fundamentalist Christians look stupid. It appears that Pat Robertson has allowed his brain to be corrupted by a little bit of science. Now his head might explode.

There is just no way the earth could be 6,000 years old as Ham and the Young Earth Creationists hold, Robertson said. “There ain’t no way that’s possible. . . To say that it all came about in 6,000 years is just nonsense and I think it’s time we come off of that stuff and say this isn’t possible.” He later referred to geological formations, a very sciencey sounding term not found in the Bible, and begged Ham not to “make a joke of ourselves.”

Lest you think the world has gone mad, Robertson still said evolution is wrong.

Whew!

See more here.

2. Victoria Jackson, insane former SNL-er running for public office.

Oh, joy. A sober and thoughtful candidate is running for office in Tennessee. That would be Victoria Jackson, who has run away with the prize of SNL alum who turned out to be the most flat-out bonkers of all SNL alums. And that is a distinction. Other competitors include Dennis Miller, who turned out to be a right-wing a*hole, and Jon Lovitz who loudly scoffed at Obama’s plan to tax the rich, and asked who declared him “king.”

But Jackson, who first gained fame for reciting poetry upside down on SNL, and has since become a noted Tea Party activist, has now, praise the lord, declared her candidacy for a seat on a county commission in the state to which she fled from liberal New York City. Among her platforms: Islamophobia—well she doesn’t call it that, she merely says all “Islamic Centers are ultimately terrorist training camps;” hating liberals—because they embrace Shariah law and wife beheadings; climate denialism, and a general antipathy towards cities, because . . . umm, they concentrate people, and that saves energy.

Toonces the Cat, her former co-star, is said to be on board as campaign manager.

3. Ben Shapiro: Liberalism killed Philip Seymour Hoffman.

The terrible disease of addiction and a potentially lethal batch of heroin emerged as the leading theories of what killed actor Philip Seymour Hoffman last weekend.

But there is something far more insidious going on, as it turns out. And thank goodness conservative thought leader Ben Shapiro shared his deep thoughts on the tragedy, by helpfully pointing the blame where it really belongs. It’s those damn liberals again. They’re killing everybody.

“…his self-inflicted death is yet another hallmark of the broken leftist culture that dominates Hollywood, enabling rather than preventing the loss of some of its greatest talents,” Shapiro wrote in the National Review.

The math, or the logic, goes something like this. Hoffman was a liberal. He died of a drug overdose. Therefore, liberalism causes drug abuse and death. Liberalism quickly devolves into “libertinism” and a “penchant for sin,” Shapiro argued. No one in Hollywood has any spirituality, principles or standards.

Except maybe the scientologists. We’re not sure where they fit in with Shapiro’s cosmology.

4. Michele Bachmann: Stop the tide of immigrants who are not conservative Republicans.

Newsflash: Michele Bachmann is saying some crazy shit again. This time she claimed that the Soviet Union (earth to Michele, the Soviet Union is no more) is stealing our innermost secrets via Obamacare, because “Belarus may have one of the subcontracting contracts to build the Obamacare website,” she said in an interview on KTTH. They may or they may not, but anyway, be worried.

Also, she has special insight into why immigrants don’t like Republicans. It’s because Republicans love patriotism and the Constitution—and immigrants don’t. So, it has nothing to do with Republicans wanting to, say, build fences along the border with Mexico, patrol with drones, arm border patrol officers to the hilt, say things like immigrants have “cantaloupe calves” because they’re all actually drug mules, or advocate mass detainment and deportations. Nope, Republican racism has nothing to do with it.

And speaking of racism, she cited some interesting statistics—and by cited we mean she just said them. “If you look at Hispanics today, 77 percent respond that they believe in big government and like big government. Fifty-five percent of Asians say they believe in big government, they like big government.”

They love it. Especially when it detains and deports them without cause and builds huge walls along the border.

5. Richard Cohen lectures Justin Bieber about pot, because it was cool when Richard Cohen smoked it, but not anymore.

We’re sure we can all agree that columnist Richard Cohen is the arbiter of cool. That’s right, the guy who wrote that the Mayor of New York’s mixed-race family made people throw up is just the heppest of all cats. So when he pronounced both Justin Bieber and the singer’s raging pot habit “uncool” this week, well, the shockwaves in the stoner community were palpable.

To support this claim, Cohen cited an article in the New York Review of Books by Harvard Medical School’s Jerome Groopman. This is because Richard Cohen is super smart and reads long articles like that. Of course, he also distorts them. Cohen warns against the dreaded “cannabis use disorder” which “can be particularly pernicious when it comes to young people. It has a big effect on their little brains.” This dreaded disorder is listed in the new fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), so it must be terrible. Other things listed in the DSM-5 include “caffeine intoxication” (“Restlessness, nervousness, excitement, red face, gastrointestinal upset, muscle twitching, rambling speech, sleeplessness, rapid and irregular heartbeat”) and “caffeine withdrawal” (“headache, fatigue, difficulty concentrating, depressed mood and other issues”).

In other words, the DSM contains a lot of conditions.

Now Richard Cohen admits that he smoked pot as a youth (and somehow avoided “cannabis youth disorder.”) But when Cohen smoked weed, it was different.

“I was of the generation for which it was a rite of passage, apiece with sexual freedom and, much more importantly, civil rights and the anti-war movement. Old fogies warned about pot, J. Edgar Hoover hated it and Richard Nixon made war against — three good reasons right there to have a toke,” he wrote. No irony detected.