Founded by a record executive, a campaign worker and a political strategist, Rock the Vote has been encouraging the youth to go to the polls since 1990. This year, the non-partisan youth engagement group’s PSA for midterm elections has a very 2014 take, in which…

1) We all get Lil Jon’s “Turn Down For What” stuck in our heads again. Except this time it’s “Turn Out For What,” allowing celebrities to name drop issues they care about.

2) The celebs are not a group likely to be seen in the same YouTube video for any other occasion: actors, a fitness trainer, a dancer, indie musicians, a model, a reality star and Whoopi Goldberg (her own category).

3) We get a glimpse into the minds of the Rock the Vote execs and what they think it takes to draw millennials to the polls: reproductive rights, prison reform and not to be taken lightly, marijuana legalization.

“Long before President Obama went on Behind Two Ferns to talk about the Affordable Care Act, Rock the Vote was pioneering the concept of using pop culture to drive interest in participation,” says Rock the Vote spokesperson Audrey Gelman.

The art of the “get out the vote” video is something Rock the Vote has had down since the beginning, when it first started making celebrity-laden TV commercials that aired on “Yo! MTV Raps.” Back then, the channel couldn’t get advertisers to buy air time on its first-ever hip hop show, so they gave the spots to Rock the Vote for free.

Luckily, the internet has saved these gems for nostalgic viewing pleasure — and for examination of what issues Rock the Vote once thought the kids would run to the polls for.

1990

In their inaugural video spot (also during a midterm election) Rock the Vote’s co-founder Jeff Ayeroff asked Madonna and music video director Paula Greif to get involved. He didn’t give directions and they came back with this: Madonna in a red swimsuit and some guys in jorts remixing “Vogue” to tell us “freedom of speech is as good as sex.”

1992

Robert Downey Jr. and Sarah Jessica Parker have been positioned in front of a cloth backdrop to motivate you to go to the polls over this important issue of their time:

“Our own government is trying to tell you what you should and shouldn’t pop into your tape deck!”

1996

“Power, real power” that’s what Chuck D of Public Enemy wants you to know you have.

2000

This PSA targets Latino voters, trying to motivate them to register to vote by mixing the conflict in Vietnam and music from Santana.

2008

This is around when Rock the Vote begins started packing more celebrities into each video for maximum impact. The idea: appeal to everyone.

2009

As the Affordable Care Act was working its way through Congress, Rock the Vote attempted to motivate 20-somethings to give a care about heath care. Who better than the stars of “Scrubs,” talking about their nipples?

2012

Or, the year that it didn’t matter what celebrities said, as long as there were celebrities. The first PSA is just a bunch of generic statements like “we will be brave” and “we will matter” without any mention of the issues. Then a follow up on Funny or Die, where instead the explanations turn to “Ryan Gosling” and “makes your hands stronger for tweeting.”

And we’re back to 2014. As co-founder Ayeroff puts it, “The way the message is delivered has changed, but the message has stayed the same.” Go vote. In case one viewing wasn’t enough: