The millennials are the biggest generation in U.S. history, numbering somewhere in the neighborhood of 75 million. They are already having a major impact on American and global life and that influence will only grow as they get older.

We asked a handful of "olds"—baby boomers and Gen Xers—connected to the Reason universe to give a shout-out to their favorite millennials. The results include libertarian activists, Middle Eastern radicals, children's book illustrators, independent congressional candidates, and a magic dragon.

Alexander McCobin of Students for Liberty, by David Boaz

We have lots of scholars in the libertarian movement. Not enough, but a few Nobel laureates and many distinguished authors and professors. What we don’t have enough of are genuinely libertarian organizations and the institution builders who create and maintain them. Alexander McCobin, co-founder and president of Students For Liberty (SFL) since 2008, is one of those institution builders.

Since I spoke at SFL’s first conference, which drew 100 students to Columbia University in 2008, McCobin and his colleagues have built Students For Liberty into the largest libertarian student organization in the world, with more than 400 leaders supporting more than 1,300 student groups representing over 50,000 students. Their 2014 conference drew 1,400.

When people ask me if the libertarian movement is growing, I tell them, "Seven years ago there was no national libertarian student group. Now there are two": SFL and Young Americans for Liberty, which grew out of Ron Paul’s presidential campaign. Indeed, Politico wrote in February, "You could argue that the rapid growth of these libertarian groups has been the real story of campus politics in the Obama era."

Not content to free the United States, the global citizens of SFL have founded branches in Europe, Latin America, Asia, and Africa, where more than 1, 100 students gathered at a July conference.

Try as I might with my jaded cynicism, I can’t get the smile off Alexander’s face, or shake his confidence that millennials are "the libertarian generation." Thanks to the combined efforts of the U.S. government and Students For Liberty, they just might be.

David Boaz is executive vice president of the Cato Institute and author of The Libertarian Mind, coming in February from Simon & Schuster.

Piff, the Millennial Magic Dragon, by Penn Jillette

Piff, the Magic Dragon, is my favorite millennial magician. Piff was born in London in 1980 and at first blush (dragons do get blood in the face) would therefor not quite be a millennial young man. But Piff is a magic dragon. And magic dragons have a longer lifespan than humans. So, in dragon years, Piff is about 27 and right in the pocket.

I saw Piff for the first time when he walked out on our stage to do our show Penn & Teller: Fool Us. He opened with a dragon sneeze of fire, and then he did a baffling card trick. There’s a rule about comedy magicians—they aren’t funny and they aren’t baffling. Piff is different. Piff had the audience screaming in laughter, and he fooled the pants off every one of them. I got lucky and we guessed the method of his trick by the skin of our teeth. We beat him. Piff lost the battle and won the war. After we joined the audience in Piff’s well-deserved standing ovation, the bookings started rolling in for him. He got so much attention from his YouTube clip from our show, that he got booked in Vegas and moved here to do his act full time at a casino. I was proud to write a letter to U.S. Immigration giving my expert opinion that the United States of America didn’t have enough magic dragons and we should allow him work here. No way he’d be taking work away from any American magic dragons.

Piff is the only magic dragon member of the prestigious Magic Circle in England and one of the youngest ever to lecture there (and that’s in people years). Now, that he’s moved here and we’ve become friends, he’s also become part of the Penn & Teller brain trust and helps us design, create, and rehearse new tricks for our show.

I don’t know if the kids are alright, but the magic dragon fledglings sure are.

Penn Jillette is half of the legendary act Penn & Teller, a best-selling author, moviemaker, and host of the podcast Penn's Sunday School.

Nick Troiano, Independent Candidate for Congress, by Krist Novoselic

Is Ron Paul really the new Nirvana? Is he grunge? On the contrary, he comes across as a country doctor and an unlikely national political figure. His prominence is a phenomenon that rose in the changes brought by the technological revolution. Look for more candidates who capture the imagination by way of technology. The 2014 election cycle is already offering this. The big news will be when this new breed of candidate is such a hit that one of them wins an election.

I look at the changes occurring in politics through the lens of my personal experience. Nirvana was yanked out of the musical underground into the front and center of the mainstream without the aid of the Internet. Nirvana really didn’t change the music industry. We only helped change what kind of music people plugged into. People wanted something different and that cleared the way for "alternative" music.