KALAMAZOO, MI -- The two young women hospitalized as a result of Saturday night's mass shooting spree continue to work to recuperate at area hospitals.

Tiana Carruthers, the first person attacked when the shooting spree began at about 5:40 p.m. Saturday, remained in serious condition Thursday evening.

"She's doing better," said Kalamazoo County Sheriff Rick Fuller, who has been enlisted to act as a spokesman for the young woman's family. "She's had her surgeries and is classified under serious condition."

Carruthers, whose age has been reported to be 25 but has not been confirmed, is being treated for multiple gunshot wounds sustained after she apparently noticed something wrong and told several children to leave the playground area of The Meadows townhomes in Richland Township.

Police have said the youngsters were able to flee to safety at a nearby apartment but Carruthers was not. The gunman apparently fired shots out the window of a vehicle, then sped off.

Emergency responders found Carruthers just outside an apartment section that was riddled with bullet holes.

Details on what she saw and what she did to prevent the children from becoming victims of the rampaging shooter are not likely to surface until her accused attacker is brought to trial, Fuller said.

Jason Brian Dalton, 45, of Cooper Township, was arrested early Sunday morning in connection with that shooting and others. He was being held in the Kalamazoo County Jail facing multiple murder and felony firearms charges.

Eight people were shot. Six died.

Fuller said Carruthers' parents are very concerned about her and want to keep her isolated while she heals.

The other survivor of Saturday night's attacks, 14-year-old Abigail Kopf, of Battle Creek, continues to be monitored at Bronson Methodist Hospital.

"Abigail remains critically ill but is continuing to show improvement," her parents, Gene and Vicki Kopf, of Battle Creek, said in a prepared statement. "She is responding to staff, has given thumbs-up and wiggled her toes. We anticipate further improvement over the next several days."

Kopf was accompanying a group of women on a night out in Kalamazoo when they were approached by a gunman outside the Cracker Barrel restaurant in Texas Township and shot. The group included Barbara Hawthorne, 68, of Battle Creek, whom Kopf called "Grandma Barb" and considered her pretend grandmother.

They were in a vehicle with Mary Jo Nye, 60, and Dorothy "Judy" Brown, 74, both of Battle Creek. In another vehicle was Mary Lou Nye, 62, of Baroda. She was the sister-in-law of Mary Jo Nye. All except Kopf were killed at about 10:24 p.m. Saturday in the restaurant parking lot.

Police say the women had dinner at Cracker Barrel before attending a show at Western Michigan University's Miller Auditorium. They were returning to the restaurant parking lot to retrieve one of their vehicles when they were attacked.

Between the attack on Carruthers and the attack on the women at Cracker Barrel, the gunman shot and killed Richard Eugene Smith Jr., 53, and his son Tyler Daniel Smith, 17, outside the Seelye KIA car dealership on Stadium Drive in Kalamazoo.

Police said the father and son were in the dealership parking lot after hours looking a new cars when they were approached suddenly and shot at about 10:08 p.m.

In their statement, Kopf's parents said, "We appreciate all of those who have donated or offered to donate to help with family and medical expenses. In addition to the Battle Creek Community Foundation fund, we have approved a GoFundMe page which was set up in Abigail's name. The page can be found here: https://www.gofundme.com/exqv3qyc

MLive writer Al Jones may be contacted at ajones5@mlive.com. Follow him on Twitter at ajones5_al