Student debt is often a necessary evil, despite how constricting it may be. Further restrictions on students' work hours only succeed in tightening the cold grip of debt. Last October, the University of Colorado began enforcing a policy that caps on-campus student employee hours at 25 per week, or 50 bi-weekly, a restriction that is both demeaning and detrimental to students.

While said to be in the best interest of the student body, a motivating factor for this policy is the Affordable Care Act. More specifically, the portion of the ACA that requires large employers to insure their employees. Openly admitted by Ryan Hoff, a university spokesman, CU's hour policy is in part an attempt to avoid paying for either health care or the fines required by the government for not providing it. Student employees were told in a newsletter on Sept. 30, 2014 that the purpose for the hours cap is to allow students more time to focus on studies and to increase the six-year graduation rate.

For many students, including two interviewed by the Daily Camera in October of last year, the only option is to work a second job off campus. By maintaining the minimum number of hours for both jobs, students often find they are working more hours than previously — the opposite of the outcome desired by the university, according to its newsletter.

Ryan Huff further stated: "It could cost more than $1 million to provide employer-sponsored health insurance to student employees who regularly work more than 30 hours a week." This sounds somewhat low for most CU expenses, considering the $156 million (recently extended to $160 million) football stadium expansion. A $1 million expense would reflect 0.625 percent of the expected $160 million.

Advertisement

As expected from a multi-million dollar business, CU is trying to minimize expenses. The Affordable Care Act has incentivized the university to cut hours, making a difficult situation more difficult for students. Students at the University of Colorado would benefit from an amendment to the Affordable Care Act, allowing for a way to opt out of the required health care benefits. This requirement is rather redundant, as students must have health insurance to attend the university.

Further, if the university is genuine in its concern for student time and quick graduation (doubtful, more time in school means more money spent), it is insulting that the administration believes students are not responsible enough to manage their own time. The entire process of increasing tuition, limiting hours, and labeling it as being in the best interest of students is a reflection of a harsh reality: there are inherent flaws in the education system, perpetuated by usage of students as cash-cows, and a desire by administrations to maintain the system. An indebted student body and young workforce cannot bear the weight of an indebted nation, when said nation does not have faith in those that will soon support it.

Adam Page is a student at CU-Boulder.