by Denis G. Campbell

This is The Monday Line

Yesterday I installed iOS 7.0.4 on my iPad. iOS 7.0 was released on 18 September around the globe. The latest batch of patch fixes (the .4 part) solved an issue I was having. Each version gets incrementally better.

Millions though downloaded iOS 7 on DAY 1 two months ago and screamed in agony wherever anyone could listen that Apps failed, Contacts were deleted, iPads locked up and few could see ANY benefit to this ‘big deal’ new system. Remember the uproar? And this operating system, the guts if iPhones, iPads and iPods, was from the arguably number one technology company in the world?

My tech/geek sister did not install iOS 7 until version 7.0.3 came out two weeks ago, six weeks after launch. Her rationale? “Why should I be Apple’s technology guinea pig? x.0 versions of EVERY computer programme suck eggs. I’ll wait a few months then install.” And therein lays the wisdom of all new technology, including the Affordable Care Act website. While much ado was made by the only 6 successful sign-ups on the first day of the Obamacare website, it was no different than any other tech release.

Wait until the bugs are worked out and you have more than a x.0 release because those are always rushed to market and it is impossible to foresee EVERY glitch or problem. Only by live use do companies operating in the REAL world, find and fix the bugs.

My sister works for a large tech company that deals with banks. 2x per year there is a team of people sent to San Francisco to sit in a room, watch for problems and fix them when big new software releases come out. They are on call 24-hours and monitor the systems for their banking customers who need them to work. It’s part of the deal.

So why do the corporate media and Republicans think the Affordable Care Act website version 1.0 was exempt from the same bugs and glitches?

Because it makes great headlines to say OMG(!) ONLY 6 people signed up on Day 1. That is what keeps the 24/7 cable news machine fed and lets everyone pile on. Well, in American football that ‘piling on’ would earn you a 15-yard penalty and loss of down.

Have we also somehow slipped into a parallel universe?

The Republican GOP Tea Party in the US House of Representatives tried 43 times to repeal the law creating the Affordable Care Act. And the Inside-the-Beltway Press, which has the attention span of a fruit fly (with sincere apologies to those flies), have joined in to pile on the computer programme in an attempt to kill it.

Stay with me and put the cup of coffee down for fear it will exit through your nose. They now say… they care about all of the poor people people who are losing sub-standard healthcare policies that covered everything… (except them getting sick.)

Does anyone else see the hypocrisy in the GOP Tea Party now claiming to care about poor inconvenienced health insurance recipients when for four years they were willing to let 44 million people go without ANY coverage? 62% of all personal US bankruptcies are health-related and 78% of those people had medical insurance.

The ACA website rollout has been rubbish. And… what big rollout has ever worked perfectly?

I remember moving offices in a very large law firm. You would have thought several partners were ready to hang, draw and quarter or at the very least sue their own firm’s administrators because everything did not function perfectly at 9:00 am Monday morning on Day 1? I watched a grown 45-year-old partner, an esteemed and accomplished attorney, stand in the administrator’s office and threaten not to leave until his problem was fixed in that moment!

So six weeks in let’s review:

the system is handling 17,000 policy sign-ups a day

106,000 signed up in the first month and

more than 1 million are in the queue with accounts set up but are being careful shoppers.

How exactly is that an #epicfail? Massachusetts signed up just 123 people in the first month of Romneycare. Now the state has 98% coverage? Where were the epic fail headlines back during that launch? They did not exist.

Talk to me in a year.

There is an unparalleled level of GOP Tea Party fecklessness working here. If the government is still seeing these kind of numbers in a year? The yes, there is a serious problem.

Here’s my real question though: what will the GOP Tea Party do when the website works, numbers improve and their 9% approval rating (Gallup) falls to 6% as the public asks what they do and why there is no immigration or budget deal?

The attention will quickly shift back to this do-nothing Congress and their willingness to destroy the country and harm its people to hurt one man, President Barack Obama. Two federal judges nominated by the President were filibustered this past week and there is a showdown coming. If a President cannot nominate his own judges (after winning a second term), the country is in deep, deep trouble.

Having visited and worked in the White House recently, the inside the Beltway media live in an enormous bubble that partly exploded last week when CBS’ flagship 60 Minutes programme had to retract an entire report on Benghazi.

Corporate media control is beginning to unravel. Forget 24-hour news cycles. There is a three hour cycle most days where the message of the day is often trumped by other news of the day.

I sat in Jay Carney’s briefing as the message of the day, Immigration reform, was co-opted by the press corps to Angele Merkel’s cell phone being hacked, ACA website woes and Benghazi conspiracy theory. When will we learn?

The media is not covering the real issues, only the fake ratings generators. The question is why do we still fall for it and pay attention?