Recently, Stephen Ubl, president and CEO of PhRMA, signed a column that unfairly maligns and mischaracterizes Turing Pharmaceuticals' commitment to research and development.

Ubl said that after 'close examination' he believed Turing's operating model is different from the model of 'innovative pharmaceutical companies' he claims to represent. However, a simple reading of Turing's press releases or website show that we have an extensive and diverse pipeline including six discovery and three clinical stage programs - especially considering our company is less than a year old.

ADVERTISEMENT

In the discovery area, three of the programs are undergoing target validation, two are close to complete assay development, and one is completing a high throughput screening campaign, while our three clinical programs will be initiating phase III testing in 2Q and 3Q next year. It is important to highlight that one of the discovery programs, rapidly approaching proof of concept in animals, focuses on new treatments for toxoplasmosis, a life threatening disease for which there has been no significant pharma research investment in the last 50 years. This is an extraordinary R&D result for a company created just over a year ago.

As with our work with toxoplasmosis, most of our R&D is in rare and neglected diseases. Diseases that many large biopharmaceutical companies refuse to devote resources to primarily because the risk of failure is so high and number of potential patients is so small. But at Turing, we believe those patients deserve a fighting chance too.

Further in his piece, Ubl boasts that PhRMA members spend 20 percent of their revenue in R&D, and while that is certainly commendable, it pales in comparison to Turing which will be investing more than 60 percent of 2016 revenues into innovative research and development.

Not satisfied with attacking the company, Ubl also attempts a personal attack on Turing's CEO by reminding us of his initial years as a successful hedge fund manager. As a physician having spent more than 20 years developing new drugs, I found the comment troubling, if not ironic, especially coming from a Washington corporate lobbyist.

At Turing, we remain committed to bringing about new and significant treatment options for patients with severe - and too often ignored - diseases; political grandstanding and uninformed sound-bites will not detract us from that goal.

And finally, now that individuals have a clearer understanding of Turing's commitment to innovative research and new biopharmaceutical discovery, we would welcome an opportunity to have a more robust discussion with Ubl, a member of his senior staff, and others in the pharmaceutical industry to identify ways we can work together for the benefit of patients.

Salinas is the president of Research and Development at Turing Pharmaceuticals.