RENTON WASH. — The Seahawks don’t have a player with Super Bowl experience, and coach Pete Carroll can’t offer any advice.

He’s never even attended a Super Bowl.

“I said I wasn’t going to go unless my team was in it,” Carroll said last week. “It really couldn’t have worked out any better.”

Game plan in place. Carroll isn’t taking any chances with his team’s preparation.

While some head coaches install only portions of the game plan during the Super Bowl bye week, Carroll put it all in place. He did so by design.

“We treated it like a normal week,” Carroll said. “We got everything done so that (this week) we are not dealing with the heavy learning stuff.”

Wright stuff. K.J. Wright played in the NFC championship game, but he wasn’t himself. He was Seattle’s strongside linebacker against the 49ers and admittedly had some conditioning issues after his return from a Dec. 8 foot injury. He expects to return to his usual weakside linebacker position against the Broncos.

“I should be out there full go,” Wright said.

Quinn staying put. Defensive coordinator Dan Quinn said he doesn’t believe Seattle’s playoff run hurt his chance to get the Browns’ head coaching job. While coaches still in the playoffs can interview for other jobs, their focus is divided.

“No,” Quinn said, when he was asked whether that led him to get passed over by the Browns, who ended up hiring Mike Pettine on Thursday. “I couldn’t be more fired up to be part of this team and moving forward here.”

Browns brass said Quinn was the runner-up for the job, which Broncos offensive coordinator Adam Gase declined to pursue.

Spotlight on …

Pete Carroll, coach, Seahawks

By Mike Klis

When: All week leading up to Super Bowl XLVIII at MetLife Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J., where Seattle plays the Broncos next Sunday. The Seahawks’ hotel is the Westin in Jersey City, N.J. Denver’s hotel is the Hyatt in Jersey City.

What’s up: Carroll has an opportunity to join Jimmy Johnson and Barry Switzer as the only head coaches to win a Super Bowl and a collegiate national championship. Johnson won a national championship at Miami (1987 season) and Super Bowls with Dallas (1992 and 1993). Switzer won three national championships at Oklahoma (1974, 1975 and 1985) and piggy- backed off Johnson to win a Super Bowl with Dallas (1995). Carroll won national champ- ionships at USC in 2003 and 2004.

Background: Carroll looks younger than his age (62). He grew up in San Francisco and played safety at the University of the Pacific, but didn’t play pro football. He coached in the NFL as an assistant with the Bills and Vikings and became head coach of the Jets in 1994. He lasted one year with the Jets. After a 6-5 start, they lost their final five games. He coached New England from 1997-99, going 10-6, 9-7 and 8-8. But the Patriots pursued Bill Belichick and Carroll settled in at USC. After a terrific run with the Trojans, he left in 2010 for the Seahawks before the NCAA infractions committee could get him.

Mike Klis’ take: Carroll and Belichick are the NFL’s most fascinating head coaches. Some coaches just have it, and Carroll has a personality that’s 180 degrees different from the dour Belichick. Carroll is a rah-rah type who was known for developing pro quarterbacks at USC (Carson Palmer, Matt Leinart, Matt Cassel and Mark Sanchez). He has built a terrific defense with the Seahawks, featuring big cornerbacks. When he returned to the NFL, Carroll immediately helped change the way the league’s defenses are constructed. First, he used the overall No. 14 pick acquired from the Broncos the previous year for Alphonso “Where Have You Gone?” Smith to draft free safety Earl Thomas. In 2011, Carroll drafted a large cornerback in the fifth round (6-foot-3, 195-pound Richard Sherman) and signed another big cornerback from the Canadian Football League (6-4, 221-pound Brandon Browner). Entering the Super Bowl, Seattle boasts the league’s best secondary. And in Richard Sherman, we do mean boast.