Jones International University, the first online-only university, is winding down and will close next year because of declining enrollment and competition, the school said Thursday.

The Centennial-based school notified students and faculty this week and said it won’t close until it has helped every student graduate or transfer to a new school.

“We examined a number of operational strategies and determined that none would be sufficient to turn around the market dynamics,” chief operating officer Bryan Wallace said.

Jones faced competition not only from startup schools but traditional universities moving courses online. There was also the economy.

“The general change in the U.S. economy impacted the number of prospective students who wanted to go to school and receive a college degree,” he said.

Enrollment plunged 55 percent from 2011 to 2014, he said.

Winding down operations could take 12 to 15 months because it plans to make sure every student graduates or transitions to a new school, he added.

Jones has 2,000 enrolled students, mostly working on business or education degrees. It also employs 115 people full time, plus an additional 90 adjunct members. Most are in Centennial.

The school has partnered with Trident University International, an online school in Cypress, Calif., that offers many of the same courses. Jones also is working with other schools that may provide education tracks unavailable at Trident.

Trident was chosen because of its similar approach to student well-being and courses offered. It’s also more affordable, Wallace pointed out. At the graduate level, Trident charges $475 per credit compared with Jones’ $800. For undergrads, Trident credits are $350, compared with $530 at Jones.

Jones Intercable founder Glenn R. Jones pioneered this nontraditional learning back in 1987, when he started a cable TV network called Mind Extension University. It offered courses from more than 30 colleges televised to 30,000 students.

He moved the effort online in 1993 with the opening of Jones University, which became the first accredited online university in 1999, according to the school. (Jones Intercable sold to Comcast that same year.)

That was long before the current trend of Massive Open Online Courses, or MOOCs. This includes the range of courses from traditional academic schools to vocational or online hobbyist classes. Some are free; some cost hundreds of dollars. Some can be taken for college credit. Companies include Udemy, Coursera and Udacity.

The online learning market also includes companies like Denver-based Craftsy, which offers online video courses for sewing, photography and cake decorating.

One research firm, MarketsandMarkets, said global online learning revenues hit $2.55 billion in 2013 and were expected to grow to $7.83 billion by 2018.

Jones, the school’s founder, continues to expand other business operations. He’s behind a new 42-acre mixed-use development right next to the Centennial campus that was announced last fall.

Trident also plans to rename its business school The Glenn R. Jones College of Business Administration.

“It was important to Glenn that there be a mission to democratize education and create educational opportunities for students all around the world,” Wallace said. “Looking back, we’re happy to have achieved that mission and see what we’ve accomplished in 22 years.”

Tamara Chuang: 303-954-1209, tchuang@denverpost.com or twitter.com/Gadgetress