Diners at one California restaurant are finding an extra charge tacked to the total of every bill, added to help the eatery pay for health insurance for each employee, as required under Obamacare.

In a prime example of companies passing the added costs of Obamacare onto consumers, République, a Los Angeles-based restaurant, is adding a 3-percent surcharge to every tab to help ease the financial burden of the Affordable Care Act. The fee, referred to as an Obamacare surcharge, is expected to help pay for health insurance coverage the restaurant must provide to its employees, TheBlaze reported.

“It’s a 3-percent surcharge that goes completely toward providing health care for all the employees of the restaurant,” Laura Teodori, République’s manager, told TheBlaze.

Under the Affordable Care Act’s employer mandate, businesses with more than 50 employees are required by law to provide health coverage to its workers. Though the employer mandate was delayed until 2015, with some exceptions, many companies have decided to proactively make changes to their policies in an effort to compensate for the increase in cost associated with providing all employees with health insurance.

If businesses like République, which employs more than 50 people, fail to cover their workers, they face a fine. And while the surcharge, labeled “3 percent healthy L.A.” on receipts, appears on all tabs, the eatery can remove it at the request of the customer.

“If people are very upset about it then of course we don’t make them pay it,” Teodori said. “We’ll take it off. But most people have been very supportive of it.”

République, a popular, new high-end restaurant in the posh California city, has received both favorable and unfavorable reviews from customers related to the surcharge.

One potential customer took to République’s Facebook page to voice her concerns with the Obamacare surcharge. Janet Chung wrote that while she had never visited the new restaurant, the 3-percent surcharge ‘turned her off’ from visiting.

The restaurant, however, defended its decision to add the fee.

“We are sorry to hear that,” République responded. “The surcharge is the best way to provide all of our employees, including those you don’t see in the front of the house, with full benefits. We know this is different and you are welcome to take the 3% out of what you would normally tip.”

Other diners, however, commended the restaurant for looking out for its employees.

“I just read about their 3% health care surcharge,” one customer wrote in a review of République on Yelp. “I LOVE this. Terrific that they’re looking out for their employees.”

According to The Los Angeles Times, restaurant owner Bill Chait is offering all of his employees three health insurance plans through Kaiser, two of which include employer contributions.

Since Obamacare’s implementation last year, many businesses have changed their policies to compensate for the law’s new requirements. Retail giant Target decided to drop its health insurance policies for part-time employees working less than 32 hours per week. Additionally, major companies like AOL and Delta reported President Barack Obama’s signature healthcare will cost them upwards of $7 million and $100 million, respectively.