AUCKLAND, New Zealand — The dominant center-right National Party was re-elected on Saturday to a third term in government with a historic level of support, despite an election campaign tainted by political scandals and resignations.

The party’s large lead became apparent early in the evening’s vote-counting process. When counting finished, it had won 48 percent of the vote, the strongest result for a single party since New Zealand adopted a proportional election system in 1996, according to preliminary results from the national Electoral Commission. The commission estimated voter turnout at 77 percent, up from 74 percent in 2011.

“Ladies and gentlemen, this is a victory for those who kept the faith,” John Key, the prime minister and leader of the National Party, said in a televised speech at the party’s election celebration in downtown Auckland. The jubilant audience responded with a chant of “Three more years!”

The result gives the National Party 61 of the 121 seats in Parliament, enough to govern alone, although Mr. Key said he would work on forming a coalition with the three smaller parties that are part of the existing coalition: ACT New Zealand, United Future and the Maori Party.

Mr. Key was greeted outside his Auckland home with a rousing haka, or Maori war dance, as he left for the celebration.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

A short time earlier, the leader of the left-leaning opposition Labour Party, David Cunliffe, said he had already telephoned Mr. Key to concede defeat. But he insisted that he did not intend to resign, even though his party had won only 25 percent of the vote.

“It will of course take the pundits some time to work through the entrails of this election,” Mr. Cunliffe said in a televised speech to Labour Party supporters in the west Auckland suburb of New Lynn. “On the face of it, there’s never been one like it: a campaign beset by dirty politics and sideshows, involving potential abuses of power at the highest level that will still take months and months to unravel. But New Zealanders have chosen to continue, and we respect that choice.”

He was apparently referring to campaign scandals that led to the resignation of a senior minister and a member of Parliament.

The New Zealand electoral system allows two votes: one for a political party, and one for a candidate in a local election district. A party can enter Parliament by winning either an election district seat or at least 5 percent of the party vote.

The Internet Mana party — a political alliance that includes the Internet Party, founded and bankrolled by Kim Dotcom, the German entrepreneur accused of widespread Internet piracy — failed to win a seat in Parliament. Its main candidate, Hone Harawira, lost his local race, and Internet Mana’s 1.26 percent of the party vote fell well short of the 5 percent needed.

The Internet Party leader, Laila Harré, blamed the National Party for undermining Mr. Harawira’s support, but Mr. Dotcom disagreed.

“I take full responsibility for this loss tonight, because the brand — the brand Kim Dotcom — was poison for what we were trying to achieve,” he told reporters. “I did not see that before, and it only became apparent to me in the last couple of weeks.” Mr. Dotcom put at least $2.9 million into the Internet Party since May 26, according to Electoral Commission records.

A co-leader of the Green Party, Russel Norman, said Mr. Dotcom’s presence in the election had tarnished left-leaning parties like his. The Green Party won just 10 percent of the vote, down from 11 percent in 2011.

“I did say that to Kim Dotcom,” he said. “Remember, I did say a long time ago that it was a bad idea. But anyway, there you go.”