Staff of Baker Motor Company gets together Dec. 3 to mark Baker Infiniti's launch in 1989 as one of the original 51 Infiniti dealers. Shaking hands are Tommy Baker (left), Owner and President of Baker Motor Company; and Infiniti Dealer Operations District Manager Bo Gregory (Provided).

Just 51 dealers were with Infiniti at the start, and there remains 23 operating originals today. Baker Motor Company of Charleston stands as one.

Tommy B. Baker, owner and president of Baker Motor Company of Charleston, said he's pleased to celebrate 25 years as a dealer for the luxury automaker.

District Infiniti representatives visited the dealership Wednesday to mark the accomplishment with the Baker Motor Company team.

"This is a significant day in my life and for Baker Motor Company," Baker said.

"When we first became an Infiniti dealer in 1989 we operated with a TOE - Total Owner Experience. This has been the core of our philosophy," he said. "It has set the standard of how we represent the product and customer experience over the past 25 years."

Baker Motor Company was among the "pioneering" dealers to start up the Infiniti brand in 1989.

Bo Gregory, Infiniti Dealer Operations District Manager, said that Baker Motor Company was there at the beginning, and "now Baker is one of 23 of the original 51 left. We appreciate and congratulate their dedication to the brand over these years."

After 25 years as an Infiniti dealer, Baker Motor Company has continued success with the brand. Baker Motor Company received top rankings in several Customer Service Index benchmarks this year including No. 1 out of 10 dealers in the district and No. 1 out of 35 dealers in the region.

"I'm so proud of our staff's commitment to the Infiniti brand," said Baker, who is also owner and president of Baker Motor Company of Mount Pleasant and Baker Buick GMC Cadillac.

"As one of the last few remaining founding dealers, the Baker Infiniti staff has proven (to have) both stability and fortitude," he said.

Baker founded Baker Motor Company of Charleston in 1988. It is the largest privately held automobile dealer group headquartered in South Carolina.

The company operates manufacturer-authorized, new car dealerships representing 12 brands including Rolls-Royce Motor Cars, Mercedes-Benz, Sprinter, Smart Car, Infiniti, Maserati, Porsche, Land Rover, Jaguar, Buick, GMC and Cadillac; two high-line pre-owned centers; a reconditioning center; and a full service, USAA- and State Farm Insurance-approved collision repair center.

For more information, visit www.bakermotorcompany.com or call 843- 852-4000.