By Peter Nicholas and Janet Hook

President Barack Obama speaks at Buck Lodge Middle School in Adelphi, Md., Tuesday, Feb. 4, 2014. (AP Photo/Manuel Balce Ceneta) Associated Press

Some Democratic lawmakers intensified pressure on President Barack Obama Tuesday to take actions he has been resisting when it comes to health care and the nation’s energy supply.

Mr. Obama hosted a private meeting at the White House for House Democrats. Both sides afterward described the session as productive and friendly. But Rep. Carol Shea-Porter (D., N.H.) told Mr. Obama at one point that some people should have left their jobs over the flawed rollout of the health-care law that is the centerpiece of his domestic legacy.

“Some people should tender their resignations,” Ms. Shea-Porter told the president, officials in the meeting said. An aide to the congresswoman confirmed the comment.

Mr. Obama has resisted firing people over the troubled launch of the health-care website last fall. In an interview with Fox News’s Bill O’Reilly on Sunday, Mr. Obama was asked why he hadn’t fired Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius.

“My main priority right now is making sure that it delivers for the American people,” he said of the health-care law.

At a news conference on Capitol Hill earlier on Tuesday, a bipartisan group of lawmakers called for the Obama administration to quickly approve the Keystone XL pipeline project, whose permit application was first submitted six years ago.

Sen. Mary Landrieu (D., La), one of the party’s most vulnerable incumbents facing re-election in 2014, said: “This pipeline is essential. The time for study is over. Action to build it is now.”

Secretary of State John Kerry has just begun the final stage of the Keystone review, aimed at determining if the pipeline coming down from Canadian oil sands is in the national interest. Eight agencies have up to 90 days to weigh in. The Obama administration has given no timeline on a when a final verdict may come.

Participants at the White House meeting said the mood was relaxed. Food was served and Mr. Obama and his cabinet and senior staff mingled with Democrats afterward – a level of conviviality that hasn’t always been the norm at such meetings.

Ms. Shea-Porter is also in a difficult re-election campaign. She represents a state where thousands of people received notifications that they would lose their insurance plans after the Affordable Care Act kicked in.

After the meeting, her aide said the congresswoman “appreciates the efforts to fix the law. … But there’s work to be done and someone should be held accountable for the unacceptable rollout.”

One Democratic official at the meeting described Mr. Obama as “spirited.”

In a statement afterward, the White House said: “In this year’s State of the Union address, the president declared 2014 a year of action. While he will continue to take action through executive authority, he stressed the importance of working with Congress on their shared priorities to help the middle class. The president discussed the importance of increasing the minimum wage, strengthening education, passing commonsense immigration reform, fighting to make sure women get equal pay for equal work, extending unemployment benefits, as well as other measures that will create jobs and help middle class families.”

Siobhan Hughes contributed to this article.