Former Baltimore Ravens linebacker Ray Lewis will remain in Baltimore instead of covering the National Football League (NFL) draft later this week.

ADVERTISEMENT

Lewis will no longer analyze the draft, starting Thursday in Chicago, as an ESPN commentator. The Baltimore Sun reported that he instead plans on helping the city in which he played as it struggles amid ongoing civil unrest.

“I felt it was important for me to stay in Baltimore and try to help the city I love,” Lewis said in a statement released via ESPN.

“I greatly appreciate ESPN’s understanding and flexibility at this late date,” he added. “I did not feel right leaving the city at this time.”

“Few athletes are as connected to a city as Ray is to Baltimore, having played his entire career there and based on all the work he has done in that community,” ESPN senior coordinating producer Seth Markman told The Sun.

“While we will miss him at the draft, we completely support him in this decision,” he added. “We hope his involvement will help resolve the situation there.”

Lewis lives in Baltimore following 17 seasons as a professional football player in the city. On Tuesday, he urged protesters not to use violence while demonstrating against law enforcement there.

“Rioting in our streets is wrong, dead wrong,” he said in a clip posted on his Facebook page.

“We have to redefine what this looks like,” he continued. “We must stop this right now. Go home. Go home.”

Violence began in Baltimore on Saturday following the death earlier this month of Freddie Gray, a black man who died while interacting with law enforcement. Gray died following a severe spinal injury suffered while in police custody.

Baltimore police on Tuesday announced that 235 people had been arrested in connection with violence there. At least 20 officers were injured, and the city is now enforcing a curfew from 10 p.m. to 5 a.m. for the rest of the week.

ESPN reported Tuesday that former NFL player Louis Riddick would take Lewis’s place during the draft. He joins other commentators for the network including Chris Berman, John Gruden and Mel Kiper, Jr.