The 2014 midterm election was the last one without the votes of Godfrey Hendrix, who has pledged to go his whole life saying he never voluntarily refrained from voting.

The nine political and news applications downloaded on the 17-year-old’s phone proves that he is informed enough to vote in spite of his age.

“If you don’t vote, it diminishes your ability to criticize,” said Hendrix. “It takes an active approach to change things.”

Students his age have their own way of civic engagement: YMCA's 70th annual Youth Assembly, a statewide simulation of the Georgia General Assembly.

Godfrey, taking on the role of a senator, drafted a bill to reform civil asset forfeiture, law enforcement’s practice of seizing property on the hunch that it has been used while carrying out of crime.

His bill went beyond imposing tighter reporting measurements. It addressed the current abuses.

The city of Philadelphia, for example, seized 500 homes this year, according to an Atlanta Journal-Constitution story that Hendrix researched.

A family was evicted from its home because law enforcement seized heroin from one occupant, even though nobody in the home had been convicted of a crime.

Godfrey also gave the example of the Cobb County Sheriff’s Office, which in 2003 seized $9.5 million worth of assets, roughly 76 percent of its budget.

“There’s a high incentive to pocket the money,” he said, explaining that only a few states compel police officers to place seized property in a neutral account.

Hendrix’s argument is that if a criminal is driving someone else’s car, that third, possibly innocent party should not be punished.

Another bill supported smart highways, in which LED lights illuminate the medians and sides of main arteries.

A senate bill proposed changing voter registration so that voters can rank their candidates.

Under the current system, explained Hendrix, libertarians are hesitant to back a third party candidate when their ideals are more closely aligned with the Republicans than the Democrats—the two parties most likely to gain seats.

Oconee County High School student Emory Linder said he enjoyed debating controversial bills that deal with the legalization or decriminalization of marijuana and a repeal of a code allowing pharmacists to refuse certain types of contraceptives.

Linder said students aren’t beholden to a party, though there was tacit understanding when people leaned toward the left or right.

“The checks and balances in Youth Assembly are pretty good,” he said. “There are lobbyists, but they don’t carry too much weight on your vote.”

“To a certain extent, it’s a little bit better than the real word,” said Hendrix, citing a rule that says a bill can only be one page in length. “It’s very difficult to add earmarks when you have to be so concise.”

He gave the Affordable Care Act, commonly labeled Obamacare, as an example of a piece of legislation that was bound to draw fire simply because of its tedious length.

“By observing what takes place at Youth Assembly, our real-world legislators should be reminded of the reason they hopefully decided to pursue a political office,” said North Oconee High Assistant Principal Eric Hamilton who advised the following students at Youth Assembly: Shariff Cissé, Afahse Poteh, Georgios Samaras, and Robert Sligh.

“The students' somewhat pure manner is what government of the people, for the people, and by the people was intended to be,” said Hamilton.

Linder noted that some of former and current government officials he spoke to went through Youth Assembly when they were teenagers.

“I believe that the future of our state will be in great hands if [our students] choose to [run for public office],” said Hamilton. “They were able to experience first hand how state government works and maybe even more importantly, how it doesn't work. I saw them raising questions regarding appropriations and ethics, as well as questioning the role and responsibility of government in society.”

For more on this story, see the Dec. 24 edition of The Oconee Enterprise, on sale now at convenience stores and grocery stores and newspaper boxes throughout Oconee County. To subscribe, go to oconeeenterprise.com or call (706) 769-5175.