By Bill Poovey

bpoovey@scbiznews.com

Published May 21, 2014

Greenville Health System’s plan to expand in Spartanburg and Anderson counties signals a possible turf war in Anderson. The resolution approved Tuesday by trustees of GHS, the state’s largest nonprofit health care system, says it will file certificates of need on the projects. The state-administered certificate of need program intended to avoid wasteful duplication is currently suspended.

The GHS board voted Tuesday to proceed with developing “multispeciality, ambulatory care centers” in Spartanburg and Anderson at a projected combined cost of $40 million. The trustees did not announce a timetable for the project.

Spartanburg Regional Healthcare System executives declined comment, but Anderson-based AnMed Health issued a statement saying the certificate of need program, “takes a careful look at capacity for services and it helps prevent an entity from arriving from outside of a community with the intent of cherry picking only certain patients. We are sure all of this has been carefully considered by the GHS officials and we are sure it will be carefully reviewed by the state agency charged with its oversight.”

The AnMed statement said that “ultimately, we believe that given a choice, people in Anderson will choose their local health care system and the local physicians, surgeons and specialists that live and contribute to this community.”

GHS Vice President of Strategic Services Malcolm Isley said cherry picking paying patients is “not the intent” of the expansion plans but GHS is looking to provide its services where it is accessible to Upstate residents.

“We believe the Upstate is our market,” Isley said Wednesday. “We want to make sure we provide GHS options to them close to where they live and work.”

Gov. Nikki Haley’s Republican administration last year suspended the program administered by the S.C. Department of Health and Environmental Control, saying the open market and not the state should determine where health care facilities expand or make major equipment purchases. State officials are challenging a recent S.C. Supreme Court decision (.pdf) that said the state must administer the certificate of need program.

While Affordable Care Act changes to the way hospitals and doctors are compensated for services have some health systems aggressively pursuing growth partners, GHS moves so far have tracked away from going head-to-head against big competitors. In April GHS, in a nonbinding agreement, affiliated with Oconee Medical Center in Seneca. The system last year affiliated with Laurens County Medical Center and previously joined with Columbia-based Palmetto Health in joint ownership of Baptist Easley Hospital.

GHS also recently joined with the Medical University of South Carolina Hospital in Charleston in a new limited liability company that also includes Palmetto Health, McLeod Health in Florence and Self Regional in Greenwood.

GHS is not alone in looking for affiliation opportunities. AnMed on Jan. 1 affiliated with Cannon Memorial Hospital in Pickens and has announced other affiliations in Georgia.

AnMed said, “although we were not aware of GHS’ plans to further expand into Anderson County, we are not surprised by the recent announcement. Going forward, the landscape of health care will change, and competition for an expanding share of insured patients will increase. GHS and every health care provider in our region will become more aggressive in their expansion efforts, AnMed Health included.”

AnMed is affiliated with Charlotte-based Carolinas Healthcare System.