Sioux Falls, SD

While the flooding Thursday night caused problems for many, some people across Sioux Falls stepped up to help those in need.

"I love cars," Tyler Swanger said.

Swanger works with cars every day. Thursday, he was heading home after his shift at Vern Eide Honda, but his work with cars wasn't over.

His car got stuck near 50th Street and Western Avenue. He noticed it was happening to others and soon began directing traffic and pushing cars.

"I didn't have anywhere else to go because I was stuck in the water. It was either you sit there and you watch other people go through the misery or you kind of get out and help out," Swanger said.

His hardwork didn't go unnoticed.

"Actually came to work and it was three or four people called in and said, 'Hey, we want to thank the guy from Vern Eide,' and the next thing you know I was getting 10 to 20 Facebook messages," Swanger said.

Cars were also getting stuck on 33rd Street. Luckily for some drivers, there were some girls willing to help out.

Rachel Martin and her roommates were watching the flood from their house. Their cars and their basement started filling up with water, but that didn't stop them from helping other people out.

"I just didn't want there to be anymore chaos out here. I mean, people just kept going in and they seemed really concerned getting on top of their cars," Martin said.

One of the people they helped was Ann Henkhaus. She was invited into Martin's home after her van started filling up with water. While she was talking with neighbors, Henkhaus's van was pushed out of the water by three men. Her car is totaled, but the kindness she received from the community has made the loss easier to take.

"It felt so good that when these horrible things happen and kind of get in the way of everyday life, you're not expecting that that people just step up and help out and they're good neighbors. It's comforting to know we live in a city like that," Henkaus said.

Flooding {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.