The analysis of 214 species, which appears in the journal Science Advances, suggests that there are good evolutionary reasons for these differing optical designs.







The challenge was to see if they could predict a relationship between an animal’s ecological niche and the shape formed by the pupil in its eye.

On the other hand, vertical slits improved depth of field and the ability to judge distances – essential for an animal that hunted by pouncing on its prey.

Tests showed that eyes with horizontal slit pupils had an expanded field of view. Whereas the round pupils of humans can expand and contract 15-fold, the eyes of cats and geckos can enact a 135- and 300-fold change in pupil size. Species active during both the day and the night require slit pupils to see in darker conditions without being blinded by sunlight. “However, this hypothesis does not explain why slits are either vertical or horizontal”.

Why are there no diagonal slits? “This study is the first attempt to explain why orientation matters”. When a grazing animal lifts its head, its eyes are elongated horizontally.

To explain why horizontally elongated pupils, with few exceptions, corresponded to grazing prey animals such as sheep, deer and horses, the researchers turned to computer models to study the effects of different pupil shapes. Having a horizontal pupil enhances the amount of light they can receive in front of and behind them while reducing the amount of light from above and below. Is the pupil no longer horizontally aligned with the ground?

“It allows them to see better in front and behind, and maybe not to be dazzled by sunlight from above”, Banks said.

“If an animal becomes nocturnal, they’re likely to develop a vertical pupil, if they become diurnal, they have a round pupil”. Once they do detect a predator, they need to see where they are running. Having eyes towards the side of their head helps them to see almost all around them.

Vertical pupils are not equally distributed among ambush predators, however.

Circular: Most predators that are active during the day, like humans, have evolved this type of pupil.

On the other side of the Atlantic, study co-author Gordon Love, a professor of physics at Durham University, found this same pattern when observing sheep and horses at nearby farms.

The findings could help researchers gain more insight into how complex organs like the eye work. In it the main theory says that it is logical for slit-shaped pupils can allow for better vision due to an intricate musculature and a greater range for the light to enter the eye.

The researchers ruled out motion, parallax as a factor since using that cue would require head movement that could reveal the predator’s position. But the correlation between pupil shape and these traits was not as strong as it was for vertical and horizontal pupils.

But the study also foundresearchers discovered that vertical slits only came into their own at ground level.