Tennant said she would fight any Republican or Democrat against the state's coal interests. Tennant seeks distance from Obama

West Virginia Democratic Secretary of State Natalie Tennant announced her candidacy for Senate Tuesday and wasted no time distancing herself from President Barack Obama on the all-important issue of coal.

Her two-day announcement tour, with stops in five cities, comes the same week that the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is expected to roll out more stringent emission rules for new power plants.

Story Continued Below

“Let me make this clear right here, right now,” she said during a morning rally in Beckley. “I will fight any Republican or any Democrat — including President Barack Obama — who tries to kill our energy jobs, whether they are coal, natural gas, wind or water.”

Tennant, an Obama delegate at last year’s Democratic National Convention, needs to get out front on the issue to credibly challenge Republican Rep. Shelley Moore Capito, the frontrunner in the race to succeed the retiring Jay Rockefeller.

Though party leaders are united behind her now, Tennant was not Democrats’ top choice to run. She finished third in a 2011 Democratic primary for governor, but her supporters insist she will be more competitive in this race. The Charleston Daily Mail took a statewide poll last month that showed Capito up just 5 points, 45 percent to 40 percent.

( PHOTOS: Senators up for election in 2014)

Tennant, 45, was a TV broadcaster before running a video production and media training company with her husband. She lost a Democratic primary for Secretary of State in 2004 but ran again and won in 2008.

Coal is not an abstract issue in the Mountaineer State — it is a major employer. The preference of national Democrats for stricter emissions rules has badly damaged the party’s standing in the state. Sen. Joe Manchin (D-W.Va.) famously shot a copy of the cap-and-trade bill in an ad during 2010 race.

Tennant pronounced herself “disappointed” last year when Manchin, who never formally endorsed Obama, skipped the Democratic convention.

“Railing about the Obama administration’s policy on coal, as satisfying as it may be, isn’t enough,” Tennant said in her announcement speech. “When I’m elected to the United States Senate, I will push for a new partnership between [the] coal industry and government that recognizes the contribution of coal to the world economy.”

Republicans are confident Capito will win, barring a huge mistake. She’s seen as a stronger candidate than businessman John Raese, who ran poor campaigns against Manchin in 2010 and 2012, and is likely to dramatically outspend Tennant.

Andy Sere, a Republican media consultant with extensive experience in West Virginia, noted that Tennant underperformed in Democratic strongholds during her 2011 run for governor.

“Geographically, the Democrats’ path to victory in this Senate race was having someone who was extremely strong in the only part of the state where Shelley doesn’t have a natural base and that’s the southern coal fields,” he said. “Instead, they are going to nominate a candidate who got pathetically low single digits in most of the southern coal county.”

Frustrated by congressional inaction, Obama decided earlier this year to unilaterally go after carbon emissions. More rules on existing plants are expected later. This ensures coal will be an issue in 2014.

Tennant promises to “push for a ‘new covenant’ in which the coal industry keeps its promise for health care benefits and pensions to its miners.” And she wants more federal investment in clean coal technologies. Democrats are quick to note that Capito was the only member of the West Virginia delegation to oppose a mine safety bill.

GOP operatives are increasingly hopeful that Capito will avoid a serious primary challenge from her right and say there are enough data points to hitch Tennant to Obama, who is highly unpopular in the state. Tennant’s husband, state Sen. Erik Wells, challenged Capito for reelection to her House seat in 2004 and lost by 14 points.

Tennant’s camp believes Capito, part of a storied political family, has not had her record scrutinized or faced a tough race in a long time. They note that Democrats still have a registration advantage, control all the statewide offices and have a field operation that will allow them to turn out their voters.

Tennant will run as a D.C. outsider and try to paint Capito as an insider who voted for Social Security privatization and Medicare vouchers. This playbook worked for Democrats last cycle in red states like Montana and North Dakota.

“Congresswoman Capito has been part of the problem in a broken Congress for the last 13 years: a Congress that is full of obstructionists, full of gridlock, and full of failed ideas,” Tennant said.

The National Republican Senatorial Committee fired back, pointing to stock footage taken at the University of Pittsburgh that appeared in Tennant’s announcement video. Pitt is the archrival of West Virginia University. It might be difficult to undercut Tennant’s home-state cred, though: She was a Mountaineer mascot as a student at WVU.

Tennant also sought some separation from Obamacare during her campaign announcement speech.

“There are elements in the Affordable Care Act that we need and elements that must be fixed,” she said without elaborating. “Rather than participate in partisan, divisive attacks, I say we get to work and make government function again – on our side.”

She presented herself as independent, noting that she has helped prosecute Democrats for election fraud during two terms as the secretary of state.

“I’m not afraid of taking on corruption anywhere I find it,” she said, “regardless of party or position.”