Affordable Care Act (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

A new downtown education center is aiming to improve community health.

Partnership Community Health Center held a ribbon-cutting celebration and open house Monday to inaugurate its new Lawrence Street facility.

The Block Community Health Education Center will assist clients with insurance enrollment through BadgerCare and the federal marketplace and will offer programs to low-income residents to help them budget for their health care costs and teach them how to navigate insurance.

Trish Sarvela, Partnership's development director, said education will be critical in the rapidly changing health care landscape.

Some who have obtained private insurance for the first time through the Affordable Care Act are now having trouble fitting their premiums into already tight budgets. Others are meeting premiums, but struggle with high deductibles.

"We're just beginning to understand what the complications really are," Sarvela said.

Partnership is a nonprofit care provider that's available to anyone regardless of income. The center sets fees on a sliding scale based on income and family size. They operate a clinic on Menasha's Goodwill campus and offer dental services at their location in Grand Chute.

The education center, established in a former law firm at 621 W. Lawrence St., was donated to the health center in 2009 from the estate of attorney Jerome Block.

His daughter, Julie Block, said her father would be pleased to see his long-time professional home continue "as a place for people to be helped and have problems solved."

The building's renovation was this year's signature project for Rebuilding Together-Fox Valley. Mary Beth Leopold, its executive director, said time and materials donated toward the effort exceeded $100,000.

There's pride to take in all the hands that went into it to meet the needs of those with limited incomes, Mayor Tim Hanna said.

"This is the essence of community," Hanna said. "This is how it works."

The center's activities will include health education programming that stresses the importance of preventive care. The center will also assist with smoking cessation efforts, which can significantly reduce a client's insurance costs.

The Affordable Care Act, often referred to as Obamacare, requires that everyone carry health insurance and sets penalties for those who don't. Tax subsidies are available to those who couldn't otherwise afford plans. In Wisconsin, changes to BadgerCare eligibility coincided with act. Those changes required many who were previously covered to obtain private insurance plans.

Community and nonprofit leaders anticipate challenges as those with low incomes acclimate to the changes and requirements.

The education center is a step forward, Sarvela said.

Those confused by or struggling with health care changes stand to benefit greatly from a single, visible and dedicated place to bring questions.

"We don't have all the answers, but we're trying to figure it out collectively as a community," she said.

— Jim Collar: 920-993-1000, ext. 216, or jcollar@postcrescent.com; on Twitter @JimCollar

The Block Community Health Education Center, located at 621 W. Lawrence St. in Appleton is open Monday through Friday from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. Services are available in English, Spanish and Hmong.

For more information, call the center at 920-882-6420.

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1lvdcUU