WASHINGTON -- In 2010, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton was updated via email on prospects for congressional approval of the Affordable Care Act, with emphasis on three undecided Senate Democrats, including Mary Landrieu of Louisiana.

Emails outlining the deliberations over President Barack Obama's health law, enacted without a single Republican vote in 2010, were among the topics covered in recently released emails to and from Clinton while she served as secretary of state, using a private server.

In one memo, Miguel Rodriquez, who oversaw relations with the Senate for the State Department, wrote that the fate of the Affordable Care rested on three Democratic senators, Landrieu, Blanche Lincoln of Arkansas and Ben Nelson of Nebraska.

He notes that Landrieu, who lost her bid for a fourth term last December, reportedly "has been using her leverage to attempt to change the bill as it moves forward and won a particularly sweet deal that could bring billions to Louisiana." The deal recouped Medicaid money that Louisiana would have lost because of an increase in per-capita income following Hurricane Katrina.

In the end all 58 Democrats, including Landrieu, along with two independents, who generally vote with Democrats, supported the health legislation, giving the Obama administration the 60 votes needed to overcome a Republican filibuster. Clinton was also provided with a list of House Democrats who voted against a first draft of the legislation and the only House Republican who had voted yes -- then Rep. Anh "Joseph" Cao, R-New Orleans.

Cao said he was voting to reflect the views and needs of his New Orleans constituents, though he voted against the final version of the bill drafted with Senate Democrats, complaining it didn't do enough to ensure government funding couldn't be used for abortions.

Clinton, who left the State Department in 2013 and is seeking the 2016 Democratic presidential nomination, had helped draft legislation to expand health insurance access for her husband, President Bill Clinton. But the legislation never got a vote. She also campaigned to improve access to health insurance in the Democratic presidential primary of 2008, when she lost her party's nomination to Barack Obama, who went on to win the presidency and made Clinton his secretary of state.

In another email, from August 2009, Clinton says that Landrieu had "asked her to attend a dinner about foster care. Also, she mentioned an event at the White house about adoption and foster care."

"Have you heard anything about this? Can you call Landrieu's office to follow up," Clinton writes an aide.

In August 2011, an email was sent to Clinton about a trip Landrieu was taking to Guatemala about a recent court decision in the Central American nation blocking most international adoptions, leaving parents who had already met with children they were ready to adopt unable to move forward.

Landrieu has long been an advocate for adoption and help for foster children.

An email to Landrieu's office from Clinton aide Alison Dilworth, said the State Department is committed to helping parents awaiting adoptions in Guatemala, but concerned about alleged scandals with international adoption. She said the State Department is "particularly concerned about any allegations regarding stolen children and inner-country adoptions."

The only mention of Sen. David Vitter, R-La, found in the released emails, was from longtime confidant Sydney Blumenthal about good sales of a book written by his son, Max Blumenthal, "Republican Gomorrah: Inside the Movement That Shattered the Party." The book, as an attached book review notes, accuses some conservative Republicans, including Vitter, of bad personal behavior.

In response, Clinton emails back that Blumenthal should be proud of his son. "I just finished the book and it's great. Congrats to all!"