Nancy Pelosi: I think I know why the Republicans won’t bring up immigration

posted at 8:51 pm on April 10, 2014 by Erika Johnsen

Three guesses, ya’ll.

House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi on Thursday blamed racial issues for the GOP’s failure to act on comprehensive immigration legislation. “I think race has something to do with the fact that they’re not bringing up an immigration bill,” the California Democrat told reporters at her regular weekly press conference. “I’ve heard them say to the Irish, ‘If it were just you, this would be easy.'” Pelosi was responding to a question about whether race factors into how Republicans deal with members of the Obama administration. She accused Republicans of being generally disrespectful to members of the administration and to women. Pelosi spokesman Drew Hammill later clarified that the reported GOP comment about the Irish has been relayed to Pelosi a number of times by Irish immigration activists she’s met with.

I realize she was asked a specific question about the made-up racial implications of Holder-Gohmert exchange earlier this week, but whyyy did she have to immediately respond with the other ways in which she pretends to think Republicans are oh so racist and sexist? …I suppose relentlessly demagoguing the crap out of Republicans is practically in her job description, and we’ve long established that intellectual honesty isn’t really her thing — and since illegal immigration is the next big-ticket item on her pre-midterm docket with which to hammer Republicans while distracting from ObamaCare and energizing a blasé base, why not take every opportunity to make Republicans look as morally repugnant as possible despite the availability of other, more valid criticisms? Makes sense.

The California Democrat does not wield the speaker’s gavel anymore, but she’s hitting the road to bring attention to immigration, which she calls her top legislative priority. In recent weeks, she’s pitched an overhaul to audiences from Miami to Los Angeles to Laredo, Texas. The Pelosi immigration road show is unfolding as the issue remains on the back burner in the Republican-controlled House. … “It’s the biggest thing that we can do, and that’s why I’ve said to the speaker, to the press, to these groups, I would rather pass [a] comprehensive immigration reform bill than win the elections in November,” Pelosi said during the 30-minute interview. “There’s nothing we could accomplish in winning that would be as big as passing immigration reform.”

Related Posts: