STAMFORD, Conn., June 11, 2015 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- via PRWEB - Independence Holding Company (NYSE:IHC) ("IHC") today announced the formation of a new sales and marketing division called Aspira A Más, which will create professional career opportunities for Hispanics and will provide much needed major medical and ancillary health insurance products to Latinos living in the United States.

Initially, Aspira A Más will focus on recruiting advisors as well as offering insurance solutions to consumers in Miami and Phoenix, but will soon expand its outreach to Hispanic communities in many other metropolitan areas, including San Antonio, Dallas, Houston, Las Vegas and Chicago.

IHC also revealed that it has signed Cynthia Olavarria, star of Tierra de Reyes and a former Miss Puerto Rico, to be its spokesperson in a comprehensive social media and digital marketing campaign in conjunction with Telemundo television stations in the two target cities.

The Hispanic Institute, a leading Hispanic American empowerment organization headquartered in Washington D.C., has also recently endorsed Aspira A Más for its efforts to create career opportunities and provide low-cost valuable supplemental health plans, including dental, vision, accident medical, critical illness, short-term medical, as well as advising on ObamaCare plans.

David T. Kettig, Chief Operating Officer of IHC, commented, "IHC is uniquely positioned to be a leader in providing career opportunities for Hispanics to become licensed insurance advisors selling quality health and life products to members of the Latino community. This is an extremely hard-working community that often struggles to create career opportunities. Through the Aspira A Más division of our subsidiary, IHC Specialty Benefits, Inc., we aspire to create a community-based movement that will enable Hispanics to have careers as licensed professionals, while offering these advisors the ability to bring major medical and ancillary health coverages to their communities that will improve their well-being and quality of life."

Gus West, President of The Hispanic Institute, stated, "We are delighted to be a part of this important initiative which will benefit Latinos in multiple ways. Hispanics are widely recognized as one of the most under-insured demographic groups even after ObamaCare. Through our highly successful civic engagement initiatives, we will be able to assist Aspira A Más in a grassroots effort to license Hispanics as career advisors who will then work through community advocacy organizations to offer much needed coverages."

"Aspira A Más is an amazing opportunity where I can lend support to a wonderful project that will change many lives," said Cynthia Olavarria. "Year after year, there are reports about Hispanics lagging behind in health and employment. Now, a great company is doing something about it and I am very excited to engage with my community and help them be on a path to professional career where they help other Latinos."

Mr. Kettig added, "Ms. Olivarria is widely known in the Hispanic community not only as a popular television star and beauty pageant winner, but for her commitment to encouraging healthier lifestyles. With her help and that of The Hispanic Institute, we believe that we can succeed in recruiting, training and licensing Latino career advisors who will be committed to serving their communities."

Javier Tejeda-Vera, Vice President of Sales and Marketing for the Aspira A Más division, added, "I have been a professional in the insurance industry for most of my adult life, but it has always been my dream to find a way to give back to my community. Aspira A Más gives me that opportunity and I am confident that we will not only be a very successful sales and marketing division of IHC organization, but will also become recognized as a leading job creator and insurance provider in cities with large Hispanic populations across the country."

Aspira A Más will celebrate the launch at a news conference, at which Ms. Olavarria and other leaders of the Hispanic community will be present, in Miami on June 11, 2015, and unveil its social and digital media recruiting campaign immediately thereafter.

For more information, please visit us at http://www.AspiraAMas.com/press-room.

#

About Independence Holding Company

Independence Holding Company is a holding company principally engaged in the life and health insurance business, and the acquisition of blocks of policies, through its insurance company subsidiaries (Standard Security Life Insurance Company of New York, Madison National Life Insurance Company, Inc. and Independence American Insurance Company) and its marketing and administrative affiliates. Standard Security Life furnishes medical stop-loss, group major and limited medical, short-term medical, group long-term and short-term disability and life, group and individual dental, vision and various supplemental products. Madison National Life sells group life and disability, group major and limited medical, group and individual dental, individual life insurance and various supplemental products. Independence American offers pet insurance, non-subscriber occupational accident, short-term medical, medical stop-loss, group and individual dental and various supplemental products. IHC owns certain subsidiaries through its majority ownership of American Independence Corp. (NASDAQ: AMIC), which is a holding company principally engaged in the insurance and reinsurance business.

About IHC Specialty Benefits

IHC Specialty Benefits is a full-service marketing and distribution company that focuses on small employer, individual and consumer products. Products are marketed through general agents online, telebrokerage, career advisors, private label and directly to consumers.

About Aspira A Más:

Aspira A Más is a sales and marketing division of Independence Holding Company (NYSE:IHC) that is dedicated to serving the Hispanic community. Aspira A Más is a part of The IHC Group, whose carriers are rated A- (Excellent) by the AM Best Company, Inc. and which provide insurance products to more than 1 million customers. Aspira A Más offers qualified producer candidates with performance-based enthusiasm and commitment the professional support they need to be in business for themselves. Learn more about the Aspira A Más opportunity by visiting http://www.AspiraAMas.com, and come join us!

Forward-looking Statements

Certain statements and information contained in this release may be considered "forward-looking statements," such as statements relating to management's views with respect to future events and financial performance. Such forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from historical experience or from future results expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Potential risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, economic conditions in the markets in which IHC operates, new federal or state governmental regulation, IHC's ability to effectively operate, integrate and leverage any past or future strategic acquisition, and other factors which can be found in IHC's other news releases and filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. IHC expressly disclaims any duty to update its forward-looking statements unless required by applicable law.

This article was originally distributed on PRWeb. For the original version including any supplementary images or video, visit http://www.prweb.com/releases/2015/06/prweb12778120.htm

The IHC Group Jeena Choi +1 917-882-0960