Hot 8 Brass Band trumpeter Raymond Williams says the New Orleans Musicians' Clinic is vital to his health. "If I'm going to give my all on the stage every night, I've got to be healthy," he says in a video that is part of the city of New Orleans' pitch to be chosen for a City Accelerator civic engagement initiative.

The City Accelerator project funded by Living Cities and the Citi Foundation would help New Orleans connect residents with services offered by the Musicians' Clinic and dozens of other primary health clinics in neighborhoods across the city.

New Orleans is a finalist along with Los Angeles, Seattle, Atlanta, Albuquerque, Baltimore and Minneapolis. Several cities could make the cut, and New Orleanians can help the city make its case.

Community feedback on the videos produced by each city will be part of the selection process. Through Friday, April 3, you can watch the city's video, rate it and leave a comment at http://www.governing.com/cityaccelerator.

That's an easy way to help thousands of our neighbors in New Orleans who need these health services.

With support from City Accelerator, the New Orleans Health Department would develop strategies to let residents know what is available to them and how they can use clinic services. For instance, the clinics serve 56,000 patients, but some of them haven't been in for a checkup in 18 months.

Health Department director Charlotte Parent, who was a nurse at Touro Infirmary during Hurricane Katrina, said the sort of outreach her department wants to do is an integral part of public health.

She also emphasized the importance of the network of primary care clinics that blossomed in our region post-Katrina. "New Orleans is a city of neighborhoods," and residents needed vital services where they live, she said in the city's video.

Since the disaster, dozens of clinics have opened across the city and in Jefferson, Plaquemines and St. Bernard parishes. Others that existed before Katrina -- like the Musicians' Clinic, which has operated since 1998 -- have been able to serve more people.

That has been possible thanks mostly to federal funding and a waiver that allows residents here who are uninsured but don't qualify for Medicaid to get care at the nonprofit clinics.

Unfortunately, Gov. Bobby Jindal's administration zeroed out the clinics in the budget presented to the Legislature last month. Legislators must find a way to put the $7.7 million for the clinics back in. If not, another $12.6 million in federal matching money would be jeopardized.

The clinics have income from other patients, and the Musicians' Clinic and some others have ongoing fund-raising campaigns. But the budget cut recommended by the Jindal administration would force clinics to cut staff and services, said Susan Todd, executive director of the 504HealthNet coalition.

The federal Medicaid expansion that is part of the federal Affordable Care Act would cover many of these patients and tens of thousands of other low-income Louisiana residents. Gov. Jindal has refused to accept that money, but some lawmakers have introduced bills for the 2015 session in hopes of overruling him.

The Medicaid expansion would provide health coverage for more than 240,000 Louisiana uninsured residents and would provide a stream of revenue to help the primary care clinics in New Orleans thrive.

For his part, Mayor Mitch Landrieu is working hard to find resources to support the clinics' mission. "As a city, we want to use innovative techniques that help ensure all residents are taking part in our community's revival," he said in announcing the City Accelerator proposal. "We can't do this alone. We need the public's help. Please show your support and pride for the city of New Orleans."

It only takes a few minutes to watch the video and rate it. Do that, and then let your state senator and representative know how important it is to keep funding these clinics.