Update from the Tombstone Marshal's Office on the shooting during Tombstone's Helldorado Days.

The actor, Ken Curtis underwent surgery on Sunday night to remove the bullet, according to the Tombstone Marshal's Office. Curtis is doing good and will soon be released to recuperate at home, according to his wife.

The second person hit, a woman, has been identified. Debbie Mitchell had minor lacerations to her neck as a result of ricochet or shrapnel, said the release. She refused medical attention at the scene.

Cochise County Sheriff's Office is classifying this as an aggravated assault, based on the recklessness and serious injury involved.

There have not been any arrests and the report will be forwarded to the County Attorney's Office for review.

Earlier story:

It wasn't quite the "gunfight at the OK Corral," but a member of the Tombstone Vigilantes gunfight reenactment group accidentally shot another member of the Vigilantes Sunday afternoon, according to the Cochise County Sheriff's Office.

One of the Vigilantes arrived late and did not have his gun properly inspected. He then accidentally shot another member of the Vigilantes. The man was shot in the upper groin area sometime around 2 p.m. and had to be airlifted to the hospital, said CCSO spokeswoman Carol Capas.

According to an update from the Tombstone Marshal's Office, actors Tom Carter and victim Ken Curtis were facing off against each other when Carter fired his gun. Curtis fell to the ground after being hit by a live round.

Curtis was flown to Banner-University Medical Center to have the bullet removed.

The show was stopped immediately. Officials say it was discovered that there was a live round in the cylinder with five expended casings that indicated the gun had six live rounds in it before the skit. Officials say two live rounds hit nearby businesses.

A woman identified as Debbie Mitchell was hit while standing in front of the Bird Cage Theater, according to the Marshal's Office.

The woman was hit by shrapnel and refused medical treatment, Capas said.

The incident happened toward the end of the town's annual "Helldorado Days" weekend.

Officials say this is an isolated incident and that visitors should be assured that safety protocol will be enforced before any more gunfight skits on Allen Street.

Copyright 2015 Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.