For the nearly 6,000 people who turned out for the first two days of the Pathway to Health mega clinic in Los Angeles this week, the free eyeglasses, tooth extractions, echocardiograms, and even quick bump-and-lump surgery were care they likely would have gone without.

Most, like Jennifer Martinez, a 25-year-old who suffers from anemia and needed an EKG, were uninsured because they’re among the 2 million Californians who are undocumented and, under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act, did not qualify for subsidized health coverage.

But among those who stood in the long lines for free care at the Los Angeles Convention Center on Friday, was 54-year-old Carolina Herredia, who has Medi-Cal but still finds herself struggling for basic treatment. Herredia drove more than 20 miles from La Puente to downtown Los Angeles for a pair of glasses, which aren’t covered under Medi-Cal, California’s version of Medicaid. Sometimes, when her primary doctor is unavailable, she’ll go to an emergency department.

“Things are better now, because my doctors are all at County-USC,” Herredia said of Los Angeles County’s general hospital in Boyle Heights. “If I have an emergency, I can go to Kaiser (Permanente). They take all people on Medi-Cal now.”

Organizers for Pathway to Health, which was sponsored by Adventist Services & Industries, said they weren’t surprised they were seeing such crowds, including people with health insurance, several years into the Affordable Care Act.

“People come in for various reasons,” said Costin Jordache, spokesman for the event. “People will come here because they can’t afford the deductibles.”

In fact, organizers expected to see more people by Friday, the last day of the clinic, which began on Wednesday. Jordache said more than 4,000 volunteers were ready for every kind of care possible, including mental health services, basic surgery and even free tattoo removal. Most came in for dental and vision care, Jordache added. Neither an ID nor insurance was needed for the free care, Jordache said, and no questions were asked among those who sought services. But people did offer up stories about why they were there.

Some on Medi-Cal — the state’s healthcare program serving the poor – said they can’t get in to see physicians for specialty care.

At least 13.3 million, or one-third of Californians, are on Medi-Cal. In the last two years, 4.7 million people signed up for the program, and many of them were newly insured.

The surge has had an impact on the overall health are system across California.

Recent figures from the state’s Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development show 1.4 million people who were enrolled into Medi-Cal visited emergency departments across California in 2015, nearly double the number from 2011. But the data can be interpreted in two ways, said Anthony Wright, executive director for Health Access, a California-based consumer advocacy coalition.

Advertisement

“That’s not a reflection of people going to the ER more, but that people going are covered,” Wright said.

Wright pointed out that the number of uninsured who went to the emergency department decreased by 70 percent in four years, from a little more than 400,000 in 2011 to 236,000 in 2015.

“The data shows the success of the Affordable Care Act, because you see the number of people who are uninsured has gone down, and that’s good important progress,” Wright said. “The fact that people who do go to the ER who are covered, who are more likely to have a payment source, is good for the hospital.”

But Wright also said mega clinics such as Pathway to Health still are needed to fill the gaps in care and also to identify to policymakers where additional reforms need to go.

“I do think there is a concern when you have ER visits based on people who can’t see a doctor or specialists then they wind up at these free clinics,” Wright said. “We need to get to the point where these clinics are not needed because people are in regular systems of care. We obviously have more work to do.”

Some Providence Health & Services hospitals are seeing more Medi-Cal patients who still have no primary care physicians, said Kevin Traber, the administrative director of emergency at Providence Saint Joseph Medical Center in Burbank. That hospital saw a 9 percent increase in emergency room care last year compared with the same time this year.

“We’re looking to build a new ER to accommodate that future volume,” Traber said.

In San Pedro, Providence Little Company of Mary Medical Center also is expanding its emergency department. Hospitals also are partnering with Exer–More than Urgent Care, to expand access to affordable emergency care while reducing hospital wait times, he said.

Meanwhile, many patients who made it to the last day of Pathway to Health said they were grateful for the care they received.

Antonio Sixto, 63, said he is uninsured and undocumented and has never visited a doctor, but the lumps on his back were troubling. It turned out the benign bumps were knots of fat that were easily removed by Dr. Janice Schilling and her assistant, registered nurse Jack Wisdom.

“Bless you for doing this,” he told them as he sat up after the operation. “I can only imagine how much something like that would have cost.”