A CNN documentary on Nathan Dunlap’s 1993 murder rampage and death sentence aired Sunday night amid growing debate about capital punishment in Colorado — and about two weeks after the governor said in an interview for that show that he could grant Dunlap clemency.

The documentary did not include Gov. John Hickenlooper’s clemency comments — which were obtained by a political blogger through an open-records request for the interview recording — though it did outline how the case has become a political talking point in this year’s gubernatorial election. Hickenlooper told CNN he could grant Dunlap clemency if he is not re-elected in November.

“I think Nathan deserves to meet his maker,” Bobby Stephens, the sole survivor of Dunlap’s rampage, said on the show.

The 45-minute documentary is part of CNN’s “Death Row Stories.” The show details how Dunlap shot five people, four of them fatally, at an Aurora Chuck E. Cheese where he once worked. CNN said they chose not to include Hickenlooper’s clemency comments because they could be a “distraction” to voters.

Hickenlooper — who is barely featured in the documentary — granted Dunlap a temporary reprieve in May 2013 after a judge set a date for his execution following years of appeals. “We knew that when we were making this decision, we were making the hardest decision — we would be criticized from both sides,” Hickenlooper, who is against the death penalty, said on the show of the reprieve. “We try to hear all the voices and all the perspectives, but you try to get to justice.”

He added: “That’s part of the governor’s role, when the governor comes in after this whole arc of judicial process and has to say, ‘Did we miss anything? Is this really the right decision?’ “

The documentary also outlines the 2005 killings of Javad Marshall-Fields and his fiancée, Vivian Wolfe, for which Sir Mario Owens and Robert Ray were sentenced to death and are now appealing.

George Brauchler, the 18th Judicial District Attorney and outspoken death penalty advocate whose office is presiding over the prosecution of James Holmes for the 2012 Aurora theater shooting, is prominently featured in the show, criticizing Hickenlooper’s handling of the Dunlap case.

“There’s one person in Colorado that is more interested in the governor being re-elected than even the governor, and that’s Nathan Dunlap,” Brauchler told CNN.