Matching patients and donors

Matching patients with donor organs is a complex process, with medical, ethical and practical considerations. But there often are still many potential matches for each available kidney. So how to decide who gets it? "We of course prioritize prior living donors; we prioritize pediatric patients," says Mark Aeder, a transplant surgeon at University Hospitals Case Medical Center. He’s also vice-chair of the Kidney Transplantation Committee at UNOS, the United Network for Organ Sharing, which oversees transplants in the U.S. His committee worked for years to come up with a better way to allocate kidneys to needy patients. The changes took effect Dec. 4th. Aeder says kids and previous organ donors are still high-priority on the waiting list. And he says most patients won’t see much change in wait time. But for some, the new rules will make a dramatic difference. Kidney donor facts

Nearly 3,000 patients are added monthly

4,453 people died in 2013 waiting for a kidney 120,000+ waiting for an organ. 101,000 are for kidneys

In 2013, about 17,000 kidney transplants took place

The majority of donors are related to the recipient Conductor Mike Brown

Conductor Mike Brown tries to whip up some Christmas cheer aboard his tiny train at Kringle’s Inventionasium, a kids’ holiday attraction at Tower City Center in downtown Cleveland. Brown has a seasonal job with the Indians, is in college full-time, and he loves to act. He has to fit all of that around what amounts to another part-time job: dialysis. At his dialysis center, Brown settles into an easy chair next to a boxy machine he relies on to do the work his kidneys don’t. He looks away as the nurse inserts two needles into his forearm, one to take the blood out, one to bring it back in. In between, the machine cleans it of waste and removes excess fluid. "This is where I will sit for the next four-and-a-half hours," Brown said. Three times a week over last 12 years

Brown, who’s 31, has been coming for dialysis three times a week for nearly 12 years. Afterward, he’s drained and can’t do much. It limits his activities, especially travel. "You have to plan an entire day around doing this," Brown said. But earlier this month, because of the policy changes made by Mark Aeder and his colleagues at UNOS, Brown moved years ahead on the transplant waiting list. First come, first serve

Many variables determine a patient’s place in line, but in large part, it’s first-come-first-served. Brown could have gotten listed years ago when his kidneys failed, but he says surgery scared him. Three years ago, a new doctor insisted he consider it. He’d live better and longer with a transplant. He got in line. Under the old rules, he still had a few more years to wait. Aeder says patients with earlier and better medical care often get listed sooner. "We find that not everybody had the same opportunity, if you will, for listing at an equivalent time." Leveling the field

To help level the playing field, UNOS is now giving patients like Mike Brown waiting time credit back to when they started dialysis. As a result, Aeder says Brown is likely to get a new kidney within the next six months. The new rules also prioritize biologically hard-to-match patients, so they aren’t overlooked when a compatible organ is available. Better matching patients

Along with making the system more equitable, Aeder says the changes also maximize use of a scarce resource, by better matching patients and organs based on their likely longevity. "We modeled well over 50 different allocation schemes…and this system seemed to provide the most additional life years of any of the other algorithms," Aeder said. Just a week after the changes kicked in, Mike Brown got his first phone call about a potential kidney match. "I was excited, I was almost in tears," said Brown. He was one of a handful of patients put on standby. "You know, I have to think about, ‘God, what would it be like, not to have to do this every other day of my life?’" Brown said. Brown ended up losing out to someone higher on the waiting list. But he knows it’s a good sign. It’ll be his turn soon.



_________________________________

Local organizations

To become a donor or contribute or want more information on kidney transplants you can visit these sites:

lifebanc.org

National Kidney Foundation

Cleveland Clinc