Bay Port's Draden Anderson (left) runs into a wall of Arrowhead defenders including Robert Tanke (right) in their game in Oshkosh. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

Oshkosh — Arrowhead's rebuilding year could turn into a championship season.

Although the Warhawks's three losses were their highest total since 2005, they closed the regular season with three straight victories to win a share of the Classic 8 title. In the playoffs, Arrowhead appears to have gotten stronger each week.

The Warhawks dismantled previously undefeated Bay Port, 42-28, Friday in a WIAA Division 1 state semifinal at UW-Oshkosh to reach the championship game for the third straight year.

That set up a monster final at 4 p.m. Friday at Camp Randall Stadium. On one sideline will be Arrowhead, the two-time Division 1 state champion. On the other will be undefeated Kimberly, the 2013 Division 2 champion, and a team widely considered the best in the state this season.

"I'm so impressed with how these kids have developed over the course of the year," Arrowhead coach Greg Malling said. "We didn't want to be, but we said we could be a 6-3 team and still make a run at it."

The path to victory Friday started on defense as the unit quickly got a rein on Pirates senior quarterback Alec Ingold. The Northern Illinois recruit entered play with 3,562 yards, 2,272 on the ground.

He finished the night with 52 yards rushing in eight carries and completed 16 of 36 passes for 121 yards, one touchdown and one interception.

"(Defensive coordinator Sal) Logue put together a very good scheme," senior linebacker Andy Hessler said. "I thought they couldn't run the ball very well, so they had to pass and that wasn't their bread and butter. They had to change it up a little bit."

Meanwhile, Arrowhead junior Johnny Duranso completed eight of 14 passes for 173 yards and two touchdowns and ran nine times for 157 yards and three scores. He led an attack that generated 437 yards and averaged 9.3 yards per play.

Arrowhead started slowly, though. Bay Port scored the game's first points on a 18-yard run by senior Blair Van Ess with 6 minutes 15 seconds left in the first quarter to cap a nine play, 80-yard drive that began after an Arrowhead fumble inside the 5 gave the Pirates a touchback.

That would be Arrowhead's last misstep for a while.

Three plays into the Warhawks' next possession, Duranso went over the top of the defense for a 60-yard touchdown pass to junior Nick Bastien.

And after Bay Port fumbled the ensuing kickoff, Duranso scored on a 13-yard run, and senior Peyton Peterson's extra point gave Arrowhead a 14-6 lead with 4:23 left in the first quarter.

"We had a few things break for us," Malling said of the offense. "We're playing well."

The big plays continued for Arrowhead.

In the second quarter, Duranso hit senior Jordan Argue down the sideline for a 41-yard touchdown 8:52 before the half. Duranso capped the half with a 72-yard run down the Arrowhead sideline to make it a 28-6 game with 1:51 left in the half.

It would be only a matter of time before the Warhawks clinched another trip to Madison, one that Duranso said has been sparked by the team's seniors.

"They're so dedicated to the game," he said. "They just don't want to go home, so they step up big in the playoffs."