Menounos was once a size 14 but has since dropped 40 lbs., slimmed down to a size 2, and maintained a healthy and fit figure.

Menounos was once a size 14 but has since dropped 40 lbs., slimmed down to a size 2, and maintained a healthy and fit figure. Janissa Delzo, YouTube

Between hosting Extra TV, starring in her own reality television series, being the CEO of AfterBuzz TV, how did Maria Menounos manage to lose 40 lbs. and keep it off?

You can read all about it in her new book, The EveryGirl’s Guide To Diet And Fitness, a follow-up to her 2011 book, The EveryGirl’s Guide to Life. But who is the "EveryGirl"? In one of the first few pages of her book, she explains just that:

Everygirl (n): A term in this book that literally refers to every girl out there, young or old, single or married, rich or poor who lacks time in their day and money to spend, either because they are struggling financially or are just wise and thrifty, but more than anything wants to improve their lives and to grow.

Menounos’ book features a wide range of health information, including 11 diet and fitness rules to live by, 13 steps that helped Maria drop 40 lbs., a guide to gyms and exercise, delicious healthy recipes, and much more. Some A-list celebrities, like Khloe Kardashian, Bethenny Frankel, Suzanne Somers, and others, offer some healthy living advice.

Photo courtesy of Janissa Delzo Photo courtesy of Janissa Delzo

A brief look into some of Menounos’ many EveryGirl Tips:

“The Skinny On Wrinkles: If I haven’t convinced you that you don’t need to be thin as a rail for health reasons, then consider the fact that when you’re skinny, the wrinkles on your face show more because you lack the fat on your face to fill them out!” “Avoid Crash Dieting: Short-term crash diets often slow your metabolism, so that when you return to eating normally you’ll gain weight back faster. Worse your body instinctively puts on extra pounds as a kind of insurance in case you’re foolish enough to attempt another crash diet down the road.” “Run Your Body On High-Quality Fuel: If you put low-grade fuel in your car, the result is a car that runs like crap, with a shortened life expectancy. Put high-grade quality fuel in your car and the result is a car that runs well and lasts longer. The same can be said for your body, as is shown by people like my father. Give your body quality fuel — food that comes from the ground — and you’ll get the same results! Not processed food. Real food.” “Pick Up A Magic Bullet Blender: I use mine constantly to blend healthy shakes and dressings. Fast to use, space saving, and easy to clean – they are a convenient kitchen and weight-loss companion.”

Photo courtesy of Pat Lambert Photo courtesy of Pat Lambert

At Maria’s June 5 book signing at Trina Turk in Manhattan, I got the scoop on the biggest takeaway she wants you to have from her book. Listen to what she had to say:

Pick up a copy of Maria’s book for $13.99 at Barnes and Noble or on Amazon.