Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker checks out a motorcycle after speaking to several hundred supporters during a stop in North Charleston Wednesday morning at Low Country Harley-Davidson. This was the his first visit to the area since declaring his candidacy to become President. (Brad Nettles/Staff) 7/15/15

Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker previewed his presidential priorities for about 200 GOP faithful during an appearance Wednesday morning at Low Country Harley- Davidson — repealing Obamacare and the Iran pact and taking on unions.

Online To stay up-to-date on South Carolina politics, go to palmettopolitics.com or download the Palmetto Politics app for iOS or Android.

Walker, who became the 16th Republican presidential hopeful on Monday, has led polls in Iowa and hoped to solidify his standing in the first Southern state to hold a presidential primary next year.

Walker, who said he had worn his “Harley boots” to the North Charleston business, talked about his upbringing in Wisconsin, the son of a Baptist minister whose first jobs included washing dishes and flipping burgers. He also talked about his accomplishments as governor, including surviving a 2012 recall election.

His 25-minute speech also outlined his vision if elected president, with repealing Obamacare and the newly announced Iran nuclear agreement at the top of his agenda.

He is running on his record in Wisconsin, where he received steady applause while noting his successful efforts to promote Republican red-meat issues such as touting concealed carry laws, defunding Planned Parenthood and requiring a photo ID to vote.

“If those reforms can work in a blue state like the one I live in, they can work anywhere,” he said.

He praised South Carolina and Gov. Nikki Haley for showing the nation how to become united after last month’s fatal shooting of nine people at an Emanuel AME Church Bible study in Charleston.

While Walker visited Charleston this spring, Wednesday marked his first visit since making his presidential run official. He talked about not having slept in 24 hours, partly because he flew Tuesday from Las Vegas to Memphis. Tenn., and then missed a connecting flight in Atlanta.

“So a little before 3 o’clock this morning, we left Atlanta and drove here because we didn’t want to let you down,” said Walker, who ran about 45 minutes late.

Kristi Caldwell of North Charleston grew up in Wisconsin and was impressed. “As of today, I made up my mind because he’s on the money,” she said. “If he can do it in Wisconsin, he can do it all over this country.”

However, Republican Marc Knapp said Walker was his top choice — at least until Donald Trump entered the fray.

“I like Donald because he reminds me of me,” Knapp said. While he agreed with Walker, “I didn’t hear anything about immigration. That’s one thing I wanted to hear,” Knapp said.

But Jim Davis, the South Carolina GOP’s 1st District chair, said Walker is near the top of his list because he’s “firm, not fiery silly.”

“He (Walker) doesn’t just throw out gratuitous stuff to get people fired up,” Davis said.

Elaine Magliacane of North Charleston said Walker is among her top choices, saying she is particularly pleased with how he stood up to the unions there.

Greg Burlos of Mount Pleasant was among those who arrived early in the morning to wait for Walker.

“If I had to vote today, it would be for this guy,” Burlos said, adding that he liked Walker’s relative youth (at 47, he is the fourth youngest in the 16-candidate GOP field) and thought he would make a great ticket with Florida Sen. Marco Rubio.

“If we nominate an old white guy, we’re done,” Burlos said. “The old white guy is done.”

Reach Robert Behre at 937-5771.