Christine Buttorff, Christine Eibner, and Katherine Carman

January 28, 2016

Editor’s note: For the reasons explained below by the post authors, Health Affairs editors have removed the original post.

On January 28, 2016, we published a blog post highlighting the possibility that marketplace enrollees in some counties might not have access to the second-lowest cost silver plan in their health insurance rating area, a situation that could affect their federal tax credit calculation. While it is true that individuals in some counties may lack access to all plans in the rating area, the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Planning and Evaluation at the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) has since clarified that tax credits are currently being calculated in a manner that addresses potential within-rating area differences stemming from lack of access to equivalent plans.

The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) regulations state that premium tax credits are based on the second-lowest cost silver plan in a consumer’s rating area. The regulations allow for flexibility in the calculation of the tax credit in several circumstances, such as in the event that the second-lowest cost silver plan is closed to further enrollment. However, the regulations do not specifically address a situation in which the second-lowest cost silver plan in a rating area is available in only a subset of counties. Based on our initial understanding of these regulations, which we verified with several sources, it appeared that a person residing in a county without access to the second-lowest cost silver plan would be required to pay more out-of-pocket to enroll in equivalent coverage than a person with access to the second-lowest cost silver plan, even if those individuals had equivalent incomes.

HHS has since clarified that, as implemented, the calculation for determining tax credits is based on the cost of the second-lowest cost silver plan available to the individual, whether or not that plan is the second-lowest cost plan in the rating area. The approach takes into account the fact that, within rating area, plan options may vary across geographic locations. As a result, tax credits for individuals in different counties will vary depending on the plans available, even if the counties are located within the same rating area. Therefore, the concern raised in our initial blog post—that some consumers may be required to pay more for equivalent coverage—has already been addressed.