ADVERTISEMENT

New York (MainStreet) — The Congressional Budget Office has scored a bill proposed by House Republicans that would amend the employer mandate in the Affordable Care Act, changing the law’s definition of “full time” from 30 hours per week to 40. If passed into law, according to the CBO, the Save American Workers Act would cost approximately 1 million people their health insurance and add just over $53 billion to the deficit over ten years. It would also save businesses almost $55 billion in ACA penalties over that same time period.

One million Americans would lose coverage, 500,000 would remain uninsured.

According to the report, changing the terms of the employer mandate to require 40 hours of work per week would cause about 1 million people losing their health insurance. Many of them would qualify for coverage elsewhere, either through insurance exchange subsidies, Medicaid or the Children’s Health Insurance Program. Up to 500,000 would not and would remain uninsured.



Read More: House of Representatives Dynamic Scoring Likely to Lead to Lower Taxes, Higher Deficits

Sponsors of the Save American Workers Act argue that raising the definition of full time would prevent employers from cutting hours in order to avoid giving benefits, for example reducing an employee’s schedule from 31 hours per week to 29. In practice; however, a 40 hour cap would make far more workers vulnerable to this kind of manipulation because more people work a 40- to 44-hour week.

According to numbers presented by head of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities Robert Greenstein, only approximately 7% of American workers work between 30 and 34 hours per week. A plurality, 44%, work 40 hours per week. While employers might currently shave hours from part time workers to avoid the mandate, the CBO concluded, “because many more workers work 40 hours per week (or slightly more) than work 30 hours per week (or slightly more), H.R. 30 could lead employers to make changes that would affect many more workers than will be affected under current law.”