Beauty Bible beauty clinic: What are the best affordable make-up products on the market?



Our weekly Q&A from the Beauty Bible experts Sarah Stacey and Josephine Fairley, whose latest book is The Anti-Ageing Beauty Bible . Their series of Beauty Bible books are now bestsellers worldwide – and this column solves your beauty dilemmas. Visit their website, beautybible.com , for lots more information, tips and exclusive offers. If you have any beauty dilemma you would like them to answer, you can e-mail them there too.

Visit their website, beautybible.com , to source any of the products mentioned below online – and for lots more information, tips and exclusive offers.

Q I am on a tight budget and wonder if you can advise on good cosmetics with a small price tag? I like to look good but I can't afford much.

A There are some really fabulous affordable brands, according to X Factor head make-up artist Julia Carta, who we met at a recent launch for US mineral brand Sheer Cover. (It is good but one snag, which we mentioned to the brand, is that you can currently only buy it online, sheercover.co.uk. However, if you know and love it already, then you are good to go!)

In-store brands that Julia rates include Danish beauty steal range GOSH, which is available at Superdrug stores nationwide: we are big fans too, incidentally. ‘I love GOSH for its extensive choice of products with a wide range of colours and textures that cater for all skin tones. It’s affordable, high quality and the pigments are strong,’ says Julia.One hero product is the new GOSH Click ‘n Conceal concealer: ‘It’s brilliant and can be applied under the eyes to conceal dark circles and brighten the whole eye area, as well as reducing puffiness.’ GOSH Velvet Touch Foundation Primer, £7.99, was one of the award-winning products in our book Beauty Bible Beauty Steals. See the range online at superdrug.com

Julia also rates Rimmel highly: ‘Again the range is extensive, affordable and there are some real heroes such as the Kate Moss lipsticks and lip pencils, which are long-lasting and will take you anywhere.’ Julia also recommends Rimmel Scandal Eyes Mascaras, ‘which have a fabulous big brush to lengthening and volumising corner to corner’, and their eyeliners, ‘some of the softest I have ever used’. Find Rimmel at Boots stores and online a t boots.com.

Foundation-wise, Julia recommends Bourjois. Again that’s a big favourite of ours. There’s a wide range, including Bio Detox Organic, fresh and even foundation, £10, and 10 Hour Sleep Effect Foundation, £9.99, from Boots nationwide if you want to try before you buy, and boots.com if you prefer to shop online . (Remember Bourjois is owned by the same company as Chanel and has access to the same research and development…)

For blushers, both cream and powder, we suggest you explore Maybelline , Max Factor and Bourjois , which all did well when our Beauty Bible Beauty Steals testers trialled them. All available at Boots in store and online.

For eye shadow, Julia particularly rates MUA Makeup Academy shadows and palettes: ‘They offer a wide range of colours, with great pigment and super longlasting.’ Again MUA is only available online from muastore.co.uk so if you prefer to play before buying, try hit the high street. (Ordering online is great for exploring your options and for second time round, when you know exactly what you want.)

Follow Julia Carta on Twitter, @julia_carta and watch her on youtube.com

Beauty Bible ♥ Liz Earle Superskin Hand Serum

We're longstanding fans of the ultra-nourishing Liz Earle Superskin range and this latest treat is a must-have for the bedside table for all fellow devotees.



More than a hand cream, it's an active treatment designed to have a firming, smoothing, age-defying action.