Every year, the powerful conservative group Club for Growth rates our nation's lawmakers on how closely their votes align with the Club's agenda - which primarily involves shrinking the size of government, limiting regulation, and cutting taxes.

The scorecards are compiled from votes that CFG designates as "key votes" - opportunities to support legislation CFG favors, or vote against legislation CFG opposes. Republicans like now-retired Oklahoma Sen. Tom Coburn lead the Senate with a 100 percent score - the only senator to receive that score - while only a handful of House Democrats have scores above 30 percent.

"2014's Congressional Scorecard has few surprises. In general, those who believe in economic freedom will be recognized for their consistency and those who do not, will not," CFG President David McIntosh said in a press release.

Key House votes for the Club on this scorecard include a vote against a bill that would have allowed people to "keep their plan" rather than adopt healthcare plans under the Affordable Care Act, Keystone Pipeline approval, and a vote against extending the debt ceiling. CFG assigns each key vote a point value - those that vote the way the Club wants get the points, those that don't receive no points.

There were fewer votes to draw data from in the upper house.

"In the Senate, Harry Reid's decision to shut down the Senate meant an unusually small pool of votes related to economic issue," McIntosh said. "While some Senators' scores may seem out of character for 2014, those who have a long-standing commitment to free markets and pro-growth policies still have lifetime scores over 90. Club members always look at someone's entire record when evaluating their commitment to tax cuts, entitlement reform and limited government principles."

A Senator from Alabama, Republican Jeff Sessions, had the second-highest score in the Senate in 2014, with a 98 percent rating from the group. Rep. Mo Brooks had the highest score in the House among Alabama representatives, with an 88 percent score. Brooks had the 37th highest CFG score in the House.

The group is known for spending lavishly on opposition to lawmakers it disagrees with, and for supporting primary and general election challenges to lawmakers who don't fit its mold.

The Club was quite active in Alabama in the last election cycle. Its PAC, Club for Growth Action, spent more than $430,000 in independent expenditures in Alabama races in 2014, according to OpenSecrets.org. Most of that money was spent against Republicans Will Brooke and Paul DeMarco, who both failed to earn the Republican nomination for Alabama's 6th Congressional District (Gary Palmer would win that primary and the general election, and replace retiring Rep. Spencer Bachus in Congress). The Club ran ads against DeMarco and Brooke.

Here are the Club for Growth rankings for the Alabama delegation to the House:

State ▼ Dist Party Name Rank Score Lifetime AL 4 R Aderholt, Robert 127 64% 63% AL 6 R Bachus, Spencer* 119 67% 68% AL 5 R Brooks, Mo 37 88% 85% AL 1 R Byrne, Bradley 71 77% 77% AL 2 R Roby, Martha 186 46% 56% AL 3 R Rogers, Mike 101 70% 56% AL 7 D Sewell, Terri 413 2% 12%

And to the Senate:

State ▼ Party Name Rank Score Lifetime AL R Sessions, Jefferson 2 98% 87% AL R Shelby, Richard 19 76% 77%

See all the rankings for the House, and for the Senate.

* Bachus retired at the end of 2014, and was replaced by Rep. Gary Palmer, also a Republican.