Buy Photo (NEWS) 07/26/15 Freehold, NJ The Monmouth County Fair was held at East Freehold Showgrounds on Kozloski Road in Freehold from July 22-26, 2015. Shown at the event is Charlotte Callicott of Aberdeen, Md. (Photo: Frank Galipo/Special to the Press)Buy Photo

FREEHOLD – Each year, tens of thousands of people come to the Monmouth County Fair for its animal shows, carnival food, thrilling rides and historic demonstrations.

The 41st Monmouth County Fair — which draws about 80,000 people each year — came to a close Sunday at the East Freehold Showgrounds. The last of the visitors purchased tickets for looping rides, tried the rock climbing wall, bought fried foods and sausage sandwiches, or roamed the tents farm animals.

“It’s about family fun. It’s about getting people out,” said Karen Jarmusz, a Monmouth County Parks employee and chairwoman of this year’s event.

If you missed the fair, here are three reasons to go next year:

1. Animal culture

Sarah Bond, a 17-year-old Colts Neck High School student from Marlboro, cradled an amber, black and white Belgian d’Uccle chicken in her arms as fair visitors roamed the poultry tent.

“I love talking to them about my chickens,” said Bond, who has participated in Monmouth County’s 4-H Club since fifth grade. Her chicken Rose, “has got great personality. A lot of people think chicken’s don’t have personality because they’re birds, but they do, just like a dog or a cat.”

And like a cat or dog, Bond said her chickens are pets, not food.

Each year, the 4-H Club and other groups fill the fair with farm animals: sheep, horses, pigs, ducks, even bees in a enclosed glass closet. Pig races, sheep herding demonstration and horse costume contests are among some of the crowd’s favorite events.

Gene Sheninger of Wayside Farm in Rockaway Township brought his 6-year-old border collie, named Sweet, to herd sheep for a fair demonstration.

Sheninger tried herding solo years ago, and quickly learned the benefits of working with a dog for a partner.

“It took me all day to catch my dozen sheep,” he recalled, but Sweet’s ability to anticipate his instructions made the job simpler.

Sweet knows what to do and where to do based on where Sheninger stands, or from his brief whistle blows.

“It’s like poetry in motion, to watch these dogs in action,” he said.

2. Carnival chow-down

No fair would be complete without favorite foods like snowcones, ice cream, hotdogs and fresh lemonade. But the Monmouth County Fair also carried some unusual offerings, like Carnival Cater’s fried peanut butter and jelly sandwiches and chicken-waffle sandwiches.

Buy Photo (NEWS) 07/26/15 Freehold, NJ The Monmouth County Fair was held at East Freehold Showgrounds on Kozloski Road in Freehold from July 22-26, 2015. The event featured amuusements, food, games of chance, animal and wildlife demonstrations. Logan Simon (10) of Marlboro (right) played a game of chance at the fair. (Photo: Frank Galipo/Special to the Press)

“It’s more trending down south,” said Sparkle Voorand, who owns the Millstone-based eatery with her husband Eric.

To prepare for the five-day fair, they ordered about 800 pounds of chicken, and scoured farmers’ markets to stock up on ingredients for their fried blooming onions.

“Blooming onions have been huge,” said Voorand. “We’ve been going through 150 a day.”

3. Local artisans

The fair is filled with artists of all talents, from jewelry makers, pianists, jugglers to puppet dinosaurs.

The event “is a lot of fun,” said Ken Ingalls, who makes homemade candles for his Little House Candles company based in Plumsted. “I enjoy the family aspect of it.”

Local musicians such as the Amish Outlaws, Motor City Revue, Dr. Cheeko and After the Reign performed over the fair’s five days, and drew attendees from across the state.

“I love the atmosphere. I love the entertainment,” said Miriam Garcia of Middletown, who carried her 11-month-old granddaughter Lila Marie Anderson around the animal pens.

Garcia said this year’s trip to the fair is bitter sweet, because it’s her last before she moves to Texas.

“I wanted to make sure I brought my granddaughter so she would experience it,” Garcia said.

Jarmusz, the fair’s chairwoman, said the event is about celebrating Monmouth County’s agricultural heritage but also about family fun.

“It’s just our way of inviting the families out for a good time,” she said.

Amanda Oglesby: 732-557-5701; aoglesby@GannettNJ.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1MQLD86