Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

3

»

Westcliffe celebrated the Fourth of July with a day full of community fun. The festivities began at 7 a.m. with a pancake breakfast hosted by All Aboard Westcliffe behind the historic Denver Rio Grande Railroad Depot on Main Street.

"We're raising money to restore the original depot. This is where the trains stopped and turned around that came up from Texas Creek," said Addie Heck, Westcliffe resident and member of the nonprofit.

The Westcliffe Depot was built in 1901 and decommissioned in 1938, and All Aboard Westcliffe aims to restore it as a historical artifact.

People fueled up on pancakes and biscuits and gravy to get ready for the day. As the sun climbed, locals and visitors started lining up in their red, white, and blue for the Independence Day parade, and American flags hung from awnings up and down the street.

Led by the American Legion, Grand Marshaled by local World War II veteran Clarence Gill, and presided over by an emcee in front of the Historic Jones Theater, the parade began with cheers from the crowd. Gathered to honor service men and women, paradegoers saluted and applauded the color guard, veterans associations, Custer County Sheriff's Office, local fire districts and Custer County Search and Rescue.

The parade was sponsored by the Wild West Cowboy Church and the Sangre de Cristo Sentinel and was celebrated as a Second Amendment open carry demonstration. Organizations and groups rode on floats and horses and marched on foot displaying their firearms.

Advertisement

"Any time I see U.S. citizens exercising their Second Amendment rights, it makes me feel that what we do is noticed and worthwhile," said Army Sgt. E5 Mark Auvil, who traveled from Fort Carson with members of the 588th Brigade Engineer Battalion to serve as color guard in the parade.

In addition to demonstration, a lot of groups were there for fun, including an Open Carry Guitar Band that exercised their right to carry guitars in public (while playing kazoos), the high school volleyball team, local ranches and churches and many more.

After the parade, the community was invited to a picnic hosted by the Custer County Democratic Party at the Feed Store Amphitheater. The organization served up free hamburgers, hot dogs and live music and did not accept donations. It was the second year the Democrats hosted a picnic after the parade.

"Last year, we had about a hundred people, but this year is beyond what we imagined," said Roland Williams, party chair. " I bought 300 hamburgers and 500 hot dogs, 60 pounds of potato salad, and we are almost out of food already — at noon."

"We want everyone to feel welcome. There are plenty of times to make political statements, but the Fourth of July is a time to celebrate our country and come together as a community. I'd love one year to see the Republican, Libertarian, and Democratic parties come together and hold a communitywide picnic," Williams said.

The grand finale of the day was yet to come. People gathered on the shoreline of Lake DeWeese by RVs, tents, blankets and tailgates to watch fireworks at dusk. Some even took their boats out on the lake for the show, and the lights of campfires dotted the landscape.

The Wet Mountain Valley Fire District and All Aboard Westcliffe hosted the annual event and put on quite the spectacle. The patriotic blaze of color exploded in the sky, reflecting off the lake and providing the perfect ending to the community's Independence Day celebration.

"I visit Westcliffe once a summer because it's such an artsy and wonderful community," said Art Twitchell, Florida resident. "I love what they do for the 4th of July, and I can't miss next weekend's bluegrass festival."

Another popular event in the community, High Mountain Hay Fever Bluegrass and Gospel Festival is July 9-12. For more information, visit www.highmountainhayfever.com.