Welcome to our inaugural edition of PostWorthy, where we’ll take you behind the scenes with veteran Washington Post reporters and editors to collect their personal thoughts, insights and observations about some of the most important stories of the moment.



Today, national political correspondent James Hohmann talked to Bob Barnes, a Post reporter and editor since 1987, about his experiences covering the Supreme Court (which he has done for nearly a decade). So Barnes has a keen sense of the justices and the law.

Because the justices wait until the end of their term to hand down the most momentous blockbusters, June is the busiest month of the year for a SCOTUS reporter. On Tuesday afternoon, Barnes answered a few of our questions about what to expect in the newsy next few days.

What are the most consequential Supreme Court decisions we’re still awaiting?

The term will really be known for two cases: King v. Burwell, about whether subsidies for Obamacare will continue to be available to people in states that did not set up their own exchanges, and Obergefell v. Hodges, which asks if the Constitution requires states to offer marriage licenses to same-sex couples. But there is also a challenge to the EPA’s plan to limit emissions of toxic pollutants from coal and oil-fired power plants (Michigan v. EPA); whether anti-discrimination protections in the Fair Housing Act extend to policies with a so-called disparate impact (Texas Dept. of Housing and Community Affairs v. Inclusive Communities Project); and a challenge to one of the drugs used in lethal injections (Glossip v. Gross).

Washington Post Supreme Court reporter Bob Barnes

There is buzz around town that the justices will side with the government in King v. Burwell. What do you make of that?

Anyone who feels confident predicting what’s going on inside the Supreme Court as the justices write this opinion is probably wrong. The oral argument showed a divided court, and it will probably come down to Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Anthony Kennedy, the court’s most influential justices. I will say that Obamacare proponents have done an effective job of pointing out the real-life consequences of an adverse ruling. I was a little surprised President Obama weighed in again this week, saying the court probably should not have taken the case. But he is right that if the court rules against the government, the remedy is a one-sentence bill by Congress (although no one expects that to happen).

Anthony Kennedy is widely seen as the swing vote on the gay marriage case. If SCOTUS recognizes a Constitutional right to same-sex marriage, what are the chances that the majority would be greater than 5-4? Who are the conservative justices most likely to join such a majority?

It would seem from the dissents conservatives wrote two years ago in the Proposition 8 and the federal Defense of Marriage Act cases that only Roberts could be in play. Although Roberts would have upheld DOMA, he made a point of noting that the court was not deciding whether state laws restricting marriage only to a man and a woman are unconstitutional. At oral argument, he raised an intriguing question about whether bans on same-sex marriage might violate protections against sex discrimination. He also seemed to be the only justice very interested in the second question in the case: whether states that do not offer same-sex marriage must recognize those unions performed in states that do.

Your story on the Court’s Jerusalem ruling led the paper Tuesday. Looking beyond the facts of the case, how big of a deal do you think this will be for executive power long-term?

Hard to know. It was a decisive victory for the executive branch, but pretty cautious in limiting the question to recognition of foreign nations and their boundaries. The majority opinion written by Kennedy seemed to make clear that the president takes the lead in foreign policy, but that there is plenty of room for Congress to act. Kennedy went out of his way to say the administration’s position that the executive branch has “exclusive authority to conduct diplomatic relations” was asking for too much.

What’s been the biggest surprise for you so far this term?

Two things:

The interaction among the justices during the lethal injection oral arguments was as tendentious as I’ve ever seen. There was such infighting that Roberts granted the advocates additional time to make their arguments without interruption. The court spends an outsized portion of its time on death penalty cases, and there is clearly some bad blood between the justices.

The other is that Roberts wrote the court’s opinion (Williams-Yulee v. Florida Bar) upholding a Florida prohibition on judicial candidates personally asking for campaign contributions. Just about every question and comment he made during oral arguments pointed in the other direction. It is a good reminder that those sessions are not always predictive.

If you’re not following Barnes on Twitter, you should. He’s @SCOTUSreporter.