As Boulder celebrates its Sesquicentennial with a bell ringing on Feb. 10, 2009, Sid Anderson joins fellow Boulderado employees Beverly Silva and Laurel McKown, far right. ( Courtesy photo )

In 1984, I walked into the Hotel Boulderado and asked if I could buy a book about the hotel's past. I was told there wasn't one, so I ended up writing it myself. But this isn't about me or the hotel.

It's about my longtime mentor and friend, the former general manager, Sid Anderson.

Sid retired last month, leaving a huge void in the day-to-day operations of one of downtown Boulder's most well-known and venerable landmarks. I'm proud he gave me the opportunity to help him preserve the hotel's place in Boulder history.

Sid was enthusiastic about the need for written documentation, so he underwrote the book project. In 1985, while construction began on the hotel's then-new, 61-room annex, he and I dredged up old ledgers and newspaper articles and sorted through historical photographs dating to the hotel's opening in 1909.

We also invited previous owners, managers and others to lunch and listened to their stories.

A former housekeeper told us about the time, in 1959, when heavy wet snow broke a skylight, sending debris through two small panels of the lobby's imported cathedral glass ceiling. The management, at the time, tore out all the glass and took most of it to the dump.

In the 1950s and 1960s, few people, even in Boulder, were concerned with historic preservation. In 1963, the city even threatened to demolish the hotel until then-owner Ed Howard installed fire sprinklers, with 900 sprinkler heads, throughout the entire original five-story brick building.

For Sid and me, the people were what made the hotel's past come alive. That included the former managers, and we discussed them all. Sid reminded me of William Beattie, manager from 1912 to 1917. Every day, Beattie went to work in a three-piece suit, complete with tie, hat, gloves, diamond stick pin and spats.

Sid, too, was meticulously dressed. His penchant for bow ties hinted at his attention to detail, necessary in his job. He knew everything that went on in the hotel and was able to discuss carpet and plumbing as easily as he could talk about sports or politics.

In my weekly visits that spanned three decades, I also saw Sid's kindness and wit, as well as his near-perfect memory and dry sense of humor.

And he always cleared off his desk and straightened his pencils at the end of the day. He never had a secretary, so I sometimes took home some typing.

As the years went by, Sid became involved in other historically oriented projects that included commemorative events, organizing records and correspondence, as well as selecting historical photographs for display. Although the city had designated the hotel an individual historic landmark in 1977 (one year before Sid joined the management team), we worked together on such a listing for the National Register of Historic Places.

In Beattie's time, newspaper writers described any hotel manager who "lives and breathes the hotel business" as a "hotel man." In every sense of the word, Sid was one of those -- perhaps the last. The hotel was fortunate to have him.

Silvia Pettem and Carol Taylor write about history for the Daily Camera. Email Silvia at pettem@earthlink.net, Carol at boulderhistorylibrarian@gmail.com or write to the Daily Camera, 2500 55th St., Suite 210, Boulder, 80301.