Notice of changes coming to Florida Healthy Kids' full-pay option arrived in mailboxes last week. Premium rates are increasing between 47 percent and 95 percent. That's a big financial impact on 36,000 working families in Florida.

It is important to recognize what aspects of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and of the Florida Healthy Kids program compelled Florida Healthy Kids Corporation to make the changes.

Before health reform, we had a hodgepodge of insurance plans that provided extremely limited benefits, like excluding mental health care, pregnancy coverage or therapies for healthy childhood development. Many plans limited how much they would reimburse health care providers for services.

Today, the ACA guarantees that people are not denied insurance due to pre-existing health conditions and we have a definition for Minimum Essential Coverage ensuring that consumers receive a comprehensive set of benefits, including free preventive care. To make these improvements in private insurance, most people are required to purchase insurance coverage or make a shared responsibility payment (penalty) with their annual tax return.

Participation in government-funded or subsidized health program like Medicaid or the Children's Health Insurance Program (Florida Healthy Kids) automatically satisfies MEC requirements. For people who purchase private insurance, including those who enroll in the Healthy Kids full-pay option, MEC must include consumer protections like no annual or lifetime maximum amount of coverage and inclusion of all 10 essential health benefits: ambulatory services; prescription drugs; emergency services; rehabilitative/habilitative services and devices; hospitalization; laboratory services; maternity and newborn care; preventive and wellness services, and chronic disease management; mental health and substance use disorder services; and, pediatric services, which must include oral and vision care.

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services worked with Florida Healthy Kids Corporation to phase in the changes for families using the full-pay plan. Through the end of 2015, the federal agency certified the full-pay plan as substantially compliant with the MEC, eliminating potential tax penalties for participating families. However, HHS required full compliance by January 2016. Some limitations of the old full-pay plan that fall short of full compliance with MEC requirements are the lack of enhanced habilitative coverage that includes therapies and services that help children with developmental needs like autism, and it does not provide for new eyeglasses annually. Under the current plan, a child with cancer or in need of a transplant could easily max out their annual or lifetime benefits, leaving their family with hundreds of thousands of dollars of medical debt.

By meeting MEC standards, the full-pay plan becomes a new group that is priced on its own. The children in the full-pay group have higher average health related expenses than children who qualify for government subsidized coverage. The higher costs can no longer be spread over the larger subsidized Healthy Kids population. As is the case with most purchases, the higher value of coverage and greater usage of services resulted in higher premiums for families in the full-pay plan.

Because of the ACA, today these families have three options for high quality coverage: accept the one of the two plans offered with the new premium rates through Healthy Kids; if a parent works for employers with 50 or more employees, they will have an offer of MEC coverage for their children from their employer; or, families may qualify for premium tax credit subsidies to purchase MEC coverage on the Health Insurance Marketplace. Families that would like assistance with applying for coverage through the Health Insurance Marketplace can visit CoveringFlorida.org to find a navigator near them. Any of these options will offer more substantial health coverage than the old Healthy Kids full-pay plan that does not fully meet the minimum essential coverage standards.

Dr. Laura Brennaman is the policy and research director at Florida CHAIN, a member of the KidsWell Florida collaborative.