The Republicans are working hard to win the Senate in November. Oddly, the party has yet to answer what would become the most salient question if they are successful: Do they plan to use the Senate majority to make noise or to make a difference?

Let’s just dust off the Constitution for a moment. If the Republicans win the Senate and hold the House, they would control the legislative branch. President Barack Obama would still have free housing in the White House. And according to the Constitution, the guy living free in the White House – hereafter referred to as the president – can still veto whatever the legislative branch produces.

No sane person thinks the Republicans are going to win a veto-proof majority in the House and Senate. To get anything done – to produce new legislation or to repeal old legislation (e.g., the Affordable Care Act) – the Republicans are going to need either Obama’s signature or enough Democratic votes to override a veto.

This brings us back to the question I posed at the outset: Are the Republicans hoping to win the Senate so they can legislate for the next two years? Or will they pass symbolic bill after bill, forcing a presidential veto or a Democratic filibuster in the Senate?

[MORE: Cartoons about Congress]

We’ve watched the House of Representatives make noise for the past few years. How many House votes have there been to repeal Obamacare in the past two years? Has any one of them affected health care delivery in the U.S. in any way whatsoever?

This is a stark choice for the GOP (if it wins the Senate). Republicans can spend another two years grandstanding, in hopes that a couple more years of symbolic legislative gestures will help a Republican win the White House in 2016. Or they can craft real legislation that reflects Republican priorities but includes enough compromises to entice Obama to sign.

The latter is not crazy. After former Speaker Newt Gingrich and the Republicans won the House in the 1994 midterm elections, the GOP passed legislation that President Bill Clinton was willing to sign. Clinton vetoed the first two welfare reform bills that Congress sent him but eventually signed the third. The 1996 welfare reform legislation – the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act – transformed the American social welfare net, arguably for the better.

A decade before that, President Ronald Reagan worked with a Democrat-controlled House to produce the 1986 Tax Reform Act, the most important and far-reaching reform of the tax code in a generation.

[SEE: Cartoons about the Republican Party]

The GOP can aspire to those kinds of bipartisan achievements, or it can spend another two years trying to make Obama and the Democrats look bad. But what if Hillary Clinton wins in 2016? Does that mean we are destined to have another four years in which the Republican goal is not to govern the country, but to make her a one-term president?

Or what if a Republican candidate wins, but the Democrats claw back the Senate? Do we have to watch the inverse of this whole debacle – the Democrats trying to derail a Republican presidential administration?

My fear is that unless the Washington mentality changes, we are destined for another decade of tit-for-tat politics, the Republican and Democrat version of the Hatfields and the McCoys. Every time I see an email or an article about “winning the Senate” or “holding the Senate,” I fear that we’ve lost sight of the goal here: Governing. Making collective decisions for the nation. Keeping us safe. Fixing problems.

Winning elections is just a means to an end. Have you ever heard people talk about “winning control” of a school board? If the answer is yes, was that a functional school system?

[SEE: Cartoons on President Obama]

There are plenty of things the Republicans could do in the Senate and House that would likely attract Democratic support and a presidential signature: Fix the tax code; do something market-friendly to address climate change; make real reforms to the Affordable Care Act; pass comprehensive immigration reform; and invest in infrastructure.

That would be a successful two years. So will it be that – two years of Republicans making incremental changes for the better but rarely getting everything they want? Or will it be two more years of principled obstruction, which will almost certainly beget even more years of the same?