It is unclear how many lives the Affordable Care Act has got left, but one of them—conceivably the last of them—is at stake in King v. Burwell, the case that is being argued before the Supreme Court on Wednesday. Less than three years have passed since the A.C.A. survived its first existential threat before the Court, in a 5-4 decision that upheld the law as a constitutional exercise of the taxing power; and it was not even nine months ago that the Court, in Burwell v. Hobby Lobby, ruled that businesses could opt out of the A.C.A. if they considered it incompatible with their religious beliefs. Yet here we are again, plumbing the pages of the law for another potentially fatal weakness—in this instance, a four-word phrase (“established by the State”) that, if your squint your eyes, turn the text sideways, and look at it through a lens provided by the lawyers at the Competitive Enterprise Institute, could theoretically, but hardly plausibly, be said to render seven and a half million Americans ineligible for the federal subsidies that enable them to be insured through the A.C.A.

Few cases simply “find” their way to the Supreme Court—they are incubated, hatched, nudged along. But King, more than most, has an ersatz, inorganic quality, like something cooked up in a lab. That is, of course, because it was—by the C.E.I. and other crusading, close-reading conservative attorneys. Their selection of plaintiffs who have plainly suffered no harm from the A.C.A. suggests an experiment gone awry—or, perhaps, an assuredness that most or maybe all of the Court’s Republican appointees will entertain any argument, no matter how silly, that can derail or dismember the supposed abomination that is Obamacare.

In this, King is not that different from the first big case brought against the health law, argued in 2011. The challengers’ claim that Congress could not, under the Commerce Clause of Article I of the Constitution, regulate “inactivity” (namely, the decision not to buy health insurance) was initially dismissed by just about everyone who had an opinion on the matter. Yet, in the end, it won the backing of the Court’s five conservatives—including Chief Justice Roberts, who, while upholding the A.C.A. on other grounds, put in a good word for this new, would-be doctrine. Increasingly, the conservatives’ view seems to be that every crackpot idea—if developed by right-thinking crackpots—deserves its day in court, especially the nation’s highest court.

Of course, statutory and constitutional interpretations tend to rest on the meaning—often obscure or ambiguous—of a single word or a phrase (“equal protection,” “cruel and unusual”). But the four words at issue in King are ambiguous only if considered in a vacuum, in an airless chamber where the purposes of the A.C.A. and the mechanisms it uses to achieve them—such as the subsidy—become the abstractions, and the deconstruction of texts becomes the reality.

That mindset is not unique to this set of judges; history shows that it is an occupational hazard. In one New Deal-era case, Justice George Sutherland—the architect of most of the conservative rulings of the nineteen-twenties and thirties—described the Great Depression as “nothing new,” just another cyclical downturn that would end as soon as debt-ridden Americans exercised some “self-denial.” Around the same time, in an opinion overturning the Agricultural Adjustment Act, Justice Owen Roberts dismissed the Dust Bowl as a regional issue, rather than a national one; it reflected “a widespread similarity of local conditions” that states would have to address without federal help. Much more recently, in 2007, there was Parents Involved, a school desegregation case most memorable for Chief Justice Roberts’s blithe assurance that “the way to stop discrimination on the basis of race is to stop discriminating on the basis of race”—an epigram worthy of Wilde, or Yoda, but revealing little awareness of what it takes to desegregate a school district.

No public officials are more detached from public life than Supreme Court Justices. Life tenure shields them (as it should) from the slings of popular opinion; a ban on video cameras in the Court chamber means that their faces are unfamiliar to many Americans; protocol encourages them to keep a low profile. (Not all do: Antonin Scalia and Sonia Sotomayor clearly relish their celebrity, and Ruth Bader Ginsburg, at eighty-one, is what the kids call “trending.”) Occasionally the Justices go on book tours or give lectures overseas; they hang out at retreats with the Koch brothers or headline at the Aspen Ideas Festival. But these extrajudicial activities rarely introduce Justices to ideas they don’t already hold, or to people whose lives have been altered by one of their opinions.

They are, at the same time, sensitive to the charge of being detached. We know this by the fact that they fling it at one another. In 1984, in a 5-4 decision limiting the federal courts’ jurisdiction in cases concerning state officials and agencies, Lewis F. Powell wrote that John Paul Stevens’s dissent rested “on fiction” and was “out of touch with reality.” Likewise, in an impassioned dissent in Schuette v. BAMN, an affirmative-action case decided last term, Justice Sotomayor wrote that the conservative majority’s tendency to deny, or wish away, the relevance of race was “a sentiment out of touch with reality.” Their “refusal to accept the stark reality that race matters is regrettable,” Sotomayor wrote. The Chief Justice, clearly stung, complained in a concurrence that “it is not ‘out of touch with reality’ to conclude that racial preferences may … do more harm than good.”

But being, or appearing, out of touch has its advantages. Some Justices, sometimes, may simply be oblivious to the real effects of their decisions; others may be oblivious when it suits them to be. Almost eighty years ago, in the Agricultural Adjustment Act case, Owen Roberts’s straight-faced suggestion that states were experiencing their own distinct droughts and parallel dust storms permitted him to deny, also with a straight face, that the collapse of the agricultural sector was a national problem requiring a national solution. In a subsequent case, in 1937, Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes rebuked his conservative colleagues for their willingness to “shut [their] eyes to the plainest facts of our national life.” We will get an idea at the oral argument for King which of our present Justices, if any, will shut their eyes and indulge the notion that the Obama Administration and Congress tucked away, in Section 36B of the A.C.A., one little phrase that, if taken literally, would someday cause the entire program to collapse. But if we take those Justices at their word, then it is we, not they, who are out of touch.​