New Labette Health CEO Brian Williams has been busy this week meeting hospital staff and community members.

He’s spent time with each shift at the hospital. He began duties on Tuesday.

“The nurses are all great, all smiling, wide awake. The thing I’m really impressed with is the cleanliness of the hospital; it smells clean. A lot of time, it’s not always the case,” Williams said earlier Thursday. “We just got a great staff. It’s a great organization. That’s a first impression, and usually the first impression is a lasting one.”

Thursday afternoon, Williams spoke to the Parsons Rotary Club. He touched on his background before discussing the future of health care.

He holds a bachelor’s degree in political science and general business from Southwest Missouri State University, and a master of business administration from Drury University. He is also a graduate of the United States Army Command and General Staff College. Williams is a Gen. George C. Marshall Award recipient and is a certified medical practice executive through the American College of Medical Practice Executives.

He attended college on a three-year ROTC scholarship and received his regular Army commission on May 17, 1985.

He completed infantry officer training and specialty training and his first assignment was in the Fourth of the 54th Infantry at Fort Knox, Kentucky. He served in Operation Desert Storm and Operation Desert Shield in Iraq and his final assignment was company commander at Fort Hood, Texas, with the First Cavalry Division.

Williams earned a Bronze Star for service in Iraq. He also won the Southwest Asia Service Medal, the Kuwait Liberation Medal, the Army Accommodation Medal and the Combat Infantryman Badge.

After the Army, he found work in the banking community before moving on to health care. He was vice president and chief of business development and neurosciences for Cox-Health in Springfield before accepting the Labette Health job.

He told Rotarians that the Affordable Care Act may not be perfect, but one of its benefits is it started a national conversation about health care and its cost.

Many people can’t afford health care now, especially those living below the federal poverty line, and the costs likely won’t drop in the near future.

Private health insurance exchanges may be the future of health care with their promise of controlling costs for businesses and employees. These are like the Amazon.coms of health insurance because they allow people to shop around for plans. A benefit to employers is these plans offer a set cost for participating in an insurance plan, with employers paying a fixed amount to offer the benefit to its employees. This amount wouldn’t be subject to the current fluctuations in the market.

Patients who enter hospitals now meet with financial counselors to have tough conversations about paying for services that will be offered and making co-pay payments on the spot.

“People come to us at one of their most vulnerable times. They’re depending on us and you have to have that conversation. So that’s only going to get harder down the road,” Williams said.

He said health care is a national problem that needs to be addressed.

“Because we have a responsibility to our country to not ignore this problem but face it and tackle it,” he said.

Williams showed a PowerPoint slide that reflected inflation has increased 43 percent between 1999 and 2014, while worker wages have gone up 54 percent nationally. The biggest issue is worker contributions to premiums are up 212 percent in this time period and the cost of premiums has increased 191 percent.

“So from a practical standpoint, most of our labor force has taken a pay cut since 1999. I see that at the hospital,” he said.

He said Labette Health employees haven’t had raises in two years.

“One of my number one goals is try to figure out how to make sure we grow the hospital’s revenue in a very positive, community-oriented way and we give our employees an increase in pay that they’ve earned,” Williams said.

He said Medicare is the “biggest driver in the federal budget,” especially since 10,000 Americans a day are added to Medicare rolls.

He hopes that the Affordable Care Act will continue the national conversation about health care and that the country can address the issue in a positive way.

“Or, I feel like we’re mortgaging our grandchildren’s future.”