Small business owners setting up a budget for the next 12 months should prepare to see a few lines added to the ledger’s debit side: One for the possible increase in the minimum wage, another to cover the newly-expanded eligibility for overtime pay, and yet another for the 2016 play-or-pay health coverage obligation for firms with at least 50 employees.

And if a business falls within Pittsburgh’s borders, a new requirement to offer employees paid sick days may be coming soon.

Individually, each new regulation represents better employee working conditions, benefits and wages, improvements that supporters say are necessary and even past due. Collectively, they could be a financial and administrative avalanche that may overwhelm employers.

“The restaurant and hospitality industry in particular has been hit very hard” by the new regulations, said Shari Herrle, vice president and director of compliance at Henderson Brothers insurance agency, Downtown.

Businesses had only recently come to grips with their responsibilities for offering health coverage under the Affordable Care Act, she said. Now they also need to figure out how they will pay overtime wages for assistant managers, “the people who help keep the business going” but had previously been salaried. And that’s on top of a possible minimum wage increase and mandatory paid sick days.

“Our clients are trying to do the right thing for their employees. It just makes it very, very difficult,” she said.

In a busy and competitive business environment, though, it’s unclear whether the coming changes have registered with employers.

“If you were to poll the average business owner on all of these and ask them if they are real, they would probably check one or two and put question marks next to the rest,” said Marilyn Landis, founder of Basic Business Concepts on the North Side and former chair of the National Small Business Association.

“They find out about things when they get a penalty, get a warning notice or literally trip over it,” she said.

As district director of the Pittsburgh Small Business Administration, Kelly Hunt provides information to help business owners comply with new regulations and “to help small businesses adjust and make sure they can still grow and succeed.”

So far, she’s not been hearing from small business owners about the changes.

“It’s kind of like people are forgetting about it right now, before they start seeing it and have to comply,” she said. “People know it’s out there, but I think they hope that it keeps getting pushed off. I doubt that’s going to happen.

“This is something that small businesses definitely need to be planning for. You need to take this under consideration. It is going to affect your bottom line in some way.”

Peter Fleming, partner and CPA at Wilke & Associates in Carnegie, said he can foresee many businesses getting hit with all four obligations, not that they’re prepared or even considering the implications yet.

“A lot of it is because they don’t want to deal with it. There’s so much complexity, they just don’t want to take the time to wrap their arms around it until they have to,” he said. “They’re in a crouched, defensive position because they know some things are coming that are not good, but they don’t want to focus on it.”

The new regulations have followed different timetables and have taken different paths, so their near-simultaneous arrival may explain why businesses seem to be slow to react.

Provisions under the Affordable Care Act that penalize employers who don’t offer a health plan were under discussion more than five years ago; the U.S. Department of Labor announced just last month a proposed rule to expand eligibility for overtime pay for workers earning as little as $23,660 a year; the Pennsylvania Legislature is considering a proposal to raise the minimum hourly wage to $10.10; and the paid sick leave legislation was approved by Pittsburgh City Council on Aug. 3.

Taken together, said Mrs. Herrle, they represent “a perfect storm for retail and hospitality businesses in the city.”

Raymond Vargo, director of the University of Pittsburgh Small Business Development Center, said business owners are busy enough with the day-to-day logistics of staying in business and trying to make a profit to keep track of all the regulations, proposed or passed.

“When a business owner wakes up in the middle of the night, they’re wondering ‘What customers am I going to get tomorrow and where are they coming from?’ ” he said.

“Any time the government puts an additional burden on the small business owner, financially, administratively, whatever, that is a true cost to that business and a small business does not have the economy of scale that that can be absorbed a little bit easier.

“It’s so hard to be successful in a business environment now and these additional burdens make it more difficult.”

Steve Twedt: stwedt@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1963.

Correction, posted Aug. 28, 2015: In an earlier version of this story, the name of the business founded by Marilyn Landis was misstated.