Jean-Michel Othoniel drawing in his Paris studio in March.

Mr. Othoniel's commission for the historic grounds of the palace of Versailles—part of the total renovation of a garden originally designed by famed royal landscaper André Le Nôtre—is meant to stand the test of time. Philippe Chancel …

The genesis of Mr. Othoniel's work, titled 'Beautiful Dances,' dates to 2011, when the artist was invited by landscape architect Louis Benech to collaborate on a proposal for a Versailles-sponsored competition to reimagine the Water Theater Grove. Pictured, a watercolor sketch of the fountain sculptures Jean-Michel Othoniel …

The arabesque forms of Mr. Othoniel's fountain sculptures were inspired by notations in Raoul-Auger Feuillet's 1701 book, 'The Art of Expressing Dance Through Demonstrative Characters, Figures and Signs,' which Louis XIV used to study Baroque dances. Shown here are notations for the dance: 'The Entrance of Apollo.' Raoul-Auger Feuillet …

A simulation of Jean-Michel Othoniel's 'Beautiful Dances,' 2012

The fountains' forms are meant to evoke The Sun King and his queen dancing on water. Othoniel Studio …

Models of 'Beautiful Dances' in Jean-Michel Othonielʼs Paris studio in March Philippe Chancel …

Elements from 'The Entrance of Apollo,' one of three fountain sculptures comprising 'Beautiful Dances,' in the glassblowing studio in Basel in April Philippe Chancel …

Mr. Othoniel working with the glassblowers in April

The sculptor is best known for his bauble-decorated entrance to the Palais Royal-Musée du Louvre metro station in central Paris, 'Kiosk for the Nightwalkers,' 2000. Philippe Chancel …

'Beautiful Dances' is linked to the past through its materials and manufacture. Mr. Othoniel partnered with a traditional glassblowing workshop in Murano—Venice's island of glass artisans—to create four blue orbs that will mark the locations of fountains in Le Nôtre's original garden design.

Pictured, Mr. Othoniel working with glassblowers in Basel on one of the nearly 2,000 gilded glass beads that make up 'Beautiful Dances.' Philippe Chancel …

One of nearly 2,000 glass beads that make up 'Beautiful Dances.' Philippe Chancel …

Mr. Othoniel working with glassblowers in Basel in April Philippe Chancel …

Gilders put gold leaf onto glass beads in the Basel studio. Philippe Chancel …

A gilded glass bead Philippe Chancel …

'The Entrance of Apollo,' the first completed fountain sculpture for the Water Theater grove, exhibited in the Salle de lʼApothicaire (Louis XIV's former pharmacy), at Versailles in February Philippe Chancel …

'The Entrance of Apollo' installed in Water Theater Grove in July Philippe Chancel …