Weak spot also responsible for dementia, schizophrenia

According to scientists in the United Kingdom, the human brain has a weak spot for Alzheimer's disease and schizophrenia. Researchers pinpointed the region using scans. They say that the weak spot develops late in adolescence and degenerates early during aging.

The study involved MRI brain scans on 484 healthy volunteers, aged between eight and 85 years, conducted by the Medical Research Council Highlights By Catholic Online (NEWS CONSORTIUM) Catholic Online (www.catholic.org) 11/25/2014 (1 year ago) Published in Health Keywords: Dementia, Alzheimer's, schizophrenia, brain scans, weak spots

LOS ANGELES, CA (Catholic Online) - It remains difficult for doctors to predict which people might develop either condition. The recent findings suggest a potential way to diagnose those at risk earlier.



Scientists caution that "much more research is needed into how to bring these exciting discoveries into the clinic."



Recognize St Dymphna, the patroness saint against mental illness, with this beautiful badge pin.





The findings fit with what other experts have suspected; that while distinct, Alzheimer's and schizophrenia are linked.

The study involved MRI brain scans on 484 healthy volunteers, aged between eight and 85 years, conducted by the Medical Research Council. Led by Dr. Gwenaelle Douaud of Oxford University, the study looked at how the brain naturally changes as people age.A common pattern was revealed in the scans. The parts of the brain that were the last to develop were also the first to show signs of age-related decline.These brain regions - a network of nerve cells or grey matter, coordinate "high order" information coming from the different senses, such as sight and sound.Scans of both patients with Alzheimer's disease and schizophrenia found the same brain regions were affected.The findings fit with what other experts have suspected; that while distinct, Alzheimer's and schizophrenia are linked."Early doctors called schizophrenia 'premature dementia' but until now we had no clear evidence that the same parts of the brain might be associated with two such different diseases," Professor Hugh Perry of the council said.The current study is highly significant as "It raises important issues about possible genetic and environmental factors that may occur in early life and then have lifelong consequences. The more we can find out about these very difficult disorders, the closer we will come to helping sufferers and their families.""Schizophrenia can be potentially devastating but at the moment it's very difficult to predict with certainty who is going to have a good prognosis and who might have a poor one," Dr. Michael Bloomfield of University College London said."This study brings us a step closer to being able to make this prediction, so patients could in the future receive better targeted treatments."The new findings may now make it possible to understand how to prevent the brain changes before they occur, Bloomfield added.

---





Copyright 2016 - Distributed by THE CALIFORNIA NETWORKRespect for Women: That in every country of the world, women may be honored and respected and that their essential contribution to society may be highly esteemed.Holy Rosary: That families, communities, and groups may pray the Holy Rosary for evangelization and peace.