When Sen. Bernie Sanders (D-VT) suggested that a single-payer system is the “cure for America’s ailing health care,” he suggested that ObamaCare was a small step in comparison to the reform he envisions. And what would this reform be, you ask.

The subsidized program that places the health care monopoly in the hands of the government.

Thomas Sowell pointed out that the reason why the single-payer system still sounds appealing to some is that people are being fooled into thinking that they are getting something for nothing. Health care at no cost for every single American, subsidized by taxpayer dollars is their goal, and the ObamaCare failure might be just the type of blessing that Congress is looking for.

But before we continue, have you ever asked yourself whether single-payer system supporters understand or even realize that subsidized health care is not free?

According to a report released by the National Taxpayers Union Foundation, during 113th Congress’ first six months, some lawmakers have been much more interested in pushing for the singe-payer health care system than introducing budget cuts. All legislation introduced during the first six months in both the House and the Senate would increase spending by $1.74 trillion. Cuts introduced by Congress would only amount to $453 billion.

According to the “Bill Tally,” the report released by the NTUF, Congress will continue to ignore cuts and focus on introducing laws that increase spending, including the single-payer health care system. If the trend continues and nothing changes, Congress will continue to favor spending over offering budget cuts.

As it now stands, the U.S. total debt amounts to a little over $60 trillion, which means that each family is stuck with a $752,000 bill as a result.

The single-payer health care system might sound like a great plan for the uninformed who tend to believe that, once ObamaCare fails, they will be offered absolutely free health care all thanks to the government. But nothing is for free, and if we don’t remediate this issue as it stands, we might get stuck in the bottom of a hole too deep, filled with debt and not one single way out.