What happened to young ladies?

Paramus, N.J.: I constantly see in the fashion and entertainment world young women and not-so-young women choosing to appear as tramps, vamps, whores and women of the night — fallen, deflowered and seductive, not innocent but all-knowing.

My generation wanted to appear as just the opposite. We were proud to be unsophisticated. We blushed. We looked forward to our honeymoons and the giving of ourselves to husbands who valued us and our unsophisticated ways. We were romantic and idealistic. If we made mistakes, we were ashamed of those mistakes. We strived for virtue, and tried to avoid vice.

Good, decent, moral, modest women help to determine the morals of a country. Men are respected and respect in turn. Good, moral women engender good men and obedient, disciplined children.

Love was mysterious and wonderful. Romance was everywhere. Today it is found only in the classics of a forgotten time. Diana Werner

Priorities

Howard Beach: I am still waiting for someone to tell me where Kayla Phillips got the money to buy a handbag for $2,500. I worked until I was 85 years old and never paid more than $20 for a handbag. Maybe she should have used the money for her two children. Jean Novak

New York kindness

Brooklyn: On Nov. 14, I was waiting for a bus. I dropped my MetroCard, attempted to pick it up and fell down, hitting the back of my head on the cement. A man stopped his car and came over to me, asking if I was OK. At the same time, a lady with her son Anthony also stopped. They both managed to pick me up. Another lady came out of one of the houses and brought me a bottle of water. I would like to thank these people for their assistance. I was able to call my daughter, who came with her car. These people stayed with me the whole time. I will keep them in my prayers. Marie Kenniff

Did she tip?

Long Island City: I would like to thank Dawn from the East Village, who was very pregnant and told me not to hit potholes. Thanks for puking in my cab. I did clean up your slop. Next time, take the train. Remember: I didn’t make you pregnant.

Steve Chaddock

No comparison

Jamaica: To Voicer Josh Ruebner: I am neither a fan or foe of Israel, but you and your minions are a disgrace. You need not worry about people disparaging you or calling you names; you and your thugs do pretty well on your own. When Israel became a state, it turned a desert into a paradise, all the while fighting Arab hordes trying to finish the job Hitler aimed to do. In all the time since, tell me what the Palestinians have accomplished? Their greatest accomplishment is in the art of bomb-making, and their greatest pleasure is to lob those weapons into Israel, killing and maiming civilians. Pat Caporrino

Knockout, who’s there?

Staten Island: The media has all but ignored the knockout game — a game that’s racially based, with people of color assaulting a vulnerable white person. Why haven’t the photos of these criminals been on page one of my newspaper so they can be brought to justice? Call it racial profiling if you will, but I am going to cross the street if I see any group of black teenagers coming towards me. I believe a sucker punch and a head fall into concrete would probably end my life. Carolyn Friedman

White-on-black

Manhattan: To Voicer Teresa Boardman: Columbine. Sandy Hook. Simi Valley. Selma. Philadelphia, Miss. I too can go and on. And what color are those perps? Raymond McEaddy

You built that

Mohegan Lake, N.Y.: Voicer Felyce Marchica continues the nauseating narrative that the mainstream media and the progressive politicians ram down our collective throats on a daily basis. She adds a new twist to this fictitious account by saying that, if Jesus were alive today, He would say that it is wrong to take away from those less fortunate so the rich can get richer. Regardless of whether you are rich or even middle class, you make your money by earning it, and not by “taking it away from the less fortunate.” Unbelievable! Freddy Sacco

Money on his mind

Long Branch, N.J.: Jay Z, exactly who is supposed to buy your $875 cap, $995 T-shirt, $1,275 hoodie, $695 ski mask and $1,795 duffel bag? Oh!, I forgot about the dummies who buy your recordings. But surely, even they can’t possibly be that stupid. Lenzy Kelley

From where she sits . . .

Jersey City, N.J.: Some Native Americans call Columbus Day and Thanksgiving Day their Memorial Days. Just sayin’. Willette Gould

Say thanks

Brooklyn: Voicer Lawrence Fiffer says he’s never seen or come across any Hometown Heroes on his bus route. My answer to him: The reason you can’t see any is probably because you’re sneaking on the back of the bus. The drivers are up front. Anthony Styron

Fuzzy math

Massapequa Park, L.I.: Thank you to the Daily News for dropping the comic strip “Get Fuzzy”; it was too “off.” “Wumo” is much more mainstream. Raymond P. Moran

You’re welcome

Forest Hills: Again, my thanks to the Daily News for the tickets to see “First Date.” We laughed throughout the whole show. It was so enjoyable. Arlene Farber

Tall tales

Manhattan: I think it’s perfect that One World Trade Center (a building we all hate) has been officially deemed taller than the former Sears Tower in Chicago, just because it made a taller spire and the fake committee couldn’t say no to New York City. Everything else under Bloomberg was faked, from test scores to crime stats to how clean and perfect he made the city. NYC is the world capital of dishonesty.

Nick Enzminger

Chucked

Bronx: Since the day the government shutdown ended, I have written to Sen. Charles Schumer three times about Obamacare — and “Chuck,” as he prefers to be called, has replied with nothing more than “thank you for your interest, I’ll give the matter much thought and get back to you.” Today, I sent him another email and told him that I wouldn’t be voting for him again, but made sure to sign it, “Respectfully yours,” so there wouldn’t be any hard feelings. Again, he thanked me for my interest, blah blah blah. I hope all politicians will one day realize that while voters love to be courted during the few weeks leading up to election day, they should not be taken for granted once elected. Jonathan Kleid

Obama vs. Bush

Brooklyn: To compare the Iraq war with people losing their health insurance is the most ridiculous thing I have ever heard. Instead of blaming Bush and the Republicans, the Democrats need to fix the mess they created with Obamacare. Teresa Pagani

The view in the mirror

Lindenhurst, L.I.: I think it’s very odd that Barbara Walters still calls her show “The View.” When Joe Scarborough was on the show, I didn’t hear a single right-wing opinion. Ms. Walters, don’t you get bored constantly listening to the sound of your own voice? Be honest, and rename your show “The Left View.” Carol Viverito

Christ-mas

Brooklyn: This letter is in reference to the upcoming celebration of Christmas. It is a beautiful thing when people want to honor Jesus Christ. A question we should ask ourselves is: What would Jesus think of people celebrating his birth today? Did you know that his disciples never celebrated his birthday? This celebration has turned into an excuse for loose conduct, drunkenness, debauchery, and office parties that encourage employees to drink until they can’t realize what fools they make of themselves. Yes, all this is in the name of Jesus Christ. Joseph Denis

The bad old days

Brooklyn: OK, New Yorkers, make sure your helmets and bullet-proof jackets are ready. Starting in January, we will be living in the Wild, Wild West. Pearl Feigenbaum