The Hackensack University Medical Center health system is acquiring Palisades Medical Center, a deal that pumps $50 million into the North Bergen hospital and expands Hackensack’s ever-growing network into Hudson County.

Executives from Hackensack and Palisades signed a letter of intent Wednesday and said they expect the agreement, which will require state approval, to be finalized later this year.

In the deal, the hospital in Hudson County will get a new name: HackensackUMC Palisades. It will also receive an estimated $50 million from the network, which could go towards the purchase of equipment, renovating operating rooms and enhancing services.

For the last two years, Hackensack University Medical Center and Palisades, both non-profits, have shared clinical privileges – Hackensack specialists have treated many pediatric and neonatal cases from Palisades. The new deal expands into other areas of care, including neurology, orthopedic surgery and oncology.

“This new venture will place our hospitals on the cutting-edge of medicine and healthcare delivery for our patients,’’ said Robert C. Garrett, president and CEO of Hackensack University Health Network.

The Hackensack network includes two other hospitals, both for-profit – HackensackUMC at Pascack and HackensackUMC Mountainside.

Across the state, more hospitals are joining networks as reimbursements decline and changes in the Affordable Care Act shift the fee-for-service model to one that provides incentives to keep patients healthy and out of the hospital. Joining networks also allows hospitals to save millions on billing, purchasing, insurance negotiations and to implement new efficiencies such as electronic record keeping.

Many hospitals in New Jersey are foregoing their standalone status or seeking buyers to remain open – The St. Barnabas health system acquired Jersey City Medical Center earlier this year. Prime HealthCare Services, a California-based for profit-company, recently took over St. Mary’s Hospital in Passaic. The chain also purchased the Denville-based St. Clare’s Health System and is awaiting approval from the state health commissioner. It is also seeking to buy St. Michael’s Medical Center in Newark.

By extending its network into Hudson County, Hackensack expects to attract patients who may otherwise seek specialized care in Manhattan for cancer, orthopedics and other treatment, Garrett said.

“We want patients to stay in New Jersey for higher level care,’’ he said.

Palisades includes a 202-bed hospital and The Harborage, a 245-bed nursing home and rehabilitation center that could receive patients from Hackensack. By joining the network, cancer patients at Palisades will have access to an array of clinical trials underway at Hackensack, which opened the John Theurer Cancer Center nearly four years ago and treats 50,000 patients annually.

“This affiliation will give our patients access to world-class physicians and the best specialty care programs available,’’ said Bruce J. Markowitz, president and CEO of Palisades Medical Center.

The agreement leaves the existing management team at Palisades in place, officials said.

Palisades is in the midst of constructing a 50,000 square-foot building next to the hospital that will contain three floors of physician offices and two floors of parking. Construction is expected to be completed later this year at a cost of more than $20 million, Markowitz said.

Email: layton@northjersey.com