Published: Monday, 12/1/2014



Five Things You Might Have Missed: 12-01 Top articles from this weekend's editions of The Blade



ASSOCIATED PRESS Enlarge At the Republican Governors Association conference two weeks ago, Ohio Gov. John Kasich charmed pundits as he traded points on policy with his colleagues. He also defended his stances on Medicaid expansion and the Common Core educational standards.

1. Ohio Gov. John Kasich potential presidential candidate

His spunky performance at a Republican Governors Association conference in Florida and his big win on Election Day has vaulted Ohio Gov. John Kasich into the long-shot category of potential Republican presidential candidates.

Mr. Kasich brushes off any suggestion he’ll run for president in 2016 and has not done the early things that potential candidates do — such as hiring a national political consultant, frequently visiting Iowa, or creating an exploratory committee.

But on the campaign trail, he talked much about the nation as a whole learning from Ohio, and he shifted from calling the U.S. Affordable Care Act “Obamacare” to “Hillarycare.”

As a gubernatorial candidate, it would have been political suicide for Mr. Kasich to have been seen as launching a presidential campaign.

But in part because of his record in Congress of negotiating a balanced budget with Democratic President Bill Clinton, Mr. Kasich’s name keeps coming up. He served in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1983 to 2001. READ MORE



THE BLADE/ANDY MORRISON Enlarge | Buy This Image Most airsoft guns, such as this one for sale at Gander Mountain, have a bright orange tip on the barrel.

2. Toys, deadly weapons difficult to distinguish

The barrels of most airsoft and pellet guns that filled a few shelves at Gander Mountain have a bright orange tip to indicate that the firearm is not lethal.

Not all toy and recreational guns have an orange tip, and many are manufactured to look and feel exactly like their lethal counterpart.

“The guns are the same size as the real thing, they’re weighted like a real gun, and it can be very difficult to distinguish between what’s real and what’s not,” said Toledo police Sgt. Joe Heffernan.

In Cleveland, 12-year-old Tamir Rice was killed by an officer who apparently believed that the boy had a handgun. After the boy was fatally shot officers learned the gun was an airsoft gun. It did not have an orange tip.

Since the Nov. 22 shooting, there’s been a renewed interest in defining regulations on such guns. Currently, there is none. READ MORE



THE BLADE/AMY E. VOIGT Enlarge | Buy This Image Sydnee Teague makes floral arrangements for customer delivery at Bartz Viviano Flowers & Gifts. Frank Viviano, owner of Bartz Viviano Flowers & Gifts, said his delivery drivers put about 1,000 miles a week on each vehicle in his fleet.

3. Lower gas prices fueling slightly better bottom line

The lowest fuel prices in years are helping to boost the bottom line of businesses that drive a lot of miles, but not as much as you might think.

“Generally it’s a good thing, but it’s not like Christmas came early,” said Gary Whitacre, the chief executive officer of of Whitacre Logistics, a 220-rig trucking outfit based in rural Wood County.

Instead it’s consumers — and by extension retailers — that stand to gain the most.

Earlier this month, the average U.S. price for a gallon of regular gas fell to less than $3 for the first time in almost four years. Since peaking in June, prices have fallen nearly 24 percent to an average of $2.82 per gallon last week, according to data from the U.S. Energy Information Administration. READ MORE



Enlarge The Postal Service will issue 500 million stamps bearing the likenesses of Rudolph and his friends from the movie.

4. Postal Service honors ‘Rudolph’ the reindeer in Rudolph, Ohio

The most famous reindeer of all is getting a little more face time this year, thanks to the U.S. Postal Service.

Postal officials announced this month it would issue a limited-edition collection of four Forever stamps featuring characters from Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer, which first aired 50 years ago. Post office officials will dedicate the 49-cent stamp Monday in Rudolph, Ohio, home of the well-known Rudolph postmark.

The Postal Service will issue 500 million stamps bearing the likenesses of Rudolph and his misfit friends, Hermey the elf, Santa, and Bumble the Abominable Snow Monster.

Rudolph, Ohio, “The Deerest Little Village in Wood County,” has been offering a special holiday postmark with the reindeer’s image since the early 1990s. Thousands of people have joined in the reindeer games since the tradition began, said Charlotte Lamb, the officer in charge at the Rudolph post office. She estimates between 75,000 and 100,000 parcels come through the office every year. READ MORE

5. Holiday Gift Guide

Need suggestions for someone living far away? What about a loved one who likes a little bling? Check out our Across the Miles and Jewelry suggestions in our 2014 Holiday Gift Guide.

Don’t miss:



THE BLADE/AMY E. VOIGT Enlarge | Buy This Image Holiday cookies made by students on the Culinary Arts program at Penta Career Center.

The Blade Holiday Cookie Exchange

Readers and bakers from around northwest Ohio and southeast Michigan sent in more than 100 recipes to share with our Blade readers. Take a look through the flavors and try an new recipe this holiday season. Also, be sure to take a look out feature articles on area bakers. Ready, set, bake! READ MORE