Southern Textile Services is getting closer to moving a new location that will position the company to double in size.

“Double our space, double our employees, double our equipment,” said Adam Rubin, owner of the Alexandria-based company that provides linen service to health care facilities.

Founded in 2006, STS currently calls a building on Masonic Drive home. Its work space in that building is about 12,000 square feet, Rubin said.

The company’s new home — a building at 1819 Memorial Drive that was the longtime site of Carroll Furniture before it closed in 2013 — has 25,000 square feet of space for STS, as well as additional space Rubin is leasing for extra revenue.

STS currently has 57 employees, and Rubin can easily see that number rising to 100 more with the company’s growth pattern. It services facilities throughout the state and in Mississippi.

Last week, the U.S. Department of Agriculture announced a $7.1 million guaranteed loan for the company to remodel the former Carroll building and buy additional equipment.

AgCenter event for timber owners

An upcoming LSU AgCenter event in Pollock is designed to show how landowners can maximize the value of an existing or future tree farm by taking advantage of the emerging biofuels industry.

The 2015 Louisiana Natural Resources Symposium will be held at Camp Grant Walker on Aug. 21.

Topics will include economics, weed control, insects and diseases of short rotation stands, tree spacing, genetically improved seedlings, benefits of a consulting forester, alternative tree species, biomass and procurement needs by industry, and state financial assistance.

For more information, contact Todd Shupe or Niels de Hoop at (225) 578-4131.

Farmers market moving

The Alexandria Mid-Week Market is moving to its new location starting Tuesday. It will be set up across Jackson Street from First United Methodist Church.

Of note for local producers or budding producers, a guide on the basic steps of selling your product to retailers is available on freshcentral.org.

The Homegrown Produce Vendor Guide is designed to answer some of the initial questions producers often ask. Look for on the site under the “Sell Your Produce” tab.

Read or Share this story: http://www.thetowntalk.com/story/news/local/2015/03/21/southern-textile-taking-steps-toward-relocation/25149653/