CINCINNATI--(BUSINESS WIRE)--HealthWarehouse.com, Inc. (OTCQB:HEWA), the only VIPPS accredited online and mail-order pharmacy licensed in all 50 states, today made public letters sent to Senator John McCain (R-Az.), Senator Amy Klobuchar (D-Minn.), Senator Paul Rand (R-Ky.), Senator Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) and Congressman John Boehner (R-Oh.). The letters address the re-introduction of legislation that would allow Americans to purchase prescription drugs from Canada. The bill known as the “Safe and Affordable Drugs from Canada Act” has been advocated by Senators John McCain and Amy Klobuchar.

In the letters Mr. Lalit Dhadphale, President and CEO of HealthWarehouse.com, stated, “We understand the intent of the bill is to help Americans who cannot afford their medications. We would also ask for your support in promoting home grown, legitimate American options that clearly address lack of affordability when it comes to prescription drugs. I believe we have made a small contribution in this area, but there are countless Americans we have not yet reached who need our service. We would appreciate your help in reaching these people as well.”

A HealthWarehouse.com customer, Steven T, commented, “I was skeptical of healthwarehouse.com after dealing with Canadian pharmacies for years. I feel I have now found the pharmacy I am going to use for the rest of my life. I received a package from Kentucky! For the first time it did not come from India. I'm still in shock.”

You can read more of these stories at http://www.healthwarehouse.com/reviews.

With the introduction of the Affordable Care Act, HealthWarehouse.com has seen a dramatic change in customer demographics. Today, nearly 90% of its customers have some form of health insurance, but are forced to pay out of pocket for their prescription medications in contrast to 10% when the company started in 2007. The company continues to provides American’s with a legitimate option to affordably purchase medications in United States, therefore the reintroduction of the “Safe and Affordable Drugs from Canada Act” is increasingly unnecessary.

The letters goes on to state that with more than $200 billion worth of brand name medications coming off patent and becoming generic over the past five years, there is “No excuse for Americans being unable to purchase their medication due to lack of affordability.”

Copies of the letters are available at https://www.healthwarehouse.com/news

About HealthWarehouse.com

HealthWarehouse.com, Inc. (OTCQB:HEWA) is a trusted VIPPS accredited online pharmacy based in Florence, Kentucky. The company is focused on the growing out of pocket prescription market, which is expected to grow to $80 billion in 2015. With a mission to provide affordable healthcare to every American by focusing on technology that is revolutionizing prescription delivery, HealthWarehouse.com has become the largest VIPPS accredited online pharmacy in the United States.

HealthWarehouse.com is licensed in all 50 states and only sells drugs that are FDA-approved and legal for sale in the United States. Visit HealthWarehouse.com online at http://www.HealthWarehouse.com.

Forward-Looking Statements

This announcement contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Actual results may differ significantly from management's expectations. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that include, among others, risks related to competition, management of growth, new products, services and technologies, potential fluctuations in operating results, international expansion, outcomes of legal proceedings and claims, fulfillment center optimization, seasonality, commercial agreements, acquisitions and strategic transactions, foreign exchange rates, system interruption, inventory, government regulation and taxation, payments and fraud. More information about factors that potentially could affect HealthWarehouse.com's financial results is included in HealthWarehouse.com's filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including its most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K and subsequent filings.