Colts junior pitches 2-hitter in win against Cañon City

Tigers sophomore Cameron Brosh blocks a pitch in the dirt against the Colts on Saturday at Justin Field. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

Tigers junior Cody Simms delivers against Pueblo South on Saturday at Justin Field. The Colts won 7-0. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

Jared Baros got ahead of the Tigers on Saturday, and the Colts stayed there.

The Pueblo South junior placed three pitches consistently, and kept Cañon City off-balance in a 7-0 Colts win in a South-Central League game at Justin Field.

In his complete-game performance, Baros allowed just two hits.

"We're working backwards, we're feeding into the pitcher, what he's trying to do," Tigers coach Tim Ritter said. "We're going out there fishing for curveballs, then we let fastballs go by and we get behind in the count and so you're swinging at his pitches."

Baros said his slider was his best pitch Saturday, and he was successful because he kept the ball down in the zone and had good command. He said earlier this season he'd struggled to find his rhythm and control.

"Today was a good example of what he can do," Colts coach J.R. Crowell said. "He was nice and fluid, nice a loose. The run early helped settle him down."

Pueblo South scored a run in the second inning thanks to a lead-off triple by Cory Voss. Baros helped his own cause two batters later with a sacrifice fly to plate Voss.

The Tigers almost struck early against Baros. In the first inning, Neiko Paolino drew a walk and Logan Nethercot followed him with a single. Cameron Brosh moved the runners up a spot with a sacrifice bunt, but the threat didn't lead to any runs.

"That's the first time I'd seen him — a lot of these guys had faced him before," Nethercot said. "He was good, he got ahead of us, and when you get ahead of somebody, you can throw what you want."

Back-to-back errors in the second by Colts third baseman Brandon Maes put more runners in scoring position, but Baros fielded a sacrifice bunt attempt and fired to third to force out Dante Teigen, and later picked off a runner at second base.

On Deck Tuesday: Cañon City @ Pueblo West, 4 p.m.* Thursday: Cañon City vs. Pueblo East, 4 p.m.* April 12: Cañon City @ Pueblo Central, 10 a.m.* * South-Central League game

The game was close for most of the way. Jared Mews' single in the fifth, followed by a wild pitch to put runners at second and third, meant the tying run was on second base. After an intentional walk to Nethercot to load the bases, cleanup hitter Brosh made a solid contact, but Mike Ramirez fielded the ball and forced out Nethercot at second.

Cody Simms was the starting pitcher for the Tigers and worked three-plus innings, giving up two hits, four walks and getting one batter to strike out. He was followed by Trey Owen, Jarett Koch and Nethercot on the mound as the team searched for someone to get ahead in counts and limit damage. The first three pitchers walked a total of six batters.

"First pitch strikes for us was 27 percent," Ritter said. "We're getting behind in the count and having to come in on fastballs. You can get away with that for a little bit, but if you keep doing that in a game, you're going to get beat and that was the difference."

The Colts finally broke open a big inning in the seventh when they put up four runs on four hits.

Voss had a three-hit game and scored three times.

For the Tigers, Nethercot was 1 for 1 and walked twice (once intentionally).

The Tigers are now 5-2 overall but 0-2 in league. Pueblo South improved to 4-5 and 1-2.

Cañon City's next game will be at 4 p.m. Tuesday against the Pueblo West Cyclones (3-3-1, 1-0).