When the Seattle Seahawks visited the White House to be recognized for last season's Super Bowl win, some players participated in videos promoting Michelle Obama's "Lets Move" initiative.

The White House must have decided the Seahawks were pretty good at promoting its policies, because it tabbed Seattle's two biggest stars for a PSA on the Affordable Care Act, more commonly known as "Obamacare" for President Barack Obama's support of it.

In a video released Friday by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), Seahawks quarterback Russell Wilson and cornerback Richard Sherman encourage people to visit HealthCare.gov to promote enrollment in the ACA or to renew their coverage. Jan. 15 is the enrollment deadline to have effective coverage by Feb. 1; open enrollment for 2015 health care coverage continues until Feb. 15.



That's not the type of commercial we're used to seeing Wilson and Sherman in since they won a championship. And they've each been in a few.



The HHS said the Obama administration has "been in regular contact with the Seahawks organization" since they beat the Denver Broncos in the Super Bowl last year. The videos were shot at the Seahawks headquarters in Renton, Wash.



“I want to thank Russell and Richard for volunteering their time to raise awareness about the importance of enrolling in health insurance coverage and join them in calling for people to visit HealthCare.gov and check out their options,” HHS Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell said in a statement. “With 25 percent more issuers in the marketplace, health insurance companies are competing for your business. And last month, 87 percent of people who signed up through HealthCare.gov were eligible for financial assistance to lower monthly premiums. January 15 is the deadline to select coverage that begins on February 1, so sign up today.”

The ACA has been one of the most analyzed parts of Obama's two terms as president. Its purpose was to reform the health care system and provide more Americans with affordable health insurance. It has had its critics, and snags that included how tedious the online process was, but the HHS says that online process has been streamlined. That is one reason they asked Wilson and Sherman, two of the most recognizable players in the NFL and experienced pitchmen for insurance companies, tablets, video games and beef jerky, to help get the word out about going to the website.



The Seahawks start the defense of their Super Bowl championship in their playoff opener on Saturday. Another Super Bowl would bring another trip to the White House, and maybe another chance for the players to discuss policy with Obama. Or for Obama to discuss policy with them.



- - - - - - -

Frank Schwab is the editor of Shutdown Corner on Yahoo Sports. Have a tip? Email him at shutdowncorner@yahoo.com or follow him on Twitter! Follow @YahooSchwab