An injured calf muscle could limit the ability of Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers to scramble and make plays on the run on Sunday. Credit: Rick Wood

By of the

Green Bay — Mike Holmgren remembers the week of preparation for a vitally important game against the Chicago Bears in 1995 as a mental tug of war between being brilliant and being smart.

His Green Bay Packers were 5-4, had lost their last two games and were facing the prospect of not having quarterback Brett Favre, who had suffered a badly sprained ankle the week before against Minnesota. On Wednesday before the Bears game it looked like there was no way Favre was going to play.

"Brett couldn't practice," Holmgren recalled last week. "His ankle was three or four times the size it was normally. I didn't even think there was a chance he was going to play until Friday."

The medical staff wrapped Favre's left ankle and foot with so much tape, it looked like he was wearing one of Herman Munster's boots. Favre threw five touchdown passes that afternoon in a game that elevated his toughness to legendary status, lifted the Packers into a tie with the Bears for the division lead and helped Favre secure the first of three most valuable player awards.

The significance of that week has surfaced 20 years later with the Packers facing a win-or-go-home game Sunday with an injured quarterback. Aaron Rodgers will take to Lambeau Field against the Dallas Cowboys in a divisional playoff game with a strained left calf muscle that is expected to limit his mobility.

Just like Holmgren was forced to do back in '95, Packers coach Mike McCarthy has had to balance the best ways to beat the Cowboys with the smartest ways to keep Rodgers on the field.

"You go into the week thinking you're not going to change anything then you start thinking about it and you realize you should probably take into account how the injury will affect him," Holmgren said. "Brett was someone who could move around. He liked to improvise as we all know.

"I told him if I think you're in danger or you can't protect yourself, I'm taking you out."

McCarthy isn't the only one facing that challenge.

Dallas coach Jason Garrett is playing with an injured quarterback as well. Tony Romo, who had off-season surgery to repair a herniated disc in his back, tore rib cartilage against Seattle on Oct. 12 and then suffered two fractures in the transverse process in his back in an Oct. 27 game against Washington.

Romo missed a game and has had to sit out Wednesday practices since then to help him recover from the previous week's game. Offensive coordinator Scott Linehan, like McCarthy, goes into games with a full game plan but has to consider Romo's condition as the game goes along.

"He takes Wednesdays off during the week and Thursdays, offensive coordinator Scott Linehan was talking about it, it's not exactly real clean on Thursdays with him getting some soreness out," Fox analyst and former Cowboys quarterback Troy Aikman said. "And then Friday comes around and he starts feeling a little better and then by Sunday he's able to play at a high level.

"It's challenging and...other than missing one game, which had nothing to do with the surgery, I think a lot of people have been surprised he has been as healthy as he has."

Thinking back to '95, Holmgren said his play-calling was in sync with what he thought Favre was able to handle as the game played on. There were plays he had to eliminate because of Favre's immobility and plays he didn't have to eliminate when he saw Favre functioning as well as he did.

The same probably will hold true for Rodgers.

"Aaron has such a good arm, such a quick release, it shouldn't bother him that much," Holmgren said. "He can throw from the pocket."

A month after Favre sprained his ankle against the Vikings, Aikman dropped back for a pass against Washington at RFK Stadium and strained his right calf muscle. Doctors told him he would be out two to three weeks.

The following week, however, Aikman returned to play at Philadelphia. He did not miss a game the rest of the season and led the Cowboys to their third Super Bowl in four years, beating the Packers and Favre in the NFC Championship Game along the way.

Aikman said he thought of that injury when he was broadcasting the Detroit game Week 17 when Rodgers hurt his calf for a second time, left the game and then returned after the Packers' first possession in the third quarter. Aikman said his injury was worse than the one Rodgers suffered.

"I think so, because it's hard to get up on your toes to throw," he said. "That's why when he (Rodgers) was in the tunnel getting up on his toes, that was a good sign. When I did mine, I could not get up on my toes. I couldn't do it."

Aikman pointed out that he, like Rodgers, could still throw from the pocket. But he was not someone who moved around in the pocket or scrambled as much as Rodgers, so it didn't have the same potential impact on his game.

He said Rodgers, who is a strong candidate this year for a second MVP award, flourishes when he can move around and it will be tough for him to do everything he wants to Sunday.

"You can do things dropping back and throwing the football, but if you push off and run it's going to pull," Aikman said. "That's what happened to him in that last game against Detroit.

"So, for me it wasn't that big of a deal because I wasn't going to be able to run anyway. But for him, who is so good at extending the play and getting outside containment, it takes some of the instincts away and you just have to be very careful."

Holmgren agreed that instincts would play a role in whether Rodgers gets through the game without further injury. He said Rodgers' natural instincts will be to run, but he will have it in his head that he shouldn't take off running.

Aikman did not say that Rodgers couldn't be successful playing with limited movement. But he did say Dallas would have an advantage if they were able to tell early in the game that Rodgers was severely limited in his movement.

"You're able to rush a little bit differently because you're not as worried about him taking off running," Aikman said. "But as far as blitzing or not I don't think the calf is what is going to determine that. The reason you don't blitz him is because you're one-on-one against good receivers with Jordy Nelson and Randall Cobb and he gets the ball out and you're not likely to get there.

"You don't get to the quarterback and then you're weakening the pass coverage, so I wouldn't expect a lot. Everyone blitzes to some degree, but I wouldn't think they're going to major in it."

Much of Rodgers' success will depend on how well his offensive line protects him. Holmgren said Favre had such a great relationship with his offensive line that they refused to let him get hit in the Bears game.

The Packers offensive line likely feels the same way.

Romo has been playing with his back injury for a while and the fractures reportedly are healed, but against Detroit last Sunday he was sacked six times and knocked down four other times and some of his throws came up short when he tried to throw on the run.

"It's a matter of pain," Holmgren said of Romo's injury. "They give him whatever for the pain and he gets through the game. You saw Cam Newton get in the car wreck and had the same thing and he came back and played.

"It's not the same injury (as the disc). It's just dealing with the pain. Tony's a tough guy. You can see it affect him once in a while, but he is tough."

In both cases, pain will be part of the equation, but at this point, with the season on the line, the two quarterbacks will do everything they can to forget it and do what has gotten them here so far.