Newspapers and websites are filled with headlines about the latest economic crisis, whether it’s Greek sovereign debt, the Chinese stock market or the price of oil. These are all important stories. People want to know what’s going in their world.

But just as the weather forecast is more newsworthy than a scientific study of the slowly changing climate, long-term economic trends are often hidden from view amid the hullabaloo of the economic crisis du jour.

This is why the yearly release of the Fraser Institute’s “Economic Freedom of the World: 2015 Annual Report” is so important. I co-wrote this report, along with James Gwartney of Florida State University and Joshua Hall of West Virginia University.

We tracked the level of economic freedom in over 150 nations and used 42 variables to measure the degree of government interference in people’s economic lives. Countries that score high on this index are those that exhibit fiscal restraint in taxation and spending, provide a stable monetary environment, allow their citizens to trade with one another and the rest of the world, and regulate lightly. Most important, they provide sound and secure private property rights consistent with the rule of law.

The most economically free countries, as usual, are Hong Kong and Singapore, while the least free are Venezuela and Congo (Cuba and North Korea are not rated).

The United States ranked 16th, with a rating of 7.73 out of a possible 10 in the most recent year. This might not sound bad. However, it might come as a shock to discover that countries such as the United Arab Emirates, Canada with its socialized medical system and even the former Soviet republic of Georgia all rank higher.

In 2000, the United States ranked second, behind only Hong Kong, with an 8.65 rating. That’s right, Americans have slowly, and without much notice in the press, lost a lot of economic freedom in the past 15 years.

What accounts for the U.S. decline?

Although the U.S. ratings and rankings fell in all areas of our index, the largest declines were in property rights and the rule of law. Increased government regulatory interference has also been an important contributing factor.

During the past decade, nontariff trade barriers, restrictions on foreign investment and business regulations of various kinds have grown extensively. The expanded use of regulation in the United States has resulted in sharp rating reductions for our indicators measuring the independence of the judiciary, impartiality of the courts and regulatory favoritism.

The broad indicators we use don’t always allow for precise explanations when rankings go up or down.

Could the expanded use of secret foreign intelligence surveillance courts, where government surveillance requests are rubber-stamped nearly 100 percent of the time, be responsible? Was the interference of the executive branch of the federal government in the bankruptcy proceedings of General Motors and Chrysler a factor?

What about the Supreme Court’s Kelo vs. City of New London decision in 2005, making it easier to condemn private property and transfer that property to politically connected private interests? Or the expanded use of civil asset forfeiture, in which the government can take your property without any proof of guilt, in prosecuting the war on drugs?

And what of increased environmental, safety and health rules and new acts like Sarbanes-Oxley, Dodd-Frank and the Affordable Care Act? Could they be a threat to property rights? Could the growth of political power of the military and military contractors be driving these numbers? Or could it be a factor that local police officers now sport armored cars, assault rifles and body armor, and look more like soldiers at war than cops keeping the peace? Could the nationalization of airport security by TSA agents be affecting economic freedom?

I believe the answer to all these questions is yes.

We may never know which of these factors figure most prominently in the construction of our ratings. However, whatever the underlying causes, when multiple indicators from different sources, each using different methods, arrive at the same conclusion, we should take these results seriously.

The data clearly shows that to large degree, the United States has experienced a significant move away from rule of law and toward a highly regulated, politicized and heavily policed state.

Robert A. Lawson holds the Jerome M. Fullinwider Endowed Centennial Chair in Economic Freedom and is the director of the O’Neil Center for Global Markets and Freedom at the Cox School of Business at Southern Methodist University. Reach him at rlawson@cox.smu.edu.