Loretta Lynch, the first black woman to be nominated to be US attorney general, has been a low-profile but quietly powerful figure in the Department of Justice for some time.

Unlike Preet Bhahrara, the limelight-drenched US attorney for New York’s southern district who graced the front cover of Time magazine in February 2012, for his high-profile prosecutions on Wall Street, Lynch has flown largely below the radar.

But through her chairmanship of the attorney general’s advisory committee – a group of 17 US attorneys who act as advisers to the attorney general on Department of Justice policy – she became close with the outgoing Eric Holder, who reportedly lobbied hard for her appointment.

Bennett Capers, a professor of law at Brooklyn law school, described Lynch’s style as “low-key, very measured”, and said she liked to play it safe. “Not pushing the envelope, not trying to overreach, but taking a level-headed approach on every case I can think of that the eastern district has brought. Not taking cases because they will make a name for her, but because they make sense.”

Lynch was born in Greensboro, North Carolina, and grew up in Durham. Her father was a pastor, as was her grandfather; a 2007 article in the legal journal Network News described how her grandfather created “his own version of the Underground Railroad” in the 1930s, to help blacks escape from the Jim Crow laws in the south.

She studied law at Harvard, and in 1990 started at the Department of Justice in the US attorney’s office for New York’s eastern district, which encompasses Brooklyn, Queens and Staten Island as well as Long Island.

She is probably still best-known for her prosecution of the white police officers who viciously beat and sodomised a Haitian immigrant, Abner Louima, in 1997, in a case that became synonymous with – and emblematic of – police brutality in America.

She had an eight-year stint in the private sector, as a litigator at Hogan and Hartson LLP, during which time she served as special counsel to the prosecution and an investigator in the United Nations’ criminal tribunal for Rwanda. She returned to public service in 2010, when she was nominated by the Obama administration to be US attorney for the eastern district.

Under her leadership, the US attorney’s office for the eastern district of New York has prosecuted high-profile cases of political corruption, terrorism and police brutality. She won a number of important victories, including the prosecution of Angel Rodriguez, a councilman, and Roger Corbin, a legislator in Nassau County, as well as a raft of city inspectors, all on bribery charges.

She was lead prosecutor in a series of important political corruption trials involving government of Brookhaven, on Long Island – a town that became known as “Crookhaven”. More recently, she led the 20-count federal indictment of the Republican congressman from Staten Island, Michael Grimm – who managed to win re-election in November nonetheless.

In 2010, Lynch led the indictment of Pedro Espada Jr, a former New York state senate majority leader, who embezzled millions of dollars from Soundview, a free medical clinic in his district.

It was a case in which Lynch seems to have taken a particular interest. In an illuminating 2013 speech, she spoke of the betrayal of public trust that Espada’s actions personified, as well as the challenges involved in building the case against him. Soundview employees, she said, refused to cooperate with the investigation – or obstructed it.

“The tragedy of these cases and these charges goes far beyond those just under indictment,” Lynch said. “Constituents who depend on the organisations that have been corrupted do not receive vital services – in the case of Soundview this was literally life threatening.”

She spoke with distaste about Espada’s lavish lifestyle. “Instead of medicine, the money went for luxury cars, extravagant dinners, vacations, parties and spa treatments,” she said. Espada was sentenced to five years’ imprisonment in June 2012.

Daniel Richman, a professor of law at Columbia and a former assistant US attorney in New York’s southern district, told the Guardian that Lynch was someone with deep experience.

“The particular office she’s in has a broad portfolio of specialisms and interests, which nicely capture the range of things that – on the criminal side at least – the attorney general will be focused on,” he said.

Richman said that he expected her confirmation to be relatively easy. “She is somebody … without any obvious political failings,” he said. Lynch is not personally connected to Obama, which in the current political climate is a plus.

“She’s very smart, she knows how to surround herself with smart people,” Bennett Capers said. “I think she’s going to be great.”

Stephen Rapp, the State Department’s ambassador at large for war crimes issues, and a friend of Lynch, pointed to her recent pro bono work for the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda as an indication of her “dedication to justice”.

Lynch traveled to the Tanzania in 2004 to help train African prosecutors for the court and return against in 2005, when Rapp was chief of prosecution at the tribunal, to act as a special prosecutor in a case that saw the conviction of a prosecution witness who had been intimidating fellow witnesses into recanting their testimony.

She was unpaid and prosecuted the case in her spare time, twice flying out to Tanzania.

“That says something about her character,” Rapp said. “At the end of the day that is the most important thing.”