Emma Coburn tested a decidedly different strategy in the 3,000 meter steeplechase final at the U.S. Outdoor Track and Field Championships on Saturday.

She didn’t jump to the lead from the gun.

No matter. On a day so hot at Hayward Field in Eugene, Ore., that Coburn wore a cooling vest before her race, she tucked behind leader Stephanie Garcia about two-thirds of the race before easing her way to the front and cruising to her fourth U.S. title in 9 minutes, 15.59 seconds, topping her own meet record set last year (9:19.72).

And she made it look easy.

“I felt comfortable, and I was happy to have some company,” Coburn told The Denver Post. ” I was surprised when I saw the time because my last 150 I let off the gas a little bit. I didn’t kick like I was trying to break an American record. I wasn’t paying attention at all to splits. The goal was just to win.”

Garcia (New Balance) finished second in 9:23.48 and Colleen Quigley (Bowerman Track Club) was third in 9:24.92.

The win earns Coburn (New Balance), the former CU steeplechase star who was running just her second steeplechase of the year, a spot representing the United States on the world team in Beijing from Aug. 22-30. It’s her second world team (she also made it in 2011).

Coburn nearly tripped in the latter part of the race, stumbling briefly on the railing. She said she was looking up at her coaches, CU’s Mark Wetmore and Heather Burroughs, for guidance when it happened. By then, though, she and Garcia had separated considerably from the rest of the pack, and she quickly regained her composure.

Her race strategy was based partly on how last year’s race played out — someone jumped to the lead, and she was able to eventually win. Garcia’s pace was fast enough for the pack to string out.

“I just can’t be predictable that I’m going to take it from the gun every time,” she said. “I enjoy racing that way, but I can’t let my opponents know that that’s the only way I know how to race.”

Coburn — who said she was in the best shape of her life — will return to Boulder for training before turning her attention to two Diamond League races in Lausanne, Switzerland, on July 9 and Monaco on July 17. She’ll return to Boulder before arriving in Beijing a week or two before her first race at the world championships on Aug. 24.

“I hope my race indicated I’m at least where I was a year ago if not a couple of steps ahead,” she said. ” I feel fit, and it’s just a matter of getting in some fast races and testing my fitness with that time. … My workouts have been going really well. And I’m just excited to get in some races where winning isn’t necessarily paramount.”

To realistically make the podium at worlds, Coburn said she’ll have to run between 9:05 and 9:08 (her best is 9:11.42, set last year). She was the No. 2-ranked women’s steepler last year and Saturday’s time also puts her at No. 2 in the world this year.

Last year, several top competitors in the event either weren’t competing or weren’t racing well. Coburn said her goal was to finish in the top 5 in Beijing, but there’s no doubt she’s a medal contender. Still, she deflected talk that she would make the podium, saying it was too early in the track season to gauge her fitness in seven weeks and the performances of her rivals.

Another former Colorado steeplechaser, Shalaya Kipp, finished sixth in 9:37.09. The top three finishers in each event advance to the world championships, assuming they have the minimum world standard.

On Sunday, Coburn’s training partners, Jenny Simpson and Kara Goucher, will both compete in the final day of the championships — Simpson in the 1500 meters and Goucher in the 5,000.

Daniel Petty: 303-954-1081, dpetty@denverpost.com or twitter.com/danielpetty