Customized TV Listings are available here: www.latimes.com/tvtimes

Click here to download

TV listings for the week of Oct. 26 - Nov. 1, 2014 in PDF format

This week's TV Movies

SUNDAY

As if college wasn't scary enough, there's the new made-for-cable terror tale "The Dorm." 8 p.m. MTV

Tusk! Something prehistoric emerges from the Siberian tundra in the docu-special "Mammoth Unearthed." 8 p.m. National Geographic Channel

"Masterpiece Mystery!" presents a two-part adaptation of P.D. James' "Pride and Prejudice"-inspired whodunit "Death Comes to Pemberley." 9 p.m. KOCE

A new special investigates tales of "Monsters Behind the Iron Curtain." In Soviet Union, monsters investigate you! 9 p.m. Animal Planet

Nucky, we hardly knew ye: The Prohibition-era crime drama "Boardwalk Empire" calls it quits after five seasons. Steve Buscemi stars. 9 p.m. HBO

MONDAY

Kim Kardashian — definitely not a broke girl — guest stars as herself on the season premiere of "2 Broke Girls." 8 p.m. CBS

Tru TV launches a raft of new programming with the game show "Hair Jacked." 8 and 8:30 p.m. Tru TV

Get on the good foot with the new music doc "Mr. Dynamite: The Rise of James Brown." 9 p.m. HBO

Nick Cannon, who starred in the original 2002 film, steps into a supporting role in the made-for-cable sequel "Drumline: A New Beat." 9 p.m. VH1

"Independent Lens" probes the cause of a deadly commuter-train crash in Japan in 2005 in "Brakeless." 10 p.m. KOCE

Lend him your ear: A former heavyweight champ voices his animated likeness in the wacky new series "Mike Tyson Mysteries." 10:30 p.m. Cartoon Network

TUESDAY

A brand new season of "NBA Basketball" tips off with defending champs the San Antonio Spurs playing host to the Dallas Mavericks. 5 p.m. TNT

Boz the great and powerful: Former NFL linebacker Brian Bosworth is profiled on a new "30 for 30." 6 p.m. ESPN, 7:30 p.m. ESPN2

May the spookiest Halloween display win in "The Great Halloween Fright Fight." 8 p.m. ABC

Lean in with Facebook's Sheryl Sandberg and other women who've made a name for themselves in the business world on a new "Makers." 9 p.m. KOCE

A new episode of "Frontline" charts the rise of the terrorist group known as ISIS. 10 p.m. KOCE

The course of true love never did run smooth, as in the new reality series "Prison Wives Club" and "My Crazy Love." 10 p.m. Lifetime; 10 p.m. Oxygen

A musical family just can't wait to get on the road again in the special "Home Sweet Bus." 10 p.m. TLC

Eliza Coupe ("Happy Endings") gets "Benched" in this new sitcom about an elite lawyer who winds up working as a public defender. 10:30 p.m. USA

WEDNESDAY

The Welsh writer Dylan Thomas does not go gentle into that good night in the bio-drama "A Poet in New York." Tom Hollander stars. 8 and 11:30 p.m. BBC America

Figure skater Johnny Weir celebrates LGBT athletes who took part in the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi in "To Russia With Love." 8 p.m. Epix

Curse you, Red Baron! A new edition of "Nova" remembers the pilots and planes that did battle in the skies over Europe during WWI. 9 p.m. KOCE

The U.S. Senate's Jeff Flake (R-Ariz.) and Martin Heinrich (D-N.M.) team up for adventure in the Marshall Islands in the special "Rival Survival." 10 p.m. Discovery Channel