By Debby Freedman, Lynn Marks and Judy Berkman

October is Breast Cancer Awareness Month and it seems like everything, from NFL cleats to cans of Redbull, is awash with pink in recognition of this devastating disease.

Although many people are aware that breast cancer exists, they may not know that the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, provides many new resources to help in the fight against breast cancer.

As breast cancer survivors and anti-poverty advocates, we have seen firsthand how traumatic a breast cancer diagnosis can be, especially for low-income women who may have previously lacked health insurance and who may not have been able to afford early diagnosis and treatment.

A recent study by the American Association for Cancer Research shows that Black women and Latinas are more likely to receive later diagnoses than their white counterparts, leading to lower survival rates. The study attributes much of this to these groups' lack of access to health care.

In our experience as legal aid attorneys and volunteers with Living Beyond Breast Cancer, we have seen many women who have struggled after a diagnosis.

There are the survivors who were terrified that losing their job meant they would lose their health insurance, and not be able to become insured again.

There are the women who desperately needed medical care following a breast cancer diagnosis, but who were unable to obtain it.

There are women who spent all of their savings and income to pay for treatment only to be evicted from their homes because they could no longer pay the rent.

And there are the low-income women who were unable to get cancer screenings, and suffered tremendously or even lost their lives as a result of their diagnosis coming too late.

Breast cancer has cost the lives of so many women.

Although death rates for breast cancer have been decreasing, according to Breastcancer.org, more than 40,000 women in the US are expected to die from breast cancer in 2015. However, with access to insurance and preventive care, lives can be saved.

In honor of Breast Cancer Awareness Month, here are five important things to be aware of now that the Affordable Care Act is in effect:

Pennsylvania has Medicaid expansion authorized under the federal Affordable Care Act. Most lower-income women (single women with incomes of less than $16,248, families of four with incomes of less than $33,474) qualify for comprehensive health insurance that will cover breast cancer testing and treatment with few co-pays. Women can apply at any time – there is no open enrollment period. The Affordable Care Act allows women who cannot qualify for Medicaid to purchase health insurance through Pennsylvania's competitive Marketplace. Many women will qualify for subsidies to make insurance more affordable. Open enrollment for 2016 coverage runs from Nov. 1, 2015 through January 31, 2016, and women who need coverage outside that window may qualify for a special enrollment period. Insurers are required to cover breast cancer screening and treatment. For help enrolling in Marketplace coverage, call 1-877-570-3642. The Affordable Care Act requires almost all insurers to pay for preventive care without co-pays or deductibles. That means that women can access breast cancer screening without any out of pocket costs. The Affordable Care Act prevents insurers from discriminating against consumers who have preexisting conditions, including breast cancer. Women with a history of breast cancer no longer have to worry that changing jobs or starting their own businesses will leave them without health insurance options. Pennsylvania provides free breast cancer and cervical cancer screening for women with limited insurance and moderate incomes (single women with incomes of less than $29,430, families of four with incomes of less than $60,630) through the long-established Healthy Woman Program. It provides cancer treatment through its longstanding Breast and Cervical Cancer Treatment Program.

Although a breast cancer diagnosis can be truly terrifying, the ACA is providing a lifeline for so many people.

This month, as we think of breast cancer awareness, please spread the word about these important resources and make sure you, friends, and relatives take advantage of new health care options. Lives will be saved.

Debby Freedman is Executive Director of Community Legal Services. Lynn Marks is the Executive Director of Pennsylvanians for Modern Courts. Judy Berkman is a Managing Attorney at Regional Housing Legal Services. All three are breast cancer survivors.