Michael Cuddyer, who hit for the cycle and played 18 innings of a doubleheader Sunday, was almost certain he’d return to the Rockies lineup Friday against Miami. But a lingering left hamstring strain kept him on the bench again. He likely won’t start until Sunday, at the earliest. But he wanted to make one thing clear:

“I’m not going on the DL,” he said. “You can put that in bold letters.”

Cuddyer met with Rockies head athletic trainer Keith Dugger on Friday and they decided it was best for Cuddyer to sit.

“I’m getting better,” Cuddyer said, his leg still bruised from the strain. “But Doogie didn’t want to risk it. I wouldn’t be able to go out and blow it up every play because the risk is too high right now.”

The Rockies put the veteran right fielder on waivers earlier this week, according to Fox Sports’ Ken Rosenthal, who reported the Rockies then pulled his name back because of the injury.

Rockies officials would not comment, and it’s not known whether any teams attempted to claim Cuddyer. Clubs will often place players on waivers with no intention of letting them go, just to gauge the interest of other teams.

Either way, the Rockies will not trade Cuddyer before his three-year, $31.5 million contract expires after this season. If the Rockies put him on waivers again, it would be irrevolcably — meaning, teams could claim him without having to offer anything in return.

Cuddyer, 35, the defending National League batting champ, is hitting .331 this season but over just 33 games. He missed 59 games with a broken shoulder after diving for a ball playing third base.

“Any time you have a bleed out in your hamstring it’s a considerable injury,” Rockies manager Walt Weiss said. “I think he’s coming around but he’ll probably still need another day or two.”

Call-up time. The Rockies over the next week will begin deciding on September call-ups when game-day rosters are allowed to expand to 40 players.

“There are several people in on that decision,” Weiss said. “Some of the guys you want to reward for having a good season, some of them you want to look at for next year. There’s some budgetary issues and all those things are factors. Those are the conversations that we’ll be having for the next week or so.”