LONG BEACH >> Molina Healthcare executives have repeatedly said this year they expect the Affordable Care Act to lead to a doubling of the firm’s revenues by 2015. Those expectations are behind the company’s expansion of its downtown office space, development that may lead to an improved business climate in the city’s core.

Molina’s expansion has already resulted in the creation of office space for hundreds of employees, and the company plans to bring still more people — and their wallets — to downtown.

Thus far, the health care firm’s project is about half complete as Molina has employees at work inside the former Press-Telegram building on Pine Avenue. Renovations of an adjacent edifice, known as the Meeker-Baker building, may be completed in just under a year.

Combined with Long Beach city government’s planned $5 million project to improve Pine Avenue by adding new lighting, trees and sidewalks, from Ocean Avenue to Anaheim Street, Molina’s expansion may create a “halo effect” bringing more commerce to downtown, real estate executive Gregory Gill said.

“You combine that (the Molina expansion) with the city initiative to put the infrastructure on Pine ... and I think that’s a great catalyst,” said Gill, who is president of the Long Beach office of Lee & Associates.

Molina’s expansion may not necessarily mean that the future of downtown will rely on the health care industry, Gill said. He cited hotels, restaurants and port-related operations as other businesses that are well-suited for the city’s core.

Lee & Associates’ most recent market report, for the year’s third quarter, describes a Long Beach where the office market is gaining health. In Long Beach and western Orange County, the brokerage reports that vacancy rates are falling while rents are rising.

The Downtown Long Beach area recorded a 13.4 percent vacancy rate during the most recent quarter.

That number signifies that downtown’s office buildings have a greater proportion of empty space than their counterparts in either the area that includes the Long Beach Airport or western Orange County — where office vacancies respectively were at 12.6 percent and 10.2 percent, but are nonetheless performing better than during recent quarters.

In 2012, downtown office vacancy rates exceeded 16 percent in both the first and third quarters.

Advertisement

What’s more, Downtown Long Beach office landlords could charge an average asking rent of $1.98 per square foot during the most recent quarter. Asking rents have trended upward since the beginning of 2012.

An executive at another brokerage, Robert Garey of Cushman & Wakefield, said the Downtown Long Beach office market is gaining health, but Molina’s expansion is not necessarily going to suddenly transform market conditions for other downtown landlords.

“It’s still a tenant’s market. It has improved from the low part of the recession that we’ve been in,” said Garey, who is a senior director at Cushman & Wakefield’s office in Long Beach.

Molina’s expansion is being driven by factors outside of Long Beach. The company has historically specialized in health plans for patients who are eligible for Medicare or Medicaid, which in California is administered as Medi-Cal. Molina is also among the 13 California firms that have been selected to provide insurance through Covered California, the state-run insurance exchange for insurance customers whose incomes are too high to qualify for Medi-Cal, but low enough to be eligible for government-subsidized insurance.

Molina also made a move in July to enter the South Carolina market.

Although the Affordable Care Act, with its mandate that individual Americans carry health insurance or pay tax penalties to Uncle Sam, remains one of the most controversial laws of the decade, the upshot for Molina is a new business opportunity.

And as executives like John Molina, the company’s chief financial officer, expect revenues to double to some $12.5 billion by 2015, Molina managers are tasked with hiring thousands of new people to process the additional work.

Molina said the company has hired roughly 2,000 people this year. The firm has about 400 people working in the newly retrofitted former Press-Telegram building.

“It’s nice to see an army of people walking toward the restaurants, because it’s been a long time,” said Phillip Splendorio, a regional manager for Long Beach-based Farmers & Merchants Bank.

“I’m looking forward to seeing what happens in the next few years,” he added, referring to Downtown Long Beach’s business prospects and the growth of the area’s dining scene.

Molina executives project the company’s lease at Meeker-Baker will begin next November. Molina predicted 700 to 800 additional employees will work there.

The Pine Avenue buildings are within walking distance of Molina’s headquarters on Oceangate.

“There’s a nice campus feel,” Molina said. “We can have people collaborate instead of having people dotted all over the Southland.”

Molina signed its lease to occupy Meeker-Baker and the former Press-Telegram offices in February. The terms, according to an SEC filing, allow the company to use the buildings through 2014. Initial rent for the former newspaper building is about $2.6 million per year.

The lease for Meeker-Baker is set to begin next November at an initial rate of $4 million per year.

Molina and his wife, Michelle Molina, are the principal landlords for the Pine Avenue buildings. Because he is an officer for the health care firm, Molina said he could not personally participate in the lease negotiations.

The Molinas had initially planned to build residential units on the land, but the post-2007 housing downturn required a change of plans.

“I think this is a classic example of making lemonade out of lemons,” Molina said. “Having your own space makes it a lot easier to grow your business faster.”