CHICAGO — On a normal day, A.J. Burnett’s performance Sunday afternoon would have earned him the lowest ERA in the National League. He woke up tied for second, after all, with Atlanta Braves starter Shelby Miller.

Burnett then pitched seven scoreless innings, dropping his ERA to 1.38 after eight starts and 52 innings. But when Miller lost a no-hitter with two outs in the ninth inning and settled for a shutout, reducing his mark to 1.33, Burnett would have to settle for second.

Burnett’s seven scoreless innings were plenty to stop the Pirates losing streak at four games. They beat the Chicago Cubs, 3-0, at Wrigley Field, avoiding a series sweep.

“Some things are going good,” Burnett said. “Plays are being made, guys are playing hard. I’m making a pitch here or there.”

Since 1900, Burnett is the only Pirates pitcher to hold opponents to two runs or fewer in his first eight starts. He allowed three hits, all singles, Sunday and struck out seven. He walked five, but the bases on balls were more indicative of Burnett picking his spots against the Cubs lineup than a lack of control.

“If I’m going to miss, I’d rather miss where I was instead of over the plate,” he said. “You don’t want to miss over the plate, especially these guys or any big league lineup at Wrigley.”

The defense behind Burnett helped him. Andrew McCutchen slid to catch Chris Coghlan’s softly hit ball after running in toward the infield, then threw to first base to double off Miguel Montero and end the second inning. Burnett picked off Addison Russell after Russell walked in the third, and Neil Walker’s diving stop stole a base hit from Dexter Fowler later in the inning. McCutchen made another nice catch in the seventh, running down Jorge Soler’s well-struck liner near the warning track in left-center field.

“When we play defense like we did, when you get a performance like A.J. put together, you’re going to have a pretty good chance of at least getting an opportunity to win,” said Walker, whose RBI double added an insurance run.

Cubs starter Jake Arrieta was almost as good. He allowed one run, on a bloop double and a single, in seven innings and struck out seven.

The Pirates took advantage of a Cubs misplay to score their first run in the fifth. Starlin Castro began backpedaling for Josh Harrison’s popup, but he didn’t get there in time. The ball dropped and Harrison took second. Francisco Cervelli’s single scored Harrison, and though Anthony Rizzo cut off Soler’s throw and caught Cervelli in a rundown, the Pirates led, 1-0.

Manager Clint Hurdle won a challenge in the sixth that defused a potential Cubs scoring opportunity. Castro walked with one out. He stole second and his front foot beat Cervelli’s throw, but Jung Ho Kang applied the tag to Castro’s left thigh as his back foot hit the bag.

“That’s the play, though, that’s getting reviewed now more than ever before,” Hurdle said. “The play that continues to get looked at is that slide, because he beats the throw.”

Video review officials in New York ruled that Castro’s foot was momentarily off the bag as he slid, overruling the call, and Miguel Montero struck out on the next pitch to end the inning.

Cervelli hit an infield single against Zac Rosscup to lead off the eighth. After taking second on pinch-hitter Sean Rodriguez’s sacrifice bunt, Cervelli scored on Walker’s double and the Pirates led, 2-0. Starling Marte’s double drove in another run.

The Pirates are off today before a two-game interleague series begins Tuesday against the Minnesota Twins at PNC Park.

Bill Brink: bbrink@post-gazette.com and Twitter @BrinkPG.