Topics: 2016 Elections, Chris Christie, New Jersey, pension reform, Politics News

As New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie visits Iowa and New Hampshire, he continues to insist that if he does not get concessions from the state’s public workers his state will go bankrupt like Detroit. Back in the spring in an edition of his monthly radio show “Ask the Governor,” Christie challenged the Democratically controlled Legislature to undertake a second round of pension reforms to stave off the doomsday scenario of state insolvency.

“So until the Legislature can come to grips with the idea that to control property taxes, to control income taxes, to control sales taxes, and to provide services, we can’t continue to sustain a pension and health benefits system that is going to bankrupt us,” he said. “And if you need any proof of that, look at the City of Detroit — just went bankrupt — $11 billion in debt versus just $2 billion in cash, and of the $11 billion in debt, $9.5 billion was for pension and retiree health benefits.”

There is only one problem: Under existing law and our federal system, New Jersey, or any other state, can’t go bankrupt. While such over-the-top rhetoric ensures the governor holds the spotlight, it brings more heat than light to a debate that needs less bombast and more finesse. It is much harder than just throwing up your hands and invoking the fiscal apocalypse. The reality is that the state, with or without Chris Christie, will have to sort this out politically, without the help of a federal bankruptcy judge.

“The states are sovereign entities. Each state has its own constitution,” says Paul S. Maco, a partner with the law firm Bracewell and Giuliani. As Maco reads the law, making states eligible for federal bankruptcy would require an amendment to the U.S. Constitution.

Maco is one of the nation’s leading experts on public finance and served as the first director of the Securities and Exchange Commission’s Office of Municipal Securities that led the SEC’s response to the 1994 Orange County bankruptcy.

Professor J. Fred Giertz, director of the University of Illinois’ Institute of Government and Public Affairs, agrees states can’t file for federal bankruptcy protections. “States do not have that option even though bankruptcy does allow an orderly process to insure equity in who gets paid and who doesn’t,” Giertz says.

To be sure, the New Jersey public pension debacle pre-dates Christie’s tenure. Under governors from both political parties, benefits were expanded while the state regularly missed payments. Things happened that probably deserved the attention of a grand jury, but no consequences ensued except a slap on the wrist for the state. Back in 2010 the Securities and Exchange Commission took the unprecedented step of charging the state of New Jersey with materially misrepresenting the status of the state’s pension system in 79 bond offerings valued at $26 billion from 2001 until 2007. Such an act of blatant fraud by a mere mortal would be an indictable offense. In Jersey, it was just part of our landscape.

When Christie, working with Democratic Senate president Stephen Sweeney and former Speaker Shelia Olivier, produced the bipartisan pension reset, which raised the public employee retirement age, increased what workers paid in for their benefits as well as ended the robo cost-of-living increases, there was a sense the state could move forward by finding common ground and shared sacrifice. In the process the collaboration reduced the state’s long-term liabilities by $122 billion.

But this spring Christie invoked the Detroit bankruptcy scenario as political cover for his decision to renege on his pledge to contribute the full $3.8 billion to the public employee pension system that was the linchpin of the deal he cut with the Democrats.