On Thursday, the Federal Reserve decided to keep a key interest rate at a historic low. The last increase of the federal funds rate was June 2006 but most experts still believe the Fed will raise rates this year. Daily Journal Business Editor Dennis Seid asked Robin Haire, founder and president of Haire Wealth Management in Tupelo, of the significance of the Fed’s decision.

Q. Why have rates remained low?

A. The U.S. economy has a cycle. After every recession there is always a recovery, mature and aging cycle. We are somewhere in the mature cycle, where rates begin to rise slowly. The cycle after 2009 was a recovery and expansion which caused the Fed Funds rate to stay low.

Q. What are the advantages of keeping rates low, as well as the advantages of raising them?

A. Low rates allow home buyers a lower long-term fixed rate and business owners to borrow at low rates for expansion. New and current homeowners, along with businesses, would continue to grow, but we don’t need a runaway train. Not raising rates can also lead to higher inflation of above 2 percent.

Raising rates makes money from banks harder to get. Leading economic indicators should be the determining factor for the Fed to raise rates. In March of this year the Fed said “improvement in the labor market and confidence that inflation moves back to 2 percent in the near term will determine a rate change.”

The labor market currently supports a rate hike, but a 30 percent drop in oil prices has caused inflation to move in the wrong direction.

Q. In your opinion, should rates have risen already. And when do you think rates should rise?

A. This is a complicated question which requires lots of thought and input from economists and leading market indicators. I think the last recession is still fresh on consumers’ minds. The Fed has been very sensitive to this and has been cautious to raise rates. It is difficult to suggest rates should have been raised sooner, but more than likely it is time to move forward with a rate hike this year. Investors would finally have their questions answered after three years of conversation of rising rates.

I think it is more important to focus on the “how far,” “how fast” and “how much” – not the “when” rates will change. More economic data will be released next week including manufacturing, housing and retail sales for September. These will provide analysis that the Fed will use for a rate change at their December meeting.