Photo

“Who believes today that war can be abolished? No one, not even pacifists,” writes Susan Sontag in a 2002 essay for The New Yorker, “Looking at War.” “We hope only (so far in vain) to stop genocide and bring to justice those who commit gross violations of the laws of war.” We seek, too, to stem the suffering of those caught in war’s cross hairs.

Matter recently published a masterful piece of reporting by Matthieu Aikins, who documented the eight days he spent in Aleppo, Syria, with the Hanano Civil Defense Team. “Whoever Saves a Life” tells the gripping, high-stakes story of a group of young men, all volunteers and none much older than 28, who have stayed in the ragged, bombed out city to work as first responders. Mr. Aikins traveled with a guide, Salem Rizek, and a photographer, Sebastiano Tomada, whose striking pictures illustrate the story.

When a bomb or shell hits — as many do, over the course of each grinding day — the men travel in a dusty red truck to the site of the destruction. Depending on how lucky those in the area were, the men either collect the bodies of the dead, provide emergency medical treatment or break through layers of concrete to rescue survivors.

“Imagine a spread of loose photographs extracted from an envelope that arrived in the morning mail,” writes Ms. Sontag. “They show the mangled bodies of adults and children. They show how war evacuates, shatters, breaks apart.”

Mr. Tomada’s photos (linked throughout this article) do the same, as described in the words of Ms. Sontag: “Look, the photographs say, this is what it’s like. This is what war does. And that, that is what it does, too. War tears, rends. War rips open, eviscerates. War scorches. War dismembers. War ruins.”

Mr. Aikins is present when the team’s hide-out, the station house of a former car impound, is nearly hit by what appears to be a barrel bomb. These are “the improvised but lethal explosives the regime had come to favor,” Mr. Aikins writes.

“To be hit by an explosion at close range is to experience light and sound as darkness and silence; silence as your ears ring louder than any sound, darkness as dust and smoke envelop you,” Mr. Aikins writes.

Mr. Aikins documents the close call with the barrel bomb in words, but he decides that a visual will do more to illustrate the destruction. In addition to the article, Mr. Aikins narrates a short video shot by Mr. Tomada, “Cheating Death in Syria.”

“This is the room we were staying in when the bomb dropped,” he begins. Mr. Aikins points to a window that has been blown out by the bomb. “Coming back during the day you can really see the scale of the damage and just how lucky we are that the bomb didn’t hit this place directly. It would have wiped us all out.”

Another wall of the building has two gaping holes. A diagonal fissure runs between them. “You can see that the whole building is on the verge of collapsing,” he says. Mr. Aikins reassures viewers, however, that no one was badly injured.

Outside, Mr. Aikins walks across an expanse of rubble. He gestures to a section of a wall from the neighboring house that collapsed. “This used to be a house,” he says, the only inflected word he speaks in an otherwise steady tone. He picks up the remnants of the propane tank that comprised the bomb. “It’s actually really heavy, thick steel,” he says. “You can imagine when that flies through the air that’s capable of cutting people completely in half.”

As Mr. Aikins writes in his longer article, but which is not shown in Mr. Tomada’s photographs, two barrel bombs hit the edge of a park earlier that day and did exactly that. What should we experience in words, and what in images? Mr. Aikins writes that one of the rescue workers finds a body in the road: “Ali ran toward a barely recognizable object on the sidewalk. It was a portly man who had been stripped of his clothes and powdered the color of concrete dust. He had been severed in half at the navel; his intestines were scattered behind him and one of his legs was folded up over his shoulder. He lay face down, and his eyes were closed, but as Ali ran up, his chest rose and fell a single time. Then he was still.”