Failures of leadership have landed Veterans Affairs in a serious crisis but have led to great opportunity for change, the department’s deputy secretary said Wednesday during a visit to Denver’s VA hospital.

Deputy Secretary Sloan Gibson, after touring his 14th VA medical center in eight weeks, said he was impressed by the transformation he’s seen in the 321,000-employee VA in almost six months working there.

Veterans still wait too long for decisions and for appointments from an antiquated scheduling system that needs a complete overhaul, he said.

“Trust is the foundation of everything we do,” Gibson said. “Trust has eroded. We have work to do. Sometimes we earn that back one veteran at a time.”

Recently proposed disciplinary action against six employees for allegedly falsifying scheduling records at VA facilities in Cheyenne and Fort Collins were the first of many he sees coming, Gibson said. The VA will hold people accountable for willful misconduct, he said, and will not tolerate retaliation against whistle-blowers.

“Whistle-blower retaliation is against the law. And it’s just wrong,” Gibson said.

As of July 23, the VA Eastern Colorado Health Care System based in Denver had called and reached 940 veterans to get them off waiting lists and into clinics, officials announced.

The Veterans Health Administration, a division of the VA, will provide the Eastern Colorado system $12.6 million to accelerate access to care.

Nationwide, Gibson said, of the $15 billion of additional funding Congress recently provided the VA, $5 billion will go to hiring more physicians and meeting other staffing needs. And $10 billion will purchase care for veterans in the private sector as the VA struggles to meet the extraordinary demands on the system by aging veterans.

Gibson had been acting secretary of the VA until July 29, when Robert McDonald, former chief executive of Proctor & Gamble, took over as head of the 321,000-employee department with a $164 billion budget to serve 21 million veterans.

McDonald replaces Gen. Eric Shinseki, who stepped down as secretary amid the scandal of sick veterans suffering, even dying, waiting for care, while administrators, who disguised real wait times, collected performance bonuses.

Gibson acknowledged Denver’s new VA hospital under construction was years behind schedule and over budget, yet it’s coming. Clinics recently have opened in Pueblo and Golden, and a center is scheduled to open in Colorado Springs on Aug. 18.

Gibson also was the keynote speaker Tuesday night for the opening of the 82nd annual convention of the Military Order of the Purple Heart, a roomful of decorated veterans who gave him a standing ovation.

“The VA is in the most serious crisis in a generation,” Gibson told the veterans. “But the VA now has before it the greatest opportunity in history to improve the care of veterans.”

Electa Draper: 303-954-1276, edraper@denverpost.com or twitter.com/electadraper