When I go to a public restroom (a nice euphemism for toilet), and am standing at a urinal, I am not very concerned over whether the person next to me is holding a penis–as long as it’s his. I am much more concerned if he or she is holding a gun. (And yes, there are appliances that allow women to urinate standing.) However, I frankly, don’t much care if my pissoire partner has or doesn’t have a penis. I don’t much care what my lavatory neighbor has in his or her pants or under his or her skirt. In a public toilet, I am not looking for or fearing any bulges of flesh–only of metal.

This nation has some very serious problems. Toilet selection is not one of them. Finding a toilet, yes. That can be a problem. Finding a clean toilet is often more than a problem. An impossibility. Feeling threatened by the gender classification of my bog mate, is not for me an issue. And, yes, for the record, I have found myself at events where a man in full, and credible, drag came to the urinal and whipped it out. My feeling? So what?

You want problems, real problems? Take the Middle East….Please! We’re involved in a series of un-declared wars in the Middle East. You want real problems? Take our sclerotic political system…Please! We’re going to have two of the most disliked and distrusted people in American life, facing off for our presidency. We have plenty of problems at home. Take our medical system…Please! Even with the expanded access from ObamaCare, it is an expensive mess that does not have the best medical outcomes in the world. Not the worst but we’re not getting what we’re paying for.

Meanwhile in the South–in Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, South Carolina and Texas–there are terrible educational results, particularly for the poor: white, black and Hispanic. They have shocking medical issues–hugely disproportionate rates of obesity, heart disease and diabetes.

So, naturally the most pressing political issues involve the right to carry arms in schools, streets and religious institutions. Since any regulation or limitation to the Second Amendment is a slippery slope leading to confiscation, the only way to stop bad children with guns is by providing good children with guns.

What could go wrong? Add guns to the normal freshman year in college of “experimentation” with drugs, binge-drinking, raging hormones and general chaos and what do you get? One thing for sure, an exodus of rightly nervous students and faculty to truly safe spaces. I am so NOT afraid of micro-aggressions. I fear macro-aggressions with automatic weapons.

But arguing the Second Amendment may not be the hottest issue (or distraction). The single most important issue facing the South, and possibly the entire nation, is which restroom to use?

Nothing seems to threaten society more than the thought of transgender people using restrooms different from their original factory equipment. Legislation demands that only the original factory version can be considered in assigning proper pooping places. Aftermarket genitalia are strictly forbidden.

This takes us to the philosophical questions of what is gender and if it is skin deep, purely genital or only outer dressing? What shall we do with transgender people with incomplete gender reassignment? Yes, I do feel for some old professor who has to face a student asking for an “Incomplete” on his gender re-assignment.

To bring these terribly important social quandaries together, we must ask what is the proper gun to bring to the proper restroom? And, naturally, who will be bathroom monitor and conduct short-arms inspections?

This is a great, and I think, cynical distraction from the real issues of life and death, war and peace, societal cohesion and political constipation that truly plague our nation. Some countries distract their angry and alienated public with nationalism. We distract with pistols and pissoires.

©2016 Jonathan Dobrer

www.Dobrer.com

Follow me on Twitter @jondobrer