When an infant is enrolled at Peace of Mind Early Education Center in Woodbury, the school’s teachers are already thinking about that child’s emerging literacy skills.

“As soon as we take in a child, at 6 weeks old, we understand the importance of every interaction we have with that child,” said Nikki Robbins, the center’s founder.

Related Articles Here’s how St. Paul police describe a teen’s arrest at Central High

Stillwater mountain biking team has a new home

Inver Hills instructor returns to work after investigation

Eagan school collecting Legos for charity

After Facebook complaints, St. Paul school employee quits Robbins’ staff members consider the sights, sounds and textures their youngest learners experience as first steps on their road to school readiness and academic success.

“All of those things help get those neurons firing to help a child learn effectively,” Robbins said.

BROADER FOCUS

Minnesota lawmakers return to the Capitol on March 8 for the 2016 legislative session, poised to tackle a long list of topics — from tax cuts to transportation funding to schools. With a projected budget surplus of $900 million, Gov. Mark Dayton says education — specifically expanding access to early learning programs — should be at the top of that list.

Last year, Republicans and Democrats fought over how to use new school funding to tackle the state’s persistent student achievement gap. This year, a growing number of education advocates say lawmakers should widen their focus on early learning from preschoolers to include children as young as 6 months old.

Child development experts say that the majority of brain development occurs in the first three years of life and that achievement gaps between low-income children and their peers emerge as early as 9 months.

“Those early interactions, those early investments really matter,” said Ericca Maas, an early learning advocate. “If we wait until 3 or 4 (years), you are basically creating a preschool program that is an intervention. You’re not playing catch-up if you start early.”

Maas directs Parent Aware for School Readiness, a nonprofit organization that advocates for the state’s Parent Aware ratings of preschools and child care centers. She said Minnesota could make real progress on closing achievement gaps between poor and minority children and their peers if every child from a struggling family had access to high-quality early learning before kindergarten.

A recent Minnesota Department of Education report mirrored the findings of other states that have shown such programs are essential for preparing low-income children for kindergarten.

Preschool is not a cure-all, however. The benefits can fade over time, especially for students who face serious challenges both at school and at home.

“Let’s set a goal that says all eligible kids should have consistent access to high-quality programming over multiple years,” Maas said.

PRESCHOOL PUSH

Dayton pushed the 2015 Legislature to create a voluntary universal public preschool program for 4-year-olds with a $175 million minimum annual price tag. He also wanted lawmakers to expand funding to help younger low-income children and to give child care tax breaks to middle-class parents.

Republicans and some school districts pushed back against a universal system and instead wanted to focus on helping the neediest children. The opponents said universal preschool would be too costly and place a burden on many districts while possibly hurting private providers.

After Dayton vetoed the initial education funding bill, lawmakers agreed in a special session to split roughly $80 million in new funding between public programs and scholarships in the two-year biennial budget.

In a news conference last week, Dayton said that when it comes to closing student achievement gaps, addressing early learning “is the most important thing we can do.”

WAIT LISTS

This year, Minnesota will spend $120 million on preschool services and scholarships to help low-income children attend public and private programs. An additional $271 million in state and federal funds will help provide child care to more than 30,000 low-income children.

Child care subsidies will be focused more on preparing children for school under recent changes in the federal program funding roughly half of Minnesota’s Child Care Assistance Program, or CCAP. In coming years, state officials must concentrate a growing amount of the federal aid on helping providers improve the quality of their programs.

Advocates say many more low-income children could benefit from quality early learning if there were more money available. Only a fraction of eligible 3- and 4-year-olds receive preschool scholarships, and the child care assistance program reaches just about one-third of the children who need it, state data show.

Sinying Lee, who lives in St. Paul’s Frogtown neighborhood, told a joint meeting of the Senate Education and Health and Human Services committees on Tuesday that long waiting lists for state assistance posed a hardship for her young family.

Until she became eligible for the aid, Lee said, she was unable to find affordable child care and was forced to rely on relatives to watch her children. However, their ability to help was inconsistent, making it tough to hold a job and have a steady place to live.

“It makes it extremely difficult for families on a limited income to find economic stability,” Lee said of the assistance wait list that runs as long as three or four years in Ramsey and Hennepin counties.

Lee has three children: One attended preschool on a scholarship last year, and the other two are receiving child care assistance so she can work full time.

EXPANDING PROGRAMS

Providing quality early learning and child care to every poor Minnesota child would be neither cheap nor easy.

It would take an additional $150 million a year to provide preschool scholarships to every 3- and 4-year-old who needs one, program advocates say. Another $275 million would cover child care assistance annually for all those who qualify and fund an increase in the reimbursement rate to encourage more providers to accept children with state subsidies.

Maas said she hopes to win additional funding to expand Parent Aware’s work so every preschool and child care center that wants a rating can get one. The system was created with private funding in 2008, and a federal grant that helped it grow is about to expire.

It’s unclear how much of an appetite lawmakers will have for a widespread spending increase for early education in a nonbudget year when there is a plethora of competing priorities. Lawmakers hope to agree on a bonding bill, address transportation infrastructure needs and cut taxes.

Rep. Jenifer Loon, R-Eden Prairie, who chairs the House Education Finance Committee, noted the success of the preschool scholarship program and pointed out that Dayton was unable to make the case for universal preschool last year.

“I don’t see that any of that has changed,” she said.

Loon said she was interested in learning more about where child care and preschool programs overlap and how both programs could operate more efficiently and effectively.

Targeted assistance for needy children has had bipartisan support in the past. Last year, Republicans and Democrats championed increased funding to help needy families afford preschool and childcare. The current biennial budget includes more than $100 million in new spending for these programs.

Early learning and child care advocates are polishing their pitches to lawmakers when they return to the Capitol. Supporters say funding programs for young children significantly benefits families and the state’s workforce.

“Child care is a two-generational approach to broader economic security,” said Ben Horowitz, a policy advocate for the Kids Can’t Wait coalition of nonprofits pushing for more investment in Minnesota’s youngest residents.

“It allows parents to work, children to thrive and employers to find and retain the workers they need. It’s an essential part of our state’s prosperity.”

BEYOND EARLY EDUCATION

Other education issues the 2016 Legislature might tackle:

Per pupil funding: School lobbyists fought hard in 2015 to win a 2 percent-per-year increase in the school funding formula in the latest biennium budget. But district advocates have long wanted lawmakers to tie the formula to inflation and will likely ask at least for another funding increase if there is a supplemental budget.

Testing and accountability: Recent changes to the federal Elementary and Secondary Education Act, also known as the No Child Left Behind Act, gave states new control over student testing and how schools are held accountable. That means the Minnesota Comprehensive Assessments, or MCA, proficiency tests could be updated and the Multiple Measurement Rating, or MMR, used to judge schools could be improved.

Special education funding: Districts have long made up the difference between the cost of required special education services and the resources provided by the federal government. The gap costs Minnesota schools about $600 million a year; districts want state lawmakers to take up some of the federal government’s slack.

Teacher training and recruitment: Minnesota faces a teachers shortage in certain specialties and a growing need to diversify its teaching force. Addressing these concerns might mean new incentives for attracting teachers and changes to how they are licensed.

AHEAD IN THE PIONEER PRESS

In the countdown to the March 8 opening of the 2016 Legislature, the Pioneer Press will explore key issues facing state leaders. From health care to public works projects to police policy, our stories over the next week can be found in your daily paper and online at twincities.com/mnleg.

BY THE NUMBERS

Minnesota spending on early learning and child care in 2016: