By Jason Hart | Watchdog.org

Labor bosses paid with union dues want to take mandatory fees from workers in all 50 states.

That’s why union officials are excited about a MoveOn.org video starring left-wing economist Robert Reich, who thinks right-to-work laws — which let workers opt out of paying unions — should be banned nationwide.

Reich would revoke the freedom of workers in 25 states to choose whether to pay union bosses, subjecting millions to forced union dues in the name of equality.

“If you remember only one thing, remember this: we must enact a federal law that overturns so-called state ‘Right to Work’ laws,” Reich said in the MoveOn video.

At the state level, right-to-work has gained momentum recently. Since 2012, unions have waged losing campaigns against right-to-work in Indiana, Michigan and Wisconsin.

Reich’s advice? If you can’t beat ’em, ban ’em.

Right-to-work is “a backdoor to destroying unions,” Reich warned, because “no one pays dues, unions have no resources to organize,” and workers get lower pay and benefits as a result.

This is a common refrain from union bosses, who typically continue bringing home heaps of bacon even as union membership declines.

RELATED: America’s top labor union bosses raked in millions in 2014

Reich’s assistant at University of California, Berkeley, where Reich has been paid more than $700,000 over the past three academic years, did not respond to a Watchdog.org request for comment.

Union bosses were quick to promote Reich’s assertion right-to-work should be banned so Americans cannot hurt themselves by opting not to pay unions.

Labor coalition AFL-CIO told tens of thousands of Twitter and Facebook fans Reich’s video was a “MUST SEE.”

MUST SEE: @RBReich explains why we must "Strengthen Unions" http://t.co/jdkug3RY2A; watch + share via @MoveOn — AFL-CIO (@AFLCIO) May 28, 2015

American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees agreed, sharing Reich’s “MUST SEE VIDEO” repeatedly.

MUST SEE VIDEO: @RBReich explains why we must "Strengthen Unions" http://t.co/aqM3wURqCx #1u pic.twitter.com/WPz89n1411 — AFSCME (@AFSCME) May 29, 2015

Despite right-to-work laws, AFSCME had enough resources to pay president Lee Saunders $348,745 last year, and AFL-CIO had enough resources to pay president Richard Trumka $322,131.

American Federation of Teachers president Randi Weingarten, who was paid $557,875 last year, called banning right-to-work a way “to make the economy work 4 [sic] the many, not the few,” posting a link to Reich’s video from AFT’s official Tumblr account.

10 ways to make the economy work 4 the many, not the few: #7 strengthen unions & preempt state “right-to-work” laws http://t.co/ZqlCxNzP4K — Randi Weingarten (@rweingarten) May 28, 2015

Nick Novak, spokesman for Wisconsin’s free-market MacIver Institute, said Reich and MoveOn want to ban right-to-work out of loyalty to union bosses’ left-wing political agenda.

“Those looking to overturn state right-to-work laws with a federal law do not stand on the side of workers, but instead are on the side of greedy union bosses,” Novak told Watchdog.org. “If the left was serious about helping workers, they would celebrate that Wisconsin just became the 25th right-to-work state and would push for more states to move in the same direction.”

While unions try to stomp out right-to-work nationwide, the free-market Mackinac Center for Public Policy is encouraging state lawmakers to build on the protections right-to-work laws provide.

Mackinac’s “Worker’s Choice” proposal would allow workers who don’t want to join unions to represent themselves, giving individuals more freedom instead of centralizing power in several huge labor unions as Reich recommends.

Killing right-to-work is far from the only policy idea where Reich — who served as labor secretary in President Bill Clinton’s administration — is on the same page as union bosses at AFT, AFSCME and AFL-CIO.

In other videos for MoveOn’s “The Big Picture: Ten Ideas to Save the Economy” campaign, Reich has called for raising the minimum wage to $15 an hour, hiking Social Security taxes and increasing the death tax.