By Michael Dwyre

Imagine hearing, "We're sorry but the number you dialed is out of service," when you call your local independent diagnostic imaging center to schedule your next mammogram, or a bone density scan, or an x-ray. Or imagine hearing, "Unfortunately, we do not have any appointments this month. Maybe next month." Imagine hearing that when you call a larger-run facility that doesn't have time for any patients because they can't keep up with the demand generated by the closing of your local independent diagnostic imaging centers. Worse, imagine when you receive the bill and you find that your portion of the payment is two or three times higher than the place you went to for the last ten years!

This is not part of your imagination; this is happening. Your local independent diagnostic imaging facilities are being forced out of business by draconian cuts (40 percent) in reimbursement rates for convenient, local independent diagnostic imaging facilities by the state's largest insurer, Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield. While larger diagnostic imaging centers have always enjoyed much larger reimbursements by Horizon, the disparity just tripled. Unbelievably, Horizon has cut their reimbursements to the lowest cost providers by upwards of 40 percent while leaving the larger, corporate facilities alone. These community centers were already receiving significantly less funding and now the difference is so vast that these local facilities have virtually no chance of surviving.

What does it mean to patient care and access? Much higher costs, longer wait times, far fewer patient-friendly open MRI's for claustrophobics and the loss of most if not all of the local independent diagnostic multi-modalities MRI centers and the additional potential for lost medical records. This is a boon for larger, corporate facilities because it means more volume for them. However, it comes at a price to the rest of us: less convenience, less competition and a reduction in quality. For New Jersey and our fragile economy it means lower tax revenue and higher unemployment when these community facilities are forced to close. There's a winner in all of this: Horizon. With fewer providers of independent diagnostic imaging services it gives them more leverage with the remaining providers, which means surge pricing and surge profits for Horizon.

This practice isn't new and we've read this story before. Just a few years ago most local cardiologists were forced out of business. Horizon drastically cut the independent provider pay rate forcing many cardiologists out of their practices and out of their field altogether. Now the same test by the same doctor on the same machine at a large radiology facility is costing two-to-four times as much because the rate is radically higher.

There are approximately 165 local independent diagnostic imaging centers that are affected by these cuts. They have been providing the same high-quality services for MRIs, CT scans, mammograms, ultrasounds, x-rays and bone density scans at a lower cost to the patient. These facilities have been open nights and weekends for the patient's convenience. Soon they will become vacant buildings. The reimbursement level is now so far below the level of profitability many places will close, and quickly. Think about the next time a woman needs to schedule a mammogram, an expecting mother needs an ultrasound, your child needs an emergency x-ray, or our seniors need a bone density scan and you have to wait weeks for an appointment only to arrive at a hospital emergency room that is not set up to handle routine appointments in a timely manner. Think about the bill and how much hospital services cost. The executives at Horizon just don't care. Their CEO has a salary topping $9 million and our insurance rates continue to outpace inflation by as much as ten times over. The Affordable Care Act was signed into law to provide options, control reimbursement rates and costs, but Horizon has found a workaround. We need to hold Horizon accountable and support our local independent diagnostic imaging centers that we have come to rely on.

Michael Dwyre is owner of the Radiology Center of Fair Lawn.

Follow The Star-Ledger on Twitter @starledger. Find The Star-Ledger on Facebook.