Kim Richards seems to still be keeping in touch with her loved ones via social media despite being in rehab. On Wednesday, her ex-husband, Monty Brinson, posted a photo of Kim and told her that he loves her.

Monty’s post seems to be in response to a photo and message that Kim sent him. “@kimrichards11 I love you too…. #love #family #blessed#heart #thankful,” he wrote. The photo shows Kim making a kissy face, with the words “I Love You” and a heart symbol underneath. Kim, with her hair around her face and makeup on, looks happy.

In response to someone, perhaps a viewer of The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills, who wrote that he/she’s hoping that Kim is getting the help that she needs and that it was so obvious that she wasn’t sober, Monty wrote that Kim is doing “great” and that he’s “so proud of her.”

This isn’t the first time that Monty Brinson has commented on Kim Richards. Last Wednesday, after Kim’s interview with Dr. Phil aired, Monty posted a lengthy message that defended Kim.

“Laying by the pool in Bel-air on such a beautiful day gathering my thoughts about the Dr Phil Show interviewing @kimrichards11 of all the people in the world I probably know Kim better than anyone. Before you get my response the only thing I would like to say at this moment, Kim is the most loving caring person I’ve ever met. I love her as a person, I love her as a friend. And most of all she loves her children more than anything. They are blessed to have her. drphil#belair#ca#loved#heart#love#sunshine#pool#life#family.”

Monty’s message may have been his way of responding to Dr. Phil criticizing Kim as a mother. During the interview, which took place just days after she was arrested at the Polo Lounge in Beverly Hills after causing a drunken scene and refusing to leave, Dr. Phil chided Kim for not setting a good example for her children. Three of Kim’s children, Brooke Brinson, Chad Jackson, and Kimberly Jackson, were present at the interview.

“You are drunk in a bar, fighting with a cop. That is not good mothering.”

Kim checked herself into rehab shortly after the interview. Yet, Monty and Brooke may soon be celebrating a very special event with Kim in person. On Monday, Radar Online reported that Kim will be allowed to leave the Malibu rehab facility to attend Brooke’s second wedding, which will take place out of the country in a few weeks, with a chaperon from the rehab center in tow.

If Kim Richards does attend the wedding, she may have some awkward tension with her sister Kyle Richards. During The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills Season 5 reunion show, Kyle accused Kim of not wanting to invite her to Brooke’s second wedding. As previously reported by the Inquisitr, co-star Brandi Glanville implied that Kim has good reason to not invite Kyle since she did something “unspeakable” and “unforgivable” at Brooke’s first wedding, a claim that Kyle later denied.

[Photo by Alberto E. Rodriguez/Getty Images]