Want more hot BPR News stories? Sign up for our morning news blast HERE

Sitting down for his first interview on “Fox News Sunday” in eight years, President Barack Obama was not hesitant to get a dig in against the network, insisting “Republicans have their own TV stations.”

It would not be much of a stretch to say Obama was hanging the candidacy of Donald Trump around the neck of Fox News.

Host Chris Wallace asked the president if he felt personally responsible for the sense of anger voters in both parties are feeling over being cut out from the decision-making process.

With surprising candor, Obama said he was “frustrated about it.”

“Number one, we’re still shell-shocked from what happened in 2007-2008. People lost homes, lost jobs, lost life savings and they still don’t fully know how that happened and was the system fixed in a way they can have confidence in.”

Wallace questioned why, after eight years, Obama had not “fixed” people’s perception of the system.

“The perception is going to be changing over time as people see results, as they get more confident” the president replied. “But, and this is the big but, nobody is going to be 100 percent satisfied in a democracy like ours with every outcome.”

“And I think the danger both among Republicans and among Democrats who just listen to each other or they just listen to people that already agree with them,” Obama said. “You know, Republicans have their own TV station.”

“Go ahead,” Wallace quipped. “You can say Fox News.”

“They’ve got their own publications, their own blogs,” the president continued. “Democrats, same thing. Increasingly what happens is, we don’t hear each other. And so what happens then is when Republicans promise to repeal Obamacare and it doesn’t get repealed, they’re outraged.”

He said some Democrats are also outraged over not getting a single payer system. Surprisingly, Obama acknowledged that “85 percent of the people get health care through their jobs, they’re pretty satisfied with it … they don’t want big change on them.”

An admission that undermines a big part of why Democrats felt the need to shove Obamacare down America’s throat.

Obama concluded on an uncharacteristically optimistic note, telling people to step back and recognize that “America has the best cards. We are the envy of the world.”

“This can be our century just like the 20th century was as long as we don’t tear each other apart because our politics values sensationalism or conflict over cooperation,” he said. “If we get that part right, nobody can stop us.”

Sign up for our morning news blast HERE