Get The Power Lunch newsletter, a must-read weekday roundup of what's buzzing in Florida politics:

Happy President's Day! Would-be President Hillary Clinton was supposed to be in South Florida today, but she's off to Nevada to forestall an insurgent Bernie Sanders campaign. Instead, her husband Bill Clinton will be appearing in Riviera Beach. We'll have a full report later in the day. In the mean time, let's take a look at the other side of presidential politics and that amaze-balls Republican debate Saturday night in today's Power Lunch.

Donald Trump, explained: Among Donald Trump supporters, a constant refrain has been, "He says what everyone else is just thinking." This has been a source of some consternation among liberals, because in general, building a massive wall at the border, banning Muslim immigration and deporting 11 million immigrants already in the country illegally are not things that they are thinking. But if those left-leaning voters watched Saturday's debate, well, maybe they finally understood what all those Trump supporters were talking about.

Because another source of confusion among liberals is the oft-heard statement among Republicans that "George W. Bush kept us safe." To which all those voters who actively protested the Iraq War wonder, "What about 9/11? When 3,000 people die in a terrorist attack, do you get to just call, 'Mulligan'?"

So those people, so anti-Trump, so anti-Bush, perhaps finally understood what Trump supporters mean if they tuned in to the Republican debate Saturday and witnessed Trump saying that the former president certainly did not keep America safe, a statement greeted with jeers by the South Carolina audience.

That only scratches the surface of what was a vicious debate, the nastiest of the primaries thus far. Also, one of the most entertaining. I'd like to think those two are not related but, we are where we are. And, leftie readers, the next time your weird uncle says that Trump is just saying what everyone's thinking, now at least you understand.

The return of Bush the Elder: Ol' Dubya may not be too popular among our nation's liberals, but in South Carolina, Jeb Bush's older brother is "the most popular Republican alive," according to one member of Jeb's campaign staff. South Carolina's Republican vote includes a huge military bloc and an equally significant evangelical one -- both bases that still look at George W. Bush as a stalwart defender of our nation. And so, the man has come out of retirement to stump for brother Jeb. The polling since New Hampshire has seen John Kasich sky-rocketing in the Palmetto State, but there are still no polls out that are strictly post-debate, a debate that was pretty good for both Marco Rubio and Jeb, who fended off Donald Trump's attacks as well as he ever has.

Scalia out: Of course, a Republican primary debate -- heck, even the presidential race itself -- was not the biggest news to come out over the weekend. Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia has gone to that great courtroom in the sky, where all decisions are 9-0 and strictly adhere to the exact wording of the U.S. Constitution. The Supreme Court is set to hear cases on "abortion, affirmative action, the rights of religious objectors to the contraceptive mandate in the Affordable Care Act, and the president's powers on immigration and deportation," per our story on the fight over Scalia's successor, and all of those decisions could now be 4-4 splits. As far as the succession itself, we know that President Barack Obama intends to nominate someone, that he will not use a recess appointment to bypass Senate confirmation, and that Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell intends to grind this out as long as he can in the hopes that a Republican wins the White House in November. We've also got the names likely to be on Obama's short list for the nomination.

Reiding the riot act: Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid backs U.S. Rep. Patrick Murphy in the Democratic Senate primary in Florida. So it should come as no surprise that he's calling on U.S. Rep. Alan Grayson to drop out of the race after a New York Times report that Grayson has put his management of a hedge fund ahead of his duties as a congressman. Grayson has politely declined to drop out of the race. ... Actually, he said, "I resent the attack on my `morality,' and I question the morality and judgment of any elected official, much less one in my own party, who would sink so low as to engage in such a smear," because Grayson takes absolutely nothing lying down. And why should he? The polls so far have this as more or less a dead heat, and the election isn't until August.

Opening the floodgates: The Sun-Sentinel's Andy Reid reports that Gov. Rick Scott has asked for federal help to get water flowing out of the Everglades before it drowns all the animals. Allegedly, this is Florida's dry season, but it's the wettest winter in more than 80 years, and federal restrictions on how much water can flow between Lake Okeechobee and Everglades National Park have caused water to rise to nigh-unprecedented levels in the conservation areas of western Broward and Miami-Dade counties.

A simmering session: Rather than the fireworks of the 2015 session, it's all quiet on the Tallahassee front, writes the Orlando Sentinel's Gray Rohrer. But conservative legislation passing through the House has stalled in the Senate, including bills on gun rights, immigration, and fracking. Rohrer takes a look at those and other bills that could prove to be hotspots as the Legislature heads toward the finish line.

Permanent alimony could be temporary: Ending permanent alimony and requiring judges to assume that, all else being equal, a 50/50 split of child custody is in the best interests of the child are among the major changes to state alimony laws being considered this session. The Sun Sentinel Editorial Board approves, and points out the long history of failed alimony reform in the Legislature.

Conflict of what now? The man in charge of the House's education budget is state Rep. Erik Fresen, R-Miami. That budget includes $90 million for charter school maintenance and construction costs, while the Senate's budget includes no money for that. In his day job, Fresen pulls in $150,000 as a consultant for an architecture firm that specializes in building charter schools. In the wacky world of the Florida Legislature, this is not a conflict of interest. And as the Miami Herald reports, he's far from the only lawmaker with ties to the charters.

MEANWHILE IN THE TWITTERVERSE ...

.@realDonaldTrump even flip-flopped on hating @JebBush pic.twitter.com/zcY8uxpoIc ≥140 CHARACTER HOT TAKE: Hey, he's just flip-flopping what everybody's thinking. Matt Caldwell @mattcaldwell_fl AP News : 102 pythons caught as state snake hunt enters final weekend m.apnews.com/ap/db_268748/c… ≥140 CHARACTER HOT TAKE: They had it coming. Julio Gonzalez, M.D. @juliogonzalezmd On @foxandfriends this am: @TuckerCarlson interviewing @ByronYork over presidential politics. I've died and gone to heaven. #younggiants ≥140 CHARACTER HOT TAKE: If a conversation between Tucker Carlson and Byron York is heaven, I'll see you in hell. As always, I'm @Daniel_Sweeney. Troll me there.