NFL draft's top two QBs bring talent, questions

Passing judgment Make a mistake at quarterback and it can set an NFL franchise back years. The quarterback must operate as the face of the franchise. Denver Post NFL reporter Troy E. Renck examines the pros and cons of Florida State's Jameis Winston and Oregon's Marcus Mariota, the top quarterback prospects in the 2015 draft, which starts April 30: Jameis Winston Pros: Lost only one game as a college starter; worked in pro-style offense. Cons: Multiple off-the-field transgressions; threw 18 interceptions last season. Only one No. 1 pick — fellow Heisman Trophy winner Jim Plunkett — threw more (19). Marcus Mariota Pros: Elite speed, processes information well and goes through progressions on routes despite playing in spread offense. Cons: Worked in the no-huddle. Hasn't played under center. Can he run with purpose and stay healthy?

INDIANAPOLIS — — Jameis Winston looks from the podium with a crooked smile and a microphone in his face. He stands 6-foot-4 but looms larger than everyone else at the NFL scouting combine.

Another interview — or will it be a confrontation? — with the media starts, and Winston immediately helps himself without throwing a pass.

"First off, I want to let you all know I know I made mistakes, and I know I have a past. But right now it's about me moving forward and earning the trust of all these 32 teams out there," the Florida State product said.

Advertisement

The modern NFL paradigm demands quarterbacks function as well off the field as on it. The quarterback is the name brand, like Gatorade and Apple. The quarterback is the face of a Fortune 500 company. How fans feel about their team almost directly links to how they feel about him.

"The quarterback is the product. No corporation has much of a chance unless they have a product that is dominant in the market place. And everything has placed more importance on the position," said former Colorado quarterback Joel Klatt, an NFL analyst for Fox Sports 1. "If you don't have the marquee quarterback within your division, you are going to be fired as a head coach, you are going to fired as a GM, and as owner hope to make money by filling the stands. That's the way the NFL works now."

Quarterback is the most high-profile position in sports. Yet in a sport-specific training society with camps and personal coaches, the NFL struggles to develop quarterbacks. As many as 10 teams are looking for a starter this offseason.

"You have to have that guy to win championships," Broncos general manager John Elway said. "There's no way around it."

Colleges provide the NFL a free minor league system but don't train many QBs for the pros. The spread offense favored in college football is about as applicable to the pro game as a fish on a bicycle.

Winston and Oregon's Marcus Mariota represent the top quarterbacks in the 2015 draft, which starts April 30. The Tampa Bay Buccaneers are considering both for the top pick.

Winston lost one game as a college starter and, like Mariota, won the Heisman Trophy. But neither is a sure thing. Winston can't escape his troubled past. Mariota, one of the fastest players at the combine, can't outrun detractors who believe his experience in Oregon's no-huddle offense makes him ill-prepared for the NFL.

Johnny Manziel's troubles illustrate how much the quarterback position has changed. Joe Namath made millions off his reputation as a party boy. Similar behavior could cost Manziel his career. He learned that the NFL isn't college. Talent is a sliver of the equation. The quarterback must be the hardest worker in the board room and the most organized worker at the company picnic.

"You are never going to 'out-ability' anyone in the NFL," Klatt said. "Character plays a major, major role. The job is too big to be compartmentalized. Authenticity is more rewarded in the NFL than anything."