More than 400 searchers, many of them volunteers, continued scouring an area south of Jacob Lake in Coconino County Sunday for a missing 5-year-old boy.

The Coconino County Sheriff's Office was alerted about the disappearance of Jerold Joseph Williams at about 2:30 p.m. Thursday.

READ: Boy, 5, missing from Coconino County campsite

Many of the volunteers are from Colorado City. They joined law enforcement officers, state, local and federal agency personnel and specialized search and rescue teams deployed in the area of Highway 67 off of Forest Service Road 241.

They are conducting line and grid searches.

A team of nine PJ's (Air Force Pararescue) also have been providing detailed night searches with thermal imaging and flir systems.

On Sunday, a member of the Maricopa County Search and Rescue team provided a privately-owned helicopter.

Jerold apparently was with his mom and 15 to 20 friends and family members at an unimproved campsite about 12 miles south of the lake. The area lies within the northern portion of the Kaibab National Forest.

Jerold's mom said her little boy was chasing grasshoppers 100 to 200 yards from the campsite when she lost sight of him.

Williams and other members of the camping party spent about four hours searching for Jerold before calling CCSO.

"The missing child is from Colorado City and there has been huge support from the community in Colorado City in assisting with this search," according to CCSO. "In addition to assisting on search teams, members of the community have been preparing meals for the responders."

Jerold is a white male, about 3 feet 6 inches tall and weighs about 35 pounds. He has brown eyes and brown very short hair. His mom told deputies has a thin build and a light complexion.

According to CCSO, Jerold has visible abrasions on his face. The last time anybody saw him, he was wearing a gray or tan shirt and black denim pants over white long underwear. He also had on hiking boots.

CCSO said it does not need additional volunteers at this time, but the agency is taking names should that change.

If you would like to be on that list or, more importantly, if you know anything about where Jerold might be, call CCSO at 928-226-5012.

Anyone with knowledge of his whereabouts are asked to call the Coconino County Sheriff's Office at 928-774-4523 or 1-800-338-7888. Here's the number for Silent Witness: 928-774-6111.

Jacob Lake, which is located in the Kaibab National Forest, is about 5 hours north of Phoenix.

Copyright 2015 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.