Sioux Falls, SD

You've probably driven past them every day and never even noticed. But the City is taking notice of you and, in particular, your driving habits. Over the past year, Sioux Falls has installed dozens of new cameras at busy intersections as a way to ease congestion. The City's wider field of vision is putting traffic into sharper focus.

Heath Hoftiezer, with the City of Sioux Falls, can direct traffic from his desktop, with light pole-mounted cameras serving as his eyes on the street.

"If you can see the congestion disappear, get better, that's a good feeling, we're helping people then," Hoftiezer said.

The adjustable cameras provide Hoftiezer with a visual road map to manually tweak the timing of traffic lights to prevent backups at intersections.

"It can go from being an intersection that's backing up to all of a sudden, it's fine and working every cycle," Hoftiezer said.

The city has installed nine such cameras at busy intersections. The most recent ones are monitoring traffic on Russell Street at West and Western Avenues

"We're able to do a good job managing traffic with the events center having those two cameras in place," Hoftiezer said.

The city has also installed an additional 36 fixed cameras along the 26th Street corridor that are part of a computerized system to adjust traffic flows. In the past year, the number of traffic cameras citywide has jumped from just four all the way to 45.

"It's increased the flow of the traffic, to me. So I think it's a good thing," Sioux Falls driver Randy Orr said.

But other drivers, willing to give the new cameras the benefit of the doubt, haven't seen any improvements yet.

"Let's just give it a little more time. I'll pay a little more attention to it. I haven't noticed really, but I'll pay more attention now," Sioux Falls driver Shannon Collins said.

Adjusting traffic patterns through the lens of a camera is a constant work in progress, prompted by suggestions from the public.

"Right now, at 26th and Bahnson, we've been working on getting a little time for Bahnson Avenue to go through that intersection. There's some little things we do, we've made some changes at 26th and Van Eps trying to get some more time in the morning with the school traffic there," Hoftiezer said.

But city traffic engineers aren't the only ones who rely upon the cameras. The street department will be watching as well, once the snow flies this winter.

"They're able to zoom in on the pavement tight and see how's it reacting to the chemicals, is it wet yet? Is the ice forming? Has the snow started at this part of town," Hoftiezer said.

Even though the number of cameras in the City keeps growing, Hoftiezer says this is not a case of too much Big Brother watching over each and every driver.

"It's not a situation where you need to have them at every intersection. For us, it'd probably be more like approximately one a mile or something like that," Hoftiezer said.

The cameras are not tools for law enforcement. The cameras can't record images and don't have the resolution to identify drivers.

"We don't need to see exactly what's going on, we're just trying to watch cars move through intersections is all we're trying to do with the cameras," Hoftiezer said.

The city installed its very first traffic camera at 41st and Louise. It will be paying close attention to the holiday shopping traffic headed to The Empire Mall beginning later this month.

And with dozens of other devices peering down upon drivers, the streets of Sioux Falls are no longer camera shy.

Each camera costs about $7,500 to install and operate Hoftiezer says it's an investment that more than pays for itself because the city no longer has to send crews to the site to conduct traffic studies.

The next intersection due for a camera is 85th and Minnesota.