Dr. Gordon Christensen has released the following statement:

“It is my pleasure and honor announcing to the citizens of the Missouri 4th Congressional District that I will seek the Democratic nomination to represent them in the House of Representatives.

All Missourians, whether they live on the farm or in the city, have to face the twin problems of increasingly expensive healthcare and increasingly difficult to get healthcare. So, to avoid the cost and the hassle, too many of us are not taking care of ourselves and our families. That only makes the problems worse. The Affordable Care Act promised to solve these problem; but to keep that promise, it needs more work both at the State and Federal level. As a physician, medical educator, and medical scientist, I intend to use my knowledge of medical care to improve the delivery of healthcare and reduce the cost of medical care for all Missourians.

As a physician, I know that all adults have the right to make their own health care decisions. This right, known as the right of Autonomy, is the central principle of medical ethics. Among other things, the right to self-determination means you can decide what medical care is best for you. This principle applies to all medical decisions including women’s healthcare and this is a principle that Congress needs to understand. Personal medical decisions should be between the patient and the doctor, not government.

All Missourians, as are all Americans, are indebted to the men and women who, by serving in the armed forces, dedicated their lives to protecting us. Our Veterans are our Heroes. We have pledged to care for them, just as they took care of us. The Department of Veterans Affairs – the ‘VA’ – has provided this care since the end of World War II. I was a VA physician for 20 years; my wife, Alice, is a VA clinical psychologist – she has worked for the VA for more than 25 years. I know that the VA is staffed by dedicated professionals who only want to do the best for our Veterans. I also know that all too often the VA fails to keep the promise of caring for our Veterans. This disservice simply cannot be tolerated. I know from my personal experience as a VA whistleblower and from my appearances before Congressional Committees, that many of the problems within the VA are due to poor Congressional oversight of the VA. I intend to fix this.

The uniquely American entrepreneurial spirit is a key driver of well-paying jobs and economic growth in the 21st century global economy. As your representative in Congress I will work toward economic security for all citizens by promoting policies that will stimulate small business and economic growth for everyone. I will also address the growing problem of the shrinking middle class in our district and country. The middle class has become a casualty of the dysfunction of the current Congress. My opponent is part of that dysfunction.

It is strange, but true, that in the 21st century, so many of our public concerns are concerns about healthcare. I have been a licensed, practicing, physician for more than 41 years. I am certified in internal medicine, infectious diseases, and tropical medicine. I have been a medical educator for more than 36 years. I am a medical scientist whose discoveries have changed the practice of medicine. I have been a medical and educational leader at the University of Missouri where I have worked for more than 27 years and where I have been the Chief of Staff of the University of Missouri Hospital and the leader of the University of Missouri faculty government. Finally, I have demonstrated my willingness to do what is best for patients, even if my speaking truth to power comes at great personal cost. I am prepared to lead the way for all Missourians to a better life in the 21st century. The time is now to put a physician in the house!”

For more information please visit www.ChristensenForCongress.com

For press inquires please contact Mike Watts at Mike@ChristensenForCongress.com