PRESIDENT AND MRS. LYNDON B. JOHNSON MEET THOMAS FLETCHER FAMILY OF INEZ. APRIL 24 1964 (Photo: Picasa)

As someone who has been so fortunate to have a profession that occasionally brings me into the company of historical figures, I scold myself sometimes for missing a chance to witness history in person back in my younger days, merely because I was busy or inattentive or — a practical consideration — far away and didn't have a car.

It's silly, of course. Kids are kids.

But in retrospect it would have been fun to meet Harry S. Truman on one of his morning post-presidential walks. But I didn't go to Missouri.

I was in New York City a few times in the late 1950s and early 1960s, when Herbert Hoover still was living at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel, but I never went over to try to catch a glimpse of him or snag his autograph.

Dwight D. Eisenhower was a ubiquitous presence in the 1950s and was in pretty good health for some years after his presidency, but it was more than a decade after his death before I got to Gettysburg, Pa., and visited his farm.

I was only a few miles away when John F. Kennedy came campaigning to Toledo, Ohio, in 1960, but I did not go to see him. I think I was in school. What an excuse!

By the late 1960s, though, I was angling to go see events for myself. All this is a long way of saying that in January 1969, I visited Washington for the inauguration of President Richard M. Nixon. My only reason for being there was to see history.

And, as a bonus, I saw Lyndon B. Johnson in his last hour as president.

I was walking down Pennsylvania Avenue, headed for the United States Capitol and the swearing-in ceremony, when my ears caught the distant sound of motorcycles on the broad, empty avenue. And there was the flag-bedecked presidential limousine, coming on fast.

In moments, I was standing opposite the car, and there inside was Johnson, gesticulating to Nixon, no doubt telling a funny story to keep the soon-to-be chief executive's mind off the responsibilities he was about to assume.

Johnson was a giant of a man but a deflated figure by 1969. In the years following, he would be given a mixed grade by history. The Vietnam War shadowed him and his presidency.

But he also gets credit for what now seems to be an almost unfathomable amount of social legislation that together was his vision for his Great Society.

And nothing else Johnson did, good or bad, eclipses his engineering of the miraculous passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

Last week, at the Lyndon B. Johnson Presidential Library in Austin, Texas, the 50th anniversary of that landmark legislation was marked by a civil rights summit and speeches by some of the men who followed Johnson into the Oval Office: Jimmy Carter, Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, and Barack Obama.

"Those of us who have had the singular privilege to hold the office of the presidency know well that progress in this country can be hard and it can be slow, frustrating and sometimes you're stymied," Obama told the summit on Thursday. "The office humbles you. You're reminded daily that in this great democracy, you are but a relay swimmer in the currents of history, bound by decisions made by those who came before, reliant on the efforts of those who will follow to fully vindicate your vision."

"But the presidency also affords a unique opportunity to bend those currents — by shaping our laws and by shaping our debates; by working within the confines of the world as it is, but also by re-imagining the world as it should be," Obama said. "This was President Johnson's genius. As a master of politics and the legislative process, he grasped like few others the power of government to bring about change."

As Kennedy's vice president, Johnson was called upon to mark the 100th anniversary of Abraham Lincoln's Gettysburg Address on May 30, 1963.

On that day at Gettysburg National Cemetery, Johnson said this: "Until justice is blind to color, until education is unaware of race, until opportunity is unconcerned with the color of men's skins, emancipation will be a proclamation, but not a fact. To the extent that the proclamation of emancipation is not fulfilled in fact, to that extent we have fallen short of ensuring freedom to the free."

On Dec. 12, 1972, Johnson appeared at a civil rights symposium at his library, the very same place where presidents spoke last week. Out of office since that January day in 1969 when he handed the reins of power over to Nixon, Johnson seemed frail and aged. He told the audience that his doctor had advised him against speaking, but he was defying medical advice.

"Of all the records that are housed in this library — 31 million papers over a 40-year period of public life — it is the record of this work (on civil rights) that we've been discussing the last two days which has brought us here that holds the most of myself within it and hold for me the most intimate meanings," Johnson said.

The former president said that while he took pride in what the Civil Rights Act and other measures already had achieved, "the progress has been much too small. We haven't done nearly enough."

Johnson paused a lot, his breaths audible in the microphone. At one point he appeared to slip a pill into his mouth. Or perhaps it was just a candy. But he pressed on. On this day, he wanted to speak not only to all those in the room, but to the future.

"Our objective must be to assure that all Americans play by the same rules and all Americans play against the same odds," he said. "Who among us would claim that that is true today? I feel this is the first work of any society which aspires to greatness. So let's be on with it."

"We know there's injustice. We know there's intolerance. We know there's discrimination and hate and suspicion and we know there's division among us. But there is a larger truth: we have proved that great progress is possible. We know how much still remains to be done. And if our efforts continue and if our will is strong and if our hearts are right, and if courage remains our constant companion, then, my fellow Americans, I am confident we shall overcome."

These were the last words of the last speech Johnson would ever give. A little more than a month later, on Jan. 22, 1973, Lyndon Johnson died.

Follow politics and government news on The Courier-Journal's politics blog and Facebook page at

www.facebook.com/cjpolitics

. Follow Carroll on Twitter @JRCarrollCJ. Reach Carroll at (703) 854-8945.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/Q1hr2D