A Manhattan startup with roots in the Affordable Care Act's expansion of Medicaid has received funding that could lead to an expansion of its own.

BeneStream, a software company that helps employers enroll workers in Medicaid, today will announce $2 million in new Series A financing from BlueCross BlueShield Venture Partners, the VC arm of the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association, closing a $6.3 million round.

The funding will go toward new hires in sales and client services, said Benjamin Geyerhahn, chief executive of the Manhattan company.

"We just sold [our services] to a client that has 16,000 employees," he said. "We have to build out our call center and our enrollment side in order to handle that volume."

BeneStream has formed partnerships with more than 30 insurance brokers, including industry giants USI Insurance Services and HUB International, which include its service in the benefits packages they sell to clients.

Securing a commitment from the Blues plans signals an acknowledgment by the health insurance industry that Medicaid enrollment can help manage employers' health care costs, Mr. Geyerhahn said.

The expansion of Medicaid programs in 31 states, including New York, to cover people who earn up to 138% of the federal poverty level made BeneStream an attractive investment, said Anna Haghgooie, managing director of Sandbox Industries, who will represent BlueCross BlueShield Venture Partners on the board.

The startup is attempting to gain traction at the national level and has done business in every state that has expanded Medicaid. It has 55 employee in seven states, up from eight last year. The company expects to earn $3 million in revenue in 2015.

The new financing is an extension of a $4.3 million round announced in July led by TLSG Investments. Other investors included Kapoor Capital, Relativity Healthcare Partners, Serious Change, Kevin Hill, Martin Babinec, ARC Angel and George V. Duczak.

Sign Up for Health Pulse Brought to you by Crain's New York Business, Health Pulse is a subscription-only website focused on the business of health care. The site is updated every day with breaking news, research and unique information. Subscribe today and receive access to the site and the daily emails. Plus, twice a week we release a special report called Extra, featuring data and statistics. Subscribe Today

Comments