Not quite two years ago, Matt Duchene was a miserable human being. He was in the throes of a terrible season with the Avalanche, his point production way down, his body banged up with injuries. He was an occasional tenant in the doghouse of his coach, Joe Sacco. Everything had always come so easy to the 20-year-old, but suddenly he was hit with the first real crisis of confidence in his life.

“I was letting my confidence get shaken badly by a lot of things that maybe were a little unfair and a little tough to handle at that age,” Duchene said. “After I kind of got to that rock bottom, it was tough. I had times where I could barely look at myself in the mirror. I was kind of like a duck; I was calm on the outside, but paddling for my life underneath the surface.”

So he did something about it.

Last summer, Duchene started seeing a sports psychologist. Many athletes do this, but don’t like to talk about it. Duchene is proud he did it, and has no hesitation talking about it. Talking to a psychologist has helped him have a different view of himself, and what he needed to do to get to where he is now: happy, productive and better equipped to handle the pressures of his job.

“My first (couple of years), if I wasn’t scoring or things weren’t going well, I would come to practice the next day and I would put so much pressure on myself to score. And then if I didn’t, I would get down and it would carry on to the next day,” Duchene said. “Now, if I have a slump, I just stay consistent with what works, because it will eventually work.

“Same thing on the flip side; before if I got hot, I would be so excited and on cloud nine. I may be like that now on the inside, but I don’t show it.”

Duchene not only changed his mind-set before last season, he changed his body. He switched to a gluten-free diet, which helped him drop weight without sacrificing muscle mass. He played well in the NHL’s lockout-shortened season and was rewarded this past offseason with a five-year, $30 million contract extension that will kick in next season. While he was happy with his growth on the ice, he was still miserable much of the time. Losing does that.

He also wasn’t happy playing for Sacco. At the time, he kept his opinions to himself. But no more.

“There were very few people in this (dressing) room who were happy. Our style of play, it wasn’t right for this team. We knew it would fail,” Duchene said. “That was the hard part. We knew (any) success was going to be short-lived. It was hard to really be excited about it. For myself, it was really hard to look at what we were doing and think it would keep on working. I can honestly say now, it’s not like that.”

Duchene loves the fast-pace system and personal style of his new Avs coach, Patrick Roy.

“The one thing with Patrick is, there’s no doghouse. If you’re not doing what you’re supposed to do, he’s going to bring you in, he’s going to sit you down and you’re going to correct it constructively and then you’re going to move on from there. You don’t stay in that doghouse,” Duchene said. “It’s the first time I can honestly say everyone in this room is excited.

“I think there’s always been a plan (here). People are professionals and they always have a plan, but is it the right plan? We’ve had a young, fast, offensively gifted team for four years and haven’t been able to show that every night. The only time we ever seemed to play that way was against a team that really opened it up and let us play that way.”

Sacco, now an assistant coach with the Buffalo Sabres, declined to comment when informed of Duchene’s remarks. Avalanche center Paul Stastny said he had some of the same frustrations under the former regime.

“Our roster was never depleted. I think we had a lot of skill. Sometimes you just have to put the right parts together,” Stastny said. “(Roy) has done a good job putting all the pieces together.”

As for Duchene, Stastny said he is showing maturation.

“The way he prepares for stuff, he’s grown into more of a team guy. He’s developed his game, not just offensively,” Stastny said. “He’s trying to take more of a leadership role with younger players and be more vocal.”

One thing Duchene said he learned through his struggles is to never give in.

“I made a decision to never let anyone rattle me, not let anyone rattle me or rattle my confidence,” he said. “I was living and dying with every game and that was a problem. Now I look at everything as a whole.”

WINNIPEG AT COLORADO

6 p.m. Sunday, ALT; 950 AM

Spotlight on Evander Kane: Kane was the player taken immediately after Matt Duchene (fourth overall) in the 2009 NHL draft, by the Atlanta Thrashers. A skilled power forward, Kane has been somewhat hidden in obscurity playing for the small-market Jets and their woebegone former identity in Atlanta. Like a lot of other Jets, he has gotten off to mostly a mediocre start, but he has great talent.

NOTEBOOK

Avalanche: Semyon Varlamov will start in goal for the Avs. … Winnipeg is now in the same division as the Avs (Central) after playing in the Eastern Conference its first two years back in the NHL. … Varlamov’s record at home is 4-1, with a goals-against average of 2.02 and .938 save percentage. … The Avs won’t play again until Friday in Dallas after Sunday’s game. On Saturday night, when they host the Canadiens, the Avs will retire the No. 52 jersey of former defenseman Adam Foote.

Jets: Entering Saturday’s game in Dallas, the Jets had gone 19 consecutive power-play opportunities without a goal. … Winnipeg is likely to start backup goaltender Al Montoya against the Avs. … Winnipeg entered Saturday ranked 26th in the NHL in faceoffs at 45.2 percent.

Adrian Dater, The Denver Post