Buy Photo Kristin Thomas, left, was in Karen Jones’ classroom in the mid-80s. Now, her daughter, Rileigh, is in Jones’ final class at Nolensville Elementary School. Thomas teaches at Page High School. (Photo: Vicky Travis / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

If Karen Jones had a dime for every first-grader’s newly lost tooth that she’s sent home in a baggie with a colorful sticker, she’d be rich.

But then again, she already is.

Generations of learners can talk about the talent, love and gifts of this Nolensville Elementary School first-grade teacher who, after 31 years, has decided to retire.

“She’s indescribable,” says Shelly Steltmann. “She’s so genuine and doesn’t want recognition for anything,”

Steltmann, 32, has continued a friendship with Jones ever since she was a student in Jones’ class in 1988. And there are others like her.

“She’s ageless,” says Kristin Thomas, 35, who was a student in Jones’ classroom in 1985-86. Now, her daughter, Rileigh, is one of Jones’ students.

“She was Pinterest before there was Pinterest,” says fellow first-grade teacher Michelle Bates. “You will never meet another teacher who seldom speaks in a public setting, but, buddy, if she does, you had better be listening because it is important and it needs to be said.”

Jones, the unassuming, honest “centers queen” loves this 6-year-old age of discovery.

“It’s a magical year,” Jones says. “It’s a year of firsts. They write, they learn to count money, tie shoes, ride bikes. ... So many firsts. I’ve never wanted to leave this grade.”

She says her first-graders really like to have their own desks, a big step up from kindergarten tables. They constantly wiggle loose teeth, love story time on the carpet after lunch, incessantly sharpen and resharpen pencils to hear the buzz and can hardly wait for Bubblegum Fridays.

It’s also a year in which kids remember successes.

“You just see the lightbulb come on,” Jones says. Especially with reading, which is Jones’ passion. She says first-graders tend to take off with reading after Christmas.

Love and guidance

At this point her career, teaching the children of past students has become commonplace in this small community.

Thomas says, “I never had a doubt we’d live here,” but having Jones as her daughter’s teacher is just icing on the cake.

Jones and other Nolensville Elementary School teachers inspired Thomas, the daughter of Williamson County school board vice chairman Gary Anderson, to become a teacher herself. Thomas teaches at Page High School.

Thomas and Steltmann still remember the days when Jones would have the girls in her class over to her house for a slumber party. “I think we were the last class to be able to do that,” Steltmann said.

Despite changes to curriculum, technology and testing, Jones says some things never change.

“They’re still just 6,” she says. “They need love and guidance. Love them, make them feel secure and they will learn. That hasn’t changed.”

That guidance includes training the children to add “ma’am” after a “yes” or a “no.” And gently correcting behavior.

“You knew she loved you, but she was not afraid to put you in your place,” says Steltmann, who, back in the day, had a problem with swiping candy from Jones’ desk.

“Mrs. Jones finally figured out that I was taking it. And she told me, ‘I’m going to have to take you to jail.’ Steltmann says as she remembers her 6-year-old self. “She scared me so much that I never stole again.”

Time is right

While Jones, 54, laughs about her sense of honesty, she shies away from saying anything negative about her reasons for retiring.

“It’s just time,” she says.

She’ll tell you that part of it because she will get full benefits after 30 years of teaching. And also because she wants to spend more time with her 23-year-old son, Daniel, who has Hunter Syndrome, a genetic disease that affects organs and development.

He’s doing well but needs care. She’d love to do volunteer work with him through her church, Epworth United Methodist, and elsewhere.

Another part of her reason to retire includes what she calls a very broad curriculum that just doesn’t go deep enough. .

“It’s bits and pieces. Like introducing adverbs and prepositions,” she says. “It’s so many skills at one time, but they still have to learn to read.”

What she’s seeing more of these days are bright first-graders who still get their b’s and d’s backward. Or they hold a pencil oddly, or don’t cut well.

“It’s so many little things,” she says, things that just can’t be taught in the classroom anymore for lack of time.

That’s why Jones plans to volunteer with her beloved first-grade team of teachers as a reading helper. Volunteering there also means she gets to see her friends.

“I don’t think she’s done working,” says Jessica Blackburn, friend and fellow NES teacher for 30 years. “She has a lot of passions.”

Maybe it’s being surrounded 6-year-olds, maybe it’s her deep and sustaining friendships at school, or raising two boys, but Karen Jones really doesn’t look much different than she did 20 years ago.

Her future plans include Thursday mornings at Starbucks, which has become one of the regular spots former NES staff meets. Another place, for quite a few NES staff each year, is an annual summer trip to Gulf Shores, Ala.

“No photos and no husbands allowed,” Jones says with a laugh.

Reach Vicky Travis at 615-881-7216 and on Twitter @VTravis1.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1n9h3JT