Katie Kieffer isn’t willing to concede victory to Barack Obama’s now-famous pledge to fundamentally transform America.

The Fox News commentator and entrepreneur states that Obama’s ideology is a direct threat to the capitalism America’s next-generation leaders are still capable of nourishing.

“It’s very fulfilling to be a self-starter and be independent,” says the author of a new book, “Let Me Be Clear: Barack Obama’s War on Millennials, and One Woman’s Case for Hope,”“[But] the only way you can do that is a free-market society. I’m a Millennial, and the socialist policies of Barack Obama don’t work and are responsible for the crisis we are in.”

Kieffer, with a degree from the University of St. Thomas and a background in commercial real estate, is passionate about helping others emerge from Obama’s economy.

“I have a strong desire to be a successful entrepreneur myself and to foster an environment that helps all persons of all ages to have a shot at being an entrepreneur. Building your own company or helping jumpstart another’s company – that’s a real passion of mine,” Kieffer told WND. “Some of my friends have degrees and are working part-time jobs. I thought, why don’t I use my passion for entrepreneurship and provide some solutions for dealing with the economic problems we are experiencing?”

Discover Katie Kieffer’s fresh insights for the next generation in “Let Me Be Clear: Barack Obama’s War on Millennials, and One Woman’s Case for Hope.”

Kieffer is also eager to help conservative leaders see that reaching the next generation requires some savvy. In particular, capturing future election wins depends in large part on distinguishing between liberal and conservative fiscal policies and how those policies impact individuals.

For example, she says, millennials need to understand that subsidized health care isn’t really free.

“I personally opted out of Obamacare and am in a Christian non-profit,” Kieffer told WND. “The more young people who opt out will make it that much harder for Obamacare to go into effect.”

Kieffer has the data to prove that Obama’s economic strangleholds on the American system pummel entire business models vital to the country’s success.

“When I worked in commercial real estate, young people were concerned because if you’re a broker you’re paid a nice commission, but you can’t make a great deal of money if you’re in a socialist system,” she explained. “I have talked to talented salespeople and brokers who say they’re going to have to leave this industry because they can’t make it under Obama; there are too many regulations.”

Kieffer claims insights into what Millennials actually want. She says 70 percent want to be entrepreneurs, but because of the stagnant economy, many can’t live on their own.

“In a healthy economy we would have 2.3 million more households than we have now,” she said, alluding to those of her generation still languishing in their parents’ homes. “They aren’t moving out and creating their own career paths, and that’s creating ‘missing households.'”

Kieffer’s ideas are already resonating with her generation, as she says the feedback from her book is positive, and the opportunities to influence Millennial voters has never been stronger.

“Millennials have lost a historical level of trust in the presidency,” she told WND. “They aren’t planning on voting in the midterms, but they are set to vote for Hillary [Clinton] in 2016. This is because they don’t exactly know why there are problems. My book is timely, because these Millennials need to know right now. They are open to truth. Facts speak for themselves, although the message is not coherent coming out of the GOP.”

For those in political leadership thinking that the next generation is a lost cause, Kieffer and others like her are a breath of fresh air.

Fellow commentator Nick Adams, author of “The American Boomerang: How the World’s Greatest ‘Turnaround’ Nation Will Do It Again,” agrees with Kieffer’s conclusions and offers his advice to Millennials who are emerging to take the reigns of government in the next few years: “Remain economically massive and nimble. Capital and imagination must continue to combine more quickly in America than anywhere else in the world. Taxes must always be low, and government should be out of the way. Don’t spend money you don’t have.”

Get “The American Boomerang: How the World’s Greatest ‘Turnaround’ Nation Will Do It Again” – autographed – from the WND Superstore!

Read Jim Fletcher’s review of Kieffer’s “Let Me Be Clear” by clicking here.