SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Wednesday in front of the U.S. Capitol at a rally against President Barack Obama’s Iran nuclear agreement titled “Stop the Iran Deal Rally,” presidential candidate Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX) offered a stern warning to those in the federal government, specifically Democrats, who allow the deal to go into effect.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Cruz said, “So to every Democratic Senator, they are facing a choice, do you value the safety and security of the United States of America? Do you value standing with our friend and ally, the nation of Israel? Do you value the lives of millions of Americans? Or do you value more party loyalty to the Obama White House. To every Democratic Senator who said he or she will support this deal, I ask you to consider how will you look in the eyes of the mothers and fathers of our soldiers, the hundreds of soldiers, American soldiers who were murdered in Iraq with Iranian IED’s that came from General Sulamani. This deal lifts sanctions on General Sulamani. Tell me how you look a mom in the eyes and say I voted to lift sanctions on the man who murdered your son when he was defending this nation. But beyond that, when we talk about terrorism, it’s worth remembering that if this deal goes through, we know to an absolute certainty, people will die. Americans will die, Israelis will die, Europeans will die. Osama bin Laden never had $100 billion. He was filled with hatred and using rudimentary tools, murdered nearly 3,000 Americans on September 11, 2001. We’re now talking about giving the Ayatollah today, a homicidal maniac who hates America as much as bin Laden did, giving him $100 billion to carry out his murderous plan. I want to ask every Senate Democrat how will you look in the eyes of the mother or father or son or daughters of those who are murdered by jihadists, those Americans who were blown up, those Americans who were shot, those Americans who were killed, those Israelis who were murdered. And let me be clear, if you vote to send billions of dollars to jihadists who have pledged to murder Americans, then you bear direct responsibility for the murders carried out with the dollars you have given them. You cannot wash your hands of that blood.”

Follow Pam Key on Twitter @pamkeyNEN