Sean Bartolucci, a 13-year-old cancer survivor, can probably run up the Rocky steps faster than you.

Sean Bartolucci, a 13-year-old cancer survivor, can probably run up the Rocky steps faster than you. ABC News

A 13-year-old from Camp Hill, Pa., celebrated his enormous victory over cancer by running up the iconic “Rocky” steps at the Philadelphia Museum of Art on Sunday. The boy, Sean Bartolucci, was joined by a big group of supporters, including his family members and friends.

In February 2014, Sean was diagnosed with neuroblastoma — the most common extracranial solid cancer in childhood and infancy. Sean fought a tumor the size of a softball in his abdomen, and now, after 18 months of chemotherapy and radiation, he’s happy to say he’s free of the disease.

Teen celebrates being cancer free with run up Rocky Steps in Philly: http://t.co/i3sDKp59ev pic.twitter.com/BB597rsuhS — ABC7 News (@abc7newsBayArea) July 13, 2015

“We were in Philadelphia when I got diagnosed, so this was one of the first things that came to mind,” Sean told ABC 7 News.

Fighting cancer was “very tough, but believe it or not he’s the one that got us through it as much as we got him through it,” Sean’s father, Chris Bartolucci, said in the video. “And I tell everybody, when I grow up I’m going to be half as strong as him, hopefully.”

Sean claims that after five rounds of chemo, 20 rounds of radiation, and a stem cell transplant, running up the Rocky steps was easy. He was surrounded by his supporters, who were all wearing “Sean’s A Fighter” shirts, as he ran up the steps two at a time.

While he was fighting cancer, he was taking online classes to make sure he wouldn’t fall behind his classmates. His enthusiasm for life is evident as you watch him run up the stairs; leading the entire pack, the teen is quite far from being behind.

“It just further proves that I have such an amazing community, such an amazing family, and so many amazing friends to lean back on if I ever need to,” Sean said in the video, but also proves he’s determined and strong himself.