On all four corners of the busy U.S. 1 and State Road 312 intersection on Friday afternoon, costumed sign spinners waived their placards in protest of a county ordinance which prohibits sign walkers in St. Johns County.

“You can’t forget about the little guy who has served his country,” said James “Stu” Stewart, who was dressed in a very warm chicken suit for the event. “(St. Johns County) is over-reaching on this. Where are they going to reach next?”

Stewart owns AAA Global Services, a Jacksonville company that employs sign spinners to advertise for local businesses. Stewart’s star employee, Jeff “Sign Guy” Cappelletti was shut down by local code enforcement officers on Wednesday and threatened with a hefty fine.

In addition to that, Cappelletti explained, the code enforcement officers intimidated the businesses he had contracts with in the city of St. Augustine, essentially putting him out of work.

“That’s what this is all about,” Stewart said. “Many times my sign spinners have limited financial options. This is a stop gap for them. But right away they seemed to single out Jeff. In a nutshell, what premise does the county have to say you can’t have a sign guy advertising your business.”

Custom-made signs for the event called the county sign code “unconstitutional, anti-jobs and anti-small business.”

Stewart, a former Marine, says he hired Cappelletti, in part, because he was a disabled veteran who didn’t want to go on welfare. Protestors spinning signs on two corners of U.S. 1 on Friday were both unemployed when they began working for Stewart. One, who was wearing a Gumby costume, also is handicapped.

Both St. Augustine police and St. Johns County Sheriff’s Office cruisers rolled slowly by the protest on Friday but did not stop. The colorful sign spinners heard a lot of honking horns and saw a lot “thumbs-up” acknowledgements from motorists.

Hopeful politicians and local activists also joined the fun.

“We’re standing with the sign guys,” said Dave Heimbold of the St. Augustine chapter of the tea party. Heimbold had a bright yellow “Don’t Tread on Me,” flag and held up a sign asking county commissioners to “loosen up” their sign ordinances or resign.

The sign protestors were in the City of St. Augustine, which does not prohibit sign walkers.

“Part of the problem is that if you disagree with a policy in St. Johns County the staff become bullies,” said Denver Cook, who is campaigning for county commission. “They take it personally. This is just a difference of opinion.”

Stewart says his first amendment attorney has assured him that the St. Johns County ordinance prohibiting sign walkers that advertise a business would not stand a legal challenge. Cappelletti said he appreciates the support his colleagues gave him Friday afternoon.

“I’m an honest guy, trying to make an honest living,” Cappelletti said. “This is my niche. You can tell by the amount of people that are honking that people like me. I’m having fun, and people feed off that.”