SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Californians have seen it before. From the overturn of voter approved Proposition 8 and Proposition 22 to this week’s U.S. Supreme Court decision in Obergefell v. Hodges to institute homosexual marriage in all 50 states, judges overruled the will of the people.

Proposition 8 is the 2008 ballot measure that California voters approved 52.3% to 47.7%, upholding marriage as the union between a man and a woman. It passed in the blue state the same year liberals came out in force to elect Barack Obama the first time around. Chief U.S. District Court Judge Vaughn Walker later overturned the measure.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Friday’s 5-4 Supreme Court decision to force every state to issue homosexual marriage licenses included the supportive vote of Justice Kennedy.

Republican 2016 presidential candidate, Sen. Ted Cruz called the marriage ruling as well as Thursday’s ruling upholding Obamacare, “both naked and shameless judicial activism.”

Breitbart News’ Ben Shapiro wrote of Justice Kennedy’s opinion, “Justice Kennedy just redefined a fundamental right and forced elected state governments to slap their stamp of approval on that right.”

Justice Kennedy was also one of five justices voting to overturn the President Bill Clinton signed Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA) in 2013.

As the Court struck down DOMA, it also decided to refrain from a substantive ruling on Prop 8. The lower court decision to overturn the measure stood. Justice Kennedy dissented the decision to not issue a ruling. A ruling against Prop 8 at the Supreme Court level could have invalidated similar measures in other states. Breitbart News’ Joel Pollak noted that same-sex marriage proponents had also hoped for a Supreme Court ruling for this very reason.

With last Friday’s homosexual marriage ruling, leftist political progressives lodged another notch in the belt of their long-game agenda and they aren’t expected to stop now. Celebration broke out in areas like San Francisco’s Castro neighborhood following announcement of the decision the San Francisco Chronicle wrote.

Constitutional conservatives aren’t standing down either. Impending implications of this ruling could leave leftist activists pressuring, even suing churches and religious organizations to compromise on their deeply held values. That threat is breeding counter measures.

Prop 8 political strategist Frank Schubert expects to see legislative response defending the first amendment reports the Chronicle. Schubert said, “You will see a lot of effort … everything from a proposed federal marriage amendment to calls for a constitutional convention.”

Syndicated radio host Mark Levin’s Liberty Amendments has given fuel to the idea of an Article V Convention of States, a very separate move from a constitutional convention. Such a move gives hope to return power to the states that have fallen victim to federal government overreach.

On the Breitbart News Saturday radio program, Representative Marsha Blackburn (R-Tennessee) told listeners there are already moves being made in the U.S. Congress to counter effects of the decision.

“The question now is whether Religious Freedom will be tolerated or whether we will be forced to advocate, participate and celebrate same-sex marriages,” posited Karen England of Capitol Resource Institute.

Capitol Resource Institute stood ready to begin collecting signatures for a November 2016 ballot measure as the Court’s decision rolled out Friday according to the Chronicle. The “Privacy for All” measure would require individuals use government and school facilities according to the gender they were assigned at birth.

Jim Daly of Focus on the Family said, “Ultimately, however, no court can change the eternal truth that marriage is, and always has been, between a man and a woman. Regardless of today’s decision, Focus on the Family will continue to address the importance of one man, one woman marriage to families, society and especially for children who have a right to both a mother and a father.

Daniel Horowitz of Conservative Review penned an email entitled, “No, It’s Not the Law of the Land.”

Prop 8 in 2008 was the second time Californians voted to uphold traditional marriage. A Huffington Post timeline of homosexual marriage laws in California details the following. In March of 2000 voters came out 61 percent in favor of a ballot measure defining marriage as between one man and one woman. In 2004 San Francisco Mayor Gavin Newsom, now rumored a 2018 gubernatorial hopeful, ordered city officials to issue marriage licenses for homosexual unions. The California Supreme Court ordered the action halted within a month and later voided all 4,000 licenses issued.

In May 2008 that same court ruled the Prop 22 ban on homosexual marriage unconstitutional. About two weeks later the California Marriage Protection Act, Prop 8, was introduced with over one million signatures and passed on the November ballot. U.S. District Court Judge Walker, reportedly a homosexual himself, overturned Prop 8 almost two years later. Since then many Californians have continued to stand for a one-man, one-woman definition of marriage.

As the leftist agenda pushers charge ‘forward’ and courts rule against the will of citizens and states’ rights, Constitutional conservatives are mounting up with plans to defend the rights and power granted them under the United States Constitution. That includes the residents of Reagan country.

Follow Michelle Moons on Twitter @MichelleDiana