On Saturday afternoon, longtime NewsChannel 7 anchor Joe Moore was laid to rest. Family and friends, who to Joe Moore could be one in the same, gathered to laugh about the past, discuss the heartache of the present, and smile upon the future of Moore’s lasting legacy.

"Tom Hipps made it his mission to go into the studio and behind the camera cause some kind of shenanigans that would cause Joe Moore to laugh on the air,” Paris Janos said to a crowd, gently chuckling, as he addressed those gathered in the chapel at Southerland Funeral Home.

“I'm comforted knowing that Joe Moore's soul is awash in a plethora of love," Jim Segina, a longtime friend of Moore said, battling tears. “His soul will hold a place in my heart and I'm sure in many of your hearts as well."

Dozens of community members, including many members of NewsChannel 7, gathered at Southerland to greet Moore’s family, attend the service and offer up words of praise for the friend, the fixture, the man whose life touched an entire community.

"He helped anybody that wanted to do better. He was there. He was there to lift you a little bit higher than you knew you could be lifted,” Janos said. “If Joe was proud of me, I couldn't do any better."

Almost everyone acknowledged that if news was Moore’s priority, the only things higher on his list of priorities were his daughters, Monica and Molly.

"I had hundreds of Facebook messages just of random people who said, ‘you know, I knew him, and he loved you,’” Molly Cromwell said. “So that was really, really special."

Joe Moore might have been laid to rest. But those who knew Moore best said that Moore is resting in his own way.

"While Joe probably didn't run to the gates of heaven, after all we do know that Joe does not run. I'm sure that his marathon led him there, where he's now catching up with dear old friends, his parents” Donna Bell, NewsChannel 7 news director said. “Perhaps something tells me that Joe is now keeping heaven just a little bit better informed. Probably quietly getting the exclusive scoop from the angels on topics that we all wonder about. And you know what, one day, I'm pretty sure that Joe Moore is gonna be the first to fill us all in as he always did. Because after all, Joe knows."