Jeremiah Hughes was found in Pearl, Mississippi about 9 p.m. after a traffic stop on I-20.

He was unharmed.

Hughes was taken into custody by DSS. Arrangements are in the works to bring him back to North Carolina.

Hughes' mother, 39-year-old Alison Robinson Naylor, was also taken into custody. She has since been released.

The Sampson County Sheriff's Office reports no charges have been filed at this time, and no further information will be released.

Previous:

An Amber Alert has been cancelled for A 2-year-old boy from Sampson County who officials say was abducted by his mother.

We're told the Amber Alert was canceled because authorities believe the child and his mother are now in Georgia.

Officials earlier said 2-year-old Jeremiah Hughes had been abducted by his mother Alison Robinson Naylor.

PREVIOUS STORY:

The Sampson County Sheriff`s Office is searching for a missing child and has issued an amber alert.

Jeremiah Hughes, age 2, is described as a 2-year-old boy, who is white, three feet tall and weighs 60 pounds.

Law enforcement officials say he has brown hair and hazel eyes and was last seen wearing a white long sleeve shirt with brown sleeves and a picture of a pirate on front and blue swiming shirts.

The Sampson County Sheriff's Office reports Hughes is with his mother, Alison Robinson Naylor. She is described as 39 years old, white, 5 feet 8 inches tall, weighing 225 pounds with black hair and brown eyes.

Officials report Naylor went to a home where Hughes was staying under custody arranged by the Sampson County Department of Social Services, and that Naylor forced her way past the homeowner and took Hughes. They report that the homeowner tried to stop Naylor and that Naylor tried to hit the homeowner with her vehicle as she was leaving.

The sheriff's office says the homeowner reported that the little boy was staying under DSS care until he could be placed with a family member, after a child welfare investigation from Pender County. The sheriff's office reports that "based on the mother's prior mental health treatment and allegations under investigation, the child is considered to be in danger."

The alert states they were last seen at 8056 U.S. 421 North, in Sampson County NC and that they are possibly en-route to 151 Beverly Street in Central South Carolina. Law enforcement is searching for a Brown 2001 Buick Century with SC license tag number KHX-728.

If you have any information regarding this abduction, call the Sampson County Sheriff`s Office immediately at (910) 592-4141, 910-260-0170 or call 911 or *HP.