Topics: 2016 campaign, 2016 election, 2016 Elections, 2016 presidential race, Barack Obama, Democratic Party, Democrats, Hillary Clinton, Politics, Presidential election 2016, State of the Union, state of the union 2015, U.S. Politics, Politics News

Liberals have been waiting to exhale for more than six years, and Barack Obama – the ultimate in noncommittal Problem Boyfriends – finally gave them that chance this week. Social media erupted in a chorus of Whitmanesque ecstasy: This was the guy they, or we, rallied around and swooned over in 2008, and have fruitlessly pined for ever since. This was the political visionary and masterful orator who announced himself, with that electrifying speech on the night of the Iowa caucuses (it almost seems a generation ago), as a transformative figure in 21st-century American history. Tuesday night’s State of the Union address was certainly full of refreshing rhetoric, and represents an intriguing political tactic (which a cynic might describe as pretending you have a governing majority when you don’t). But hang on a minute: Where has that guy been, anyway, and who was that other, somewhat less inspiring person who occupied the Oval Office between approximately Jan. 20, 2009, and this week?

After the dire and arid political slog of the past several years, the lame-duck SOTU of 2015 was a veritable cornucopia of big ideas: Free community college for all! A national childcare policy, to replace our national parental-enslavement policy (one of the most insidious victories of American capitalism)! Soaking the rich, albeit modestly, with higher capital-gains taxes! Diplomatic openings to Cuba and Iran, and an above-board military campaign against ISIS, duly authorized by Congress! A rational energy policy that looks toward the long-term future and addresses the climate crisis, instead of the build-a-pipeline-and-let-our-grandkids-suck-it approach! Rhetoric absolutely matters, in politics as in life, and before I go all Cassandra on you, let me be clear that I’d rather hear the president say things like that than not.

However – and you knew there was a “however” coming, didn’t you? – Obama’s bravura Jimi Hendrix solo from the other night was more than a little puzzling, and requires some decoding. Why all these quasi-utopian visions after years of nothing – and why now, after a crippling midterm defeat, with the shot-clock on his presidency running down into the single digits? I’m not entirely sure how to understand all this, except to say that its meaning is not obvious on the surface and that it feels inadequate to exclaim “At last!” and collapse onto the divan.

This SOTU feels like an “overdetermined” event, a concept from political theory meaning something caused and shaped by many different factors, which may be disharmonious or contradictory. My guess is that this speech and its agenda were both heartfelt and calculated, both an attempt to get us to gaze toward the far horizon and an attempt to put the Republicans on the wrong foot next year. No doubt it’s overly smug, after a speech that made so many disheartened Americans feel hopeful, to observe that actions speak louder than words. But Obama’s mixed and troubling record of official deeds stands in sharp contrast with the high-flying, big-picture rhetoric of that Throwback Tuesday speech. And at least when it comes to the remainder of his presidency – which will get swallowed up in the 2016 campaign any day now — Sen. Mitch McConnell’s crack that the SOTU felt like a laundry list of programs specifically designed not to pass is disconcertingly on target.

How do we square this inspiring vision of progressive advances that might happen one day, but certainly won’t under Obama’s administration, with the record of the drone-warrior president, the “kill list” president, the Wall Street smoochy-face Tim Geithner president, the Grand Bargain-hunter, the president of the most secrecy-obsessed and leak-averse White House in history? Let’s assume, for the moment, that Obama is not just sadistically taunting his left-liberal base, after the fashion of an old-time cheating husband who occasionally gets a yen for home cooking. Hell, we can go further than that: Let’s assume that Obama means what he says (insofar as any politician ever does), that he feels immensely frustrated with the political paralysis of Washington and hopes to seize the moment to make one last impression on American history before retiring into several decades of overpaid foundation work. Given all that, I see a few plausible hypotheses, none of them entirely exclusive of the others.

1. This was always the real Obama. But the Republicans were so mean!

We get this a lot, am I right? Let me see if I can ventriloquize without mockery: It’s amazing what Obama has been able to accomplish, given the level of racial hatred, paranoid bile and short-sighted obstructionism from his political opponents. One day we will all understand what a great president he was.

There’s a pretty big half-truth lurking here; it might even be three-quarters of a truth. Obama has undeniably been the target of poorly disguised or undisguised racism, and the target of a scorched-earth Republican strategy of total non-cooperation pioneered under Bill Clinton. That latter portion results mainly from GOP panic over its aging, declining and entirely white voter base and didn’t have much to do with Obama’s parentage or skin color. But the combination has been toxic, and during his first term Obama seemed perpetually surprised to learn that congressional Republicans’ only mission was to make him look bad in every way possible, up to and including not ever quite being convinced he was a real American.

One can argue that the GOP’s ideological terror tactics affected White House policymaking in all sorts of ways, and consistently put Obama on the defensive. He kept on trying to forge statesmanlike compromises on budget-cutting, immigration and emissions policy, all of them in the depressing vein of neoliberal realpolitik, and the Republicans kept on being Lucy, pulling the football away from Charlie Brown. But was it Republican persecution that led Obama to entrust the financial system to a slightly different constellation of the bankers who had wrecked it in 2008? Or to expand the drone war into a covert campaign of airborne assassination whose true scale we may never know? Or to prosecute more whistle-blowers, under a World War I-era law designed to target foreign spies, than all previous presidents combined?

If the argument is that Republicans took advantage of divided government and a fragile economic situation to derail nearly all of Obama’s somewhat-activist domestic policy goals, especially following their stinging defeat on the Affordable Care Act, that’s clearly true. But the nature of the opposition is not sufficient to explain the Obama contradictions.



2. Obama was trapped by a crappy economy other people had broken and stupid wars other people had started. He had to focus on those things, and couldn’t get around to a progressive agenda until now.

This is the president’s version of events, pretty much: Now that we’re notionally out of recession and not exactly at war in Iraq and Afghanistan (although not exactly out of it either), it’s time to think big once again about shaping our destiny as a nation. Conveniently, I’m on my way out the door — so good luck, everybody!