New Bill Will Allow Medical Professionals to Gain Licensing in 60 Days, Shortening the Wait for New Doctors to Practice in State

Las Vegas/Reno – Through the Nevada Governor’s Office of Economic Development, Nevada’s commitment to economic diversification and job growth is resulting in a strengthened Nevada economy. Part of the effort to create jobs in the state is the elimination of barriers to growth; in this case, new legislation, sponsored by the Governor on behalf of the Office and passed by the Nevada Legislature, will help expedite medical licensing for the Health & Medical Services industry.

The Expedited Licensure Bill, which went into effect July 1, allows for medical professionals, currently in good standing in another state, to receive licensure to practice in Nevada within 60 days.

“With an increased focus on enhancing STEM and Graduate Medical Education, two new medical schools in Las Vegas, and the expansion of the University of Nevada School of Medicine, this new law will assist the state with workforce development and recruitment efforts,” said Vance Farrow, Health and Medical Services Industry Specialist for the Governor’s Office of Economic Development. “The Nevada Legislature recognized the quality jobs that could be attracted to the State and unanimously approved this bill. As a result of the law, Nevada can actively begin to not only fill our healthcare shortage areas with the recruitment of medical professionals, but also create jobs that will bring money into Nevada’s economy and align industry needs with the state’s education and workforce training systems.”

The bill will streamline the process that all medical licensing boards will follow moving forward, as well as ensure the route to licensure happens in a limited amount of time.

“Las Vegas will soon be able to boast that it has three medical schools and the framework to double or triple physician residencies,” said Doug Geinzer, Chief Executive Officer of Las Vegas HEALS. “This bill removed our biggest barrier for faculty recruitment, which was the timeliness to get physicians licensed in Nevada. We can now move forward swiftly to attract faculty and highly trained specialists to develop future fellowship programs.”

The Expedited Licensure law is not limited to doctors, but all medical professionals, including nurses, social workers and therapists.

“This law passed through the legislature with a focus on creating jobs and propelling growth in Nevada’s healthcare industry,” Farrow said. “As a result of the law, we hope to see an increase in the number of quality medical professionals who call Nevada home, both from a recruitment standpoint and as a result of the graduate medical residents who stay to practice in Nevada following graduation.”

Larry Matheis, former Executive Director of the Nevada State Medical Association, said that building a physician workforce in the state is a priority that will be more fully realized with the bill’s passing and the advancement of medical training and schools open in Nevada communities.

“This need is critical for patient access as we experience unprecedented growth in the numbers of Nevadans covered by Medicare, Medicaid and private insurance resulting from the federal Affordable Care Act,” he said. “Additionally, the state’s expanded support for post-graduate specialty education of these physicians is certain to provide tremendous future benefits to the state. While this means that we would expect fewer physician workforce shortfalls in future decades, there is an immediate need to recruit practicing and experienced physicians to these schools as faculty and to our metropolitan and rural communities to provide specialty services for Nevada patients.”

Senior physicians in key medical specialties are vital to provide quality faculty to these expanded education programs. After years of effort to balance maintaining high quality licensing standards with the need to acknowledge the value of experience, the expedited process for all physicians with flawless records in other states is a vital action to encourage experienced physicians to move to Nevada.

“Filling the needs of Nevadans for quality medical care is thus addressed in both the short and the long term by the actions of Governor Sandoval and the Legislature this year,” Matheis said.

About the Governor’s Office of Economic Development:

Created during the 2011 session of the Nevada Legislature, the Governor’s Office of Economic Development is the result of a collaborative effort between the Nevada Legislature and Governor Brian Sandoval to restructure economic development in the state. GOED’s role is to promote a robust, diversified and prosperous economy in Nevada, to stimulate business expansion and retention, encourage entrepreneurial enterprise, attract new businesses and facilitate community development. More information on the Governor’s Office of Economic Development can be viewed at www.diversifynevada.com .