THE ECONOMIST tries to provide readers with concise, to-the-point prose. It seems we have something to learn from Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, whose concurring opinion today in Holt v Hobbs, a religious liberty case involving a Muslim inmate’s beard, came in at 65 words, including references and parentheticals. The justices held unanimously that there is no compelling reason for Arkansas prisons to deny Gregory Holt’s request to wear a half-inch beard, which he regards as his religious duty. Justice Samuel Alito wrote that under the Religious Land Use and Institutionalised Persons Act, Mr Holt (pictured) can grow his beard. The state’s justifications for shearing Mr Holt’s face against his will—preventing prisoners from hiding contraband like SIM cards and blades in their whiskers and ensuring that prison guards can readily identify inmates—are, in the court’s view, spurious.

Justice Ginsburg signed on to Justice Alito’s opinion but wrote separately to emphasise that Mr Holt’s demand is fundamentally different from the claim put forward in last year’s controversial Burwell v Hobby Lobby case. In Hobby Lobby, owners of a crafts store sought, and received, by a 5-4 vote, an exemption from the contraceptive mandate of the Affordable Care Act. As evangelical Christians, David Green and his family members asserted that they could not, in good conscience, pay to supply their employees with birth control devices and drugs they considered to be abortifacients.

For Hobby Lobby, Justice Ginsburg filed a fiery, full-throated dissent. Her central contention was that the majority refused to consider “the impact that accommodation may have on third parties who do not share the corporation owners’ religious faith”. So in Holt v Hobbs, she felt the need to clarify her vote:

The distinction Justice Ginsburg wishes to push, then, is this: part of the court’s investigation in considering whether to grant religious exemptions from generally applicable laws, as in Hobby Lobby, or from prison grooming regulations, as in Holt, is whether and in what way the accommodation will impact the lives of third parties. No one suffers when Mr Holt lets his stubble grow a bit. But when a corporation with 23,000 employees refuses to provide a benefit available under federal law, thousands of women are directly impacted. They have to buy their own birth control pills, for example, or shell out $1,000 for their own IUDs.

In a case from 1985, Estate of Thornton v Caldor, Inc., the Supreme Court struck down a law granting every employee the right not to come in to work on his or her Sabbath. This law, the justices found, constituted a “substantial burden” on employers, who had to offer higher pay to persuade workers to come in on the weekend. And it represented a “significant burden” on non-religious employees who had to fill in for their Sabbath-observant colleagues:

“The unyielding weighting in favor of Sabbath observers over all other interests contravenes a fundamental principle of the Religion Clauses: the First Amendment gives no one the right to insist that in pursuit of their own interests others must conform their conduct to his own religious necessities.”

For Ian Millhiser of Think Progress, Justice Ginsburg’s concurrence, in line with the reasoning in Caldor, is “everything you need to know about religious liberty.” That’s overstating things a bit. While there are clear cases like Hobby Lobby and Holt where an accommodation either does or doesn’t entail harm on third parties, there are other cases that are more difficult to classify. You could say, for example, that no one is harmed when a Seventh Day Adventist gets her unemployment check after being fired for refusing to work on Saturday. But taxpayers foot that bill; they are an impacted third party. And you could say that when an Amish family gets to keep its children on the farm rather than sending them to high school, nobody outside the Amish world is negatively affected. But what about the children who are denied an education that could give them choices and expose them to possibilities outside the Old Order Amish Church? And what about the wider society, which may benefit if some talented Amish people decided to study physics or run for office?

These aren’t easy questions, and I'm not suggesting the accommodations in these cases should have been denied. Those seeking clarity for future claims of religious free exercise will not find it in Justice Ginsburg’s haiku-like concurrence in this case. But for all of its brevity, her opinion today reinforces how radical the court's ruling in Hobby Lobby was last June.