Photo

WEST DES MOINES, Iowa — It was a summer Friday night in Iowa, and a high school auditorium here was overflowing, as more than 1,000 people, holding signs and collecting names, spilled out into the lobby and onto the sidewalk. Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont strolled onstage — tieless, his white hair askew, his shoulders stooped — and stopped at the sight in front of him.

“What this campaign is doing is sending a loud and clear message to the billionaire class: And that is that their greed is destroying the United States of America,” Mr. Sanders, a candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination, shouted above the roar of the crowd. “This country belongs to all of us — and not just a handful of billionaires.”

To many in this state with the first nominating contest of 2016, it was a familiar scene: a candidate from Vermont challenging the Democratic Party status quo with a lusty if slightly cantankerous presentation — and drawing huge crowds. In 2004, it was Howard Dean, the doctor and former governor of Vermont, who commanded his party’s attention with booming rallies and displays of populist passion; this summer, it is Mr. Sanders, a candidate with a similar pedigree who seems to be playing off a similar script.

Yet for all the obvious similarities, there are striking differences between the two — in their campaign appeals, ideologies and skills as candidates — which may go far in determining whether Mr. Sanders follows Mr. Dean’s trajectory: a once-hot comet who quickly burns out after Iowa.

Both men are New York natives who live in Burlington, Vt.; they avoid talk of themselves or their biographies, and display irritation with many of the conventions of the way campaigns are conducted and covered. Both call for universal health care, though the appeal has less resonance now than it did before the Affordable Care Act was passed. Both have seemed to strike a chord that suggests impatience with the more establishment Democrats in the contest, whether Hillary Rodham Clinton today or John Kerry and John Edwards, senators from Massachusetts and North Carolina, in 2004.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

And both have drawn fervent crowds who embrace their philosophy and celebrate their candidate-as-fighter styles.

“He is telling the truth, and not giving political speeches,” said Gwen Harvey, 67, a retired insurance manager who saw him speak here. Maggie Rawland, 86, a self-described Democratic activist who said she has been attending political rallies in Iowa for 40 years, said Mr. Sanders was “firing up audiences — and better than Dean did.”

Photo

“He’s saying what we are hoping the big majority of people are saying,” she added: “that the money in politics has gone too far.”

Still, what may prove more significant, as Democrats begin to focus on the choice ahead of them and attention shifts from the Republican contest after last week’s debate, are the ways in which the two liberals from Vermont are different.

For Mr. Dean, a defining issue was his opposition to the war in Iraq as he seized on the overriding concern of many Democratic primary voters to distinguish himself from Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry. By contrast, Mr. Sanders can speak for 60 minutes without once mentioning foreign policy; his animating issues are economic inequality and the corrupting influence of money in politics.

Mr. Dean was, at 55, a kinetic live wire of a candidate, plunging into his first national campaign after 22 years in Vermont politics. Mr. Sanders, 73, is, at least in comparison, the measured if stern family uncle, an independent who for all his association with the progressive politics of Burlington shows the command of policy that comes with being a product of Washington, where he has served since 1991.

Mr. Dean was wary of people who tried to paint him as being too far to the left. Mr. Sanders is a self-described socialist, and that political philosophy is celebrated in campaign speeches that, while in some ways reminiscent of Mr. Dean’s appeals, seem to take them one step further. “The only way we are going to transform America is to develop a strong grass-roots movement that I call a revolution,” he told members of Netroots Nation, an organization of liberal activists, at its convention in Phoenix in July. “We need a mass movement of the American people to say enough is enough.”

And in an age of unforgiving news and social media, Mr. Sanders has so far displayed a discipline on the campaign trail that often eluded Mr. Dean. The former governor was prone, in all his exuberance, to self-destructive missteps and bursts of anger. He had to apologize for asserting that Mr. Edwards had been deceptive about voting for the Iraq war resolution (he had not), then apologize again after coming under fire from his rivals for declaring that he wanted to be the “the candidate for guys with Confederate flags in their pickup trucks.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Dean’s campaign was undone, as much as anything, by the release of videotapes of public television appearances in Vermont in which he had disparaged the Iowa caucuses.

Photo

“Their personalities are just so different,” said Deborah Marlin, 50, who showed up for Mr. Sanders’s rally here and recalled seeing Mr. Dean around Iowa in 2004, a year in which she ended up supporting George W. Bush. “I think Bernie is much more of a people person.”

The two may call the same quiet Vermont community home, and Mr. Sanders was the mayor of Burlington while Mr. Dean represented the community in the Vermont House of Representatives, but they are not close. Mr. Sanders said the last time he spoke to Mr. Dean was “when I bumped into him a year ago.” He did not endorse Mr. Dean in 2004. Mr. Dean, who has endorsed Mrs. Clinton in this contest, did not return telephone calls or emails seeking comment for this article.

“I’ve known Howard Dean for decades,” Mr. Sanders said over hot tea at a Thai restaurant in Phoenix recently, when the temperature outside was 97 degrees. “I like Howard Dean. Our politics are different. What Howard did in his race was brilliantly seize on the issue of the war in Iraq and the fact that Democrats didn’t have the courage to say what had to be said.”

“In terms of Dean’s politics and mine, they are different,” he said. “I look at issues much more from a class-based perspective than he does. He did health care stuff. My perspective is a little bit different. I say we do need a political revolution.”