JEFFERSON COUNTY —McIntyre Street, one of the main thoroughfares connecting Golden and western Arvada, will be widened and improved between West 44th and West 60th avenues.

The project’s schedule indicates the county will complete design for the project by September 2014 and begin construction in May 2015.

See project plans and documents at dpo.st/mcintyreproject.

McIntyre Street is one of the busiest thoroughfares in unincorporated Jeffco, according to Kevin French, director of transportation and engineering for the county.

“It’s needed safety and operational improvements for some time,” he said.

The improvements will include widening all sections of the road within the project to four lanes, adding a concrete median, making sure major intersections have left and right turn lanes, and adding bicycle lanes and sidewalks on both sides of the street.

There are two stoplights at Table Mountain Parkway and 52nd Avenue in the proposed design.

French said there are funds to complete the first phase of the project — West 44th to West 54th — but not yet for the second phase.

What survives the design process for the first phase depends on what will fit into the approximately $3 million budget.

“We may need to do some tweaking,” French said.

The county hosted public meetings earlier this year and public comments show varying support for aspects of the project, with some opposed to a concrete median or to the project altogether.

A conceptual map showed that of the 74 written comments received, 54 percent supported, 28 percent were impartial and 18 percent were unsupportive.

Lined primarily with horse properties, residential subdivisions and some office-based businesses, McIntyre is the only major north-south through street between Colorado 93 to the west and Ward Road to the east that connects communities in western Arvada to Colorado 58.

It also provides key access to the Fairmont community.

It is currently two lanes in each direction from Colorado 58 north to Table Mountain Parkway, then narrows to one lane in each direction until just north of West 60th Avenue, where it becomes the four-lane McIntyre Parkway.

This project leaves out the stretch of two-lane road north of West 54th Avenue to McIntyre Parkway, but French said the county does not have the funds to deal with the three bridge structures on that section of the road.

However, he said, the intersections with the most turning vehicles are at 50th, 52nd and 54th avenues.

“Through traffic analysis, the 54th intersection is really key,” he said.

In a “frequently asked questions” document presented at a public open house June 11, the county said that it classifies McIntyre as a principal arterial — which is typically four to six lanes — between Highway 58 and West 48th Avenue, and a minor arterial — typically four lanes — between West 48th and West 64th avenues.

It states the current traffic north of West 44th is approximately 22,000 vehicles per day and 13,600 north of West 54th, numbers that are projected to grow.

Josie Klemaier: 303-954-2465, jklemaier@denverpost.com