Fairview High School Principal Don Stensrud on Sunday urged the class of 2014 to never grow up.

He told the more than 500 scarlet-robed graduating seniors assembled at Broomfield's 1STBANK Center that they should continue to be responsible, make good decisions and do what's right.

But, he added, don't not lose what makes children so wonderful — caring about what really matters, playing the game just for fun and taking risks.

"Life's an adventure," he said. "Stay a kid and take risks ... You will make this world a much better place than we adults have left it."

Most Boulder Valley School District students received their diplomas this weekend, while New Vista high School seniors will graduate Saturday.

At Fairview's graduation, senior Galen Otto started the ceremony with a soaring rendition of the national anthem, while a trio of seniors — Avi Kolbrener, Ethan Cohen and Sebastian Meyer — sang "Timshel" by Mumford and Sons.

The accomplishments of the graduating class took center stage, from the football team's winning streak to renowned music and theater programs to academic accomplishments. Students with GPA's above 4.3 and International Baccalaureate candidates also received recognition.

Student speaker Savarone Ammann popped a red balloon to make sure he had the crowd's attention, then shared shared some of his high school memories, from writing an essay on the War of 1812 without knowing anything other than the year it happened and losing a mustache growing contest.

Advertisement

Then he urged his fellow graduates to make their mark.

"Let your ideas and opinions be heard," he said. "It does not matter where or what you choose. It only matters that you're heard."

Faculty speaker Frank Lee also offered advice, including that "life will never be less complicated than it is right now. If you have a dream, now is the time to pursue it."

Other keys to success, he said, include hard work, being willing to try to turn someone's "no" into a "yes," treating yourself and others well, staying focused and choosing partners carefully.

Dana and Bayan Alhouti, among the family of Yazeed Abdullah Alhwati, cheer when they see him enter the arena. Fairview High School seniors graduated on Sunday at the 1STBank Center in Broomfield. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

Given all their accomplishments, said graduating senior Jeffrey Clarke, the seniors should be well prepared to take on life's challenges.

"I dare you to pursue more than one dream," he said.

Continuing the theme, class president Natalie Sprowl talked about her decision to risk failure by running for president and warned against letting a fear of failure hold you back.

"If you take that risk, you have already succeeded," she said.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Amy Bounds at 303-473-1341 or boundsa@dailycamera.com