WASHINGTON – Don’t mess with Texas.

Infuriated with President Obama for allowing up to 5 million undocumented immigrants to stay here legally​, a trio of Texas Republican politicians are plotting retaliation at separate levels of government.

Governor-elect Greg Abbott pledged the state would sue Obama over the executive order, alleging it’s illegal and will cost the border state more money to deal with a likely influx of immigrants through Mexico.

“ We have​ ​a president who feels completely unconstrained by the constitution,”​ ​Abbott, who already sued Obama 30 times as ​his state’s ​attorney general, said on Fox News Sunday.

Texas Sen. Ted Cruz said the n​​ew GOP-led Congress should ​retaliate by ​block​ing​ Obama’s executive and judicial nominees in the Senate, which would include Obama’s attorney general pick, Loretta Lynch, the US Attorney for the Eastern District of New York.

“It is a stunning and sad display of a president declining to honor his constitutional obligation to take care that the laws be faithfully executed,” Cruz said on Fox News Sunday.

​”​It would impose real consequences on the president and the administration.”

​Holding up Lynch’s nomination ​might not sit well with many Republicans as the move would likely keep current AG Eric Holder — someone who Republicans loathe​ — in office longer​.

Cruz led the effort last year to de-​fund Obamacare through the budget process, which led to a 17-day shutdown that most Republicans acknowledged was a mistake – except for Cruz. ​Asked about the shutdown, he responded: ​“Let me point out we just had a historic election where we won.”

He suggested a similar move to de​-​fund the immigration order by restricting ​money for the Department of Homeland Security. Republicans need to “honor” pledges to voters to block amnesty.

“We need to actually do what we said two weeks ago on the campaign trail,” Cruz said.

In the US House, Rep. Mike McCaul (R-Texas) said they are reviewing various options to block the president. Congress must pass a budget bill by Dec. 11 or risk another shutdown.

“We are not going to shut the government down, but we are going to shut down this president and his actions,” McCaul, chair of the Homeland Security Committee, said on CBS’ Face the Nation.

Democrats and Obama defended his executive action as legal and necessary since the Republicans in the House failed to advance the bipartisan Senate bill. Obama downplayed the move as “restrained.”

“Take a look at the track records of the modern presidency, I’ve actually been very restrained,” Obama said on ABC’s “This Week.” “And I’ve been very restrained with respect to immigration. I bent over backwards and will continue to do everything I can to get Congress to work because that’d my preference.”

His repeated his message to incensed Republicans: “Well my response is pass a bill.”