This week, Saudi Arabia and Russia agreed to freeze oil output, and many are wondering if all OPEC members will come to the table. However, the question is not if they will come to the table, but when.

The fact is, current prices simply are not sustainable for these OPEC nations that are reliant on petroleum to fund up to 90 percent of their economy. Without a sovereign wealth fund to provide investment income, Saudi Arabia has learned that maintaining its expensive social programs, security forces and foreign policy initiatives in the face of rapidly declining petrodollar revenues is unsustainable. During a press conference after the first agreement between OPEC and non-OPEC producers in 15 years, Saudi Arabia oil minister Ali al-Naimi stated bluntly, “We want a stable oil price.” Saudi Arabia is the de facto leader of OPEC.

The day after the proposed freeze was announced, Iraq agreed. “Iraq is ready to agree with any decision that serves the drop in oil prices because Iraq is suffering from this sharp drop in oil prices and has lost lots of money…,” Iraq oil ministry spokesman Asim Jihad said in an interview with The Washington Post: “What’s the benefit of selling oil with low prices?”

On the same day, Iran – considered the biggest holdout – also welcomed a production ceiling. “We look forward to the beginning of cooperation between OPEC and non-OPEC countries and we support any measure that can stabilize the market and increase prices,” Iran oil minister Bijan Zanganeh said.

It’s important to note that even if in the near future Iran decides not to participate in an output freeze, many experts agree its ability to ramp up production post-sanctions has been wildly exaggerated. It is widely believed that throughout sanctions, Iran continued to sell oil on the black market, so in reality, Iranian production can only increase by about 300,000 barrels per day.

With the social welfare economies of major oil-producing countries at risk across the globe, this historic OPEC-Russia agreement to freeze production is a step in the right direction. As Naimi said, this deal is “simply the beginning of a process to assess in the next few months and decide whether we need other steps to stabilize the market.”

Ultimately, consensus will be reached and cuts will be made to relieve OPEC’s self-inflicted pain.

Harold Hamm is chairman and CEO of Continental Resources.