For more on the GOP primaries visit www.dailymail.co.uk/gopprimary

Hillary Clinton tapped into the holiday spirit today with a video mocking her Republican opponents as 'Grinchy.'

'American families like progress a lot. But the grinches in GOPville? It seems they do not,' the ad's narrator says.

'Together they shout with great grinchy zeal that on health care their plan is, "repeal," "repeal, repeal," "repeal," ' the video says, with Donald Trump, Carly Fiorina, Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio making cameos.

Clinton's GOP grinches video comes after Cruz aired an ad over the weekend in which the former secretary of state was parodied as the infamous Dr. Seuss character in 'The Grinch Who Lost Her Emails.'

SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEO

Hillary Clinton tapped into the holiday spirit today with a video mocking her Republican opponents as 'Grinchy'

Clinton's GOP grinches video comes after Ted Cruz, depicted in the ad here, aired an ad over the weekend in which the former secretary of state was parodied as the infamous Dr. Seuss character in 'The Grinch Who Lost Her Emails'

Who could it be? Cruz's Grinch wore a pink pantsuit and referred to Clinton's email scandal

Playing off the Dr. Seuss theme Cruz started when he read Green Eggs and Ham from the Senate floor to his daughters during his 2013 marathon speech on Obamacare, the Texan reads to his wife and kids from fake Seussical storybooks.

'Twas was the night before the shutdown, and all through the House, not a bill was stirring, not even to fund a mouse,' Cruz says as the commercial promotes 'How Obamacare stole Christmas.'

Other classics name-checked in the video include: 'Rudolph the Underemployed Reindeer,' 'The Senator Who Saved Christmas,' which is unmistakably modeled off Cruz himself, 'Frisking Santa' and 'Miracle on K Street'.

'Act now, and you'll get a leader who does exactly what he says he's going to do. In this case, read festive stories like, "Frosty the Speaker of the House," ' the narrator says.

The commercial then pans to a picture of a light brown snow man with a cigarette in his mouth and a gavel in one hand and a glass of red wine in the other - a nod to recently retired GOP leader John Boehner.

Other classics name-checked in the video include: 'The Senator Who Saved Christmas,' which is unmistakably modeled off Cruz himself, 'Frisking Santa' and 'Miracle on K Street'

The task of attacking Clinton is left to his eldest daughter, Caroline. 'I know just what I'll do, she said with a snicker, I'll use my own server, and no one will be the wiser,' she says

There's also the Lois Lerner 'masterpiece, Auditing St. Nick.'

'I will audit him here or there. I will audit him anywhere,' Cruz says, mocking the disgraced former IRS executive who plead the fifth before Congress in a hearing on her agency's targeting of conservatives.

The task of attacking Clinton is left to his eldest daughter, Caroline, who reads aloud from 'The Grinch Who Lost Her Emails.'

'I know just what I'll do, she said with a snicker, I'll use my own server, and no one will be the wiser,' she says.

This Grinch from Cruz's book has has blonde hair and wears a pink pantsuit as she types on her computer.

Cruz's Saturday Night Live-inspired parody video aired during the show over the weekend in Iowa.

Playing off the Dr. Seuss theme Cruz started when he read Green Eggs and Ham from the Senate floor to his daughters during his 2013 marathon speech on Obamacare, the Texan reads to his wife and kids from fake Seussical storybooks

Donald Trump wasn't exempt from is her criticism, either. The real estate mogul is seeming depicted above, building a wall along the U.S. border with Mexico

At another point Trump and Rubio parodied shouting 'with great grinchy zeal, that on health care their plan is, "repeal," "repeal, repeal," "repeal." '

'Our progress they'd take, and stuff in a sack. Instead of moving forward,' Clinton's video says

Today Clinton dropped her own Seuss video.

'On immigration they vow to build a wall on the border. And as for deporting DREAMers they would, "terminate President Obama's illegal executive order," it says, using Trump's own words for the latter half.

'Environmental reform, they promise to nix it. And Roe v. Wade, they aspire to "fix" it.'

The Clinton camp hits Republicans for repealing Dodd Frank, trickle down economics and defunding Planned Parenthood, among other topics.

'Our progress they'd take, and stuff in a sack. Instead of moving forward,' it says, in the words of Rand Paul, ' "we've come to take our country back." '

The video concludes with the message, 'We'll stop them from reaching their extreme grinchy goals, when we head out together to vote at the polls.'

'We'll send them back to GOPville, where they all belong. We'll protect our progress and keep american families strong.'

In line with the holiday spirit, the candidates are taking the better part of this week off from campaigning. Clinton is in Iowa tomorrow, on Tuesday, and doesn't return to the trail for a full week. She'll resurface in New Hampshire on Dec. 29.

Cruz has no public events today. Tomorrow he heads to Tennessee and Arkansas and Wednesday he's in Oklahoma.