'Your turn to come up with other ideas'

EDITOR'S NOTE: This story has been corrected to report that the Lyons Board of Trustees did not reject a resolution that would have made a Habitat for Humanity project financially feasible. The board did not bring it to a vote. Also, the number of families displaced by the 2013 flood has been corrected.

Lyons leaders maintain they're committed to providing affordable housing for the roughly 100 families displaced by the September 2013 flood, but agreeable solutions continue to prove hard to come by.

In a March special election, the town's voters rejected by a 55-45 margin a plan that would have dedicated a slice of Bohn Park as the site of a 66-unit affordable housing project that would give preference to flood victims.

After that vote, a housing committee was convened by Lyons resident and housing task force member Amy Reinholds, with a goal of coming up with some alternatives to Bohn Park.

"I rounded up these guys who were loudmouths on Facebook," Reinholds said. "I had them show up at Oskar Blues the night after the Bohn Park election, and I said, 'Well, now that this failed, it's your turn to come up with other ideas.'"

The first idea with any real legs to emerge from that seven-person committee was a proposal that would have brought six homes, built by Habitat for Humanity of the St. Vrain Valley, into the 3/4-acre lot at 304 Second Avenue, the presently vacant former home to Valley Bank & Trust.

Advertisement

But, in the town's latest affordable housing-related snafu, the Lyons Board of Trustees did not bring to a vote Wednesday night a resolution that would have made the project financially viable.

"We didn't have sufficient information to make an informed decision with using taxpayer dollars," Mayor John O'Brien said. "We didn't have complete information on the extent of the project, the cost of the project and exactly what was required by Habitat for Humanity to move forward."

Those six homes would have been sold to displaced Lyons residents at $150,000 a pop, less than half the current median home price in town.

'It was kind of a conflict of interest'

But Lyons has one of the state's costliest average tap fees — which mainly cover the price of connecting a home or business to public sewer and water systems — at roughly $45,000 per property. The resolution that came before the trustees last week proposed charging Habitat for Humanity a flat fee of $7,000 per unit in lieu of the typical tap fee rate.

Even with Bohn Park — a project six of seven trustees supported — the tap fee matter was never settled; had the voters approved the measure, officials would have worked the fees out later. But the downing of Wednesday's resolution was based upon a lack of specifics, cost-wise.

"We want to have a policy before we commit taxpayer dollars to future projects," O'Brien said.

The board did end up passing a resolution stating an interest in negotiating tap fees with Habitat for Humanity, but following the vote against the proposal of $7,000 flat fees, two of the housing committee's seven members, Valley Bank project developer Craig Ferguson and Thomas Delker, resigned.

"As a property owner, it was kind of a conflict of interest and I didn't feel like I needed anyone to accuse me of that," Ferguson said.

"But I also felt like this was such an easy project. If the (trustees) cant approve this, what can we possibly do? There's nothing easier than this project. That's not to say the board isn't going to take a little time and reconsider, but I can't spend all this time on these meetings anymore."

Trustees united in stated support for affordable housing

Ferguson heads several prominent upcoming music festivals in the state, including Telluride Bluegrass. His colleague Delker, however, resigned over what he perceives as the board's ignorance to the tap fee issue, and his frustration over the failure of a proposal he, like Ferguson, thought would be a shoo-in.

"I resigned because I felt like this was a project that would help the town heal from the flood and from our last very divisive vote on Bohn Park," Delker said. "I felt like everybody could get behind this, with donated materials and labor from Habitat to build homes at a very low cost for folks that lost theirs. It seemed like a really strong, easy project, and it was clear that the board was not friendly to our proposal, and it was very adversarial, so I didn't feel like continuing on."

Had the trustees closely studied tap fees in advance, he posited, perhaps the Valley Bank plan would have gone through without issue.

"I was really surprised that the board didn't know what their costs were on the tap fee side, that they didn't know how much they could waive," Delker added. "This was going to be a problem for any affordable project, and I didn't hear any knowledge on where the pain threshold was, where does it hurt the town, where are they actually starting to lose money on these tap fees.

"You'd think they'd know somewhere of what it costs to make something happen on a per-unit basis, but they didn't."

However, in a back-and-forth under a Facebook post by Delker, announcing his resignation, trustee Connie Sullivan stated that the town would have had to cover $162,000 out-of-pocket in order to make Valley Bank work.

The trustees are unanimous in the stated support for affordable housing solutions in a town that has a slew of flood-displaced families who'd like the return, on top of some of the same housing issues that plague increasingly pricey cities across the county.

But as the Front Range approaches the second anniversary of the flood, the future of affordable housing in Lyons remains unclear and contentious.

"We are open to all conversations and working with the town to identify other infill properties, but there's not a huge amount of options with respect to a landlocked community like Lyons," said David Emerson, executive director of the St. Vrain Habitat branch. "It's a snag."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness