Buy Photo A new Hello Kitty balloon appears at the Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade. A month after warning of a bad batch of heroin stamped with the cheery image of the Hello Kitty cartoon that killed a Stafford teenager, the authorities believe they’ve found the source of the toxic drug. (Photo: FILE PHOTO )Buy Photo

A month after warning that a bad batch of heroin stamped with the cheery image of the Hello Kitty cartoon had killed a Stafford teenager, authorities believe they’ve found the source of the toxic drug.

On Friday, they announced charges against a Trenton man in the overdose death of the teen, 18-year-old Brendan Novak, who was found face down and unresponsive in a bedroom of his Breakers Drive home the morning of June 21.

Dahmir A. Jones, 23, has been charged with first-degree drug-induced death, the eighth person in a year to be charged by the prosecutor, Joseph D. Coronato, in a fatal overdose. The Prosecutor’s Office alleges Jones sold Novak heroin in wax folds with the Hello Kitty stamp. But testing later showed that the batch was “almost entirely composed” of Fentanyl, a powerful narcotic that is increasingly turning up in the local heroin supply.

Authorities raided Jones’ Wood Street apartment in Trenton on June 23 and charged him with possession of heroin and possession with intent to distribute. He has been held since then in Mercer County jail, on $250,000 cash bail. The Prosecutor’s Office did not have his photo available.

Investigators were quickly led to Jones largely thanks to a new mandate by the prosecutor that all drug overdose deaths be investigated as if they were crimes, requiring a more thorough analysis of the scene, spokesman Al Della Fave said.

“They’re able to glean significant evidence almost instantly,” he said.

The drug-induced death charge against Jones came Thursday, one day after Dr. Ian Hood of the Ocean County Medical Examiner’s Office determined that Novak died as the result of drugs, with evidence of Fentanyl in his system. Jones faces 10 to 20 years in prison if convicted, Della Fave said.

This is the eighth time Coronato has charged an alleged dealer through New Jersey’s strict-liability statute, which allows prosecutors to hold dealers and drug manufacturers responsible in overdose deaths.

The tactic has become one of Coronato’s tools in an ongoing battle against heroin and opiate abuse in Ocean County. Earlier this year a Lacey man, Kenneth W. Staunton, 34, was sentenced to 7½ years in state prison for his role in the heroin overdose death of Raymond Farino, 27, also of Lacey. And last month a Point Pleasant man, Nicholas Ippolito, 22, pleaded guilty to manslaughter in the heroin-induced death of Joseph Piezzo, 25, of Brick.

“We will relentlessly pursue those responsible for every overdose death in Ocean County, especially those who embellish their product with deadly additives,” Coronato said in a statement. “My office will do everything possible to help those stricken by drug addictions, but will show no such kindness to dealers ignoring the tragic consequences of their actions. At this point it should be abundantly clear to drug dealers that Ocean County is not a wise place to do business.”

Heroin abuse is still a major problem in Ocean County. So far this year, 39 people in the county have died of drug overdoses, many of them linked to heroin, compared with 71 at the same point last year, according to the Prosecutor’s Office. The sharp drop in overdose deaths is no measure of success, the Prosecutor’s Office has said.

In the four months since the office rolled out the nasal spray opiate antidote Narcan to all police departments in the county, 60 people have been saved from an overdose.

On Thursday night, Little Egg Harbor Police Officers Sean Crotty, Edward McNally and Joshua Peterson used Narcan to help revive a 22-year-old man in a Cedarbrook Lane home who stopped breathing, apparently because of drugs. He was taken to Southern Ocean County Medical Center in Stafford for further treatment, police said.

Dustin Racioppi: 732-643-4028; dracioppi@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1moutzs