Topics: almost human, androids, androids on tv, Editor's Picks, Entertainment News

There’s a scene in the pilot episode of FOX’s “Almost Human” where Dorian, a DRN model police android, approximates human behavior by awkwardly injecting the word “man” into his speech patterns. “I’m running my colloquialism routine,” says the recently recommissioned robot, “so I express most data conversationally, man.” In this moment, it seems that Dorian, played with a sort of Zen charm by actor Michael Ealy, is only pantomiming his humanity as a way to blend in with his android-hating human partner John Kennex (Karl Urban). Later, however, Dorian insists that his artificially-designed emotions are as real as any human’s. “I was made to feel,” he tells the detective.

If the former is true, then it is likely that, throughout the course of the show, Dorian will struggle to understand certain intricacies and nuances of human behavior — specifically those that go against his presumably methodical and logical programming. If the latter is true, expect Dorian to experience difficulty in making sense of his own emotions as one newly born into an adult form. If any of it sounds familiar, that’s because we’ve seen it before. Wikipedia defines an android thusly: “a robot or synthetic organism designed to look and act like a human, especially one with a body having a flesh-like resemblance. Until recently, androids have largely remained within the domain of science fiction, frequently seen in film and television.” The android, aside from being a very cool idea with a myriad of narrative possibilities, is a device frequently used by sci-fi storytellers to hold human behavior and emotion under a microscope.

Zack Stentz is the screenwriter behind such successful Hollywood blockbusters as “Thor” and “X-Men: First Class.” He also served as a writer and producer on “Fringe” and “The Sarah Connor Chronicles,” which featured Summer Glau as the latest in the line of killer machines that began with James Cameron’s iconic Terminator android. Via email, Stentz told me the following:

I think there are several different ways to use an android character to explore what it’s like to be human. Traditionally, Gene Roddenberry liked to use his android characters, both in the original series but particularly ‘The Next Generation’s’ Commander Data, to explore the human condition by having them as outsider characters looking in on the world of emotion and irrationality with curiosity and sometimes envy. There’s a marked tendency in science fiction television to use android characters as Pinocchio figures — they all seem to want to become ‘real boys’ despite usually being stronger, faster, and smarter than the humans they envy.

Personally, I’m partial to Marvin the Paranoid Android from the BBC’s hilarious, low-budget adaptation of Douglas Adams’ “Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy.” The clunky service bot’s cynical take on man’s nihilism is both infinitely quotable and increasingly relatable in today’s over-stimulated, never-satisfied society. (Marvin was also the funniest, best-devised contrast to another iconic android — George Lucas’ annoyingly upbeat, eager-to-please C3P0.) Hell, you could probably find traces of what Stentz is talking about in “Small Wonder’s” Vicki the Robot. But “Star Trek: TNG’s” green-tinged Lieutenant Commander Data is, by far, the most well known synthetic human on the small screen to ever puzzle over what makes people sad or why we have sex for pleasure.

Data was, as Stentz points out, stronger, more agile, and arguably more intelligent than his counterparts in Starfleet. Nevertheless, his lack of social intelligence continued to be a source of embarrassment to him. Though man-made, Data was described as “sentient,” which allowed the writers of that show to explore the deepest notions of what it means to be self-aware. Defining sentience and establishing its implicit rights are common themes in such android-heavy films as “I, Robot” and “Blade Runner” — which is, of course, loosely based on Philip K. Dick’s short story, “Do Androids Dream of Electric Sleep?”