A wildfire that swept across a busy California freeway, sending people running for their lives, has calmed down as some crews shifted focus to another blaze that forced hundreds of campers to evacuate.

Higher humidity and lower temperatures helped pacify the fire that burned over Interstate 15 in a mountainous area 55 miles northeast of Los Angeles on Friday. The 5.5-square-mile fire destroyed 20 vehicles on the freeway before burning three homes and 44 more vehicles in the community of Baldy Mesa.

U.S. Forest Service spokeswoman Carol Underhill says crews will focus Saturday on protecting some 700 homes in the area. About 2,800 people were evacuated.

Most of Interstate 15 reopened Saturday.

Another fire 20 miles away forced hundreds of campers to flee. It had been moving toward the community of Wrightwood but shifted direction overnight.

Fanned by hot desert winds, the fire started Friday afternoon along Interstate 15 -- the main highway between Southern California and Las Vegas -- and spread quickly.

Dozens of vehicles were abandoned and hundreds of others turned onto side roads to get away from the flames as water-dropping helicopters flew over the Cajon Pass area.

Motorists stuck on the road described a harrowing scene.

"It's crazy, you're watching black clouds and white clouds of smoke, there's a ridgeline off to my right ... and it looks like any second flames will come over the ridgeline," Chris Patterson, 43, said from his vehicle.

It's not uncommon for wildfires to reach freeways in California. It was unclear, however, why dozens of cars were caught along Interstate 15, forcing frightened people to flee on foot.

U.S. Forest Service spokesman Uriah Hernandez said no injuries had been confirmed.

The agency said the fire had burned at least 3, 500 acres and was threatening the rural community of Baldy Mesa.

Melissa Atalla said she could see the flames from her gas station in Baldy Mesa.

"People are spectating from our parking lot, running around getting water and beer. It's chaos," Atalla said. "One man came in and said, 'Oh my, my house is getting burned.'"

The fire led authorities to shut several freeway lanes, causing traffic to back up for miles. California Highway Patrol spokesman Steve Carapia said 50 to 75 vehicles were left abandoned on the freeway.

Raquel Martinez, 34, was traveling to Las Vegas with her husband for the weekend when they got stuck in northbound traffic on the I-15 for about an hour.

The sky darkened to black. As they drove by, cars were covered in "pink powder" — or fire retardant. Cars meanwhile were being redirected up narrow twisty emergency lanes from the southbound side headed north.

"I haven't seen a fire that big and so close to us. It really was huge," Martinez said.