These three recipes can help you stay on track with your fitness goals, while also having a little fun.

These three recipes can help you stay on track with your fitness goals, while also having a little fun. Triple Tri, CC BY 2.0

The Super Bowl is one of the first major events of every year. And along with excitement about the big game day comes lots of food and temptation to break those healthy New Year’s resolutions. Layered dips, hot wings, and football-themed sweets can really throw a wrench in your diet plan. “Like the holidays, football Sundays are packed with celebration and stress — both of which are common triggers for overeating,” said Dr. Anthony Fabricatore, vice president of Research and Development at Nutrisystem, in a statement regarding NFL Fans' weight gain.

But these treats promise to give you all the fun and flavor, without necessarily making you pack on the pounds. Take a look at these three healthy Super Bowl recipes:

7-Layer Dip

Ingredients: refried beans, low-calorie sour cream, taco seasoning, shredded cheddar cheese, pre-made low-calorie guacamole, chopped tomatoes, green onions, black olives, and tortilla chips.

Directions:

1. Spread the refried beans in shallow serving dish.

2. Then mix sour cream and your preferred seasonings in small bowl until well blended.

3. Spread the mixture over the refried beans.

4. Then top with layers of cheese, guacamole, tomatoes, onions and olives.

5. Serve with tortilla chips.

Recipe courtesy of McCormick

Baked Honey Garlic Chicken Wings

Ingredients: chicken wings, honey, soy sauce, garlic powder, ketchup

Directions:

1. Prepare the wings: Remove wing tips and discard. Cut wings apart at joint. Put in a shallow casserole dish.

2. Combine honey, soy sauce, garlic powder and ketchup in a bowl. This becomes the sauce.

3. Pour sauce mixture over the chicken and marinate for at least an hour, longer if you can.

4. Bake at 375°F in a preheated oven for one hour. Be sure to flip them halfway through.

5. Pour on any leftover sauce.

6. Return to the oven and bake for 5 minutes, turn and bake the other side for 5 minutes.

7. Serve.

Recipe courtesy of Salu Salo Recipes

Whole-Wheat Greek Pizza

Ingredients: olive oil, cherry tomatoes, clove garlic, ground pepper, whole-wheat flower, whole-wheat pizza dough, grated haloumi cheese, pine nuts, arugula, red-wine vinegar, Kalamata olives

Directions:

1. Preheat oven to 450°F.

2. Place tomatoes, garlic, and one tablespoon of oil in a food processor, seasoned with salt and pepper. Pulse until the ingredients look a little chunky.

3. Lightly flour your work surface, then stretch the pizza dough until it’s big enough to make your pizza.

4. Move the pizza to a baking sheet or pan.

5. Spread tomato sauce evenly over the dough.

6. Top the tomato sauce with cheese and pine nuts. Then season with salt and pepper.

7. Place pizza in the oven and bake for about 15 to 20 minutes, or until the crust is golden.

8. Sprinkle arugula and olives over the pizza.

9. Slice and enjoy.

Recipe courtesy of Whole Living