Topics: CIA, Paris, September 11, Terrorism, Innovation News, Technology News, Life News, News

When asked what it was like to know the majority of the CIA’s secrets for decades, John Rizzo, the former top lawyer at the agency, has a candid answer. He leans in close, his eyes sparkle, and he says, “Well, actually, Elsa, it was neat.” He pauses with a dreamy expression on his face, then reiterates – “it was neat.”

Rizzo is a man with a distinctive presence. From the minute he walks into the Tombs Restaurant in Georgetown on a balmy afternoon, he gives off an air of formidable sophistication. Although he’s now in his sixties, his eyes glimmer with nothing but youth. As we settle in at the bar and he orders a glass of pinot noir, his friendly demeanor and jovial attitude persist.

Throughout his time at the agency, Rizzo was known for his colorful style. In most photos of him, he wears pink in some fashion, whether it’s a pocket square or a bow tie. But on this autumn day, he wears a muted, academic ensemble – a tweed jacket, denim collarless shirt, and brown loafers. Retirement may have mellowed his wardrobe, but certainly not his spirit nor his opinions.

Our conversation begins with the Paris terror attacks, arguably the most psychologically impactful event on the American public in recent memory. He quickly pronounces that, “as horrendous as the [terrorist attacks in Paris were]…the reaction doesn’t come close to anything in the reaction after 9/11.”

However, he still sees Paris as a valuable catalyst for a broader discussion about terrorism to resurface in the public dialogue. “Paris can serve to remind people that there is still a significant terrorist threat out there…that it’s real, and that these terrorists are capable of planning and coordinating a highly sophisticated and ruthless kind of attack.

We’re…fourteen years after 9/11…” He pauses and asks, “how old were you during 9/11?”

“I was seven.”

Rizzo chuckles. “So peoples’ memories tend to fade,” he finishes cynically, taking another sip of wine. “I’ve been lecturing around the country…and I’m struck…that the students really don’t have any real or firm recollection of the horror of 9/11. So, I mean, as terrible as it was, I think Paris could serve to…really reignite this debate.

“Sooner or later, there’s gonna be another attack on the homeland. Probably not a plane, but something…” he pauses and ponders, then repeats himself. “Something. It’s frightening.”

He also ties surveillance into the Paris discussion. “An attack like this, coordinated, simultaneous…these plotters had to have communicated with each other via some sort of encrypted communications,” Rizzo gestures to my iPhone sitting on the bar and shrugs.

If Rizzo is correct, the balance between privacy and security could very well tip back towards security and post 9/11 policies in the post-Paris era. In fact, he believes the balance is much more tenuous than President Obama has portrayed it.

“President Obama was quoted once as saying, “the choice between privacy and security is a false choice.” With all due respect, I disagree with that. It’s a real choice, and it’s a tough choice, especially in the balancing part.”

According to Rizzo, fears of intrusive government surveillance are hyped and unfounded. He seems frustrated with post-Snowden legislation and attempts by both the government and private companies in the U.S. to limit the surveillance capabilities of intelligence agencies.

“Believe me, the CIA has no interest in prying into the private life of – you, or virtually any American,” he laughs. “There’s no time for it, there’s no interest in it. So these fears about ‘Big Brother’ – it’s just not the way the system really operates.”

Rizzo is disdainful of those who harbor such fears, and especially those who act “promiscuously” on them such as Edward Snowden, the famed NSA surveillance whistleblower, and John Kiriakou, a CIA torture whistleblower. He slams them both and argues that it’s the responsibility of the CIA and NSA to spy on foreign governments – though one can only wonder what Germany and France would have to say to that.

“Snowden…was…29 years old…in Hawaii in a shack somewhere as a contractor for NSA, and he gets to decide what the world should know…about espionage activities against foreign governments which is what, you know, that’s what the CIA and NSA are supposed to do – that’s the whole point – they’re supposed to spy.”

As for Kiriakou, Rizzo’s criticism is more succinct and scathing.

“Kiriakou – he’s no Aldrich Ames. I mean, he’s an idiot,” Rizzo says without sympathy. “He wanted to be a big shot, that’s why he did it.”

I’ve always thought that most people leak because there’s a sense of grandiosity – that they know all the hot secrets…so I think that’s why lower-level people are involved.”