Making a flatter, fairer Internet

Manhattan: An overwhelming amount of pressure on the Federal Communications Commission over the past few months finally brought forth a favored result last week when Chairman Tom Wheeler approved new net neutrality rules. Broadband companies fought net neutrality because they found ways to make more money by potentially increasing charges for streaming services, social networks or search engines that use 50% or more of the bandwidth. But the FCC ruled that broadband providers, or gatekeepers, do not own the Internet; they merely transport it to our homes or devices. Now, if a consumer sets up an Internet connection, all content must stream at the same speed. No playing favorites. We rely on search engines’ algorithms to display results fairly and honestly. But, unfortunately, companies often put their monetary gain before their responsibility to consumers — by manipulating the algorithms to improve their favorable Google page placements and by cleaning up bad reviews. I started myEZBZ.com to counter these unfair practices with a marketplace that truly levels the playing field. When a consumer needs to source a product or service locally, the opportunity is sent, at the same time, to every local business that can meet it without any price tiers. This way, a consumer can transact with the hidden gems on page 100 of Google that can offer service as good — if not better — than the ones on the first page. Shana Schlossberg

He surrenders

Verona, N.J.: Congratulations, Mr. Obama! I wish to be the first to nominate you as president of the Appeasement Club of the USA. Your recent decision on Iran’s nuclear ambitions have quite rightly earned you that honor. God help us all! Barbara M. Gromb

Selling snake oil

Westfield, N.J.: All the talk about Bibi Netanyahu’s address to Congress has been best described by Samantha Power, our ambassador to the UN. She said, “The United States of America will not allow Iran to obtain a nuclear weapon, period.” These words are very close to what President Obama used to sell the public on Obamacare: “If you like your health-care plan, you can keep your health-care plan, period”. Now, the administration is using the same words to sell a dangerous plan that could cost millions of lives. Tom Lienhard

Breaking tradition

Long Branch, N.J.: Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu’s address to Congress sets a dangerous precedent. What happens the next time there is a disagreement between the President and the prime minister? If the PM can go around the President to the Congress, then the prime minister has become the de facto President of the United States. Lenzy Kelley

Crocodile tears

Pine Hill, N.Y.: Nancy Pelosi said she was near tears during Netanyahu’s speech because she was insulted by the way he insulted America’s intelligence. How about her intelligence? When she told the American people we have to pass the Obamacare bill to see what’s in it, she insulted every American’s intelligence. And now that the American people are finding out what is, it is bringing a lot of us to tears. Joe Verde

The shrinking prez

Valley Stream, L.I.: To Voicer Fred Diaz: It’s not just the Republican Party that is disagreeing with President Obama’s policies. You need to open your eyes and look objectively at his presidency. Not only his scandals — for which there are many (such as the IRS and Fast & Furious) — but also take a good, long look at how he has handled foreign policy. His own party is slowly distancing itself from him, which was obvious in the last election. It seems that everyone has gotten the message but you. Larry Bernard

This law is terminal

Bronx: I hope the Supreme Court justices follow the law and the Constitution, instead of rewriting it or trying to be politically correct when they make their decision on government subsidies — as stated 11 times in Obamacare. Chief Justice Roberts’ wrong and costly interpretation of the law must not be repeated. Robert Neglia

Channeling Ben

Quakertown, Pa.: Maybe it’s a campaign ploy, but Hillary Clinton looks more like Ben Franklin every day. Scott McGarvey

Hide and seek Hillary

Astoria: It’s no surprise that Hillary Clinton used private email to conduct government business. From alleging “a vast right-wing conspiracy” against her equally sleazy husband, until DNA on the dress refuted that, to making up a heroic story about dodging sniper fire until news footage showed a little girl giving her flowers, this is a woman whose career has personified lies, sleaze and deceit. As an affirmative-action candidate, though, she’s able to hide behind her gender, much the same way President Obama is able to hide behind his race. Brad Morris

Mental health madness

Rosedale: This letter is not easy to write, but I need to do so in support of Chirlane McCray’s Feb. 26 Op-Ed and Voicer Steven Goldfinger’s letter. I am a 57-year-old woman. I work full-time and have excellent health insurance that also covers mental health, which is a godsend because I have depression and anxiety caused by events from my childhood. Unfortunately, a few years ago my current carrier, in order to save money, created a list of “preferred” and “non-preferred” drugs — which they will and will not pay for. The anti-depressant I was taking was on the non-preferred list, which meant I was forced to switch to one the paper-pushers decided was an acceptable alternative. This medicine did not work as well, but what could I do? As my medication dwindled and the refills ran out, I was forced to make a difficult decision. With the help of my therapist, I weaned myself off the meds. I have been able to keep the depression and anxiety under control, because I have a strong support network at home and church. But how many people have that? I completely agree that mental health aid must be more accessible. Paper-pushers cannot be making decisions for health experts. Louise Walton

Let the horses decide

Foristell, Mo.: I disagree that horses should always be kept in the cold. People who have owned and loved horses know that it depends on the individual horse and the level of work in the cold. To have rules imposed on them by people who do not know horses is wrong. Most of the time horses in pasture, given the choice between staying out or going into available shelter, will choose staying out. Kathy Laramie

The first teachers

Staten Island: To Voicer Jean McTavish, principal of Edward A. Reynolds West Side High School, and Voicer Kim Sweet of Advocates for Children in New York: Nowhere do you mention parents. Respect begins at home, and if parents were to pay attention to their children’s character as they grow, teachers could spend more time teaching. You can’t take a child and pass him or her along to the schools for parenting. Maria Musolino

There’s a rat out there

Manhattan: Re “N.Y.’s killer rats”: In my Gramercy-Stuyvesant Square neighborhood, the de Blasio Department of Sanitation often does not pick up the garbage until 5 p.m. or later while simultaneously having inspectors prowl the streets to issue recycling violations. In the Bloomberg years, garbage was picked up by 8 a.m. except in emergency snow conditions. I believe this is a strategy to raise revenue by concentrating enforcement in rich Manhattan neighborhoods and away from the outer boroughs, and the mayor is allowing this social agenda to endanger the public health by encouraging rat infestation. Naresh Jessani

De Blasio, groundhog killer

Blauvelt, N.Y.: Could the seemingly endless and unusually cold winter possibly be attributed to last year’s disastrous mishandling of the groundhog? If so, we know who to blame! Jacqueline Jewett

A player philosopher

Glendale: Let’s have a big round of applause for my new hero, Daniel Murphy of the Mets. He expressed his views on the gay lifestyle (a term, by the way, which is often used by homosexuals) and didn’t back down from his Christian beliefs. Thomas Murawski

Tennis anyone?

Woodside: As an avid tennis fan, I find it frustrating to turn page after page of the sports section and hardly ever find even a line about tennis. There are tournaments going on worldwide and, if I’m lucky, I can find one line telling me who won or who is competing. With so much space given to all the other sports, can’t The News find room for a tennis column? Jean Hampsas