A federal judge in Washington, D.C., has ruled that billions of dollars in cost-sharing subsidies are not allowed under the Affordable Care Act. The ruling represents a victory for the Republican-controlled House of Representatives, which challenged the subsidies.

Judge Rosemary M. Collyer found that funding for the subsidies is not earmarked by the ACA. The cost-sharing subsidies have been used to reduce deductibles and copayments for insurance consumers whose income falls below 250 percent of the poverty line.

According to Judge Collyer’s decision, “The Affordable Care Act unambiguously appropriates money for [premium subsidies] but not for [cost-sharing subsidies]. Such an appropriation cannot be inferred.”

Collyer stayed her ruling pending the Department of Justice’s appeal to the D.C. Circuit.

The ultimate impact of the decision on insurers remains in doubt. Some analysts find that the ACA seems to compel cost-sharing reductions whether or not they are reimbursed by subsidies. Judge Collyer’s decision concurred with this interpretation, stating that the law does not “condition the insurers’ obligations to reduce cost-sharing on the receipt of offsetting payments.”

In that case, it seems likely that insurers would shift the burden to taxpayers by front-loading costs into increased tax-subsidized premiums. In either case, the elimination of deductible and co-pay subsidies would undermine the “affordable” part of the Affordable Care Act.

For now, it seems Congress has shifted its own burden, to the tune of $130 billion over the next ten years, according to an estimate by the Congressional Budget Office. The insurance industry and large employers will set their lawyers to the task of reducing costs and maximizing profits at the expense of poor and working people who will, as consumers and taxpayers, will continue to subsidize insurance industry and corporate profits.

The American Hospital Association said that Judge Collyers’s ruling “could be a setback for those who need affordable health care insurance” because of a potential impact on premiums.

And the $130 billion in federal savings? A quick glance at a pie chart of federal spending makes clear that those dollars, which could build new schools in Detroit and Chicago and replace lead service pipes in Flint, will instead be used to sail warships into Chinese waters in the South China Sea and send Hellfire missiles into wedding parties in Pakistan.

Source: Law360. “House GOP Wins Challenge to ACA Cost-Sharing Subsidies”

Photo source: lincnt.com

Join the Discussion