Richhart meets goal to walk at graduation

Jeremy Richhart-Kind, of Fleming, walks across the stage to get his diploma during NJC's commencement ceremony Friday. Richhart was injured in a car accident in 2013, leaving him paraplegic. He set a goal at the beginning of the school year to be able to walk across the stage to receive his diploma. ( Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

Jeremy Richhart's cap declared "I Will Walk," showing his dedication to being able to walk across the stage on graduation day. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

STERLING — The 72nd annual commencement ceremony Friday at Northeastern Junior College was both somber and a time for celebration, as 357 students celebrated a new chapter in their life.

Graduates mourned the loss of Morgan Burns, an NJC student who passed away earlier this week and was remembered with a moment of silence at the ceremony. But they also celebrated the huge accomplishment of another student.

Jeremy Richhart-Kind, of Fleming, was in a car accident in 2013 which left him paraplegic. Following a discussion with his automotive technology classmates last fall about how great it would be for him to walk across the stage to get his degree, he decided to make that his mission. Thanks to the help of fellow NJC student Jamie Bunk and the support of the community, he was able to achieve his goal.

Pictured are the 2015 graduates of Northeastern Junior College at the school's annual commencement ceremony Friday. NJC graduated 357 students this year. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

A smile on his face, the words "I WILL WALK" printed on his cap, with the help of two other graduates, Richhart took one step and then another, walking across the stage to receive his diploma, as cheers filled the Bank of Colorado Event Center.

Friday's ceremony started with students proceeding into the Bank of Colorado Events Center to the traditional graduation song, "Pomp and Circumstance," performed by Mary Smith, adjunct music instructor.

Alumni Mace Bearers Wendell and Jewel Sonnenberg, from the classes of 1948 and 1951, led the students in, along with Faculty/Staff Marshall Mike Vair.

After all the graduates made their way to their seats the NJC Contemporary Choir performed the National Anthem and an invocation was given by Troy Clevenger.

Advertisement

NJC President Jay Lee welcomed the students and guests and congratulated the graduates, before introducing Richard E. Martinez Jr., chair of the Colorado Community College System board of directors.

"Education is the first step in a long process of personal growth," Martinez told the graduates. "Compassion, courage and critical thinking will serve you well as you face the tough issues of our world today."

Alumni Mace Bearers Wendell and Jewel Sonnenberg, along with Faculty/Staff Marshal Mike Vair, begin the procession into the Bank of Colorado Event Center at NJC's commencement ceremony. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

He encouraged the students to treasure their education, "keep your eyes open to the world around you; always see in others what they are capable of being and becoming; inspire those around you, show them the good that can come from great education, show them above all else that they can do it to."

Martinez challenged the students to never stop learning and to "know that you have it within you to do what it takes to make the world a better place."

Denzel Stewart, 2014-15 ASG President, then spoke, thanking those who helped support him.

"Being your president has been a great honor. You all would never let me forget my role in this campus," he told his fellow graduates, recalling some of his interactions with other students on campus.

Associated Student Government President Denzek Stewart shares a few words of advice with his fellow graduates. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

He encouraged the students to hang on to the memories they've made so far and to continue to make more memories.

"Today is the youngest you will ever be, you can only make moments to remember today," Stewart said. "Thank you for all the memories NJC."

Following his speech, Dr. Ray Kilmer, president of the NJC Alumni Association board of directors, said a few words.

"Soon to be graduates, this is your day," he told the students. "We're very proud of you."

He told the graduates to reflect and look to tomorrow, ask the question "having reached this point in my life, where am I headed?"

Kilmer also encouraged them to "believe in yourselves, set out to prove a few things for yourself and others and told them to acknowledge, appreciate and benefit from the support of others, "but don't take advantage of those who believe in you."

He then presented the Pride in Association Award, which recognizes a family for their support, dedication and loyalty to NJC over the years, to the Tom and Traudi Torres family.

Several student award recipients were also acknowledged.

The Charles F. Poole Award, given to scholastic class leaders who attended NJC continuously and contributed to campus life, went to Andrea Northup (Sterling), Jim Padilla (Sterling), Jacob Piper (Hugo), Kelsey Smith (Montrose) and Tyler Vandenbark (Fleming).

The NJC Contemporary Choir perform the National Anthem, under the direction of Celeste Delgado-Pelton, during NJC's commencement ceremony. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

Additionally, the Armilda R. Dowis Award, given to an outstanding graduate in an occupational program, went to Troy Clevenger (Crook) and John Wegele (Atwood).

Lee also recognized recipients of the Griffin Foundation Scholarship, a scholarship given to students who attend community colleges. Four out of the six scholarships went to NJC students. Recipients include Brook Miller, Troy Clevenger, Drew Carlson and Kelsey Smith.

ASG officers then presented the Joel Mack Award, which goes to outstanding teachers selected by the student body, to Mike Anderson, chair of the agriculture department; Celeste Delgado-Pelton, music instructor; and Kevin Stump, math and physics instructor.

Then it was the moment the graduates had been waiting for, time to step on stage and receive their degree or certificate.

In all, NJC conferred 108 Associate of Arts, 41 Associate of General Studies, 35 Associate of Science and 109 Associated of Applied Science degrees, as well as 143 certificates.

After a benediction by Drew Carlson, as "Grand March from 'Aida'" played, performed by Mary Smith, the graduates left the event center and headed on to the next chapter of their lives.

Serving as class escorts for the ceremony were 2015-16 Associated Student Government officers John Ottoson, Hannah Clark and Spenser Dexter. Ushers were NJC Ambassadors Josi Dreher, Nicole Fischer and Matt Brower.

Callie Jones: 970-526-9286, cjones@journal-advocate.com