Customers line up to wait for Pastry chef Dominique Ansel’s bakery to open in the Manhattan after being shut down by the city. Keith Bedford for The Wall Street Journal

New York’s famed “cronut” bakery, shut down by the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene due to a “mouse infestation” Friday, reopened its doors Tuesday morning–and undeterred customers waited in long lines for the signature pastry.

Several hundred customers, including first-timers and a number of returning fans, descended onto the Dominique Ansel Bakery in SoHo to purchase the cronut, which had been put on hiatus over the weekend by the closure.

The bakery was closed Friday afternoon by inspectors from the health department, which said in a statement that an infestation was discovered that required pest control services. The store was cleared Monday after a second walk-through by the inspectors.

With a security guard posted on its doorstep, customers were brought inside the shop in groups as its owner, Dominique Ansel, greeted supporters and thanked them for returning.

“We’re back stronger than ever,” Mr. Ansel said during a lap of the line outside the shop, which extended to the corner of Spring Street and Thompson Street.

Customers were forgiving of the apparent rodent problems, saying such issues were common in big cities.

Lester Sykes, 26 years old, from Brooklyn, lined up at 6:50 a.m. and became one of the first to emerge from the shop with one of its acclaimed cronuts – described as a cross between a doughnut and a croissant.

He agreed to sample the snack in front of the waiting media, describing it as “churro-like.” But he said it probably was not worth missing his bus, which left without him minutes earlier.

“It’s good,” Mr. Sykes said, pointing out that most shops in the area have difficulties with mice. “The mice didn’t worry me. There’s mice there, and there, and there,” he said, pointing indiscriminately at nearby shops.

Jennifer Funk, 27 years old, from Utah, said she was not concerned by the mouse controversy.

“It’s a little sketchy but… I have a strong stomach.”

Others came down just to be part of the moment. Jay Randolph, a web video producer, was one of them, arriving at 6 a.m. to be at the front of the line. “I just wanted to see what the scene would be like.”