Though the U.S. government has been in lockdown since Oct. 1, on that day enrollment started for health insurance exchanges, one of the main features of the Affordable Care Act.

John Bardis, founder and CEO of medical software and services provider MedAssets (MDAS), has been warning that the exchanges are one contributing factor in a “reimbursement cliff” that health care providers are about to face. Adding to that is the longer-term trend of baby boomers joining Medicare and leaving private health insurance, which has been shouldering a disproportionate share of payments. Bardis says the shrunken revenue will make operating efficiency — which he says his company can provide — all the more crucial.

MedAssets, founded in 1999 and publicly traded since 2007, is a member of IBD’s Computer Software-Medical group. But like many of its peers such as Athenahealth (ATHN) and Cerner (CERN), it identifies less as a software vendor than as a provider of a broad range of products and services to help hospitals and clinics manage their back-office functions.

In a recent interview with IBD, Bardis explained just what MedAssets does and how it fits into the changing landscape.

IBD: Can you summarize why you think reimbursement is falling, and how MedAssets can help?

Bardis: If you go back to the foundation of Medicare, every payment for any service whatsoever was structured on a cost-plus basis. If you provide any service to Medicare, you get (reimbursed for) cost, plus an additional defined margin over cost back to the government. So we set the foundation for a never-ending process of cost increase.

Unfortunately, the private sector used the same cost infrastructure approach. So we had an arms race for costs all the way through 1983. That’s when the diagnosis-related groups system for providers was established, which put cost caps on pre-existing cost infrastructures by hospital across the country for the same procedures. (But) the result was that we had thousands of different health care providers providing the exact same procedures at thousands of different prices.

What MedAssets does in dealing with four out of five U.S. hospitals is that we understand what best practice looks like as it relates to cost of delivery, and we’re able to view the differences (between providers) in how those costs are deployed and how they’re paid for. Based on that data, we’re able to recommend courses of actions (including) the integrated coordination of care that allows more effective handoffs in the care of patients. That eliminates the silos that have been created in a cost-plus environment.

Remember, physicians were also highly incented to be volume-driven and focused only on their own level of care. They were not incented at all to coordinate the integration of care, or be concerned with how someone else was going to be paid for things that the physician wasn’t responsible for. Doctors were highly incented to produce as many units as they possibly can, at the highest price they can. The specialists’ handoff to one another was not coordinated in any way.

This new environment is getting much more focused on ensuring that the total wellness of patients leads to an outcome that they can measure and justify for the dollars that are being spent. Central to that is the coordination of care in the place (where it’s) most expensive to deliver: the hospital. We literally manage the cost of $55 billion of supply expense, but we also manage the coordination of how those particular supplies are utilized — not unlike the supply chain in relationship to an automobile, and how it’s built and is ultimately delivered to the consumer.

We coordinate the use of items with clinical interface, oftentimes led by physicians, who contemplate how a product is to be utilized in the face of available resources that they use to deliver the care, and the price of the product, with an outcome in mind. The average hospital is less than 60% in terms of its utilization of contracting price to maximum performance. There’s a great deal of coordination yet to be done, and a great opportunity to reduce the cost of care.

The nature of how health care has been paid for has been governmental and industrial. What is different about the Affordable Care Act is that the exchanges will be made up of individuals. They will, for the first time, be highly incented to acquire their health care. This is the biggest change I’m aware of since the institution of Medicare.

IBD: How does the trend of baby boomers moving to Medicare from private insurance play into this?

Bardis: (Let’s say) we were to look at a graph and just say the horizontal axis is cost (of health care). Then, when you go up above it about 70 points, that’s (what) private insurance (pays), and when you go below it 15 points, you have Medicare. What’s happening with that 170% line is that about 5,000 people a day are leaving it, and they’re going to Medicare at 85% of costs.

And 7 million people this year (are projected to join) the new exchanges, and potentially within the next five years, 20 million or more. Those exchanges were priced at what we believe is substantially below that 170% level.

IBD: How is MedAssets differentiated from its competitors in terms of dealing with this environment?

Bardis: We not only know how to execute the best practice, but we know how to provide the data analytics that bracket it, so that we can continue to provide insight every day on how their current performance and resource management is comparing to best practice. We constantly cycle through the use of that data in order to evolve best practice, and provide the benchmark.

In a very defined time frame, we’re able to make commitments to cost reductions that are very specific, and then we achieve them. Over and above our traditional ability to drive down costs, we’ve done over $3 billion of identified and guaranteed savings. We’ve never missed a number.

IBD: Is the revenue cycle management, or bill collecting, side of the business also differentiated? There are a number of other companies that offer that service.

Bardis: We do a great deal of work to coordinate payment with clinical expectation in contracts. So payors provide contracts for providers to do the delivery-of-care work. We coordinate that delivery of care with payment in a way that rationalizes the rules as to how value is derived. So it’s not strictly about revenue — it’s about getting the right payment for the right expected outcome.

Revenue cycle management is a very relevant factor in doing the work that we do, because it continues to require the use of work-flow enhancement to make sure you’re managing revenue process more efficiently (and) the documentation required for how payor contracts work.