Topics: 2016 Elections, Bernie Sanders, Chuck Schumer, Hillary Clinton, Mark Kirk, Mitch McConnell, Ron Johnson, russ feingold, Tammy Duckworth, U.S. Senate, Elections News, Politics News

Over at the Washington Post, Paul Waldman notes the Capitol-sized elephant in the room that the candidates in Tuesday night’s Democratic debate could not honestly address: Should you win the presidency, how are you going to work with a Congress full of chowder-headed nihilistic conservatives who see opposing your agenda not as a difference of political opinion, but as the defining battle in determining the course of Western civilization?

Okay, Waldman was not that apocalyptic. But the question, which was directed at Bernie Sanders, reminds us that all the attention paid so far to the presidential primaries has obscured one that is just as consequential to the success of a Hillary Clinton or Bernie Sanders presidency: Which party will control the Senate after 2016, and how effective will it be in working with a Democratic president?

Conventional wisdom has it that Democrats have a good chance of retaking the Senate majority just two years after losing it in the 2014 midterms. Of the 34 seats up for grabs, 24 belong to Republicans, some of whom were swept into office in the 2010 Tea Party wave and could get swept right back out again if the voting public decides it has seen enough of that crowd’s government-by-temper-tantrum ethos.

If Democrats can snare a net gain of four seats (five if there’s a GOP president), they will control the Senate. With the House of Representatives a lost cause for the party until congressional district maps get redrawn after the 2020 census, the fate of any major legislation pushed by a Democratic president will rest in the upper chamber. As anyone who recalls the push to pass Obamacare knows, those first two years are when a new president has the best chance of pushing big-ticket items, so Clinton or Sanders will want to push legislation before the 2018 midterms roll around and possibly give the Senate back to the GOP.

There are some Republican-held seats that are vulnerable to Democratic challenges. In Illinois, the native state of Hillary Clinton and adopted home of Barack Obama, Rep. Tammy Duckworth has an excellent chance to knock off Sen. Mark Kirk. (She must first get past a spirited primary challenge from former Chicago Urban League president Andrea Zopp.) In Wisconsin, former Senator Russ Feingold could take the seat he lost in 2010 back from Ron Johnson, whose major accomplishments in office involve mostly sounding like a snarky jackass, a job usually better left to political opinion writers. Democrats also have a good shot at picking up currently Republican-held seats in New Hampshire, Florida and Ohio.