South Africa

A surfing event in South Africa had to be called off on Sunday after the defending champion was attacked by sharks.

Mick Fanning of Australia was competing in the World Surf League competition at Jeffreys Bay on the eastern Cape, when a shark approached his surfboard.

"And then, all of a sudden, I started getting pulled underwater. And then the thing came up. And I was on my board and it was right there. I saw the whole thing just thrashing around, but I was getting dragged under by my leg rope and then I felt like it kicked me off, but it was still there going - I was still attached to my board," Fanning said.

Fanning, a triple world champion, was knocked off his surfboard and into the sea moments after the final of the J-Bay Open had begun.

Fanning escaped injury and the event was abandoned soon afterwards.

His opponent in the final, compatriot Julian Wilson, was also rescued.

The waters off the Cape are well known for sharks.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.