Get Covered Illinois, the organization created to promote health insurance sold under the federal Affordable Care Act, said Wednesday it is eliminating most of its staff in a move the group attributed to decreased federal funding.

The organization led efforts to sign people up for coverage through the health law's first and second open enrollment periods, producing commercials and overseeing hundreds of federal enrollment specialists known as navigators.

The federal government reduced funding this year for many states that use the HealthCare.gov exchange to sell insurance plans after supporting the states in the exchange's first two years.

The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services awarded Get Covered Illinois about $115 million in 2013 that the organization drew on during the first and second enrollment periods. The organization received an additional $10 million in November for 2015.

In total, the state's Department of Insurance has received about $150 million in grants to support enrollment, outreach and technical functions of the exchange, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation, a nonprofit that focuses on health care research.

Get Covered Illinois had coordinated efforts of nonprofits around the state that used grant-funded navigators to find people without insurance and sign them up. The group will continue to operate a call center where people can get help enrolling six days per week.

Consumers can also consult insurance brokers, who receive commissions from the insurance companies rather than being supported by federal funds.

"Entering year three, we will be operating with less federal funding than in previous years and have reduced our staffing levels," Get Covered Illinois Chief Marketing Officer Jose Munoz said in a statement. "Get Covered Illinois remains committed to offering education and enrollment assistance to Illinois consumers."

Fifteen positions were eliminated, while three top administrators, along with call center and IT staff, will stay on. Karin Zosel, who was announced by Gov. Bruce Rauner as the organization's director in March, will remain. The last day for those losing their jobs is July 31, according to one affected employee.

On Thursday the Illinois Department of Insurance said it will absorb Get Covered Illinois, which has been part of the governor's office. The department will maintain the Get Covered Illinois website, its help desk and an in-person assistance program, according to a department news release.

Some states have chosen to replace the federal dollars with state funds, said Ceci Connolly, managing director of the PwC consulting firm's Health Research Institute.

"Maryland and Vermont, for instance, are using state dollars for consumer outreach," Connolly said. "California and a few others are charging insurers fees to run the exchanges. And a few state-based exchanges have gone back to their legislatures requesting additional money to continue operations."

About 294,000 Illinoisans had health plans bought through the federal marketplace as of the end of March, according to the most recent federal enrollment data. More than 700,000 Illinoisans have signed up for Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act's expansion of the program.

This story was produced in partnership with Kaiser Health News, an editorially independent program of the Kaiser Family Foundation.

wjventeicher@tribpub.com

Twitter @wesventeicher