Detroit 3, union to look at ways to mitigate levy on top benefits

Buy Photo UAW President Dennis Williams speaks during the Ford and UAW official start of contract talks gathering at Cass Technical High School in Detroit on Thursday, July 23, 2015. Regina H. Boone/Detroit Free Press (Photo: Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo

Organized labor generally supports President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act, but there's one part of it unions and many others simply loathe, and it could become a key point of debate in upcoming UAW negotiations.

Beginning in 2018, any individual health insurance plan costing more than $10,200 annually, or any family plan costing more than $27,500, will be subject to a 40% tax on the amount over those thresholds.

That would apply to the current UAW plan, which has no deductibles for those hired before 2007 and feature comparatively generous benefits. The next UAW contract could stretch beyond 2018, and so the tax will likely be a point of negotiation this year as the UAW looks for a compromise to cover extra costs because of the tax.

UAW workers won't be the ones paying the tax. Health insurers will be assessed, or in the case of self-insured companies, it will fall to the employer. Even so, the assumption is that insurers will pass on the cost through higher premiums.

"I don't think it’s very fair of the U.S. government to penalize people for having a good health care plan," UAW President Dennis Williams said in June.

On that the two sides agree, with General Motors, Ford and FCA also saying it's unfair to punish companies that provide better-than-average health care insurance. We're talking about real money. For example, an individual health care plan costing, say, $15,000 a year, would trigger a tax of $1,920 (40% of the $4,800 over $10,200). A family plan costing, say, $33,000 a year, would incur a tax of $2,200 (40% of $5,500).

It's not just about the UAW. The Cadillac tax affects those with jobs that offer high-end plans and their employers. So whether it’s a union that bargained for low-deductible, high-benefit plans, industry executives with amazing benefits, or anyone who pays a few dollars for their prescriptions and a small fraction of a hospital bill, they likely will be faced with the tax or a higher premium because of it.

One of the goals of the ACA is to reduce the cost of the most generous health care plans and replace it with taxable income. There are more than two years before the tax takes effect and the law could change during that time.

As it stands now, the tax would raise about $87 billion between 2018 and 2025, the Congressional Budget Office estimates. That revenue will help pay for the subsidized, but less-generous plans now covering millions of people who previously were uninsured.

"This is a tax that no one wants to pay," said Larry Levitt, senior vice president of the Kaiser Family Foundation, a health policy research organization in Menlo Park, Calif. Adding to the pain for employers is that the tax is not deductible to partially offset their larger corporate tax obligations.

Gold standard

There's no doubt the UAW health care plan for Tier 1 workers — those hired before 2007 — has been the Cadillac standard in terms of generous benefits.

For example, there are unlimited doctor's office visits with a $25 co-pay ($20 at Ford). Visits to urgent centers or emergency rooms carry co-pays of $50 and $100, respectively.

Prescription drug co-pays are $6 for generics, $12 for brand names and $17 for erectile dysfunction drugs. Mail order co-pays are higher, but one gets larger quantities by mail.

UAW members hired before 2007 pay no deductibles or co-insurance contributions, with one exception. Choosing a doctor outside the preferred provider network will mean the member pays 20% above the first $100 of service.

Those hired since 2007 — Tier 2 workers — pay $300 deductibles for individual coverage and families pay a $600 deductible. In addition, Tier 2 individual plans carry a 10% co-insurance contribution up to $700 a year, with family plans incurring co-insurance of up to $1,400 a year.

The automakers don't break down their UAW workers' health insurance premium costs by family and individual, but data from each company show that they spend on average $14,800 per worker, including both single and family plans.

Most Tier 2 workers plans will not be subjected to the Cadillac tax, said Kristin Dziczek, director of Ann Arbor's Center for Automotive Research industry and labor group, because those plans cost below the threshold.

Negotiations this year occur against the back-drop of two opposing ideas.

The UAW says workers gave wage concessions and sacrificed during the GM and Chrysler bankruptcies and it's time for the automakers to give back now that they are making record profits and breaking sales records in North America.

The automakers argue that the industry goes in cycles and they cannot afford to slide backwards into the bad habits that led to UAW contracts of the 1990s and early 2000s that increased Detroit Three labor rates far beyond Asian and German automakers with non-unionized plants in the U.S.

Those higher labor rates were among many factors that led to the Detroit Three’s financial troubles. The concessions that the UAW agreed to in 2007 and 2011 have only recently brought labor costs closer to their non-unionized rivals.

The union formally began negotiations with FCA, GM and Ford in July in advance of the Sept. 14 expiration date of a four-year contract with all three automakers.

Negotiating options for the UAW and automakers for dealing with the Cadillac tax:

Raise wages: First, automakers and the UAW could agree to raise wages, or pay a lump sum in 2018 (and 2019 if they reach another four-year agreement) by an amount roughly equal to the amount of the tax. Workers would pay the tax on the increased income, but at a rate considerably less than 40%.

Reduce benefits: Raising wages reduces the impact on workers, but it doesn't provide the companies any relief. For that the UAW would have to agree to bring the cost of their plans below $10,200 for individuals and $27,500 for family coverage. That would mean accepting higher co-pays and deductibles, less generous benefits or a combination of all three.

Pool resources: Williams floated the idea in a June interview of combining the three automakers' 140,000 active UAW workers, and possibly non-union salaried workers, into one insurance pool to save money.

"We have 607,000 retirees in our VEBA — a special trust established to insure retired UAW members — 140,000 active. Another 150,000 salaried. If you pool that, that's a pretty good number. I'd be wiling to go to the bargaining table with those numbers," Williams said.

While that may be a conversation starter, it's not clear that such a pool would reduce the cost of coverage low enough to avoid the tax without UAW members contributing more toward the health care they use than the 6% to 8% they currently pay.

The law's intention in the long run is not to collect more revenue, but to reduce the amount of health care that people use. By paying more of the cost, consumers will be more selective in seeking treatment, said Roberta Watson, head of employee benefits practice with the Wagner Law Group, which has offices in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., Boston and San Francisco.

“The theory is that if people have more skin in the game they will put downward pressure on the cost of medical care,” Watson said.

Trade-offs needed

A solution will require a major trade-off on both sides. The companies may have to raise base wages of those hired before 2007, something they have not done in nearly a decade.

For the UAW the solution may require sacrificing the bountiful medical coverage that has been sold in recent contracts as a trade-off for the absence of raises.

Another option would be to limit the new contract to two years through the fall of 2017 and hope they can lobby Congress and the next administration to amend or repeal the tax.

But now that the ACA has survived two Supreme Court challenges, repealing the tax is unlikely, said Kaiser Family Foundation's Levitt, who adds that many non-union workers and their employers will face the tax beginning in 2018.

"Unions are facing these issues sooner because these negotiations are happening now," Levitt said.

But the framework of collective bargaining may lead to a more balanced solution.

“In the union setting, there’s more of a chance the company ends up offsetting the higher deductibles and co-pays by raising wages," said Watson.

Contact Greg Gardner: (313) 222-8762 or ggardner@freepress.com. Follow him on Twitter @GregGardner12

The Cadillac tax

What is it?

A permanent, non-deductible, annual tax beginning in 2018 on high-cost employer-sponsored health coverage.

Purpose

Reduce tax preferred treatment of employer provided health care

Reduce excess health care spending by employees and employers

Help finance the expansion of health coverage

How much?

The tax is 40% of the cost of health coverage that exceeds predetermined threshold amounts.

Cost of coverage includes the total contributions paid by both the employer and employees, but not cost-sharing amounts such as deductibles, coinsurance and co-pays when care is received.

For planning purposes, the thresholds for high-cost plans are currently $10,200 for individual coverage, and $27,500 for family coverage.

These thresholds will be updated for 2018 when final regulations are issued and thereafter indexed for inflation in future years.

The thresholds will also be increased:1) If the majority of covered employees are engaged in specified high-risk professions such as law enforcement and construction, and 2) for group demographics including age and gender.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1NE05Aw