Barack Obama has side-stepped the Constitution far too many times in his two terms as President. Earlier this month, even, the South Dakota Republican party petitioned the U.S. House of Representatives to begin impeachment proceedings for just that and a host of other reasons.

The president has sought to put into action by executive order that would circumvent congressional approval and require background checks on certain gun sales. Former House Majority Leader, Tom DeLay, has already said that if that were to occur the House should consider impeachment proceedings immediately.

It was reported that Obama was considering the move after the incident on October 1st wherein Christopher Harper-Mercer attacked a school and left nine dead and nine injured at Umpqua Community College in Roseburg, Oregon.

The order would necessitate high-volume gun dealers to perform background checks on buyers. It would be a unilateral decision by Obama about a major issue in the gun rights debate and for that, DeLay is insisting on nothing but impeachment.

DeLay, who has also served as Majority Whip, says that bringing a presidential order like that to the attention of the Judiciary Committee is “a very healthy thing to do,” he also comments that Congress needs to stand against any kind of unilateral action by Obama.

DeLay is also encouraging congress to do more than just point out one issue, he says, “The House needs to use its power of hearing to start letting the American people know that this is a lawless president, we have a lawless Supreme Court,”

He isn’t wrong. Obama has violated his oath of office many times over. He lied to Americans about what ObamaCare meant to their health insurance, he has begun a war on the coal industry, and countless other infringements litter his terms.

We shouldn’t be lauding his presidency at the end the way you’re meant to say something nice about any scumbag at his funeral, but instead we should be standing behind Obama’s wrongdoings and setting the precedent that the American people hold their leaders accountable to their actions.

Tell us what you think in our poll below.

Should Barack Obama be impeached? Yes

No View Results