Topics: From the Wires, News

ST. CLAIRSVILLE, Ohio (AP) — As states rethink the use of solitary confinement to punish unruly inmates, a prisons oversight group is reshaping national accreditation standards to ease such procedures.

Proposals range from mandatory health care visits and mental illness treatment for inmates in segregation to more time out of cells for recreation and education.

“The punishment that we give to Americans is deprivation of their liberty, but it doesn’t mean that we try to punish them more while their liberty is deprived,” said James Gondles, executive director of the American Correctional Association.

In Michigan, the state’s 7-year-old Incentives in Segregation program has led to reductions in misbehavior by inmates whose good behavior is rewarded with privileges in a step system.

Last month, New York prison officials agreed to overhaul their use of solitary confinement, offering a broad slate of reforms aimed at reducing the number of inmates sent to “the box.” In September, California said it would end its unlimited isolation of imprisoned gang leaders, restricting a practice that once kept hundreds of inmates in notorious segregation units for a decade or longer.

Also in September, the Association of State Correctional Administrators issued a report calling prolonged isolation of inmates in jails and prisons “a grave problem in the United States.”

Critics of rigid solitary confinement say it’s a dehumanizing form of punishment that increases inmates’ anxiety and anger, strips them of social contact necessary to interact safely with others, and makes it harder for inmates to integrate back into the general prison population and, upon release, society.

Inmates sent to solitary should be prisoners “we’re afraid of, not mad at,” said Gary Mohr, director of the Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and Correction.

Mohr and Rick Raemisch, the Colorado prisons director, are developing the new American Correctional Association standards based on changes they’re pushing at home.

A 2014 Colorado law bans the placement of inmates with serious mental illnesses in solitary confinement. That law was enacted after the fatal 2013 shooting of Tom Clements, then the state’s prisons director, by a former inmate who had been released after spending much of his sentence in solitary confinement.

Ex-Ohio inmate Johnny Hairston says anything is better than the traditional approach to segregation.

Hairston, 59, said he spent many days “in the hole” during 15 years in and out of several Ohio prisons on drug trafficking, forgery and robbery charges. Usually he was sent down for fighting, he says.