Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share From November 2015 -- Kynect "adds no value" that the federal exchange doesn't provide, said Matt Bevin at a press conference in Frankfort. Matt Stone, The Courier-Journal

Buy Photo Matt Bevin (Photo: CJ file photo)Buy Photo

Kentuckians should have a clearer picture about where their state is headed this Tuesday night.

That’s the day that the filing deadline for Republicans and Democrats seeking office in 2016 passes, and it’s also the day that Gov. Matt Bevin will deliver his first budget address – the most important speech of his political career.

With the filing deadline, we’ll learn a little bit about the quality of candidates as the Republicans try to take control of the Kentucky House of Representatives for the first time since 1921.

We’ll see if there are any districts where Democratic incumbents have decided not to seek another term – a key fact that could make the GOP’s job much easier.

LIKE US ON FACEBOOK

And we’ll also learn about any Democratic challenger to Sen. Rand Paul. After others, including former Auditor Adam Edelen and Louisville lawyer Andrew Horne, have taken passes on the race, it appears that the most likely to jump into the fray is Lexington’s mayor, Jim Gray, who made a fortune running his family’s construction business.

If that comes to pass, we’ll learn if Kentucky’s voters are as progressive as those in Lexington who chose Gray as their mayor in 2010 knowing that he is gay.

And while that electoral stuff is important, clearly the biggest thing will be Bevin’s budget address in which he’ll lay out his spending priorities for the next two years – and more clearly define his thinking about the role of government.

Democrats are hopeful that he follows the model of Kansas Gov. Sam Brownback, who was about as popular as a pet skunk last fall when a couple of pollsters found that only between 18 and 26 percent of Jayhawks approved of the job he is doing.

Think about that. In a red state like Kansas – which brought us people like Bob Dole, Alf Landon and Dwight Eisenhower - President Barack Obama is more popular than its Republican Governor.

Brownback accomplished that amazing feat by pushing through a tax cut while slashing government programs. He cut education programs as well as the state’s road fund – which in turn forced some local communities to raise taxes to pay for services that Kansas would no longer fund.

He slashed healthcare for children and people with low incomes, reduced funding for veterans affairs, delayed the implementation of a computer system that would have helped state workers determine who was eligible for family services. He instituted education cuts as well as tourism cuts.

He did away with the Kansas Arts Commission and laid off its staff and caused the state to lose hundreds of thousands of dollars in federal grants – before public uproar forced him to create a new arts agency and restore some funding.

The social media rumor mill in Kentucky cranked up last week with allegations that Bevin plans to zero-out funding for the Kentucky Arts Council.

The Council provides grants for artistic endeavors across Kentucky. It funds gems like the Paramount Arts Center in Ashland, the Mountain Arts Center in Prestonsburg, Appalshop in Whitesburg and the Carson Center in Paducah.

It funds public school arts programs and helps artists to pursue their crafts.

Closer to home, it gives grants to the Louisville Orchestra, the Louisville Ballet, the Kentucky Opera Association, the Speed Museum, the StageOne Family Theatre and Actors Theatre of Louisville, among others.

The Bevin administration has refused to comment on the cuts, which leads one to believe there is, at least, a sliver of truth to it.

If the rest of the cuts are as painful, Democrats may have found the issues on which to run their 2016 campaigns.

MORE NEWS AND COMMENTARY ABOUT GOV. BEVIN

Joseph Gerth can be reached at (502) 582-4702 or jgerth@courier-journal.com. His mailing address is 525 W. Broadway, P.O. Box 740031, Louisville, KY 40201-7431. Follow him on twitter at @Joe_Gerth.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1VgrMmt