The 2015 Colorado legislative session is the history book. Republicans controlled the Senate for the first time in a decade. Gov. John Hickenlooper was more engaged than before and even hinted at a veto. And there were all sorts of folks who made a name for themselves, and issues that stood out.

Some of them made it into The Denver Post today in separate winners-and-losers package — one from the Capitol team and one from the opinion section — but there are plenty more observations. Read on:

Sen. Mike Johnston, D-Denver: Whether it’s reducing education testing, police reforms or complicated financial issues, Johnston seems to have his knowledgeable fingers in a lot of pies. And wearing his late father’s suit was a tender touch.

Becker & Becker: What sounds like a law firm is actually two House members, Republican Jon Becker of Fort Morgan and Democrat KC Becker of Boulder, who are known for their effectiveness. Jon knows the budget inside and out, having once served on the JBC — and it shows. KC has a strong background in land and water use and local government — and it shows.

Sen. John Cooke, R-Greeley: As the Weld County sheriff, Cooke made a name for himself at the state Capitol in 2013 fighting Democratic gun-control bills. As a new senator, the Greeley lawmaker has stood out in plenty of ways. He sponsored a felony DUI bill that finally passed and he signed on to some of the police-reform measures. Cooke is known for his sense of humor and for being a nice guy. A favorite newcomer, for sure.

Former Rep. Mark Waller, R-Colorado Springs: During his six years in the legislature he pushed for a felony DUI bill, which finally passed this session. It doesn’t have his name on it but it clearly has his stamp on it.

Rep. Gordon Klingenschmitt, R-Colorado Springs: While the freshman lived up to the controversy he was expected to generate — even being admonished by his fellow Republicans for a controversial statement concerning a ghastly crime in Longmont, he got a lot of atta boys for turning the dull, daily reading of the journal into something interesting by channeling The Beatles’ “Yesterday” and for poking fun of himself during the annual Hummers show, where the minority party spoofs the majority party.

“Make My Day (insert word here):” It was then-state Rep. Cory Gardner who coined the phrase “Make My Day Better” back in 2006 when asked about his measure to extend deadly-force protections to businesses. Gardner’s now a U.S. senator; the bill keeps getting introduced by Republicans but fails to pass; and House Democrats have their own clever nickname: “Make My Day Bloody.”

Rep. Crisanta Duran, D-Denver: Her ability to work across the aisle this session as the powerful House majority leader took people by surprise, considering her sometimes testy work on the Joint Budget Committee. The new, improved Duran worked with Republicans on workforce development and other issues.

Throw Back Thursday #TBT: Senate Democrats had some fun with their Thursday press releases, where they blasted Senate Republicans for “Moving Colorado Backward” and came up with delightfully snarky names for GOP bills, including “The ‘Mr. Gorbachev, Tear Down those Windmills’ Act,” for a bill to repeal a renewable-energy standards for rural Colorado.

Sen. Pat Steadman, D-Denver: In early February, he summed up the divided legislature and what would come of it in a line that resonated: “You get the feeling it’s going to be a Shakespearean tragedy, and at the end of Act V all the characters are going to be dead on the stage.” Not all were, but enough did fall on their sword.

Chief Justice Nancy Rice: The annual state of the judiciary report tickled lawmakers when she called a spade a spade, saying some of the courthouses needed to repaired, including one where judges chairs are covered in bat poop. Only she didn’t say poop.

Sen. Rollie Heath, D-Boulder: The behind-the-scenes lawmaker, who had a hand on bills ranging from workforce development to student testing, in a just a few clever words took on GOP Sen. Laura Woods’ bill to overturn workplace discrimination laws for small businesses to eliminate gender, ethnicity, sexual orientation as factors but not age. Heath said the bill then would apply only to him, a white guy in his 70s.

Sen. Kerry Donovan, D-Vail: She also made a name as a freshman, particularly for her efforts to fight for rural Colorado, whether it was renewable energy or economic development. And the Capitol fell in love with her dog, Lewis, who got so many treats his percentage of weight gain for the session might have matched mine.

Oil and gas: The industry won big time by stealing away Gov. John Hickenlooper’s lobbyist, Tracee Bentley, midway through the session. Also, contentious industry legislation was sidelined, thanks to split chambers and the governor’s task force.

“Hi, Lynn!” Dan Brown is the first person to greet visitors to the Senate GOP office; Susan Raplee to the House GOP office. Both make their offices a fun place to visit.

Rep. Bob Rankin, R-Carbondale: As a member of the JBC he helped craft the budget, and then worked to get state elected officials their first raise in 20 years. He did it all in such a way that he has earned a reputation as a statesman.

Yogis: The legislature ended a requirement that yoga teacher-training studios be state certified after yoga teachers testified it was more of a calling than a vocation. As a bonus, Sen. Owen Hill, R-Colorado Springs, performed the “crow” position on the committe table after the bill passed.

Rep. Yuellin Willett, R-Grand Junction: He didn’t support the school liability bill named for slain senior Claire Davis, but his respectful speech on why he opposed the measure made people take notice of him, again. Another strong freshman in a crowd of strong freshmen.

The president and the speaker: President Bill Cadman, R-Colorado Springs, and House Speaker Dickey Lee Hullinghorst, D-Boulder, learned the hard way that overseeing a chamber and a caucus can be a little bit like herding cats. At times, they shone, at times they stumbled.

U.S. Sen. Michael Bennet: Senate Republicans looked petty when it was learned they killed the initial Denver Public Schools pension bill because Bennet had been the former superintendent and the Democrat was running for re-election in 2016. The brouhaha revealed the bond deal he oversaw left the district’s pension system in good shape, funded at 86 percent compared to other school districts at 66 percent.

Joey Bunch and John Frank, Denver Post: My two colleagues at the Capitol filled in when I went home to care for a sick dad and then to bury him. I will forever be grateful.