Email opinions@newsiom.co.im

----------------------

Unions back new arrangements

In June Tynwald will be discussing the future public sector pension arrangements for the Isle of Man.

The majority of trade unions support new arrangements for the future. Union members have not been found lacking in their commitment to ensure there is a fair and sustainable scheme for the future; members understand the need to pay more in and to receive a reduced level of benefits in the future than they do now.

They will also be involved in ‘cost sharing’ arrangements to ensure that the scheme remains sustainable and affordable. Current and future arrangements are not dissimilar to other public sector schemes in the United Kingdom.

Our members provide professional care and support to the island’s population. It is recognised that the island needs more people to come and work there and that the health service needs to be attractive to health professionals to move from the UK. To date, this has been possible by the Isle of Man offering similar pension arrangements to the UK. If that situation changes for the worse health care professionals will not want to put their future financial security at risk by moving to the Isle of Man. We are already getting to hear that the lack of clarity about future pension provision has already resulted in difficulties in filling some roles – this lack of clarity should not be allowed to continue.

We would ask MHKs to recognise the significant amount of work that has been done to make future pension benefits sustainable and affordable and to support the proposed arrangements at its meeting in June.

Gerry O’Dwyer, the Royal College of Nursing (RCN)

The British Medical Association (BMA)

The Society of Radiographers (SoR)

The Hospital Consultants and Specialists Association (HCSA)

The Chartered Society of Physiotherapy (CSP)

The Society of Chiropodists and Podiatrists (SCPOD)

The Royal College of Midwives (RCM)

----------------------

Commission is ‘unlawful’

In today’s letter I reveal how all of the delegations of functions made by the Public Services Commission since it was formed are unlawful.

Copies of the delegations arrived in my post in a brown envelope, but without any indication as to who had sent them, after I had submitted a request to be provided with copies of them through an electronic contact form addressed to the commission.

I found out later that they had been sent by the Office of Human Resources, but only after my request had been directed to the IoM Financial Supervision Authority and only after it had been suggested to me that I should submit a Freedom of Information request even though the commission is not covered by the Freedom of Information Act!

In a letter to me, one of the island’s two Acting Attorney Generals, Mr John Quinn, had helpfully set out the minimum essential requirements which a delegation must have for it to be lawful, which included the requirements that it must –

(1) identify a person to whom the delegation is made;

(2) be signed by the person making the delegation.

Armed with his advice I wrote to Mr Quinn and provided him with my analysis of 13 delegations made by the commission and asked him if he agreed with me that for the reasons which I explained to him at length and in great detail, all of the delegations were unlawful because the requirements set out above hadn’t been satisfied and that in some of the cases the delegations might be forgeries as the commission hadn’t authorised the delegations.

In doing so I cited in particular a delegation to ‘Certain employees and officers of the commission’ and ‘Certain employees of departments, boards and offices of government’ – I mean, how do you identify who such people are? I pointed out also that all bar one of the delegations were unsigned and concluded that without a signature the delegations were simply worthless pieces of paper.

I asked Mr Quinn whether or not he agreed with my conclusion that all of the delegations were unlawful, but, never being one to shirk the opportunity of sitting on the fence, Mr Quinn has now responded to me, but has neither confirmed nor denied that my conclusions that the delegations are unlawful is correct.

In his reply he said that ‘If the formalities surrounding the execution of the documents or the “officeholder” reference terms used within delegations are in issue in any particular case then it will be a matter for a competent tribunal if ever asked to assess whether the formalities relating to the delegations detract from its plainly intended substantive effect”, knowing full well that it is unlikely that anyone will ever test the illegality or otherwise of the delegations before a competent tribunal.

If the plainly intended substantive effect is all that is required for a delegation to be lawful then why did he set out the essential minimum requirements referred to above?

He didn’t make any mention, of course, of the delegations to ‘certain employees’ or to the fact that the commission hadn’t authorised some of the delegations and he didn’t make comment on my suggestion that for this reason some of the delegations might be forgeries.

I rest my case.

Trevor Cowin, Poortown Road, Peel.

----------------------

Find tram-less towns elsewhere

In response to the letter in the Manx Independent of May 12 ‘Traffic jams with the horse trams’.

The Horse Trams reply

‘Promenade’ is French for ‘walkway’,

Four legs or two unsaid.

But, impatient, hurried, stressed, alone

You prefer your car instead.

What happened to Manx friendliness?

What price is traa dy liooar?

After fourteen decades service

Don’t you want me anymore?

What about your children’s children?

And the tourists who have fun?

Will they be pleased you stopped the trams?

Will they still want to come?

You complain I slow the traffic,

But the problem’s lots of cars.

And visitors who ride on me

Spend cash in shops and bars.

If you make the horses homeless

Tourists may stay away

For tram-less, dull and car-full towns

They can get in the UK.

Sara Goodwins, Dreemskerry Hill, Maughold.

----------------------

Liverpool Airport bottom of heap

I have travelled the world extensively and have passed through dozens of airports - some excellent and some not very pleasant - but I have always considered that Liverpool Airport is at the very bottom of the heap when it comes to to customer service and the inconvenience which passengers have to suffer.

If unlucky with the plane’s stand upon arrival it is necessary to walk almost the full length of the terminal building outside exposed to whatever the weather has to offer, then go up on to the first floor only to be faced with the same walk in the opposite direction to arrive back just above the plane’s stand again.

This is a nonsense and an ordeal for elderly people or for anybody with a mobility difficulty.

If being met by car, the charge to enter the pick-up area for just a couple of minutes is a complete rip-off.

When flying out of this airport, the manipulative manner in which passengers have no option but to follow the winding path through the shopping outlets is annoyingly cynical but the passenger experience goes rapidly downhill from there on.

At some departure gates passengers have to queue in a narrow passageway and - after being processed - are corralled like cattle in a small space where no seating is provided.

Then, when the gate opens, passengers may think their ordeal is finally over, but no - they are then left to stand on a metal stairway up which a gale is often blowing and again with no seating provided.

The overall experience was better years ago when the Isle of Man flights used a glorified Portakabin as a departure lounge/gate.

This week I accompanied a relative to Walton Centre Hospital for a consultation with a specialist – she is in constant pain and has very limited mobility and the airline was aware that she was unable to use the aircraft steps and would require the mobile lift each end to get on and off.

The outward flight went without a hitch; the nightmare started when we returned to the airport for the early evening flight home.

The young woman at the check-in desk was chewing gum and was more interested in the screen of her smartphone than the passengers.

She asked no security questions and communicated in monosyllables; she was obviously totally unsuited for any job involving dealing with the general public.

We were hungry and had little time before the flight so we opted for the Burger King outlet in the departure area.

This was a big mistake; every table and areas of the floor were covered in old food debris and general rubbish. It was obvious that no attempt had been made to clear up for hours.

Some advertised food and drink items were not available and when the member of staff behind the counter was asked what on earth was going on he just replied ‘we are way understaffed’.

A stag party of drunken youths were in the outlet and were amusing themselves by shouting obscenities at each other despite the presence there of families with young children.

Later on we saw another stag party in the bar area.

They were drunken, rowdy, foul-mouthed and well out of order.

Despite this the bar staff continued to serve them more over-priced lager just as quickly as they could pour it.

Numbers of young men and hen party females were wandering unsteadily around the departure area openly swigging alcohol in full view of the few police officers that were there.

Their only reaction was to shake their heads and it was clear that this was just the typical behaviour that they witness on a daily basis.

When we were waiting at our departure gate a drunken youth at the next gate started to physically and verbally abuse a girl who appeared to be his partner. He grabbed her by the scruff of her neck while he screamed obscenities into her face.

The numerous passengers at the gate did nothing to help but a few did get their phones out and start taking photos.

I saw a security officer standing nearby who was also doing nothing about the situation – I advised him in the strongest terms that he should start doing his job before the girl was hurt at which he got on the radio and a number of police officers arrived on the scene in short order.

The yob was stopped from flying but it is clearly unacceptable that other passengers should have to get involved in such situations.

It is also completely irresponsible for alcohol outlets in this airport to permit passengers to become abusively drunk when they know full well that they are about to board flights and make life a misery for their fellow travellers.

To round off the experience, the mobile lift to board the aircraft was not available because ‘we are short-staffed and everybody has gone home’. My relative was told that she could struggle up the steps as best she could and entirely at her own risk. There was no alternative but for her to do so in considerable pain.

A senior Manx politician was on our flight and must have seen some of the drunken behaviour for himself (I did not see him in Burger King).

Perhaps it is time he had a word with a certain HNWI and tell him that his miserable airport is not good enough for people from the Isle of Man and, furthermore, that behaviour that is considered normal - nay compulsory - on the main drag in Magaluf is not acceptable in what purports to be a major UK airport.

Name and address supplied