Colorado continues to be at the vanguard of novel social and policy experiments. Recreational marijuana was legalized a few years ago, for better or for worse. Following the Paris terrorist attacks, Gov. Hickenlooper wanted to bring more Syrian refugees to Colorado.

Next November, a single-payer health care plan will be on the ballot for Colorado voters to approve or not.

What is single payer? Simple. It means one single entity replacing all existing insurance plans in the state, the same entity paying all insurance claims. All existing types of insurance, meaning Obamacare exchange plans, employer-based insurance, Medicare and Medicaid all wrapped up into the new plan called ColoradoCare.

Some call this “government-run health care” and shudder at the thought. Never mind that Medicare, Medicaid and the VA are government run health care plans. ColoradoCare isn’t technically government run, but instead would be administered by an elected 21-member board. But how is an elected insurance board member different from any other elected government official?

Cost would be $25 billion, the same as the current state budget. If the state budget is doubled, the money has to come from somewhere. Somewhere means taxpayers.

ColoradoCare will be paid for by a 10 percent payroll tax, 1/3 paid by employees, 2/3 by employers. Self employed? You pay for it all. The current Colorado income tax rate is a flat 4.63 percent, meaning your state tax bill may more than triple.

Will this mean free health care? Not quite. ColoradoCare has no copays or deductibles on primary and preventative care, but copays would remain on other services and prescriptions. This is what all commercial and Obamacare plans provide now, by law. So this new plan will cost more for the same benefits.

Has single payer been tried elsewhere? It was tried in Vermont but scrapped before being implemented due to high costs and a necessary 11.5 percent payroll tax, which would have crippled its economy. Ironically, Vermont is a solid blue state represented by declared socialist Sen. Bernie Sanders. Should have been a slam-dunk in Vermont, at least until economic realities interfered.

How about marijuana? Can’t those revenues fund ColoradoCare? Marijuana revenue is about $150 million a year, less than 1 percent of the projected cost of ColoradoCare. So Rocky Mountain high revenue is actually quite low relative to what’s needed.

The $25 billion price tag is what we are told now. Anyone believe it won’t cost more? Lyndon Johnson promised that Medicare would cost $500 million a year. Actually it costs 1,000 times more, nearly $500 billion a year. What happens when ColoradoCare runs out of money due to overly rosy cost projections?

Two options. One is to ration care, meaning many treatments or medications won’t be covered. The other is cut reimbursement to physicians to the point that many quit or move out of state. That leads to long waits for appointments and procedures. Just look across the pond at the UK’s government run system to hear stories about waitlists and rationing. What good is having insurance if there are no doctors in the house?

Colorado currently has a commission exploring options to improve our current costly and inefficient system. Thoughtful analysis is helpful. Turning the entire system upside down and modeling it after Medicaid or the VA is not. An important decision for voters next November along with who will be our next president.

Brian C Joondeph, MD, MPS, a Denver based retina surgeon and writer. Follow him on Facebook and Twitter.