We're learning the baby's parents are directors at Grace Community School in Lehigh Acres -- where the infant died. Soon after the child died, the daycare posted the following statement on their Facebook page:





"She was breathing and fine one minute, and gone the next. These symptoms or lack of symptoms are common to Sudden Infant Death Syndrome."





We found out SIDS is the leading cause of infant deaths in Lee and Collier County.





A sad statistic for Lee County -- in the last five years, 80 children have died. Most of them were infants found in their cribs not breathing, and without an explanation of how they died.





"It just hit me," said parent Katy Clements. "Because I remember those first hours, days, weeks. It's a nightmare."





Clements lost her first born to Sudden Infant Death Syndrome or SIDS.





"He never even had a runny nose," said Clements.





At barely six months, Clements found Amari Antonio Clements not breathing.





"Losing a child period is painful. But when there isn't an explanation, you don't know who to blame. So you blame yourself," said Clements.





According to Golisano Children's Hospital, Lee and Collier County rank the highest when it comes to SIDS. They say 1 out of 5 child deaths in Florida usually happens when other people - besides the parents - are taking care of a child.





"Many times people will put their child on their backs. But unknown caregivers will put their child on their tummies," said Sally Kreuscher with Golisano Children's Hospital.





But, it's not something you can detect.





"There's really nothing you can look for. However, like I said, there are things you can do to prevent it. So never put any items in the crib such as bumpers or blankets. You can use a pacifier or keeping the room at a cool temperature," said Kreuscher.





Keeping your child on their back and in a crib while they're sleeping helps too. But, nothing cures SIDS or the pain it causes for parents.





"Love your children because tomorrow is never promised. It really isn't," said Clements.

Clements says what helped her move on was on-line support groups

As for the investigation, the Department of Children and Families is looking into the six-month-old's death.