Novartis AG ADR (NYSE:NVS) and Amgen Inc (NYSE:AMGN) have recently been involved in a tussle over the biosimilar imitation drug developed by Novartis for Amgen’s blockbuster biologic drug, Neupogen.

In recent events, Amgen has sued Sandoz, a Novartis subsidiary, for patent infringement and unfair competition, as reported by Bloomberg Intelligence. Amgen has filed a petition, asking the court to stop the launch of Neupogen’s biosimilar. The biosimilar, if approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), would be the first ever biosimilar drug to be marketed in the US.

The tussle began when Novartis filed its application for Neupogen’s biosimilar to the FDA. The application for the imitation drug was accepted in July, making it the first-ever biosimilar to be reviewed by the FDA. Earlier, the US did not make a legal framework for the approval of the biosimilar drugs, and thus the country lagged behind many other regions, where people can easily access the cheaper version of the expensive biologic drugs. However, under the Patent Protection and Affordable Care Act 2010, the FDA is now authorized to approve biosimilars.

Since biosimilars are not the exact same copies of the biologic drugs, which are developed from living cells, a very thorough evaluation process has been devised to test their safety and efficacy. After evaluation, Oncologic Drugs Advisory Committee for FDA recommended approval for Novartis’s biosimilar for Neupogen on January 5, as it demonstrated similar safety and efficacy profiles to the original drug. The reviewers mentioned that the biosimilar “meets the requirement for a demonstration of ‘no clinically meaningful differences’ between the proposed product and the reference product in terms of safety, purity, and potency.”

Novartis was said to launch the biosimilar as early as March 8, contingent upon the FDA approval, but Amgen filed a suit against the company on February 6, based on patent infringement; the court scheduled an oral dialogue between the companies on March 2. The launch of the imitation drug poses a serious threat to Amgen, as the launch of biosimilar can take away the blockbuster status of the original drug as early as 2016.

However, the launch of the biosimilar is now facing delays, as the hearing on Amgen’s injunction bid to block Novartis’s biosimilar has been postponed to March 13.

The decision on Amgen’s request to block the launch of Neupogens’s biosimilar is expected to be announced by April 10. Novartis has agreed to not launch its product before the decision is announced. The company has also agreed that it will give Amgen a five-day notice to the launch of the biosimilar, if the court decides in favor of Novartis before April 10.

For Neupogen, Biosimilars have been in other markets for years now. Novartis itself markets the biosimilar imitation version of Nuepogen in more than 40 countries with the brand name, Zarzio since 2009. Zarzio is one the leading biosimilars worldwide with a market share of approximately 30% in Europe.

Neupogen, drug approved to treat neutropenia in cancer patients, lost its patents in 2013. Despite patent expiration, the drug managed to rake in $1.2 billion sales in 2014. According to analysts’ forecasts, the revenue generated by the drug is estimated to see an 8.6% Year-over-Year decline, totaling up to $1.05 billion only for the current year. For 2016, analysts have forecasted $985 million sales for Neupogen, indicating the severe threat, which the biosimilars are posing to the company’s revenues.

FDA had earlier approved copies of biologic drugs, which were not considered to be true biologics. Among these was Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd. ADR's (NYSE:TEVA) copycat version of Neupogen, which was approved in 2012 with the brand name Granix. The copycat version cannibalized 5-10% of Neupogen’s market share, according to Michael Yee, an analyst for RBC Capital Markets.

The delay in the decision not only benefits Amgen, but also the other generic drug maker, Apotex, Inc., which has been developing the same biosimilar in collaboration with Intas Pharmaceutical. The Canadian generic drug maker announced on February 17 that the FDA has accepted for filing the company’s application for filgrastim, the biosimilar version of Neupogen. The company plans to market its biosimilar version under the brand name, Gratsofil.