A place for Clinton and Trump to coexist in peace

The management and employees of Sticker Giant in Hygiene are hoping that a giant ball of stickers that is currently under construction can get over the line of weighing over 220 pounds by Wednesday, which will put the project affectionately named "Saul" into the Guinness Book of World Records.

Saul is currently made up of over 100,000 stickers and Jesse Michaels, Sticker Giant's marketing director, believes that the ball will be very close to that 220-pound target by the time the judges conduct the official weigh-in.

Longmont Mayor Dennis Coombs will be there for the official judging, as will accountant Barb Clausen from Clausen & Associates, and Sam Knight of Green Mountain Surveying who will be measuring Saul. Ted Risk, co-founder at Wibby Brewing, will be providing the space for the weigh-in, as one of the conditions set by Guinness is that the procedure must take place in public.

Clausen said that she will there as the required CPA, verifying the weight.

"The rules are that the ball has to round, and the weight is constantly flattening it so we have to roll it around the floor to keep its shape," said Michaels.

According to Sticker Giant founder John Fischer, the company prints 9,300 miles of stickers a year, and Wednesday is now officially National Sticker Day.

"No matter what your opinion, your taste in music, your political affiliation or whether your kid is an honor roll student or not, in this country, you can share your message in a colorful and fun way," Fischer said.

In fact, Fischer is keen to point out that bumper stickers for Donald Trump and Hilary Clinton are coexisting peacefully on Saul right now.

Advertisement

Michaels said that officials from the Guinness Book of World Records won't actually be in attendance on Wednesday because the cost of making that happen is large. However, Saul's weight, measurements, photos and videos will be submitted, along with what Michael's says is a lot of paperwork.

Staff at Sticker Giant have been arguing about who gets to take Saul home at the weekend to continue sticking the stickers onto the surface and, during regular working hours, they will continue to build the ball up with excess stickers, said Fischer.

In the 1950s, the Stamp Collecting Club at Boy's Town, Nebraska, built a 600-pound ball of stamps but Saul will be the undisputed king of sticker balls if he beats the 200-pound target on Wednesday.

Saul is available for personal media appearances, and the ball can be decorated with network bumper stickers for such an event. Sticker Giant was started in Fischer's basement in 2001, and the company is on the verge of moving to a bigger space in Longmont.

Brett Callwood: 303-684-5274, callwoodb@timescall.com or twitter.com/city_slang