Remember the speculation about whether U.S. Senate candidate Mike Rounds would run negative ads? His campaign insisted they wouldn't launch personal attacks, but said contrast ads about the issues were fair game. Further, they said they had always planned on doing so in October.

Now the first Rounds ads that directly go after Democrat Rick Weiland and independent Larry Pressler — "the same person," the Rounds campaign line goes — started airing this morning. It's pretty tame stuff, nothing especially creative or memorable, but probably very effective nonetheless. It doubles down on Rounds' biggest advantage in the race: the conservative lean of the electorate.

The question is how much effect this will have as Rounds also undergoes (much more nasty) attacks on the EB-5 matter. Negative ads work, the truism goes; so if both ad campaigns work and the swing voters conclude they agree with Rounds on the issues but don't trust his character, who will they go for?

Here's the ads, which are really the same ad with two variations:

Mike Rounds: "Our values and Keystone" (10/11/2014)

Narrator: Which candidate for the United Stated Senate best represents your values? Larry Pressler and Rick Weiland want to raise taxes. Mike Rounds will oppose Obama's tax plans. Pressler and Weiland support Obamacare. Mike Rounds will work to repeal it. Pressler and Weiland oppose building the Keystone pipeline. Mike Rounds believes it will boost the economy. Only Mike Rounds will represent our values with his votes in the United States Senate.

Rounds: I'm Mike Rounds, and I approve this message.

Mike Rounds: "Our Values and Guns" (10/11/2014)

Narrator: Which candidate for the United Stated Senate best represents your values? Larry Pressler and Rick Weiland want to raise taxes. Mike Rounds will oppose Obama's tax plans. Pressler and Weiland support Obamacare. Mike Rounds will work to repeal it. Pressler and Weiland want more gun control. Mike Rounds is NRA-endorsed and supports the Second Amendment. Only Mike Rounds will represent our values with his votes in the United States Senate.

Rounds: I'm Mike Rounds, and I approve this message.

Read or Share this story: http://argusne.ws/1vZNYa6