Beverly Beavers Brooks always has had a desire to help women achieve.

After working in several different fields, Mrs. Brooks got her chance at her dream job in 1999.

She recalls meeting a woman at the International Women’s Conference in Houston in 1977. The woman worked for the Women’s Bureau for the U.S. Department of Labor, and Mrs. Brooks thought she would one day like to have that job. More than 20 years later, she discovered the position was available and got it.

She worked as regional administrator for the Women’s Bureau for the U.S. Department of Labor until she retired in 2012. She was responsible for Texas. Louisiana, Oklahoma, Arkansas and New Mexico and worked to make sure women were treated equally in the workforce. They held conferences and provided information and more than anything, they educated women about what their rights were.

“I liked most the opportunity to help women succeed,” she said of the job.

She represented the United States at the International Labor Conference in Switzerland in 2009.

Mrs. Brooks, 70, grew up in Tyler and graduated from Emmett Scott High School. She left her hometown in 1962 to attend Hampton University in Virginia and Bishop College in Dallas, both historically black colleges. She studied sociology and later went to Texas Southern University in Houston.

Mrs. Brooks worked as a social worker in New Jersey and New York before living for more than a year in Germany with her now ex-husband while he was in the military.

She moved to Houston, where she worked as project director for the minority Women Employment Program, funded by the U.S. Department of Labor.

“It’s really impacted who I became career wise,” she said. Through special recruitment efforts and counseling, they worked to break the barrier of minority women not serving in managerial roles in the workplace, she said. After serving as project director in Houston, she worked for the organization for five years in Atlanta.

Mrs. Brooks said she learned how to sell herself because she had the responsibility of selling others. She also learned how to negotiate salaries, learned leadership skills and how to manage people and situations.

After a decade, she moved to Dallas and owned a full-service telephone answering service business for seven years before she sold it and went to work for what is now Bank of America. She started out as a community investment officer, ensuring that the minority and business communities were being served by the bank, she said. She also worked in Charlotte, N.C., and Atlanta, and when she left Bank of America after 12 years, she was senior vice president.

In 2005, she attended the Senior Executive Fellows Program, Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University.

After 13 years of working for the Women’s Bureau for the U.S. Department of Labor, Mrs. Brooks retired two years ago and returned to Tyler. She reconnected at a school reunion with her eighth-grade boyfriend, Willie Brooks, and the two have been married for seven years.

It is the volunteer work she has done since being back in Tyler that got her honored in March as The 16th annual Women in Tyler luncheon honored six women in March for being “Women Who Care.”

“It made me feel pretty special because I had not been here that long,” she said. “I think part of the reason I was nominated was because of my work I did with women.”

Mrs. Brooks is a graduate of Leadership Texas Class 2000 and has received several awards from national and local organizations, mostly for her work with the Women’s Bureau.

Among her awards are Women Changing the World from Texas College; the Community Service Award, National Council of Negro Women, Dallas & New Orleans Chapters; Certificate of Congressional Recognition; Atlanta Business League, Top 100 Black Women of Influence in Atlanta; Certificate of Commendation for contributions to Small Business Development, U.S. Department of Commerce, Small Business Development Agency; and Outstanding Woman Entrepreneur, Black Business and Professional Women’s Clubs.

In Tyler, she co-founded an all-white Labor Day party called Party with a Purpose, which raises money for charities. She said they hope to raise more than $5,000 this year for Texas College.

Mrs. Brooks also is involved with Battleground Texas, an offshoot of the National Democratic Party, trying to turn Texas blue and educate the public about the importance of voting, she said. She also is managing the campaign of her brother who is running for re-election as Justice of the Peace Precinct 1 Quincy Beavers.

She plans to start a leadership academy to help a small group of middle school-aged black boys. She said it will be a multifaceted program that will include tutorial, leadership, scheduling and athletic components. She plans to name it after community leaders — the Noble E. Young and Asa G. Hillard Leadership Academy.

“I don’t do what I do for recognition,” she said. “I do what I do because it makes me feel good.” Mrs. Brooks said she has lived a very full life and being honored makes her feel like she is doing what God wants her to do.

The other women who were chosen as Women in Tyler this year were Jennifer Carson, Jean Coleman, Verna Hall, Irma Rodriguez and Rebecca Taylor.

If you know of a professional woman or business service in the Tyler area that should be highlighted in this column, contact cmurphy@tylerpaper.com.