Reuters

U.K. doctors and public health officials may be required to report any financial ties to drug makers under plans that are being considered by U.K. government officials, The Telegraph reports. The move comes after the paper ran an undercover investigation showing how National Health Service staffers were allegedly paid by drug makers that lobby health care providers to use specific medicines.

Some staff, who say they worked as industry consultants, charged more than $23,000 to organize so-called ‘advisory board’ meetings for drug makers and many of the meetings took place in five-star hotels in other countries, according to the paper. Some attendees told the Telegraph they were taken to “flashy” restaurants and paid large sums while considering whether to “switch” drugs.

NHS staffers who participated in the advisory boards argue their involvement helps them make “best use” of government money by analyzing drugs and providing expert advice, the paper wrote. Meanwhile, a dozen NHS staffers who attended one meeting in Germany told the paper they reported the trip and payments from a drug maker to their employers, and were not involved in subsequent decisions to adopt the drugs that were discussed. Each was paid nearly $800 a day.

An NHS England spokesman tells the paper “these are extremely serious allegations so we have immediately directed NHS Protect [an investigative agency] to launch a full investigation of each and every case identified by this press report.” He adds the U.K. may want to pass a law requiring “full disclosure of any payments” made by companies to health professionals or NHS employees.

The spokesman cited the Sunshine Act, which was incorporated into the U.S. Affordable Care Act and requires drug and device makers, as well as group purchasing organizations, to report payments to doctors. The law was proposed in response to concerns that companies were unduly influencing medical practice and research.

As a result, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services last year launched the Open Payments database, which displays how much money doctors received from companies. Although the American Medical Association continues to complain that CMS has failed to make it easy for doctors to correct or update filings by companies, industry watchdogs have praised the effort.

The paper notes that NHS England’s statutory guidance states that, “where certain members of a decision-making body have a material interest, they should either be excluded from relevant parts of meetings, or join in the discussion but not participate in the decision making itself.”

This applies to clinical commissioning groups, which are organizations of local doctors who issue decisions about hospital care, medicines to be prescribed and mental health services, among other things. These groups are overseen by the U.K.’s National Health Service.

We asked the NHS for a response to the latest Telegraph report that some U.K. ministers are considering introducing such a law. As always, we will update you accordingly.

Last year, the Association for the British Pharmaceutical Industry, the industry trade group, last year began publishing aggregated payments to doctors and, next year, will publish certain detailed fees. The decision came as part of an update to an industry code of conduct, which was made following concerns about industry influence.

In a statement, ABPI executive director Virginia Acha argues “continued work with health care providers is critical for future development of medicines and it is right and proper that these professionals are paid for their time, experience and expertise. It is also fundamental that patients are confident that these relationships are above board and transparent.”

As for the possibility of a U.K. Sunshine Act, she says “the UK pharmaceutical industry operates well under self-regulation and is keen to deliver greater transparency through this model rather than legislation similar to that which has been put in place on other countries, such as the U.S. We believe that many healthcare professionals would also support voluntary disclosure of this information in order to provide greater transparency” about relationships they have with the pharmaceutical industry.