There are a number of ways to approach service in Congress. U.S. Rep. Rosa DeLauro, the 3rd District Democrat from New Haven who is one of the most liberal members of Congress, tends to find issues she believes are important but not getting attention, and attend to them.

Many of them are worthy of her intense advocacy. She is an impassioned defender of programs for the poor and powerless, such as Head Start, Medicare and food stamps, as well as a watchdog on food safety.

Some of her other passions are quixotic, however, such as her bill this year to impose a federal tax on sugar in soda. She's right that such a tax would curb obesity, diabetes and tooth decay, by hurting soft drink sales. But the bill is governmental overreach and an impossible sell in a nation that consumes vast amount of the stuff.

Nevertheless, Ms. DeLauro — the dean of the Connecticut congressional delegation, in office since 1991 — is in sync with her heavily Democratic district, which includes New Haven and Yale University. The Courant endorses her for a 13th term over challenger James Brown, a teacher and coach from Stratford.

Ms. DeLauro, 71, is the daughter of two New Haven aldermen who was weaned on the personal politics of the tight-knit, largely Italian Wooster Square neighborhood (that her parents fought to save from urban renewal).

Yet all her politics isn't local: She voted against arming the Syrian rebels, saying it was not clear who we were arming. At the same time, she worked to help Sikorsky Aircraft win back the contract for presidential helicopters.

Why Not Mr. Brown?

The race to unseat Ms. DeLauro, a popular incumbent, often attracts little-known long-shot candidates. This year's unknown soldier is Mr. Brown, a 46-year-old math teacher and track coach from Stratford whose political experience consists of one term on the Stratford Republican Town Committee and a seat on the commission that oversees a town-owned forest.

Mr. Brown offers a standard Republican issue package — repeal the Affordable Care Act, abolish the U.S. Department of Education and Common Core, and reduce burdensome regulations. He comes across as personable and reasonable, but short on experience.

With experience, Mr. Brown could be a serious contender. But the person who will best serve the district in the next two years is Ms. DeLauro.

She is cross-endorsed by the Working Families Party.