THE WA education system has been attacked for forcing kids into institutionalised learning too early and robbing them of their childhood.

A leading parenting expert has gone so far as to suggest WA families with young children should consider moving interstate or home schooling their kids.

Maggie Dent, an Australian author and parenting specialist, told The Sunday Times the "saddest stories" she hears are from WA parents because of compulsory schooling for five-year-olds.

"If your child is not looking too flash at the end of the four-year-old (kindergarten) group that you've got them in, you could keep them home if you want to in any other state except WA, where as soon as they turn five they must turn up to school," she said.

"There isn't any flexibility in that and the one size fits all doesn't always work.

"In WA, I have worked very hard to help some parents whose children are still wearing nappies, they need a three-hour sleep in the afternoon and they are being forced to go to school.''

In WA, the first year of compulsory schooling is pre-primary. A child must attend if they turn five years old by June 30 - meaning some kids can be four-years-old when they start their official education.

In NSW, all children must be enrolled in school by their sixth birthday while in Victoria children must be at school in the year they turn six.

In a submission to the Federal Government's current childcare and early learning inquiry, Ms Dent writes that WA is leading the nation in pushing formalised education on younger and younger ages.

She said parents who feel their young children are struggling at school should look at moving states or home schooling their children.

"To be honest, if I get an email from a worried parent about a child whom they see is developmentally too young for formal schooling and is being told they have to attend because of their age, I might give them four suggestions so they can reduce the stress and angst their child is likely to endure - search if you are in a city for a 'best practice' preschool that is still play-based and has happy kids; move to Victoria or NSW where school starting ages are more flexible; find a Waldorf Steiner School (which uses an education philosophy based sensory experience) or homeschool,'' she said.

The Government's Productivity Commission is reviewing childcare and early childhood learning as part of the biggest public examination of the sector in two decades.

Ms Dent urged the inquiry to considering a trialling a later school starting age for children nationwide because pressuring them to sit tests and learn to read too young was robbing them of their childhood.

"It staggers me to see the push down towards formalised learning that is happening across Australia when there is absolutely no evidence or research that validates that this can have a positive influence on young children's lives,'' she said.

Ms Dent said the removal of "play" from kindergarten and preschool could damage children's ability to be social beings.

"The rise in aggressive behaviour being exhibited by many younger children, mainly boys, is a sign they are unable to cope with environments with no opportunity to play, no fun, little movement and developmentally inappropriate tasks - and we then penalise these children by suspending or expelling them," she said.

Education Department early childhood education executive director Garry Hewitt said there was clear research that high quality learning programs early in a child's life led to positive outcomes.

"Children's learning and development are maximised by families and qualified teachers working together," he said.

"Keeping children at home for another year would mean they could not benefit from that partnership at a time of very rapid cognitive, emotional and social development."