A bipartisan bill allowing patients to use medical marijuana in states where it has been legalized was introduced in the US Senate on Mar. 10, 2015. Senators Cory Booker (D-NJ), Rand Paul (R-KY), and Kirsten Gillibrand (D-NY) announced the proposed legislation that would also move the drug from Schedule I to Schedule II under the Controlled Substances Act.



The Compassionate Access, Research Expansion and Respect States (CARERS) Act would prevent the federal government from enforcing drug laws that conflict with state medical marijuana programs. 23 states and DC have legalized marijuana for medical use. Under the CARERS Act, patients, providers and related businesses in those states would no longer be in violation of federal law.



Marijuana is currently classified as a Schedule I controlled substance along with heroin, LSD, ecstasy, and other drugs considered to have "no currently accepted medical use," "a high potential for abuse," and "a lack of accepted safety for use of the drug or other substance under medical supervision." By reclassifying marijuana as Schedule II, it would join drugs such as cocaine, methamphetamine, oxycodone, and other drugs that have "a high potential for abuse" but "less abuse potential than Schedule I drugs." A press release announcing the CARERS Act stated that the shift would recognize "what Americans already know: marijuana has a legitimate medical purpose."



The CARERS Act would also remove cannabidiol (CBD) from the Controlled Substances Act's definition of marijuana, thus allowing states to import CBD oil. CBD is non-psychoactive and has been used to control seizures in children with intractable epilepsy.



Senator Gillibrand stated in a press conference that legalizing medical marijuana would allow parents to "ease their children's pain more effectively" than the powerful and addictive opiates currently being used.



Doctors in Department of Veterans Affairs facilities would be permitted to recommend marijuana to military veterans under the bill, and it would also enable banks and credit unions to provide financial services to businesses participating in medical marijuana programs. Such businesses currently operate on a "dangerous" cash-only basis, according to Senator Gillibrand.



Finally, the Act removes "unnecessary bureaucratic hurdles" that, according to the senators, have made it difficult for researchers to gain government approval to undertake research on the drug.



In announcing the proposed legislation, Senator Booker stated that at present "otherwise law abiding Americans... are fearful of unnecessary, expensive, life-disrupting investigations and prosecutions. Today we join together to say enough is enough. Our federal government has long overstepped the boundaries of common sense, fiscal prudence, and compassion with its marijuana laws. These laws must change."



One organization opposing the bill is Smart Approaches to Marijuana, which favors the development of pharmacy-dispensed, cannabis-based medications rather than the legalization of smoked marijuana. The group's president, Dr. Kevin Sabet, stated in an email to the Washington Post that the bill is "like using a sledgehammer to crack a nut. Why not start work with scientists to incentivize research rather than open the floodgates to Big Marijuana? Most major medical organizations oppose smoked pot as medicine because the risks outweigh any benefits. This bill just isn't supported by the science, plain and simple."



Even some supporters of legalized medical marijuana are skeptical that the bill can pass. Allen St. Pierre, Executive Director of the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws (NORML), said the bill may be "DOA" due to opposition from some Republicans. He acknowledged, however, that a bill like this one being introduced in the US Senate is a "historic" moment.





Sources:



Cory Booker, Kirsten Gillibrand, and Rand Paul, "Compassionate Access, Research Expansion, and Respect States Act of 2015," huffingtonpost.com (accessed Mar. 11, 2015)



"Booker, Paul & Gillibrand Announce Bipartisan New Medical Marijuana Bill to Allow Patients – Including Veterans – to Access Necessary Care without Fear of Federal Prosecution," gillibrand.senate.gov, Mar. 10, 2015



"CARERS Act Press Conference," youtube.com, Mar. 10, 2015



Niraj Chokshi, "Sens. Booker, Gillibrand and Paul Unveil Federal Medical Marijuana Bill," washingtonpost.com, Mar. 10, 2015



Niraj Chokshi, "What’s in the Historic Medical Marijuana Bill Being Unveiled," washingtonpost.com, Mar. 9, 2015



Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), "Drug Scheduling," dea.gov (accessed Mar. 11, 2015)



Katy Steinmetz, "Senators Introduce Historic Bill to Allow Medical Marijuana," time.com, Mar. 10, 2015



Smart Approaches to Marijuana (SAM), Our Wish List," learnaboutsam.org (Accessed Mar. 11, 2015)



US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), "Regulatory Information: Controlled Substances Act," fda.gov (accessed Mar. 11, 2015)