'Fifty-five years later, to give back something like this, I think would be really cool.'

The shoes were to be mailed in 1960, at a cost of 10 cents, from Cambridge, Mass., to Boulder, but they ended up in the care of a Tennessee auto mechanic who collects goods found in old storage units. ( Rick Pannell / Courtesy Photo )

In his down time, Rick Pannell has been known to buy up an abandoned storage unit or two, usually for no more than about $50 apiece, and usually containing nothing more than some dusty clothes and, more often, a whole lot of trash.

Pannell, of Kingsport, Tenn., has struck gold on a few occasions; some good fishing equipment, a couple usable car parts and a new stereo system were among his proudest hauls.

"I go to the flea markets and I'll buy the units," Pannell, 55, a mustachioed auto mechanic says with a warm and unmistakably southern drawl. "There's probably 30 or 40 storage units around here with different things. You split 'em out

But in 10 years of bidding on and then rummaging through storage units, Pannell is yet to come across as curious an item as the pair of hand-stitched baby shoes — white and baby blue, tied with satin bows — that he found two years ago.

They were packed inside of a small cardboard box, which was buried anonymously among the heap of useless junk that typically surrounds the good stuff, in his experience. On the box, though, Pannell found an intriguing mailing tag.

The shoes had been shipped Jan. 21, 1960, at a cost of 10 cents, from the College Seal and Crest Company in Cambridge, Mass., to Stuart Jewelry, 1112 13th St. in Boulder.

For his birthday earlier this month, Pannell decided he would try to find the person those shoes were meant for.

Advertisement

"I always like to do something that needs to get done on my birthday," he says. "This pair of shoes has been sitting on my desk for two years, so I wanted to start the search for these booties, find who used to own them or see if they were a gift, or an advertising thing sent to the jewelry company."

In years past, his birthday challenges have included trimming a tree, spending a much-needed few hours relaxing at a racetrack and learning to parachute.

The baby shoe investigation, however, has proved more than a one-off activity. Both the College Seal and Crest Company and Stuart Jewelry — formerly owned by Wallace Stuart, of Boulder, who died in 1989 — no longer exist.

The address once occupied by Stuart Jewelry isn't registered anymore; the Fat Shack restaurant sits at 1110 13th St. and the Alforat Mediterranean Restaurant sits at 1116, but there's nothing in between.

Several Boulder jewelers as well as the University Hill property manager who owns the building the jewelry company once occupied said they aren't in touch with the Stuart family.

On Jan. 21, the shoes will turn 55, just like Pannell did three weeks ago. He is hoping to solve the mystery by then.

"I thought it might brighten somebody's eyes for Thanksgiving or Christmas, to reunite the item with a family member," he said. "I know there's things that I had when I was small that got gone through the years, and you're not really sure what happened to them. Fifty-five years later, to give back something like this, I think would be really cool."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness