Topics: Aging, betty white, Editor's Picks, Life stories, Teenagers, Life News, Entertainment News

I don’t recall when people started calling my firstborn an “old soul,” but I’m pretty sure she hadn’t started walking or talking yet. I think at first it was just about her eyes, the way they convey a certain combination of wisdom and boredom that always seemed out of sync with her age. Now, as she approaches 16, she somehow seems even further beyond her years. And it turns out my kid is the one who’s teaching me how to grow old gracefully.

I should mention that in many respects my daughter is a typical high schooler. Unlike her mother, she recognizes the music playing at H&M without having to ask Siri to identify it. She has conversations about people who are famous on Vine. She can read a text without holding her phone — a phone that does not have its brightness set to the highest possible level — at arm’s length and squinting. To the outside world, she resembles “Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt’s” Xanthippe. In her heart, though, she’s more Betty White. Last night she watched “The Proposal.” Again.

In the past year, my daughter has dragged me to see “Iris” and “The Second Best Exotic Marigold Hotel,” read the Grace Coddington memoir, and, after getting hooked on Netflix’s “Grace and Frankie,” asked me in awe, “Do you know about Lily Tomlin? She’s incredible.” After watching the Elaine Stritch documentary “Shoot Me,” she changed her iPhone’s lock screen wallpaper to an image of the late Broadway legend, scowling on a New York City street in an oversize fur coat and hat. She’s lately been on an Angela Lansbury and Tina Turner kick. Her favorite Peggy Carter? Elderly Peggy Carter. When I asked her recently why she’s so fascinated with older ladies, my daughter simply shrugged and replied, “Uh, because they’re queens?”

My child, admittedly, has the privilege of being a fangirl of the geriatric set while inhabiting an often more advantageous age group herself. Sure, she can’t yet drive or vote, and rando dudes on the street love to order her to “Smile, baby.” But a large portion of the popular culture revolves around the tastes of her and her peers, and none of the products in her makeup case contain the word “mature skin.” It’s possible that in 50 or 60 years — when, if she’s lucky, she’ll be a feisty old bird herself — she’ll be less enchanted with the idea of being aged. Yet as one who is considerably closer to senior citizenship than she is, I find great inspiration in my daughter’s frequent and sincere pronouncements of “You know who’s a BAMF? Maggie Smith, that’s who.”