Colleges are offering classes covering all sorts of subjects these days, including celebrities like Beyonce, movies and even "valuable" life skills.

It's the start of the school year for many college students — luckily they all still have time to change their schedules if they wish. And we're here to help, by highlighting three types of classes students should totally be taking.

First up: the celebrity class. Yes, students can actually study the Queen B herself, Beyonce. (Video via Columbia Records / Beyonce)

This past summer, Rutgers University offered a course called "Feminist Perspectives: Politicizing Beyonce." The course description reads, "This course will attempt to think about our contemporary U.S. society and its current class, racial, gender and sexual politics through the music and career of Beyonce."

Rutgers is also offering a class where students can study Bruce Springsteen lyrics. (Video via Columbia Records / Bruce Springsteen)

College professors across the country have also taught classes on Miley Cyrus and Lady Gaga, both pertaining to sociology.

And English classes on Kanye West have been taught at both the University of Missouri and Georgia State University. (Video via Roc-A-Fella Records / Kanye West)

And what about classes about some of your favorite TV shows and movies?

Multiple colleges have offered classes where students actually get to just binge-watch "Game of Thrones" episodes in the classroom, with University of California Berkeley being the latest.

The University of Baltimore used a vast selection of Marvel films to look at modern culture. (Video via Paramount Pictures / "Iron Man 2")

And students at American University in Washington, D.C., are reading "The Hunger Games" trilogy while discussing issues like feminism, politics and social media marketing. (Video via Lionsgate / "The Hunger Games: Mockingjay - Part 2")

And finally, need to brush up on some life skills? A few colleges have got you covered.

Students at the University of Southern California can take a #SelfieClass. A clinical professor for the school said, "The more interesting [selfies] deliberately challenge conventions or templates of a beautiful face and body, and really try to show something broader about who you are as a person."

So sadly, not a class on how to take a selfie. But thankfully, Kim Kardashian already taught us how.

"Lighting is everything. Angle is everything. And a lot has to do with how you crop it. Like if you don't like something on your body, just crop it," Kardashian said on "Jimmy Kimmel Live."

"Can I crop out my entire body?" Jimmy Kimmel asked.

Cornell University provides a tree climbing class to its students, teaching them "how to use ropes and technical climbing gear to reach the top of any tree, to move around, and even to climb from tree to tree without returning to the ground." (Video via Cornell University)

And finally, Centre College in Kentucky offers a class on walking.

It's actually called "The Art of Walking" and students are expected to walk during class. According to The New York Times, these walks can go for as long as 25 miles.

This video includes images from Getty Images and Paško Tomić / CC BY 2.0.