GRAND JUNCTION — The massive, deadly landslide on the Grand Mesa has turned new attention to the unpredictable nature of the state’s mountainous terrain in a year expected to see much more soil, rock and mud tumbling down across Colorado.

Higher-than-average snowpack, climbing temperatures, and an increase in the wet and wild rainstorms called microbursts are saturating slopes and taking the brakes off masses of unstable soils.

“Right now, we are in a cycle of dangerous landslides,” said Jeff Coe, a geologist with the U.S. Geological Survey. “It’s not a question of if; it’s when there will be more.”

Coe, who is monitoring the Grand Mesa slide, said approximately 1,300 slides have occurred in Colorado in the past eight months. Some are so small and in such remote places that they are barely noticed.

Constant slipping above Slumgullion Pass, which is near Lake City in southwest Colorado, keeps the hillside moving about 6 inches a year. Some of the most visible are rockfalls on roadways, such as the huge slide south of Ouray that closed Red Mountain Pass for weeks this year and the one that shut down Loveland Pass last week.

“We have a very dynamic topography. When you add water, it gets much more dynamic,” said Tad Pfeffer, a geophysicist with the civil engineering department at the University of Colorado.

He points out that the lumpy, hummocky landscape in the foothills near Denver was created by past landslides. Experts, including Coe and Pfeffer, say there is little they can do to stop slides or to predict what will or won’t slide. The forces percolating and loosening soil and rocks on cliffs and slopes are “sneaky,” and geologists say they are causing constant slipping and sliding.

The resources devoted to researching them are slim. Landslides merit only a fraction of the funds devoted to earthquakes in Colorado, as well as nationally.

The Colorado Geological Survey has four landslide experts based at the Colorado School of Mines in Golden. The U.S. Geological Survey has eight landslide scientists based there. Nationally, the USGS has only a dozen landslide experts, including those in Colorado, working with an annual budget of just over $3 million to monitor slides across the country.

In comparison, earthquakes, which happen less frequently than landslides in Colorado, have about 40 USGS scientists dedicated to their study in a state that had nine deaths and more than $9 million in damages in the last heavy landslide year of 2010.

Lynn Highland of the USGS Landslide Information Center studied slides in Colorado for that year and advocated more tracking of slides and the losses they cause.

Currently, the only database of landslides in Colorado is a digitized map being created by the Colorado Geological Survey that shows where landslides have occurred. It doesn’t contain related information that would help to show susceptibility for more slides.

That map shows slides as red patches sprinkled across the state, with the hot spots in the central mountains and the Interstate 70 corridor. In western Colorado, the slides are particularly dense around the Grand Mesa, where the recent landslide cut loose from what is believed to be the site of an ancient slide area.

In parts of Europe, there are landslide maps that go back to medieval times, but U.S. landslide experts don’t have that kind of data. They also don’t have the newest technologies that might help to paint a clearer picture of what is happening under Earth’s surface.

There is monitoring equipment in place along the I-70 corridor, which cuts through some of the most active landslide areas in the state. And there are monitors in some of the most movable areas of the state, including Slumgullion Pass and the Chalk Cliffs near Buena Vista. Geologists were placing monitors in the Collbran slide late last week.

Those monitors are so sensitive that they can detect movement by centimeters. Satellites trained on slides now can be used to watch for “creeping” that might indicate a slide is getting ready to make another run.

But the gold standard for landslide-data gathering and behavior predicting is mostly out of the grasp of government slide experts.

Light detection and ranging, or LiDAR, uses a pulsed-light laser beam to essentially X-ray Earth from an aerial vantage point. It can create an image of a slide area, minus the vegetation, that can show whether there are unknown fault lines or whether the area has slid previously.

That technology has been around since the early 1960s, when it was used to measure clouds. It later was used by astronauts to map the surface of the moon.

“It would be enormously useful,” said Jonathan Godt, director of the Colorado Geological Survey’s Landslides Hazard Program.

The problem is that most of the LiDAR equipment is privately owned — and it is expensive to use. Godt estimated it might cost about $50,000 to use LiDAR on the Collbran-area slide. It is something that authorities are considering as they puzzle over what that massive slide might do next.

Since early this year, they are able to put their heads together much easier to study such matters.

The state and national landslide experts are now all housed at the Colorado School of Mines. The Colorado Geological Survey recently made that move after the Colorado legislature cut it out of the Colorado Department of Natural Resources and placed it under the auspices of the School of Mines.

That means more collaboration is taking place when there is a disaster like last Sunday’s 700-acre slide. Geologists with those agencies say it also will help leverage more resources to do more research and gather more data on Colorado’s constantly shifting topography. But the likelihood of garnering more funding is slim.

The Colorado Department of Transportation currently does some of the most visible management of slides in the state, because there are more than 750 locations along roadways recognized as chronic hazards.

Under CDOT’s Rockfall Program, a rating system is used to evaluate and prioritize locations for rockfall mitigation. CDOT is looking to expand that program to mudslides and landslides. Data gleaned from such a program could force changes in alignment of new roadways where rockfall and mudslides are more common.

Daniel Miller, a geomorphologist for the nonprofit Earth Systems Institute, said the bottom line in a state such as Colorado is that nearly all mountainous areas, including those with major highways, could be shown to be landslide prone.

“That’s just been the way it is,” Miller said. “Whenever you have rocks up high, they are potentially going to fall down, but yet, the frequency in which landslides occur is so low that the actual risk that is posed is one that people are quite willing to accept.”

Nancy Lofholm: 970-256-1957, nlofholm@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nlofholm

Staff writers Monte Whaley and Zahira Torres contributed to this report.