The 24 hours before D.J. Augustin’s debut with the Nuggets on Friday night were a bittersweet blur.

He was traded from Oklahoma City to the Nuggets on Thursday morning. That day, he also attended the funeral of Ingrid Williams, wife of Thunder assistant coach Monty Williams, who died in a car crash a few days earlier. The next morning, with his most essential items packed, he flew to Sacramento to meet his new team, the Nuggets, at their hotel.

The airline lost his luggage.

“(Thursday) was kind of an emotional day,” Augustin said. “The next morning, I had to leave real early. It’s been rough, but it’s part of the game.”

Thirty minutes before Friday’s game, the point guard was cramming whatever he could retain to be able to play with some sort of knowledge of the Nuggets’ offensive schemes. Then he played well, scoring eight points and contributing six assists and three steals in 19 minutes as the reserve point guard.

His luggage made it to the arena during the game — in time for him to have it for the late-night plane ride afterward to his new city.

As for the game, Augustin was pleased.

“I felt pretty good,” Augustin said. “Trying to learn the offense and the defense, the different schemes … My teammates did a great job of helping me.”

Nuggets coach Michael Malone was not surprised Augustin was able to be effective on the court without knowing the teams’ schemes.

“He’s been in the league long enough, he’s been on enough good teams and had a big role on certain teams where I knew if we put the ball in his hands and kept it simple for him, he’d make the right play,” Malone said. “And he did that. The synergy that he and Joffrey (Lauvergne) had in that first half was terrific. I thought (Augustin) made some really good reads. He is a very capable and effective pick-and-roll player. That’s what we allowed him to do.”

Augustin, as fast a guard as there is in the league, quickly got in rhythm with Lauvergne, setting the big man up time after time for easy layups and dunks out of high screen/rolls.

“He gave me four or five baskets in six minutes just on pick-and-roll,” Lauvergne said. “So when you start the game like this, everything is easier after.

“Us keeping it simple for him allowed him to play his game, and I wasn’t really surprised. We liked him coming back in that trade, seeing his body of work over many years in the NBA.”

The Nuggets hope things get easier for Augustin as fast as possible. They’re going to need him to be the primary backup at point guard, behind Emmanuel Mudiaye, while Jameer Nelson remains out because of a wrist injury. Malone said Nelson’s injury will keep him out “for the foreseeable future.”

Asking Augustin to know everything there is to know in the final 27 games is a stretch, but he said he’ll do his best to soak in as much as he can.

“A few more games, a few more practices, time to sit down with coaches and watch film a little bit longer … Everybody on this team knows how to play the game,” he said. “Just got to go out there and play hard.”

BOSTON AT DENVER 3 p.m. Sunday, ALT; 950 AM

Spotlight on Isaiah Thomas:

The 5-foot-9 point guard from the University of Washington is coming off his first All-Star Game appearance and 25 points in the Celtics’ first game after the break, a 111-93 loss at Utah on Friday. The Nuggets did a solid job on him defensively in their 111-103 loss at Boston on Jan. 27, but Thomas — named after the former NBA star — can be an explosive scorer when he gets going.

NOTEBOOK

Nuggets:

They returned to the practice court Saturday after their 116-110 loss at Sacramento on Friday, when they allowed 70 points in the first half. Game film and defensive work were on the agenda Saturday. … Darrell Arthur (quadriceps) made it through the game after missing the previous five. He played 17 minutes against the Kings and is expected to be available to play against Boston. Jameer Nelson (wrist) isn’t expected to play against the Celtics.

Celtics:

Kelly Olynyk (shoulder) won’t be available to play against the Nuggets. He missed Boston’s game at Utah too. … The Celtics waived David Lee on Friday, clearing the way for the veteran forward to sign with another NBA team. … Boston has won three consecutive games against the Nuggets.