Buy Photo Weathered sign for Green Grove Road on route 66 looking west. (Photo: Asbury Park Press file photo)Buy Photo

NEPTUNE – In an effort to mitigate the traffic congestion along Route 66, state officials have proposed a $12 million widening project that would expand the roadway from two lanes to four.

The plan, detailed by the New Jersey Department of Transportation this week, looks to widen a 1.2 mile stretch of Route 66, from Jumping Brook Road to Wayside Road, which has a history of delays and bottlenecks, officials say.

A statement from Congressman Chris Smith’s (R-NJ 04) office said the new roadway would include turning lanes, a median, crosswalks, sidewalks and improved access to retail businesses.

The project is expected to be federally funded with construction beginning in 2019.

“The area is plagued by daily, bumper-to-bumper traffic jams which are worsened during the summer months,” Smith said in the statement. “Studies show the crash rate on Route 66 is three times the state average for this type of roadway, making the need for improvements even more critical.”

MORE: What can be done to improve Route 9 in Toms River and Lakewood?

Route 66 serves as a major roadway for local traffic as it provides access to and from the Garden State Parkway, Asbury Park– a tourist destination–, and a stream of restaurants and retail outlets that have moved to the area in recent years.

According to Smith’s office, the road was built in the early 1940s and has had few upgrades since then. Smith said Route 66 is an emergency evacuation route for tens of thousands of Shore area residents.

“During storms—when the need for expeditious evacuation is paramount, the traffic moves at an alarmingly slow pace,” Smith said.

MORE: ROAD SAGE: A love letter to Route 18, a true freeway

Neptune Committeeman Michael Brantley, formerly the mayor, has lobbied for the expansion of Route 66– a project he says has been discussed and stalled for more than 30 years.

“For over a decade, the Neptune Township Committee has been working aggressively with the state and county agencies to try to alleviate the backups and bottlenecks on Route 66,” Brantley said in a statement. “If we can get this done, it would improve travel for a lot of motorists in this part of the county.”

State and local officials plan to hold a meeting in Neptune in November to provide additional information on the project.

Nicquel Terry; nterry@gannettnj.com; 732-643-4023

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1NDD7d1