Americans are adding some interesting new job titles to their resumes. Consider budtender, as workers at marijuana dispensaries are often called.

With pot now legal for medical or recreational use in 23 states plus the District of Columbia, budtending could be a career with pot-ential. Budtenders make about $20 to $30 an hour, according to a spokesman for the National Cannabis Industry Association.

Some other examples:

Uber driver The on-demand ride service, whose drivers supply their own cars, is giving taxi companies a run for their money in cities around the world. How much of that money goes to its “driver-partners,” as Uber calls them? A study released in 2015, and based on Uber’s own data, put the range at about $16 to $30 an hour, depending on the city. However, that doesn’t account for the driver’s unreimbursed expenses, such as car payments, insurance and gasoline.

Drone technician The small, remotely operated flying machines commonly called drones do many jobs today, from filming Hollywood movies to checking the soybean crops in Iowa. They may even deliver packages to our doorsteps one day. Keeping them flying is the job of drone technicians, whose salaries range from about $60,000 to $68,000 a year, according to the Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International.

Cybersecurity analyst With hacker attacks in the news almost daily, big retailers and other companies are looking for better ways to protect their sensitive info. Enter the cybersecurity specialist, whose job is to find and fix any weak spots in their computer networks. Some refer to themselves as “ethical hackers,” using the same tricks as the bad guys but for nobler ends. Salary range is about $82,000 to $121,000 a year, according to Foote Partners, which tracks tech pay.

Healthcare navigator “The most important healthcare job you’ve never heard of,” as one report put it, navigators guide consumers through the maze of insurance coverage and medical treatment. The Affordable Care Act helped popularize the job title by giving it to people and organizations hired to help insurance shoppers apply for coverage. But navigators also are employed by large nonprofits, hospitals and even individual patients. A survey of major job boards shows navigators earn $34,000 to $48,000 a year, on average.

Professional gamer Get paid for playing video games? Some players are, and handsomely too, as gaming becomes a worldwide spectator sport. The website e-Sports recently reported that the 500 best-paid players’ earnings ranged from about $49,000 to $1.2 million.

— Greg Daugherty

Check out all of What People Earn:

What People Earn 2015: Real People, Real Jobs, Real Salaries

What People Earn 2015: More Everyday Americans Share Their Salaries

What People Earn 2015: You’ll Never Guess What These Celebs Make

Trading Up: New Careers for Millennials