Company counters ex-owner's claim as practice's largest creditor

Capstone Pediatrics, a physician-owned pediatric practice with 11 offices across the region, has filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Tennessee.

Formerly known as Centennial Pediatrics, Capstone was acquired by Dr. Gary Griffieth and his sister, Winnie Toler, in late 2013 in the wake of a criminal investigation — and ultimate conviction on a misdemeanor fraud — of ex-owner Dr. Edward “Eddie” Hamilton.

As part of a plea bargain agreement, Hamilton was required to put the practice up for sale and to pay restitution and damages of more than $1.6 million for overpayment and improper billing. He was also excluded from taking part in all federal health care programs for 20 years. Hamilton now operates Icon Pediatrics, a concierge pediatrics medical practice that does not bill insurance or Medicaid claims, and that has medical commercial real estate holdings, including some in which Capstone Pediatrics is a tenant.

Hamilton said he is Capstone’s largest creditor, but bankruptcy attorney Griffin Dunham, who is representing the company, said Capstone disagrees with Hamilton on this point.

“There’s a dispute about whether Dr. Hamilton is a creditor,” said Dunham, a member with Nashville-based Emerge Law. “Based on the facts and issues that have arisen after the purchase, Capstone intends to defend against any assertion that Dr. Hamilton is owed anything.”

According to court documents, Capstone said the practice was “fraught with compliance issues, IT issues, manpower issues, and oppressive contracts with rental rates in excess of fair market value” when they bought it.

“Capstone’s top priority is, and always will be, unparalleled patient care,” Dunham said. “But despite its top-notch patient care, problems that existed before Capstone purchased the assets forced the reorganization. Among other things, lease expenses needed to be reduced and employees needed better benefits. Once these are addressed, Capstone’s financial position will be even stronger and more sustainable.”



The counterpoint

Hamilton has a different view of the situation. He said when the practice was initially purchased in 2013, he stayed on as an employee and advisor.

”They (Capstone owners) didn’t really seek or accept my input,” he said. “I left the practice with clean books and didn’t leave them with any accounts payable.

“In hindsight, they were probably undercapitalized,” Hamilton added. “I think they probably got into a deficit right from the start. I believe they made a number of decisions that they alone were responsible for and some things were out of their control. Perhaps they didn’t fully appreciate the health care environment they were going into.”

Hamilton said Capstone “has never been able to consistently pay” installments on the promissory note connected to its purchase of the practice.

“I spent 25 years building the practice,” Hamilton said. “I’m concerned about children in our community who are not being served.”



The numbers

Capstone’s initial Chapter 11 petition (filed late last year) showed total assets between $1 million and $10 million and liabilities in the $10 million to $50 million range. The list of creditors holding the largest unsecured claims, according to the filing and that Capstone is challenging, includes Hamilton ($3,357,178), the Internal Revenue Services ($1,277,270) and Physician Sales & Service Inc. ($304,517).

In 2014, gross revenues at Capstone were $24,858,435, according to the filing.

As a physician-owned practice, Capstone is bucking a growing trend of health care providers working for hospitals rather than joining independent physicians groups or having solo practices.

If there’s one thing that Hamilton and the Capstone owners agree on, it’s that the physician-owned model of health care is difficult to navigate in today’s world.

“It’s tremendously challenging for independent practices in today’s health care environment,” Griffieth said. “We’re not alone and are facing pressure from every direction. There’s little margin for error or the unexpected hiccups that can arise.

“Margins for a pediatric practices are minimal, at 3-7 percent on average,” he added. “When we purchased the practice, we had to do significant due diligence. We spent the first six months adding structure for compliance, IT and other systems to build a strong base for efficient, high-quality, coordinated care that’s expected of a pediatric center of excellence. From day one, we were climbing uphill. But we’ve always been and will be committed to the practice’s success and health of the community.”

Caring for a significant number of TennCare/Medicare patients added to the complexity of the operating environment.

“At the same time, reimbursements for the care we provide have decreased,” Griffieth said. “As of Jan. 1, 2015, TennCare reimbursements to physicians were reduced when the state decided it wouldn’t be able to supplement the matching federal funds that were put into place as part of the Affordable Care Act. Reimbursement rates reverted to 2012 levels, representing a 25-30 percent decrease in payments for the care we provide. As a result, we’ve worked hard to renegotiate our contracts with several payers.”

Hamilton said he needed more help than he realized.

“When I look back, I see that I was running the practice like a small business,” Hamilton said. “It grew to be the largest practice in the state in its specialty. I kept operating it like it was a small business, but I should have run it like a corporation. I didn’t have a formal business team in place, which made navigating the regulatory environment very hard.”

At its peak, the practice was serving about 80,000 patients a year, Hamilton said.

Griffieth said Capstone now provides pediatric and adolescent care to approximately 30,000 patients a year — ranging from newborns to people age 20 — and has a care team of 140 people, including pediatricians, nurse practitioners, physician assistants and support staff.

Dunham believes the Chapter 11 restructuring will be successful.

"Capstone’s management is uniquely qualified to navigate the company through the reorganization,” he said. “So qualified, in fact, that the Bankruptcy Court waived the requirement to appoint an ombudsman over the case. Although many might want to point fingers at Dr. Hamilton, Capstone prefers to focus on the strengths of its current management, its strong financial outlook and providing the best patient care available.”