Praise God Kim has been released! https://t.co/Ev47wkemvD #ImWithKim pic.twitter.com/pHRqajimE3 — Ted Cruz (@tedcruz) September 8, 2015

Ted Cruz has a busy week planned.

On Tuesday, he was in Kentucky, planning to visit county clerk Kim Davis in jail (but actually meeting her after her release) to show support for her decision to refuse marriage licenses to same-sex couples. On Wednesday, he's back in D.C., holding a rally with Donald Trump to demonstrate opposition to the agreement with Iran. And then, of course, Cruz is expected to be on Capitol Hill, participating in Senate business -- all leading up a possible end-of-month push to shut down the government in lieu of allowing federal money to go to Planned Parenthood.

You'll remember that Cruz was a central player in the last government shutdown, which hit Washington in the first weeks of October 2013. At that point, the fight was over whether to fund Obamacare. With Democrats controlling the Senate, and the president from whom "Obamacare" derives its nickname still holding the pen at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, that effort was doomed from the outset. This time, with Republicans holding a small majority but the same president holding that pen, the outcome likely wouldn't be different.

The 2013 shutdown led to the worst approval ratings for the party in the history of Washington Post polling. So a remake of the shutdown likely makes many Republican leaders blanch, what with a presidential election only a year away.

But Cruz likely sees it differently. Pew Research surveyed voters before and after the shutdown to gauge their opinion of what had happened. Cruz, given his central role in the shutdown, was polled separately. Among non-tea-party Republicans, his favorability dropped and his unfavorability rose. Among tea partyers, though?

For anyone observing, there's a lesson: Tea party Republicans would reward someone who was willing to stand up to the establishment on core issues -- no matter the ultimate outcome.

In 2016 polling, Cruz has slowly gained on the primary leaders. He's made a concerted (and so far not completely successful) push to consolidate the evangelical vote behind his candidacy. He might be having better luck with tea partyers.

Quinnipiac University polled in July and August, a period during which Trump surged ahead of the rest of the pack and one-time leaders like Jeb Bush and Scott Walker slipped. But notice what happens when you isolate the tea party contingent of the Republican Party. Cruz soars.

Part of Cruz's ascent is certainly because he is riding the same anti-establishment wave as Trump and Ben Carson, who got 10 percent in the new poll but was faring worse than that with tea partyers. Cruz has been most direct about agreeing with Trump even on the businessman's more exotic journeys around the lands of rationality and appropriateness. (There's probably a good reason for this.) Cruz's big jump might also be due to the bigger margin of error in polling a smaller group of people.

But in a 17-person race, building a strong base of support in a decent-sized constituency is important. That's why Cruz is in Kentucky; a March poll found that tea party supporters opposed same-sex marriage by a 40-point margin. Other Republicans viewed it slightly positively. It's why he's getting out in front on Iran very visibly -- and standing by Donald Trump's side.

The long-term question, though, is how big that "decent-sized" constituency actually is. Gallup found that one-fifth of Americans were tea party supporters last November. Among Republicans, the figure is one-third, according to a New York Times/CBS News poll. (The composition of the responses in Quinnipiac's polling isn't clear, but that Cruz gained only two points from July to August overall despite the tea party surge suggests that the percentage is small.)

In Iowa in 2012, 64 percent of caucus-goers said they strongly or somewhat supported the tea party -- a figure that's certainly higher than it will be next year given the decline in overall tea party support but that offers some sense of how pervasive the movement still is in the Republican Party. (In more-libertarian New Hampshire, the 2012 figure was 51 percent.)

If Cruz can continue to demonstrate to those anti-establishment voters that he will put their desires first, it's safe to assume that his position with them will stay strong. What could make that point more effectively than standing beside a woman who literally ignored a government mandate? Well, besides shutting down the government for the second time in two years. Those efforts help define Cruz's niche in the primary: The anti-establishment establishment guy. He's the Kim Davis of the Republican Party, doing what he thinks is right, not what's necessarily in the best interests of his party or anyone else.

All of which suggests that Ted Cruz's very savvy and very intentional week and month of activity will not end any time soon.