Topics: aol_on, Editor's Picks, Religion, Life News, News

If the number of those professing no loyalty to make-believe celestial despots (thankfully) continues to grow, faith derangement syndrome is advancing to its final stage among those suffering from it.

A new PPP survey reveals that Republicans are afflicted most, with 44 percent now favoring installing Christianity as the United States’ official religion. (Lest we forget, the GOP’s roster of potential 2016 candidates is stocked with rabid believers, and even faith-faker Donald Trump is courting evangelicals.) A shocking 28 percent of Democrats are also theocratically inclined. Only 53 percent of Republican and Democratic voters combined oppose declaring Jesus jabberwocky our national faith.

The upshot: almost three out of four adult Americans would, in effect, junk the First Amendment, and with it, our gloriously godless system of governance.

These statistics should prompt all rationalists to sound the proverbial tocsin with unrelenting fury. The religious-secular divide among Americans is deepening, putting those who value reason, evidence and consensus-based decisions in direct opposition to putrid supernatural gobbledygook’s slackwitted votaries; in other words, to those who hear voices, see visions, and engage in kooky superstitious rituals – prayer, for instance – that would lead to their immediate institutionalization if such symptoms were not classified under the (scandalously) ennobling rubric of “religion.”

Remember, the PPP survey deals not with the simple spread of faith, but with the desire of one part of the population to force its antiquated way of life and counterfactual worldview on the other.

The situation, thus, is dire. We no longer have time for niceties. We need to speak out forcibly against faith and expose it for what it is – a delusion deleterious to liberty and the commonwealth.

The stakes are high. The faith-deranged support a (largely successful) nationwide campaign to restrict women’s reproductive rights and introduce Religious Freedom Restoration Acts, of which there are now 21 in force, with others on the way. As a result of decades of Christian propaganda, performing abortions can be life-threatening for doctors. And in times of widespread fiscal austerity, the government loses about $83 billion a year to religious tax exemptions. This should all outrage us and incite us to act.

Yet we have it relatively easy. Abroad, a terrorist state founded on religion is destroying Syria and driving refugees into Europe. Sectarian violence threatens to bedevil Iraq indefinitely. Boko Haram is wreaking more and more havoc in West Africa. A Christian-Muslim conflict is ripping apart the Central African Republic. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is spiraling out of control. The longstanding hostility between India and Pakistan could erupt into a nuclear war that would end life on Earth as we know it.

Even in countries at peace, religion offers justification for violence and oppression. Take Saudi Arabia, for instance, where floggings and beheadings, often for apostasy or blasphemy, are routine events. Female genital mutilation is endemic in 28 mostly Muslim countries. Last January, religion motivated young men to commit mass murder in the heart of Paris, and over cartoons. Then, a month later, another faith-inspired terrorist opened fire on a free speech conference in Copenhagen while the Femen leader Inna Shevchenko was speaking, killing one and wounding three.

This is all almost too depressing to contemplate. Yet there’s an even direr reason to speak out forcibly against religion now — our species’ fading prospects for survival. Global warming, scientists show, is proceeding far more rapidly than had been predicted. The consequences have been to spark demonstrations in Syria that led to the civil war there, and worsen drought in the Sahel, helping birth Boko Haram. As the Himalayan glaciers melt, the Ganges River plains are threatened. Sea levels may rise as much as four feet by the end of the century. There may well be 150 or 200 million climate change refugees by 2050, and mostly from deeply religious parts of the world.

To worsen matters, our antibiotics are losing their effectiveness, leading to fears of what some have called a “bacterial apocalypse.” Overpopulation will also plague us, doubling the population in the next 35 years in Africa alone. Some scientists are even talking of human extinction.

Now, facing all these problems, the last places we should turn to for guidance are the macabre fables of ancient books, books composed before people knew they had to wash their hands after defecating.

Confronting all these perils, are we really going to sit by and keep quiet as religious conflicts divert our attention from solutions, set one group of humans against another and inspire misogyny, mayhem and murder? Are we going to nod humbly as pastors, priests, rabbis and imams preach division and hatred, when now more than ever we need a spirit of comity and union? Are we going to keep mum as faith-charlatans propose junk science be taught in schools as an “alternative” to evolution?

Will we keep on genuflecting to the avuncular Pope Francis, even as the Vatican aids, abets and shelters child rapists and forbids contraception, which is the same as sentencing people to poverty and underdevelopment in places like Africa and the Philippines?

Are we not going to object as our limited time and our limited resources are diverted to religious studies, faith groups and the building of places of worship?

We don’t have time or resources to spare. Every hour passed studying the Bible or the Quran in search of some “sacred” truth could be spent learning about the real world and our universe. We can’t tolerate such waste anymore.

Yet we do. By and large, we smile politely to people, humans just like us, who raise themselves above us by merely declaring themselves “saved” in one fashion or another. This, on their part, is unspeakable arrogance. We should stop smiling at once and speak out against such absurd presumption. Ignoring it just helps it continue.

Religion is, after all, implicitly arrogant. It assumes it knows the truth, that its followers are saved and that the rest of us are deluded and even damned. Are we really going to sit by as faith movements demand “tolerance” for such views, and try to make us to submit to their wills? Whether religion offers solace to some isn’t the issue. The submission and control it seeks to impose is. Toss out the Supreme Being and we’re left with one set of humans striving to dominate another, and justifying themselves with ideology based on nothing but myth.

We need to expose those myths for the lies they are, political correctness be damned.

We’ve all heard, “This is my religion and it’s true for me.” Objectively, though, the my-religion-is-true-for-me line is false, of course. Jesus can’t be the savior for some, but not others. Muhammad cannot be the prophet of God for one group, but not another. There either is a God, or there isn’t – and there is not. There is no middle ground between truth and falsehood. None should be sought.