Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

JACKSONVILLE, Fla. (AP) — By Roy Williams’ own admission, it’s been a tough season for North Carolina.

The death of coach Dean Smith, an academic scandal that raised questions about whether the Tar Heels have lost their way off the court, and a poor record — at least by Carolina’s standards — have made it hard.

Heading back to the Sweet 16 of the NCAA Tournament gives the coach and his players something to savor.

“I’m an emotional guy. … Losing Coach Smith, losing Ted Seagroves, my big-time buddy, Stuart Scott, the stuff that we’ve had going on, Mitch Kupchak’s daughter, it’s been a hard year, it really has,” Williams said after Saturday night’s 87-78 victory over fifth-seeded Arkansas. “I probably acted sillier in the locker room after this game than I have in quite a while. I’m going to try to enjoy the dickens out of this one for a while.”

The fourth-seeded Tar Heels (26-11) head to Los Angeles for the West Regional semifinals, where they’ll play either top-seeded Wisconsin or No. 8 seed Oregon.

Sixth-seed Xavier also advanced from Jacksonville, making it to the Sweet 16 for the third time in six years and ending the biggest feel-good story of the tourney with a 75-67 win over Georgia State. The Musketeers will face No. 2 seed Arizona in Los Angeles.

It will be a cross-country trip for the Tar Heels, somewhat fitting given their path this season.

“We didn’t have the type of regular season we wanted to,” said Tar Heels star Marcus Paige, who scored a team-high 22 points against Arkansas. “We had some bumps in the road, and we weren’t a typical Carolina team in terms of our record this year and our seed and stuff.

“Our fans expect us to have a No. 1 seed overall every single year. Unfortunately it didn’t happen for us this year, but we understand the moment, and you’ve got to win six games. Once you’re slotted in the tournament and you’re in position, it’s up for grabs. And we knew that we had the talent, we had the capability, we just have to buy in and do what we’re told, and we’ve been playing a lot better. Even if we have a bad regular season by Carolina standards, you can make up some ground for that by playing well in the tournament and making things happen late in the season.”

Aside from Carolina advancing to the Sweet 16 for the first time in three years, here are some things to know about Saturday’s West Region matchups in Jacksonville: