Beth Seidenberg is a licensed physician immunologist who helped bring drugs like the asthma drug Singulair and the pain medication Vioxx to market before turning to venture capitalism. As a partner at Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers (KPCB), she’s helped develop companies that led to some pretty sizable exits, and we’re thrilled to announce that Seidenberg will be talking with us about her journey, Silicon Valley and her take on medical biotech startups at Disrupt SF 2015.

Since Seidenberg joined KPCB in 2005, she’s incubated five companies and served as the founding CEO of two. Perhaps most notably, she navigated the exit of biotech company Flexus Biosciences, which was acquired by Bristol-Myers Squibb in February for $1.25 billion. Her other exits include Arresto Biosciences (acquired for $225 million), Atara Biotherapeutics (IPO in October 2014), Tesaro (IPO in 2012), and iPierian (acquired by Bristol-Myers Squibb in 2014 for $725 million).

She also serves on the board of 9 companies, including 3-V Biosciences, Armo Biosciences, Atara, Auxogyn, Breathe Technologies, Epizyme, iPierian, Redbrick Health and TESARO, all of which keeps her pretty busy while staying abreast of everything happening in the healthcare arena.

Needless to say, Dr. Seidenberg provides a valuable skill set to KPCB and we’re lucky to have her speak at Disrupt SF.

Seidenberg has a lot to say about the current state of the healthcare system, the tech industry’s love – hate relationship with the Food and Drug Administration, and how the healthcare startup landscape is changing in light of President Obama’s Affordable Care Act. And she’s playing a central role in that change. At KPCB, Seidenberg focuses on life science, investing in digital health and biotech companies who drive to improve health and the treatment of patients.

Before KPCB, Seidenberg was senior vice president of development and chief medical officer of Amgen, Inc. Prior to that, she was a senior executive in research and development at Bristol-Myers Squibb as well as Merck & Co., Inc. She received her M.D. degree from the University of Miami, and did post-graduate training at Johns Hopkins University, George Washington University and the National Institutes of Health.

Come hear what insights Seidenberg has to share at Disrupt SF 2015, which takes place September 21 – 23 at San Francisco’s historic Pier 70. Early bird tickets to the show are still available, and you can secure your spot at the best startup event in tech by buying a ticket here.