Clarksville, TN – After opening the season with three straight road losses, the Northeast Eagles football team were hoping to turn things around at their home opener against the Smyrna Bulldogs Friday night.

However, the Bulldogs proved the proverb, “The best laid schemes of mice and men often go awry,” applies to Eagles as well.

They shutout the Eagles 44-0.

The Eagles converted only three first downs in the game. They generated less than 100 yards both rushing and passing. Most of the positive offense was generated by junior quarterback Benji Burchwell who had to contend with bad snaps most of the night.

Burchwell completed eight passes for 36 yards and rushed for 53 yards.

The Eagles defense were able to make some stops and force the Bulldogs to settle for field goal attempts. But they also gave up big plays that put them in a deep hole early and kept them buried throughout the game.

Smyrna sophomore quarterback John Turner had a big game, completing 10 passes for 194 yards with two touchdowns.

Turner’s first touchdown was a 10-yard strike to Deven Sims. It was the end of a five-play drive the Bulldogs orchestrated after recovering an Eagles fumble in the first quarter.

Sims caught another touchdown pass on the Bulldogs next drive. This time he pulled down a 58-yard bomb with one hand in tight coverage for the score.

After kicking a 32-yard field goal, the Bulldogs ended the first half with a two-yard touchdown run by Austin Brown to make the score 24-0.

Any momentum the Eagles hoped to have in the second half was quickly destroyed by Sims who returned the Eagles second half kickoff 88 yards for a touchdown.

Bulldog senior running back Kyle Smith rushed for 80 yards in the game including a two-yard touchdown run in the third quarter to make the score 38-0. The Bulldogs final score was a 12-yard scramble by Jontarious Turner with less than a minute remaining in the game.

The win improves the Bulldogs to 4-0. Next they will play at home against the Oakland Patriots.

Still winless (0-4), the Eagles will try to end their losing streak and give their new head coach Terry Arrington his first win across town at Clarksville High Friday, September 19th.

Box Score

1 2 3 4 Final Northeast Eagles 0 0 0 0 0 Smyrna Bulldogs 14 10 14 6 44

About Marlon Scott

Marlon Scott is a freelance journalist and writer. He graduated from Austin Peay State University in 2011 with a B.S. in Communications, majoring in Communication Arts with a concentration in print and web journalism. His writing career began as a sports writer for The All State, the APSU student newspaper, in 2006. He continued working for the paper until his graduation, serving in various positions including Sports Editor and Editor-in-Chief. In 2010, Scott contributed stories and photographs as well as designed and served as Editor-in-Chief for the monograph, Civic Art of Clarksville: The stories behind the pieces. Scott has also produced 60 stories for The Leaf Chronicle. You can find him on twitter @theMarlonScott and on Facebook Email: mrscottoftn@gmail.com

Sections

Topics