Former Sen. Mike Kopp has chosen former Pueblo city councilwoman Vera Ortegon, a Colombia-born microbiologist, as his running mate.

Kopp is the first of the four Republican candidates for governor to announce his selection for lieutentant governor.

He introduced Ortegon in Denver on Friday morning, and then prepared to make campaign stops in Pueblo and Colorado Springs. Before the official announcement, Ortegon hugged excited family and friends.

“I’m ready to unleash the Colombian hurricane,” Kopp said as he introduced Ortegon, referring to her energy.

The choice of Ortegon covers geographic, gender and ethnic lines and guarantees Kopp some extra publicity as the June 24 primary approaches.

“This is unbelievable, really unbelievable,” Ortegon said, when she was introduced. “I stand tall and proud.”

Ortegon, whose first language is Spanish, has degrees in microbiology and biochemistry, and has served on numerous boards and commissions. She currently manages a health-care corporation with six medical providers and two locations in Pueblo.

After the announcement, Ortegon talked about her path to citizenship in 1976 after moving to the United States from Colombia. She was on former Gov. Bill Owens’ team, working on economic development for southern Colorado.

She said even when she served on the City Council she never felt like a politician, but “a servant of the people.”

Ortegon ran for the state Senate in 2010 but lost to Democrat Angela Giron, who was recalled by Pueblo voters last year because of her support for tougher gun laws.

Ortegon nominated Kopp at the state Republican assembly in April, where he won top line by getting the most votes from delegates. In a video of his speech, she can be seen behind his shoulder.

Ortegon and her husband, Anthony, have two sons, Anthony and Arthur, who works for Denver Mayor Michael Hancock.

The winner of the primary faces Democratic Gov. John Hickenlooper, who four years ago tapped college president Joe Garcia as his running mate. The Hickenlooper-Garcia team will be on the November ballot.

The other Republicans running for governor are former congressman Bob Beauprez and Tom Tancredo, and Secretary of State Scott Gessler.

Beauprez and Tancredo previously have run for governor.

Beauprez in 2006 picked Mesa County Commissioner Janet Rowland as his sidekick, saying she brought geographic and gender balance to his ticket. But he was criticized for tapping someone who also opposed Referendum C, a 2005 tax measure that divided the party, and someone who when asked about gay marriage said, “Do we allow a man to marry a sheep?”

They lost to Democrat Bill Ritter and his running mate, Barbara O’Brien.

Rowland now is backing Kopp.

Tancredo ran on the American Constitution Party ticket in 2010 , and chose former Rep. Pat Miller, known for her conservative pro-life stance. They came in second behind the Hickenlooper team, but well ahead of the GOP nominee, Dan Maes, and his running mate, former state Rep. Tambor Williams.

Lynn Bartels: 303-954-5327, lbartels@denverpost.com or twitter.com/lynn_bartels