Republican presidential candidate and Ohio Gov. John Kasich formally announces his campaign on July 21. (REUTERS/Aaron P. Bernstein)

Republicans’ most serious challenge in 2016 — in addition to attracting women and minorities — is class-based. The Democrats like to call the source of the problem “income inequality,” but the GOP’s problem is broader than that. It needs both a message and messenger that emotionally connects with middle- and lower-income voters, offers them hope and eschews libertarian hostility to government. The Hill provides a good summation:

Democratic presidential candidates Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders are hammering Republicans over what they say is a growing gap between the rich and the poor. Polls show their calls to raise the minimum wage and improve working conditions seem to resonate with voters. By contrast, many of the top GOP presidential candidates are finding it difficult to gain traction with a broader message of economic growth and job creation, strategists say. This disconnect could make Republican presidential candidates vulnerable to attacks from the left over income inequality that place them at odds with the average worker. . . .

This does not mean Republicans need to or should embrace big government or the liberal welfare state. They have to show that the GOP is not dedicated to taking things away from ordinary voters but rather finding ways liberals haven’t to provide opportunity and lift up those zapped by stagnant wages and rising health and college costs.

The problem for many GOP candidates is that the highly ideological and libertarian strain in the base pushes candidates to harsher anti-government rhetoric and policies that are negative — taking away Obamacare being the most obvious. That not only makes contenders such as Sens. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) and Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) objectionable outside the right-wing base but also pushes candidates who might have greater appeal, such as Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, into the right-wing weeds.

However, it is worth noting that two candidates with real momentum have avoided this pitfall both in tone and in substance. Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.), son of an immigrant, and Ohio Gov. John Kasich, son of a mailman, both aim their message at those beyond the comfy upper middle class. Sons of blue-collar workers, they can relate viscerally to those who want to enjoy the dignity of work but who do not view all government as the enemy. They both seek to relate to audiences both emotionally and programmatically. Rubio has arguably the most detailed set of reforms (on taxes, higher education, immigration, etc.) of any candidate, while Kasich can rattle off a long list of positive things he has done for the poor and middle class in his state.

Rubio grabs his audience with tributes to the American Dream, not in the abstract but in personal and concrete terms:

The single mother who works long hours for little pay so her children don’t have to struggle the way she has… The student who takes two buses before dawn to attend a better school halfway across town… The workers in our hotel kitchens, the landscaping crews in our neighborhoods, the late-night janitorial staff that clean our offices … and the bartenders who tonight are standing in the back of a room somewhere… If their American Dreams become impossible, we will have become just another country. But if they succeed, the 21st Century will be another American Century. This will be the message of my campaign and the purpose of my presidency.

Kasich talks about obligations to our fellow citizens and the values of empathy and kindness:

And as I hope you all know, economic growth is not an end unto itself. If you’re drug addicted, we’re going to try to rehab you and get you on your feet. If you’re mentally ill, prison is no place for you. Some treatment and some help is where you need to be. You’re the working poor? We’re going to give you an opportunity to take a pay raise and not bang you over the head because you’re trying to get ahead. We’re changing that system. If you have an autistic son or daughter, most of them, they can’t get insurance. We’ll work to make sure all of them have it. If you’re developmentally disabled, you’re made in God’s image. They have a right to rise. They have a right to be successful.

Neither candidate is afraid to confront pro-business libertarians. Rubio, for example, proposed a tax plan with a generous credit for middle-class families, to the horror of doctrinaire supply-siders. Kasich extended Medicaid, heresy on the right, and reformed everything from police practices to home nursing care. They do not view government as the enemy, certainly not on the state level.

There are legitimate differences of opinion with Rubio and Kasich on the substance of their proposals, but to their credit they at least have positive proposals that consist of more than ideological talking points. Moreover, their emotional connection with voters make them relatable in ways that more cerebral and more ideological candidates are not. If not either of them, then a candidate with these qualities is the Republicans’ best bet in 2016.