Assistant administrator, Support Services, Kaiser Permanente Santa Rosa Medical Center, 401 Bicentennial Way, Santa Rosa 95403, 707-393-4383, kp.org Age: 55 Residence: Windsor since 2012. Prior to that I spent 18 years in Iowa. Professional background: I have been in health care administration since 2006, overseeing support services and ancillary departments -- facilities, environmental services, food services, supply chain and linen. Prior to my health care work, I spent more than 20 years in durable goods manufacturing, building and distributing agricultural and heavy industrial machinery. Education: B.A., business, William Penn University, 2003; M.A., public administration, Drake University, 2006; M.S., human capital management, Bellevue University. During my time in manufacturing, I became Black Belt-certified in lean methodology. Staff: Some 16 staff members dedicated to facilities. Overall, I provide oversight to the equivalent of more than 200 full-time employees. Describe the facilities you oversee: Kaiser Permanente Santa Rosa encompasses the hospital (325,000 square feet), five medical office buildings, including clinical space in Rohnert Park (330,000 square feet), leased space (110,000 square feet) and a four-level parking structure (295,000 square feet) on over 10 acres. Tell us a little bit about yourself: I am from Southern California, but my wife and I relocated to the Midwest in the early 1990s to help care for my aging parents. When our children grew and moved out, we decided to relocate to Northern California to avoid the cold weather. What do you see as the role of the facilities managers within your organization?: Our mission is to provide high-quality, affordable health care services and to improve the health of our members and the communities we serve. Our role goes beyond building maintenance and repairs, providing adequate space and a clean environment -- these are just the basics. We must also optimize our resources for the services we provide to those that deliver care to our members. Health care is a highly regulated industry that requires the facility manager to not only meet customers’ expectations, but to also comply with a multitude of federal, state, local and regional accrediting agencies’ requirements. View as one page 1 | 2 Next

(page 2 of 2) What is the achievement you are most proud of?: Reaching my education goals. I left high school before finishing my junior year and did not return to school until I was 40. I held down a full-time position and graduated with honors, ultimately receiving a bachelor’s degree and two master’s degrees. What is your biggest challenge today?: With so many variables surrounding health care reform, it is difficult to forecast where we will be six, 12 or 18 months from now. California’s uninsured population is the largest in the nation -- 15 percent. The Affordable Care Act seeks to expand Medicaid coverage to close the uninsured gap. We are starting to see an increase in the Medicaid patients, while also seeing reimbursement cuts. For health care providers, this is a “do more with less” situation. This dynamic environment makes planning and resource optimization much more challenging. What the next major project either under way or on the horizon?: At any given time, we have 20--30 active projects, ranging from simple ergonomic workstation upgrades to a complete department renovation. We have a landscape remediation (drought-tolerant) project, main entrance canopy replacement, internal and external sign replacements, remodeling a main operating room and projects designed to reduce energy consumption. What product or service would/or is helping you do your job more effectively?: Technology has been the most helpful. We installed building automation systems throughout the facility, which greatly improved efficiency. We just finished installing devices giving us the ability to remotely monitor relative humidity in operating-room suites. How do you think your profession will change in the next five years?: I think that we will see fewer patients in the hospital, more in the clinics and even more at home. For Kaiser, it is all about the continuum of care, not just a single office visit or a hospital stay but the entire spectrum of care. That is why we are so connected with our community. This will mean a shift from the highly regulated brick and mortar facilities to finding effective ways of delivering care to our members where it is most convenient and appropriate for them. If we continue to learn how to provide care the way our members want it (clinics, home-based, telemedicine), I foresee a reduction in the overall square footage we currently require. Most admired businessperson outside your organization: Probably Richard Branson, CEO of Virgin. Clearly he is doing something right. He owns over 400 companies and is worth in excess of $4 billion. He also stands out as someone who is very passionate and committed about providing great customer service. Current reading: A More Beautiful Question: The Power of Inquiry to Spark Breakthrough Ideas by Warren Berger and Appreciative Inquiry: A Positive Revolution in Change by David L. Cooperrider. Stress reliever: Walking. Favorite hobby: Riding a motorcycle. Words that best describe you: Strategic, analytical and decisive. View as one page Prev 1 | 2

Assistant administrator, Support Services, Kaiser Permanente Santa Rosa Medical Center, 401 Bicentennial Way, Santa Rosa 95403, 707-393-4383, kp.org Age: 55 Residence: Windsor since 2012. Prior to that I spent 18 years in Iowa. Professional background: I have been in health care administration since 2006, overseeing support services and ancillary departments -- facilities, environmental services, food services, supply chain and linen. Prior to my health care work, I spent more than 20 years in durable goods manufacturing, building and distributing agricultural and heavy industrial machinery. Education: B.A., business, William Penn University, 2003; M.A., public administration, Drake University, 2006; M.S., human capital management, Bellevue University. During my time in manufacturing, I became Black Belt-certified in lean methodology. Staff: Some 16 staff members dedicated to facilities. Overall, I provide oversight to the equivalent of more than 200 full-time employees. Describe the facilities you oversee: Kaiser Permanente Santa Rosa encompasses the hospital (325,000 square feet), five medical office buildings, including clinical space in Rohnert Park (330,000 square feet), leased space (110,000 square feet) and a four-level parking structure (295,000 square feet) on over 10 acres. Tell us a little bit about yourself: I am from Southern California, but my wife and I relocated to the Midwest in the early 1990s to help care for my aging parents. When our children grew and moved out, we decided to relocate to Northern California to avoid the cold weather. What do you see as the role of the facilities managers within your organization?: Our mission is to provide high-quality, affordable health care services and to improve the health of our members and the communities we serve. Our role goes beyond building maintenance and repairs, providing adequate space and a clean environment -- these are just the basics. We must also optimize our resources for the services we provide to those that deliver care to our members. Health care is a highly regulated industry that requires the facility manager to not only meet customers’ expectations, but to also comply with a multitude of federal, state, local and regional accrediting agencies’ requirements. What is the achievement you are most proud of?: Reaching my education goals. I left high school before finishing my junior year and did not return to school until I was 40. I held down a full-time position and graduated with honors, ultimately receiving a bachelor’s degree and two master’s degrees. What is your biggest challenge today?: With so many variables surrounding health care reform, it is difficult to forecast where we will be six, 12 or 18 months from now. California’s uninsured population is the largest in the nation -- 15 percent. The Affordable Care Act seeks to expand Medicaid coverage to close the uninsured gap. We are starting to see an increase in the Medicaid patients, while also seeing reimbursement cuts. For health care providers, this is a “do more with less” situation. This dynamic environment makes planning and resource optimization much more challenging. What the next major project either under way or on the horizon?: At any given time, we have 20--30 active projects, ranging from simple ergonomic workstation upgrades to a complete department renovation. We have a landscape remediation (drought-tolerant) project, main entrance canopy replacement, internal and external sign replacements, remodeling a main operating room and projects designed to reduce energy consumption. What product or service would/or is helping you do your job more effectively?: Technology has been the most helpful. We installed building automation systems throughout the facility, which greatly improved efficiency. We just finished installing devices giving us the ability to remotely monitor relative humidity in operating-room suites. How do you think your profession will change in the next five years?: I think that we will see fewer patients in the hospital, more in the clinics and even more at home. For Kaiser, it is all about the continuum of care, not just a single office visit or a hospital stay but the entire spectrum of care. That is why we are so connected with our community. This will mean a shift from the highly regulated brick and mortar facilities to finding effective ways of delivering care to our members where it is most convenient and appropriate for them. If we continue to learn how to provide care the way our members want it (clinics, home-based, telemedicine), I foresee a reduction in the overall square footage we currently require. Most admired businessperson outside your organization: Probably Richard Branson, CEO of Virgin. Clearly he is doing something right. He owns over 400 companies and is worth in excess of $4 billion. He also stands out as someone who is very passionate and committed about providing great customer service. Current reading: A More Beautiful Question: The Power of Inquiry to Spark Breakthrough Ideas by Warren Berger and Appreciative Inquiry: A Positive Revolution in Change by David L. Cooperrider. Stress reliever: Walking. Favorite hobby: Riding a motorcycle. Words that best describe you: Strategic, analytical and decisive. 1 | 2

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus