SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

President Barack Obama is a serial-liar of the first order. That is not partisanship talking, that is history and science. And when Obama says, as he did Tuesday in Chicago, I’m not going to “take everyone’s guns away,” that means he’s coming for them.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Did I mention Barack Obama is a liar? Not only is Obama a liar, this “not gunna-gunna” ploy is a tactic the President has effectively used many times before. It’s a two-pronged assault that requires the cooperation of his DC Media allies.

By lying and saying he’s “not gunna,” Obama lulls his opponents into a false sense of security. By lying and saying he’s “not gunna,” it allows Obama’s DC Media allies to attack as liars and extremists those who say Obama will take their guns.

Let’s look at the science, shall we?

I’m Not Gunna Force People To Buy Health Insurance

Obama’s “not gunna” lies started during the 2008 presidential campaign when he said he was “not gunna” force people to buy health insurance. Here’s video of a 2008 debate between Obama and Hillary Clinton where he criticizes, not just the mandate in her health care plan that forces people to purchase health insurance, but the fact that they are fined and therefore “worse off” if they don’t purchase insurance.

We don’t want to put on adults a situation where we are mandating them to purchase insurance and if the subsidies are inadequate the burden is on them and they will be penalized, and this is exactly what Senator Clinton’s plan does … If healthcare is affordable you don’t need a mandate.

Except, from the mandate to the penalty, this is exactly what ObamaCare does.

I’m Not Gunna Take Away Your Health Insurance or Your Doctor

While he was trying to shove ObamaCare into law in 2009 and win re-election in 2012, dozens of times Obama said, I’m “not gunna” take away your health insurance and I’m “not gunna” take away your doctor.

Obama was lying.

Obama knew he was lying.

The DC Media knew he was lying.

And those of us who called out his lie were accused of racism by Obama and the DC Media.

By the time the fallout hit, millions and millions of people lost their insurance, and with it, their doctors.

The lie, and the DC Media’s willing complicity in covering up the lie, was necessary to get the monstrosity passed. Had the president told the truth, or the DC Media exposed what they knew was the truth, ObamaCare never would have passed.

I’m Not Gunna Sign Executive Orders Changing Immigration Law

More than 20 times President Obama reassured Americans he would not override Congress as a means to change or ignore immigration laws. Again and again, Obama told us he would not and could not unilaterally ignore or rewrite these laws.

He lied.

I’m Not Gunna Take Away Your Guns

“I believe in the Second Amendment. I believe in the people’s lawful right to bear arms. I will not take your shotgun away. I will not take your rifle away. I won’t take your handgun away.” — Then-Senator Obama, September 9, 2008.

—

—

While running for president, Obama was desperate to wrist-flick away the gun issue knowing it could hurt him in the general election.

In 2008, Obama also voted in favor of an amendment that would prohibit the confiscation of guns, even during a national emergency.

This was all a lie.

Twice this year, although the DC Media ignores this in order to protect him, Obama has said that he backs Australia’s gun laws, the spine of which is outright confiscation. Democrats and the DC Media always lie about Australia’s government-mandated confiscation by couching it as a buyback program — which it most certainly was not. Sure, the Australian government paid people for their guns but they were forced to turn them in. A buyback program is voluntary.

In June of 2014, Obama praised the Australia law:

—

—

In June of 2015, Obama again praised the Australia law.

—

In summation, Obama said…

I’m not gunna force you to buy health insurance. He did.

I’m not gunna penalize you for not buying health insurance. He did.

I’m not gunna take away your health insurance. He did.

I’m not gunna take away your doctor. He did.

I’m not gunna unilaterally rewrite immigration law. He did.

I’m not gunna unilaterally ignore immigration law. He did.

And now we’re supposed to trust him when he says he’s not gunna take away our guns.

P.S. The DC Media is also covering up Hillary’s endorsement of Australia’s gun laws.

Follow John Nolte on Twitter @NolteNC