ENLARGE Bradley Wiggins at the Tour of California. Getty Images

It was now two years ago, almost: the summer fairy tale for the cyclist Bradley Wiggins. Victory on the Champs-Élysées, the first British winner of the Tour de France, adding to the history days later with a triumphant Olympic time trial through the streets of his hometown London. That afternoon, as speculation of impending knighthood began to swell, Wiggins sat in a throne at a former palace of Henry VIII, his mod haircut matted, gold medal around his neck, visibly uncomfortable with the bumptious grandeur of the moment. "A bit of a prawn sandwich fest," he called the scene. Hours later, Wiggins sent out a photograph of himself on Twitter, celebrating boozily not far from the Thames.

He'd had enough with the pomp. He'd had a few. Wiggo was the people's champ.

A year later, the champion had returned hard to earth. The 2013 season never got started for Wiggins, derailed by injury and a tug of war within his own cycling outfit over leadership of the team. He would not race at the Tour de France, which would be won instead by his Team Sky colleague Christopher Froome, who'd ridden brilliantly in his protection the year before. Wiggins rebounded to win the Tour of Britain and take silver in the time trial at the world championships, but it was mostly a season undone. "There was just this massive sort of hangover effect of the previous year," Wiggins said the other day in a telephone interview.

ENLARGE Wiggins took a drink and a privileged seat at the 2012 Olympics as he waited to collect his gold medal. Imago/Zuma Press

The 2014 season has begun with far more promise. Wiggins is currently leading the Tour of California, the weeklong stage race that concludes Sunday in Thousand Oaks, Calif. Last month, he sent message of his early season fitness—and thrilled cycling purists—with a top-10 performance at Paris-Roubaix, the grueling cobblestoned race which basically feels like being tossed in a dryer with a bicycle for five hours.

"I knew I was capable of that," Wiggins said of Paris-Roubaix. "But it's another thing to do it."

The familiar Wiggins confidence was returning, but there was new perspective. Wiggins spoke as if he'd made peace with the idea of working for Froome at the Tour de France this July. (21st Century Fox, a Team Sky sponsor, and News Corp, owner of The Wall Street Journal, were until last June part of the same company.)

"It's about getting him his second Tour, and it's going to be all hands on deck," said Wiggins, who added that he and Froome had a "good sit down" in December at a team training camp.

Like Wiggins the year before, Froome had endured the ritual now attached to the Tour leader's yellow jersey: assuring the public he was racing clean. Repeated drug scandals had eroded confidence in the sport, none bigger than the unmasking of Lance Armstrong. The skepticism had exasperated Wiggins when he was in yellow, but now he believed questions were an inevitable part of cycling and winning.

"That's the way the sport has gone now, and I think it will certainly be like that for the next few years, unfortunately—or fortunately," he said. "It's the legacy that Lance and everything has left us. I don't expect that to go away in the near future…It's going to take years of consistent, credible, honest performances."

Meanwhile, Wiggins sounded more comfortable with the magical madness of two summers ago. At the time, there was hardly a moment to think—Wiggins had rushed from the Tour de France podium straight on to London, where the British cyclists were heavily pressured favorites. He'd already won three gold medals before as a track cyclist, but nothing compared with taking one on roads lined by the British public.

"Two years on now, there's an element of 'God, how did I do that?'" he said, laughing.

Knighthood had arrived, as expected. Wiggins agreed to the recognition after securing the blessing of his musical idol, Paul Weller. He called it an "incredible honor," but it still sounded funny. This was a cyclist who talked about wanting to visit the Viper Room on Sunset Boulevard when the Tour of California was complete. Who had a quick opinion on whether or not The Smiths would reunite. ("No, I think Morrissey is far too stubborn.") Who said he valued his guitar collection far more than his bikes.

"People will always give me bikes," Wiggins said. "But some of the guitars I have are irreplaceable."

He was now Sir Bradley. But on the road, he was beginning to look like Wiggo again.

Write to Jason Gay at Jason.Gay@wsj.com