Topics: Baltimore Orioles, Baseball, FairWarning, MLB, Oakland A's, U.S. Department of Labor, wage violations, Business News, News

This piece originally appeared on FairWarning

A federal investigation of pay practices in Major League Baseball has been expanded to include two more teams—the Baltimore Orioles and Oakland A’s—bringing to four the number of clubs that have come under scrutiny for possible violations of U.S. wage standards.

The Labor Department’s focus is pay for clubhouse and administrative workers and interns, who in some cases have gotten less than the minimum wage or were not paid time-and-a-half after more than 40 hours of work in a week, as the law requires.

Officials with the department’s Wage and Hour Division, who confirmed they are investigating the Orioles and A’s, also disclosed terms of settlements that will require the Miami Marlins and San Francisco Giants to give back wages to underpaid workers.

According to agency spokesman Jason Surbey, the Marlins agreed to pay $288,290 in back wages and damages to 39 team employees, including clubhouse and office staff. The 23 clubhouse workers, who provide services to team players such as cleaning and preparing the locker room for games, were paid $50 a day. But they worked as many as 11 hours on game days, and so were not properly paid the minimum wage and overtime, Surbey said.

The settlement with the Giants involves payment of $220,793 in back wages and damages to 78 employees. Most were interns who received stipends but were determined by the agency to have been employees entitled to minimum wage and overtime. The interns worked in baseball operations and group sales, among other duties, and were due back wages ranging from $60 to $4,000 apiece.

A Giants spokeswoman declined comment, and representatives of the Marlins and the baseball commissioner’s office did not return phone calls.

“Whether in America’s factories, fields or ball parks, a fair day’s work deserves a fair day’s pay,” said David Weil, administrator for the Wage and Hour Division. “Unfortunately, in our recent investigations of Major League Baseball teams, we found employees not being paid the minimum wage and overtime to which they are legally entitled. That’s unacceptable and I am pleased that we have been able to secure back wages for those workers.”

Federal officials would not provide details of the Orioles and A’s cases, describing them as open investigations. Team representatives also declined to give details.

Wage settlements with the Miami Marlins and San Francisco Giants involve paying more than a half million dollars in back wages and damages to more than 100 employees. (iStockphoto)

“The Oakland A’s continuously review their employment practices and believe that, as a result, they are in compliance with all of their wage payment obligations,” said A’s public relations director Bob Rose in a written statement. An Orioles spokesman said the club is “aware of an ongoing investigation, but we don’t have any comment at this time.”