Summertime outdoor exhibit at the Longmont Museum designed to help kids learn about the dynamics of water

Have fun, get wet and learn are the objectives of the newest exhibit at the Longmont Museum & Cultural Center, called Splash Factory!

""This was actually designed and built by the Children's Museum of Denver," said Jared Thompson, the Longmont Museum's curator of exhibits. "We bought it from them."

Splash Factory! at the Longmont Museum Longmont Museum & Cultural Center: 400 Quail Road Hours: 9 a.m. - 5 p.m. Monday through Saturday; 1 - 5 p.m. Sunday Cost: Combined admission to Splash Factory! and the museum's indoor exhibition, Planes, Trains & Automobiles, is $5 for adults, $3 for students and seniors (62-plus). Admission is free to the special exhibits on the second Saturday of each month. Phone/website:303-651-8374 or longmontmuseum.org

The exhibit is meant to get young children interested in the properties of water. Displays include the "geyser," in which children pump a handle up to the maximum reading on a meter and then shoot water up to 30 feet in the air. There's also a whirlpool, where kids can watch balls get sucked into a vortex, and the "laminar jet," which pushes balls through a tube and suspends them in the air.

"(They)learn through play," Thompson said. "And it's a good thing for the hot Colorado summer."

Splash Factory! will be at the museum all summer long. A combination ticket ($5 for adults and $3 for students and seniors 62 and up) also gets you into the Planes, Trains & Automobiles exhibit, which Thompson also put together.

Advertisement

"Everything in it is a scale model," he said of the Planes, Trains exhibit. "So there's not any fantasy cars. Everything exists."

Thompson spent the latter part of last week putting the Splash Factory! exhibit together and then training the volunteers on how to help the kids play with it.

"It's really engineered pretty well," he said. "Those guys are all really smart guys. They're all industrial designers."

Contact Times-Call staff writer Tony Kindelspire at 303-684-5291 or tkindelspire@times-call.com