Coach Gary Kubiak might want to watch out. Scouts have their eyes on his backup quarterback.

Three days after Brock Osweiler’s impressive showing in Seattle — arguably his best showing as a pro — Nuggets coach Michael Malone, general manager Tim Connelly and other team assistants and staff members attended the Broncos’ training camp practice at Dove Valley.

And Osweiler, for obviously reasons, caught Malone’s eye.

“I mean he’s 6-foot-8,” Malone said of the former Arizona State quarterback who almost ended up at Gonzaga to play basketball. “I know that he played very well in the first game against Seattle and I hope he can really have a great season, but I heard he was a pretty good high school basketball player. If he wants to come over and help us out, he’s more than welcome to, and I promised coach Kubiak we’ll make sure he doesn’t get hurt.”

Malone spent some time with Broncos general manager John Elway during practice and, afterward, had a lengthy conversation with Kubiak about coaching — and getting fired. Kubiak was let go by the Houston Texans in 2013, and Malone by the Sacramento Kings last December.

“We talked about myself being fired in Sac, when he got fired in Houston, and how it really does make you stronger and makes you a better coach at the next opportunity that you get,” Malone said. “We’re just really thankful for the time that they allowed us here today.

“For me, one thing I asked coach Kubiak, it’s so big, everything about the Broncos. They have 90 players on their roster right now and they have 20-something coaches. I talked to him about how he delegates to his staff and how he trusts his coaches to do their jobs. Obviously, he kind of steps in whenever he sees fit, so we talked about that.”

Malone stayed for the full practice, watching intently from the sideline as Osweiler and Peyton Manning led the team through 11-on-11 drills, and Joe DeCamillis coordinated three special teams periods. He watched as Von Miller tore through offensive linemen during one-on-one drills. And he watched as backup receiver Bennie Fowler hauled in a couple more deep catches, as follows to his 41-yard grab Friday.

But Malone couldn’t escape Dove Valley without fielding questions about the Ty Lawson trade last month.

“We wish Ty well. I mean that sincerely. That’s not just coach talk,” Malone said. “We all wish him well. But it was a move that we felt was a good move for us. I hope he’s able to get his life in order, and when he does, we all know he’s a special player.”

Malone said he had input on the deal, acknowledging that he continues to work closely with Connelly, (assistant general manager) Arturas Karnisovas and (president) Josh Kroenke.

“We’re a team. There’s no separation between church and state,” Malone said. “We’re together, we’re one, we communicate, and I think that’s so important. But at the end of the day, Tim’s job as GM is to make those decisions, obviously with the blessing of Josh Kroenke. They asked my opinion, I gave it, I tell him what I feel and believe in, and then whatever decision they make I roll with it.”