Camp host Gene Lavielle strums his banjo outside his camper Tuesday during some down time at St. Vrain State Park. ( Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer )

If every camper stocked patience along with their marshmallows and sleeping bags, the crickets would sing more than they already do for summertime state park hosts and hostesses.

"Usually, it is a show when folks pull in with a big truck and trailer," said Gene Lavielle, a St. Vrain State Park host in Firestone. "The thing that's really fun is watching the husband who's usually the driver and the woman who is usually the spotter."

But make no mistake. Lavielle, 71, brings only humility and good-natured humor to figuring out the physics of visitor parking problems and to popping jammed trailer canopies.

Decades earlier, he faced similar challenges getting his family into fresh air and is happy to help others make great memories together camping.

Best1 Camp hosts Carol and Gene Lavielle clean a campsite Tuesday at St. Vrain State Park. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

Lavielle and roughly 130 other volunteer park hosts and hostesses live on site seasonally at some of Colorado's 42 state parks, state spokeswoman Jennifer Churchill said.

In that role, they check visitors in and out; pick up trash; pull weeds; and clean fire pits. They answer the same questions over and over again with a smile about where to buy propane, where to do laundry, and where the fish are biting.

Mostly, though, they roll out the welcome mat for people weary of driving, weary of work and the usual ways of being with family, which explains why these volunteers shine, said Linda Richards, who supervises SVSP's 12 hosts and hostesses.

They set the tone for rest and relaxation because they live it.

"I realized 13 years ago that there was more to life than taking care of a house and our yard," Gene Lavielle said.

He and his wife both retired then — he as a quality control manager and she as a fire chief's secretary — to travel the country in their Teton fifth wheel.

Now, they exude a certain joie de vivre with their "Anchors aweigh!" lifestyle and take pleasure in encouraging the same in others — even if only for the two-day consecutive stay SVSP allows in the summer.

A park with slightly unlikely mojo

Ironically, a home on wheels ultimately led Gene Lavielle and his wife, Carol, 70, to care for a much bigger back yard.

SVSP, which sits northwest of the intersection at Interstate 25 and Colo. Hwy. 119, covers 604 "land" acres and 152 "water" acres — namely, ponds stocked in the winter with rainbow trout and in the summer with saugeye, walleye, catfish, crappies, pike and bluegill, Richards said.

In addition to directing campers to the fishing, birdwatching and outdoor educational opportunities for kids and adults, host couples here keep the park so manicured that campers consistently rank it high on "cleanliness" in surveys, she added.

"They will pull weeds and sweep gutters without being asked," Richards said.

Tidiness, majestic mountain views, and easy access perhaps make up for the downsides of this park, for the incessant hum of interstate traffic and the visibility of high-tower advertising, such as the nearby Conoco station's unleaded and diesel gas prices displayed in digital red and green.

On a Saturday morning in mid-July, a single dad from Longmont hoping to camp over the weekend with his kids pulled up to the ranger shack in a sports utility vehicle. He idled in a line four cars long behind a vehicle with a Florida license plate.

Then, he got lucky.

A checklist of campsites used by camp hosts George and JoAnn Sanford at St. Vrain State Park. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

A minute before he pulled up to the window where Richards stood, a park host called her with news of a camper who needed to leave a day early due to engine trouble.

When Richards offered the spot to the man, he explained that he had found every campground between Longmont and Loveland full.

Of SVSP's 87 sites — 46 of them equipped with full hook up — it was the only spot open that weekend.

"I'll take it!" he said.

Behind the scenes

With more than 100 visitors in the park daily during the summer months, park hosts and hostesses stay busy meeting and greeting newcomers.

But behind the scenes, they form a semi-permanent community by gathering to grill dinner or take a so-called L.E.O. — a "Let's eat out!" date.

In either setting, these couples spend the time required to build genuine friendships that often begin with the shared experience of retiring and downsizing.

SVSP hostess and host Shari and Tom Conlin lived in the same Longmont home for 30 years before selling it recently to live full-time in their recreational vehicle after retiring from jobs in accounting and grocery store loss prevention, respectively.

Part of their hesitation in putting their brick-and-mortar home on the market came down to nostalgia about bringing up their children there, they said.

"But the kids aren't there anymore," Shari Conlin, 55, said.

She and her husband also found that those grown children were not as interested in their stuff as they presumed.

"After about five minutes of going through things with them that became obvious," Tom Conlin, 58, said, chuckling.

Ultimately, the Conlins adopted a "Tiny House" mentality shared by the Lavielles and sold their home without regrets.

That move forced them to pick just a few treasures to take on the road.

Tom Conlin named none.

His wife through misty eyes mentioned that she kept her mother's well-worn Bible.

Other than that, they cut ties with almost all of stuff they once thought they needed — duplicate Tupperware, knickknacks and furniture — all of which could be replaced easily.

Carol Lavielle admitted that she struggled to give up her bowling balls during the transition into a nomadic lifestyle.

Instead, she kept more precious items, such as a lead crystal vase from their 25th wedding anniversary.

When a particularly bumpy ride through the mountains unlodged it from its normally secure place between the kitchen faucet and the backsplash, it shattered on the floor.

"And a cheap bottle of red wine survived," she said. "You have to let a lot of stuff go."

The upshot is they all now know that free spirits make for happy campers, however long or short the stay. And happy campers like to stay longer, Gene Lavielle said.

"We notice that the travelers want to be on the road before 9 a.m. But the locals, they will stay until noon," he said. "They don't want to go home,"

Pam Mellskog can be reached at p.mellskog@gmail.com or 303-746-0942.