If you're unsure about a response, it's OK to ask for a moment to collect your thoughts before responding.

As a prospective medical school student, you've likely prepared to answer questions about your academic career, volunteer work and future aspirations during your admissions interviews. But you probably haven’t given much thought to how you might answer ethics questions.

First, let’s start by explaining ethics questions. These questions arise from societal and cultural concerns and there may be a great deal of disagreement about the right way to approach the issues involved. Current topics include stem cell research; conflict of interest in the world of medical devices and pharmaceutical agents; using animals for research; and organ donation from foreign countries.

[Follow these tips for successful medical school interviews.]

It is quite possible that you will be asked your opinion about the future concerns for medicine in the U.S. You may be asked to talk about the Affordable Care Act, for example. Luckily, you don’t need to understand all 2,000 pages of the law, but you should definitely know why some people are in favor of it while others are very much against it, and you should know how the future of medicine is changing as a result.

Interviewers ask ethics questions for multiple reasons. The first is to determine if prospective students are aware of current bioethical issues. The second is to see how open-minded they might be with their future patients. The third is to find out how reflective and thoughtful you can be.

There is often no one right answer. If you get caught up in thinking there is a right answer, you may freeze. I have observed applicants searching the interviewer’s face as if to uncover the perfect answer.

If you're unsure how to respond, it is best to represent all sides to the best of your ability. You should be able to formulate not only your own opinion, but also that of various others.

[Learn how to show professionalism in medical school applications.]

When posed with an ethics question, put yourself in someone else’s shoes and speak from his or her point of view. Then follow that up with another point of view. That is what the interviewer is waiting to hear​.

Prospective students may be given the opportunity to create their own question, such as being asked to talk about recent ethics issues in medicine. Be prepared by considering this question ahead of time.

Interviewees also should be able to explain their reasoning for offering a particular answer, as it gives the interviewer insight into how they think and whether they seek evidence for a determination, which is a crucial skill for physicians​.

Applicants will often be asked how they would handle a patient who had a different viewpoint. When a physician listens to a patient carefully and then reflects back to them what they have said, the patient knows the physician has clearly understood the message.The physician tries not to insert his or her personal bias, but rather tries hard to understand how the patient came to that perspective.

Like being in a minefield​, it is best to know exactly where tricky spots are so that you can pass through safely. Some of these questions veer toward religious or political issues, which really are inappropriate to ask. If they come up in conversation, however, it is better to avoid an argument with the interviewer.

[Practice showing compassion as a premed student.]

If a question surprises you, it is perfectly acceptable to say, "That is a very interesting question. Let me think about it a moment." Then collect your thoughts and start exploring all the various options about how it can be interpreted. Describe them as if they all carried the same weight initially and as you hear yourself express them aloud, you will be able to determine where you want to place emphasis.

Using examples from life experiences provides evidence for your opinion. Avoid crediting or discrediting others or their opinions.

Although ethics questions can be challenging to answer, they are also an opportunity for prospective students to shine.