By Rob Port | Watchdog.org North Dakota Bureau

BISMARCK, N.D. — An amicus brief siding with the Obama administration in a lawsuit over health insurance subsidies has become something of a hot potato.

North Dakota is a deeply Republican state with a long history of opposing the unpopular law.

The U.S. Supreme Court is considering King v. Burwell, which challenges the federal government’s ability to distribute insurance subsidies through the federal exchange. The law says subsidies may be distributed “through an Exchange established by the State.” Plaintiffs in the case argue this excludes subsidies paid through the federal exchange, in which all but 14 states, including North Dakota, participate.

The Obama administration has argued the intent of the law was to allow subsidies through both the federal exchange and the state exchanges.

North Dakota is joined to an amicus brief filed by the attorneys general of 24 states siding with the president. Attorney General Wayne Stenehjem is the only Republican to sign the document.

But whose idea it was to sign isn’t clear. According to Stenehjem, the filing came at the suggestion of Gov. Jack Dalrymple.

“The North Dakota Legislature declined to establish its own health care exchange and instead rely on the federal government’s exchange, in part because of the belief that the state participants would be eligible for federal income tax credits for a portion of their health insurance premiums,” Stenehjem said in an emailed statement to Watchdog.org. “Since the income tax liability of as many as 11,000 North Dakotans will be affected by the outcome of this US Supreme Court decision, the Governor has suggested that the voice of the ND taxpayers should be heard by joining in a legal brief intended to provide assistance to the Court in their decision making.”

Jeff Zent, a spokesman for Dalrymlpe, remembers the provenance of the filing differently. Zent said it was the other way around.

“When the attorney general approached the governor’s office about filing the amicus brief the governor agreed that the issue must be cleared up,” Zent told Watchdog, though he acknowledged that Dalrymple supports the filing.

Obamacare remains deeply unpopular with North Dakotans. Recent polling by DFM Research indicates 59 percent of North Dakotans disapprove of the law; just 29 percent approve. A total of 61 percent of poll respondents said they would like to see the law either entirely or partially repealed, while just 10 percent said they’d like to see the law remain as is.

The poll, conducted Jan. 17-26, included 5,700 respondents with a margin of error of 4.9 percentage points.