Chief Executive Officer Mike Olson anticipates that within the next month, he will schedule interviews with candidates for the chief financial officer position.

Citizens Medical Center hired recruiter John G. Self four months ago to identify qualified candidates for the permanent CFO position.

Olson reported to the hospital's board of managers at a meeting Wednesday that the firm is vetting candidates and conducting thorough background checks.

During the meeting, board members authorized Olson to continue leasing the management of six nursing homes under Regency Post-Acute Healthcare System's new owners.

The county-owned hospital does not own the physical facilities, but rather has a mutually-beneficial partnership that involves licensing the skilled nursing facilities while Regency handles the management.

Citizens is one of seven hospital groups that has a partnership to license Regency's facilities.

Olson said continuing the partnership with Regency enhances patient care and provides greater coordination between acute and longterm care settings.

The pending sale was expected to close a few days ago, but Regency sought a different lender, which requires new documentation by the owner of their license to complete the transaction.

In other news, board chairwoman Dr. Tanya Seiler and Olson talked about what they learned at the Texas Hospital Association's annual conference in January.

Seiler said while the Affordable Care Act means more people are insured, it doesn't necessarily mean they can afford to pay for the medical care they need.

Seiler, who is an obstetrician and gynecologist, said she's seen how her insured patients are having trouble paying for the out-of-pocket costs because they first have to meet their deductible.

Olson said the speakers recommended the best way to deal with the changes in the health care industry, particularly the cost and federal regulations, was to stay focused on patient safety and clinical outcomes.

"I think that's really smart advice," said board member Luis Guerra.

Best practices for patient experience was also the focus of a presentation by Jane Cook, the hospital's interim chief nursing officer.

She reported to the board that employees will be working to improve patient satisfaction by decreasing their anxiety and increasing trust with medical personnel.

One way to do that would be to have less of an emphasis on checklists and instead focus on managers making patient rounds and asking open-ended questions to determine whether they had a positive experience.

She said shift leaders would also be meeting with each staff member quarterly to assess what tools they need to work better and happier.

Olson added being sure to acknowledge excellent work by specific employees is also important. "That's how we get better," he said.

The meeting ended with a tour of the new 3D tomosynthesis mammography machine.

Board members and administrators met with radiologist Dr. Bruce Tharp and mammographers at the hospital.

Mammographer Cheri Alkek said they have been using the new technology on patients for the past three weeks and that the images produced allows the radiologists to get a more clear picture of the scanned area.

Tharp told the group Citizens is able to detect cancer earlier, especially in dense breasts and reduce the number of callbacks.

This has helped eliminate some of the anxiety patients experience when they are told they need to return for a follow-up scan.

"It's a really valuable tool, so I'm excited that we have it," he said. "It's really what's best for the patients."

SHARE