rider holds on during a bareback bronc ride at last year's New Year's Eve Rodeo at The Ranch. The event returns for audiences again this year. (Special to Go)

Expect some rowdy freestyle bull fighting and championship riding for this New Year's Eve Extreme Rodeo Challenge at the Budweiser Events Center. For the eighth year in a row, bucking broncos, music and mutton busting will provide ample entertainment for ringing in the New Year.

This year's show features a lineup of nationally acclaimed bull riders, including the youngest championship freestyle bullfighter in current competition, Ryder Rich, 14. Top stock from all over the nation will also make appearances, including championship bucking bull "The Rocker."

The whole event began many years ago in the imagination of Kevin Rich of Eaton. He raises bucking and riding bulls for a living, and also produces the New Year's Eve competition. The show features sponsored team battles in which individual riders compete in different events for the evening, and their composite score determines a grand champion team of the night.

"The teams consists of one bareback rider, one saddle bronco rider, two bull riders and one freestyle bull fighter," Rich said. "It is just like any other rodeo. The majority of the cash and prizes are given to individual members. But then afterwards, the teams that are sponsored have five contestants on their teams and they compete for the overall championship after it is all said and done."

Full-time professional rodeo rider Wes Wahlert of Galeton will ride for the New Year's Eve show. This is just one stop on his yearly tour, ranging from 60 to 200 rodeos a year.

Advertisement

For the shows, his goal is to hold on for at least eight seconds as a bucking bull fiercely attempts to remove him from his back.

"After that, there are two judges each with 25 points for the bull and 25 points for the rider," Wahlert said. "The judges look at how hard the bull bucked, how difficult was the bull to ride and how did the rider counter the bull. A score over 90 says the rider did a really good job. The biggest possible points are 100. There has been one 100 ride in the history of rodeos."

When Wahlert steps into the ring, a random draw will match him with a bull.

"I do pretty well for myself riding bulls," Wahlert said. "Sometimes it is two seconds and a lot of times it is eight seconds. You hope for those 8 seconds more than you do the two. It is a heck of a good time for New Year's Eve. It is a really good family fun event to go to and we have a good time."

Throughout the night, finalists in the Northern Colorado Big Country Radio Idol will compete for the top award, and the Austin Wahlert band will also perform. Shooting demonstrations by the Weld County Sheriff posse will entertain, as well as the popular mutton busting event.

"Basically this is one event where kids under 60 pounds get on a sheep try to score the highest by staying on as long as possible," Rich said. "It can only happen in the Rodeo world. You go to Elitches and you have to be so tall to get on a ride. But here in the West we just strap a young child to a farm animal and turn them lose and that is our entertainment."