State officials have been crowing that more than 400,000 Californians have enrolled in plans through the state’s health insurance exchange, Covered California.

However, another important statistic is getting lost in the exchange hubbub, and it has to do with

, the state’s publicly funded Medicaid program that insures low-income residents.

Medi-Cal is huge. In previous columns, I described it as serving more than 8 million Californians.

That was

2013.

Under Obamacare,

, opening the program to more Californians, including childless adults, who previously were ineligible.

How many people have enrolled so far under the expansion? The

, which administers Medi-Cal, hasn’t been terribly forthcoming with the answer.

But it did say this when I asked: “Current Medi-Cal enrollment is nearly 9.2 million.”

Um … excuse me?? That means about one in four Californians is on Medi-Cal. That also means Medi-Cal is not just huge, but ginormous.

Clearly,

the enrollment process. But like the folks who have wrestled with

or waited on hold for hours without getting an answer to their question, some Medi-Cal applicants say they are hitting roadblocks that are preventing them from obtaining coverage.

And I’m hearing from them. A lot of them.

Today, I’m going to explain what you can do if you get tripped up in the Medi-Cal application process.

, there’s no open-enrollment period for Medi-Cal like there is for Covered California and the open market. You can apply for Medi-Cal anytime.

A: I wish I could give Michael from Clovis a definitive answer, but I can’t. I don’t have enough information to say whether he’s newly eligible for Medi-Cal or not.

But that’s not really the point. I have received numerous emails from others who also think they have been denied Medi-Cal because they’re being subjected to the old (pre-January) eligibility criteria.

, some key enrollment criteria have changed. The income threshold to qualify for Medi-Cal went up to 138 percent of the

(FPL). Last year, that computed to about $15,800 for an individual and $32,500 for a family of four. (The 2014 FPL guidelines have yet to be released.)

And, as I’ve already mentioned, the program is now also open to childless adults.

There are other changes that affect eligibility that I won’t get into here. Suffice it to say, lots of Ask Emily readers think they’re eligible under the new guidelines, but they’re getting denied.

These include people who have applied online as well as those who applied through their county social services agencies, which determine Medi-Cal eligibility.

Now what should they do? State officials maintain that you’ll get the right answer by contacting your county directly.

(You can find contact phone numbers for your county’s social services agency

or by clicking the “Find Local Help” button on the

.)

County Medi-Cal workers have been trained in the new rules, says Tony Cava of DHCS. They “can sit down with people and ensure eligibility questions are understood and accurately answered,” he says.

And we will all live happily ever after.

If only. Some Ask Emily readers tell me that it was precisely county workers who denied them coverage or couldn’t help with the new eligibility criteria.

One was Yvette of East Los Angeles, who says she is “mystified and dumbfounded” by a social worker’s denial.

“I’m hoping you could give me some pointers as to how I can appeal or fight her decision,” she adds.

Will do.

A: Yes. Appeal the decision.

When you receive your denial letter, there will be directions on how to appeal, says Cava.

You really should do so if you believe you were wrongly denied, says Jen Flory, senior attorney at the

.

Flory confirms that there have been problems as Californians have tried to apply for the expanded Medi-Cal program. Most complaints come from people who applied through the Covered California website, she says.

“People have gotten some notices that have confusing information,” she says. “One said something like, ‘You may be eligible for Medi-Cal, but here’s how you pick your Covered California plan’.”

If you’re planning to appeal, you have to do so within 90 days. Once you do, you are entitled to a hearing within 45 days, she says.

However, people often avoid hearings because they “are able to resolve the issue with a county worker ahead of time,” she says.

If you do end up at a hearing, you generally will receive a decision within a month.

Sounds like fun, doesn’t it? Luckily help is available. Flory points to the Health Consumer Alliance website:

. The alliance offers programs

that can assist you.

Good luck.

soLearn more about Emily here