U.S. Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., speaking in Exeter on Saturday, has called on former secretary of state Hillary Clinton to return donations to the Clinton Foundation from Saudi Arabia and other countries that have poor records of human rights. (DAN TUOHY/New Hampshire Union Leader) U.S. Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., speaking in Exeter on Saturday, has called on former secretary of state Hillary Clinton to return donations to the Clinton Foundation from Saudi Arabia and other countries that have poor records of human rights. (DAN TUOHY/New Hampshire Union Leader)

Paul calls out Clinton on women's rights



EXETER - Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul is demanding Hillary Clinton return Clinton Foundation donations from Saudi Arabia and other foreign countries with poor human rights records.



The likely Republican presidential hopeful lit into the likely Democratic candidate in an interview Saturday.



"I think she needs to return the money to the country she took it from," Paul said. "I think it sends a very bad statement to the world and to the American public that she's willing to take money from countries that have such really poor human rights and women's rights records."



Paul cited Saudi Arabia and Brunei, a country in Southeast Asia, where he said a woman accused of adultery risks death by stoning.



"In Saudi Arabia, a woman was gang-raped by seven men and the woman was then, when she went to the police, arrested and given 90 lashes - the victim of a rape," Paul said. "I think it's unconscionable that Hillary Clinton would accept money from a country that treats women that way."



Paul is on a two-day visit to New Hampshire as he explores a run for President. An announcement is anticipated in early April.



Phil Nazzaro, a 2014 state Senate GOP nominee from Newmarket, hosted a breakfast gathering for Paul at Epoch Restaurant in Exeter on Saturday. Paul began the day greeting people at the Pink Cadillac Diner in Rochester. His schedule included stops in Hampstead and Hollis, where he was to appear with state Sens. Regina Birdsell, R-Hampstead, and Sen. Kevin Avard, R-Nashua.



Nazzaro was on the veterans committee for Ron Paul in 2012. He is not endorsing anyone at this point, but he spoke highly of the buzz around Rand Paul.



"He has a message that appeals to a broad group," Nazzaro said.



In Exeter, Paul said Congress must take bigger steps to curb federal largess and get real with the debt, which puts America "closer to the day of reckoning."



Paul received applause when he said the Affordable Care Act should be repealed. He was critical of Medicaid expansion, in his home state and in the Granite State. "The problem is, money doesn't grow on trees," he said.



Paul called for abolishing the U.S. Department of Education as one step to trim the federal government.



An audience member asked him about why he joined 46 U.S. senators, including Sen. Kelly Ayotte, R-N.H., in signing a letter to Iran regarding negotiations on nuclear weapons.



Congress will only negotiate a good deal, Paul replied. Moreover, he said, the letter gives the U.S. leverage to negotiate from a position of strength."



"I think also it's the constitutional position," Paul said in a follow-up interview. "The Constitution says that legislation is written by Congress and legislation can only be undone by Congress. Most of the sanctions against Iran are laws that are passed by Congress. So (President Obama) doesn't really have the legal ability to undo them. He has to ask permission."



Paul said he is still looking at the Republican budget proposals released this past week, but he said Republicans need to show the American people that they are serious about fixing the debt and deficit.



The debt left behind after this administration will be a huge burden on the middle class, and those least able to make ends meet, said Paul.



Obama has trashed the Republicans' budget as a blueprint to benefit the rich over the middle class. "Sounds like pablum to me," Paul said of the President's response.



dtuohy@unionleader.com















To improve the chance of seeing your comment posted here or published in the New Hampshire Union Leader:



Identify yourself. Accounts using fake or incomplete names are suspended regardless of the quality of posts.

Say something new, stay on topic, keep it short.

Links to outside URLs are discouraged, if used they should be on topic.

Avoid comments in bad taste, write well, avoid using all capital letters

Don't cite facts about individuals or businesses without providing a means to verify the claim

If you see an objectionable comment please click the "Report Abuse" button and be sure to tell us why.

Note: Comments are the opinion of the respective poster and not of the publisher.

Post a comment