Steve Stricker reacts after missing a birdie on the fourth hole. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Louisville – Steve Stricker hopes to learn this week how much golf he'll be playing the rest of the year, if any.

He plans to see a doctor in Chicago to discuss options to treat the torn labrum in his left hip that has been bothering him for two months.

"I'll see what I need to do and what my options are," Stricker said. "I have no idea."

The 47-year-old Madison resident showed a lot of grit at the PGA Championship, putting together four rounds in the 60s — 69-68-68-68 — to finish in a tie for seventh place at 11-under-par 273.

He made only one bogey over the final 41 holes.

"I am proud of the way I played," Stricker said. "I didn't make many mistakes but I just never really built any momentum. Today, I had a couple chances early on and didn't get 'em to go.

"When you feel like everybody is going low and you're kind of treading water, it's hard to make putts. That's kind of the way it was feeling for me. But I played well every day."

Stricker said he wasn't sure if he would compete in the FedEx Cup playoffs, which start in two weeks.

"If it feels better than this I'll play," he said. "If it doesn't get any better I don't think I will. I don't even know if I can hurt it more, you know what I mean? I know nothing about it. But if I'm going to feel like this I probably won't go.

"I've been told that this (doctor) may give me a shot right away this next week and maybe it'll make it feel better right away. If that's the case, I'd probably go play the playoffs, or at least the first one and see how I do and go from there."

First, however, Stricker has to honor a commitment and play in an outing Monday at Whistling Straits.

"I'm going to go home and drive up early in the morning," he said. "I'll be playing golf. In a cart."

Playing it down: Lift, clean and place has never been allowed as a condition of play at a major championship. Every major has played the ball "down," no matter the turf conditions.

Some players thought an exception should have been made after an already waterlogged Valhalla course absorbed another inch of rain Sunday. Play was suspended for nearly two hours.

Had this been a regular PGA Tour event, the ball almost certainly would have been played "up." Players could have marked their golf balls in the fairway, picked them up and cleaned them of mud and debris, and replaced them.

"We've never played preferred lies in a major so this is what you're going to get," said Ian Poulter. "You're unfortunately going to get guys that are going to mishit a lot of shots and get badly punished.

"It might be somebody's week to win a major and, unfortunately, it isn't because of an awkward lie in a soggy fairway."

Graeme McDowell agreed.

"It was unplayable this morning," he said. "The ball should have been played up, simple. To me, it's fair out there if you can play the ball up. It's not fair if you can't play the ball up. It's casual water everywhere.

"Common sense has to prevail at some point."

Find and keep: Madison's Jerry Kelly said after Saturday's round that he'd "found something" on the last few holes, and he carried it into the final round.

He shot a bogey-free 67, hitting 15 of 18 greens in regulation and making four birdies. He nearly eagled the 537-yard par-5 18th, reaching the green in two and rolling a 60-footer to within inches.

Kelly finished in a tie for 27th at 6-under 278.

"It definitely was much better," he said. "I struck the ball the way I should have all week. I kind of realized where I went (wrong). And I'll go there again, but it's nice that my thoughts are clear enough that I can eventually grab on.

"And it's still good enough that even when it's bad I can make the cut in a major. I'm getting better."

That's K-E-L-L-Y: Kelly and his caddie, Eric Meller, had a little fun with the guy operating the manual scoreboard on the 18th hole.

As they walked up the fairway, Kelly glanced at the board and noticed his name had been spelled K-E-L-L-E-Y.

He held out his hands in mock indignation. Then he walked back to Meller, had him drop the golf bag and turn around, and pointed to the correct spelling of his name on the caddie bib.

"We were just having a little fun," Meller said.

Chip shots: Kelly withdrew from the Wyndham Championship next week. He'll rest and get ready for the FedEx Cup playoffs. "Hopefully, I'll play four (weeks) in a row," he said. ...

There were 132 scores in the 60s for the championship, including 32 in the final round. Four players shot in the 60s in all four rounds: champion Rory McIlroy, Phil Mickelson, Rickie Fowler and Stricker. ...

In what could be his final PGA appearance and on his 54th birthday, Kentuckian Kenny Perry birdied his final hole for a bogey-free 68. He finished at 6-under for the championship. ...

Jim Furyk, runner-up in the 2013 PGA, finished in a tie for fifth. He had a good run in the majors this year, finishing tied for 14th at the Masters, tied for 12th at the U.S. Open and tied for fourth at the British Open.