Rep. Jim Bridenstine put a former tea party group leader on his office payroll for six months to do a “confidential” project that cost at least $64,000 in salary payments alone, according to public records and Bridenstine’s spokeswoman.

House records show the Tulsa Republican’s office paid Dean Clancy nearly $44,000 from late August through the end of 2014 and called him “special projects manager.” Sheryl Kaufman, Bridenstine’s press aide, said Clancy was paid another $20,000 this year.

Kaufman said Clancy “provided expertise and oversaw a major legislative analysis and development project of a confidential nature. The work product has not been released.”

Clancy also described his work as confidential, and he referred to it as a six-month contract with the congressman. However, House members aren’t allowed to contract with people or companies for tasks related to legislation. Kaufman said Clancy was employed as a full-time staff member.

Members of Congress are exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, so details won’t be available until Bridenstine releases them.

Bridenstine, who has been associated with tea party groups since his first campaign in 2012 and has advocated tough measures to cut spending, actually spent more on his congressional office in 2014 — $1.18 million — than any of the other four U.S. House members from Oklahoma.

And only he and former Rep. James Lankford, R-Oklahoma City, spent more in 2014 than they did the previous year.

The information is contained in recently released reports that show all five of the Oklahomans spent less than they were allotted for their Oklahoma and Washington offices.

The allocations vary somewhat but are about $1.3 million a year. That does not include the congressman’s $174,000 salary or the cost of benefits, such as health care coverage. Also, some lawmakers are able to pay top staff members partly through committees on which they serve.

Because of budget cuts, the allocations are down more than 10 percent since 2011.

House records show — and the five Oklahoma offices confirmed — that staff members got either raises or end-of-the-year bonuses.

“Congressman Bridenstine’s staff did not receive raises in the fourth quarter; however, supplemental compensation equivalent to about 7 percent of annual compensation was paid,” Kaufman said.

Bridenstine hired Clancy in August, and paid him $13,667 for his first six weeks of work and then $10,000 a month for the last three months of the year.

Clancy’s resume on his LinkedIn page is that of a three-decade D.C. veteran who has held numerous Capitol Hill and executive branch jobs for Republicans. He also spent time as a lobbyist and more than three years as vice president of FreedomWorks, a group aligned with the tea party movement and its political candidates who advocate for smaller government.

Bridenstine was among the tea party conservatives who pushed in 2013 for lawmakers to insist on the repeal of the Affordable Care Act as a condition for funding the government. The impasse between the House and Senate led to a 16-day shutdown.

Clancy describes himself as an expert in health care and the federal budget. He wrote a column last year challenging the Republican advocacy of selling health insurance across state lines.