BOULDER — In taking a first glance at postgame statistics, some college basketball coaches immediately look for shooting percentages. Others may put the highest priority on rebounding totals.

And players, of course, look for the number of points they scored.

When Colorado men’s coach Tad Boyle spots a stat sheet, a bit of arithmetic is required. He’s an absolute fanatic about assist-to-turnover ratio.

That’s the number of assists divided by the number of turnovers.

“It’s the first thing I look for,” Boyle said. “I look at assists and turnovers. I want every player, whether it’s a post player or a perimeter player, to take pride in his assist-to-turnover ratio.”

Boyle said he continues to be frustrated by the inability of his team to improve on its assist-to-turnover ratio.

Colorado (8-5, 1-0 Pac-12) opened league play Friday night at the Coors Events Center with a 62-56 victory over UCLA. Boyle praised his team for its intensity and tenacity. But he was disappointed in the negative assist-to-turnover ratio compiled by the Buffaloes: 12 assists against 18 turnovers.

“It’s a function of being able to make plays for others,” Boyle said of assist-to-turnover ratio. “And it’s taking care of the basketball. You have to do those two things.”

In the most recent Pac-12 statistics, Colorado ranked at the bottom (0.9) among conference teams in assist-to-turnover ratio. CU and Southern California (also 0.9) were the only Pac-12 teams with a negative assist-to-turnover ratio. A ratio of 1.1 or higher stands in positive territory.

Boyle does not expect his entire starting lineup to rank among the league leaders in assist-to-turnover ratio. But he has set standards.

For post players (centers and forwards), Boyle wants to see a 1-to-1 ratio. Perimeter players (wing forwards and shooting guards) should be 2-to-1, with twice as many assists as turnovers. Point guards, Boyle said, should strive for a 3-to-1 assist-to-turnover ratio.

“If you do that, it means you’re playing at an elite level,” Boyle said. “But if it’s negative, you’re hurting the team.

“It really comes down to a player making good decisions on the court,” he explained. “That’s something everybody can improve on.”

Of the Buffaloes’ top nine players, only four have a positive assist-to-turnover ratio: junior forward-center Josh Scott (2.1), senior combination guard Askia Booker (1.3), freshman point guard Dominique Collier (1.3) and junior combination guard Xavier Talton (1.1).

“Coach (Boyle) wants us to play hard but also smart,” Booker said.

Only Scott’s ratio reaches the standards set by Boyle relative to a player’s position.

“Josh Scott has 15 assists in 12 games (he missed the victory over UCLA because of back spasms), and that’s certainly not earth shattering,” Boyle said. “But he has only seven turnovers. It’s the ratio that’s important.”

Relative to assist-to-turnover ratio, several key Colorado players have a long way to go before pleasing Boyle. Junior forward Xavier Johnson has 24 turnovers and just eight assists (0.3). Sophomore forward Dustin Thomas has 19 turnovers and 10 assists (0.5). Sophomore guard Jaron Hopkins has 19 assists but also 23 turnovers (0.8).

Colorado’s poor assist-to-turnover ratio no doubt has contributed to the Buffs’ disappointing record thus far. Committing a turnover or failing to pass to an open shooter especially rears its ugly head during crunchtime. CU has lost three games — to Colorado State, George Washington and Hawaii — by three points or fewer.

“It’s funny, we’ve worked more in practice this year on passing than we ever have,” Boyle said. “It hasn’t helped. But as a coach, you watch film with players and try ball-handling and passing drills.

“What I have found is, there are certain players that seem to have a knack for a good (assist-to-turnover) ratio. It’s a feel thing. Especially when players become juniors and seniors, they should have a feel for how to get that done.”

Colorado has another opportunity to earn a Pac-12 victory and, yes, improve on its assist-to-turnover ratio at noon Sunday against visiting Southern California (8-5, 0-1).

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler

A passing grade?

CU’s assist-to-turnover ratio under coach Tad Boyle:

*2014-15: 0.87 (12th in the Pac-12)

2013-14: 0.85 (12th in the Pac-12)

2012-13: 0.74 (12th in the Pac-12)

2011-12: 0.90 (ninth in the Pac-12)

2010-11: 1.18 (fourth in the Big 12)

* Through 13 games

Sources: Pac-12, Big 12