Florida Sen. Marco Rubio takes a selfie with a member of the crowd in Minden Park on Monday afternoon.

Ted Cruz speaks to his supporters at Minden Park on Tuesday.

Ahead of the last nights caucus, many Republican presidential hopefuls visited Nevada with the hope they will win the silver state nomination.

Sen. Marco Rubio and Sen. Ted Cruz both made trips to Douglas County in an attempt to get the conservative vote.

Sen. Dean Heller and Rep. Mark Amodei were present at Minden Park on Monday to welcome Rubio.

“This is the guy who I think can unite this country,” said Amodei. “And who knows something about the c-word. Constitution.”

Lt. Gov. Mark Hutchison was present, and urged people to get involved.

“Caucusing and voting is a serious business,” he said. “This is a man who is going to beat whoever the Democratic nominee is.”

Rubio focused on the last eight years, and said that he wants to change the way that President Barack Obama has run the country.

“The damage Barack Obama has done to America is extensive,” he said. “On my first day in office I will repeal every single one of his executive orders.”

Limiting the federal government and returning some of the 86 percent of federally owned land back to Nevada was a huge selling point to the around 400 attendees.

“There is not supposed to be a federal solution for every problem in America,” said Rubio.

He also said he wants to bring both parties together, and will work in favor of all Americans, even the ones who don’t like him.

“I will never divide you against each other on purpose,” said Rubio. “I will do everything possible to bring this country back together.”

Overall, Rubio focused on last night’s caucus and asked people to participate and give him their vote.

“We can’t afford to lose this election,” he said. “We can’t win if people don’t vote.”

Assemblyman Jim Wheeler and Attorney General Adam Paul Laxalt welcomed Cruz at Minden Park on Tuesday.

“Ted Cruz has been unyielding in Washington,” said Laxalt. “A relentless conservative.”

Cruz supporters played off on the fact that he would follow the Constitution and he spent his life doing so.

“We’re really all here to stand for the Constitution,” said television personality Glenn Beck. “We have to have a president that will honor that.”

Cruz said that he would also rescind all of Obama’s executive orders as well as open an investigation into Planned Parenthood.

“All of us are here today because our country is in crisis,” said Cruz.

He shared in Rubio’s desire to repeal the affordable care act, rebuild the military and return Nevada’s land into state hands.

Both candidates are vying for the Nevada nomination, but early polls have suggested that Donald Trump will take the state.