Nearly 90 percent of Colorado residents infected with hepatitis C, now the deadliest infectious disease in the United States, are going untreated, a new report estimates.

The Colorado study, released Wednesday, suggested two reasons:

• Many are baby boomers who contracted the blood disease decades ago through transfusions and don’t know they have it.

• Others have not sought treatment because the new drugs that can cure it are extraordinarily expensive. The drug Sovaldi, for one, can cost $84,000 for a 12-week course of treatment — and insurers say they can’t afford to cover such high-cost drugs for everyone who needs them.

Officials estimate at least 70,000 Coloradans have hepatitis C.

The Center for Improving Value in Health Care analyzed data from the Colorado All Payer Claims Database for commercially insured patients to estimate the untreated percentage of hepatitis C carriers.

“When we looked at claims information for insured Coloradans, we were surprised to learn how many patients are not getting treatment for this serious, potentially life-threatening infection,” said Ana English, the center’s president.

Because the disease is curable now, she said, “it’s incumbent upon us as a state to increase access to affordable treatment.”

The Colorado study follows a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report this month that hepatitis C now kills more people than any other infectious disease, including HIV/AIDS.

Left untreated, those infected can develop liver cancer and other life-threatening diseases related to hepatitis C and may unknowingly transmit the disease to others.

According to the CDC, deaths associated with hepatitis C reached an all-time high of 19,659 in 2014. A second agency study showed that by 2013, hepatitis C-related deaths “surpassed the total combined number of deaths from 60 other infectious diseases reported to CDC, including HIV, pneumococcal disease and tuberculosis.”

More people are dying despite new drugs that can cure the disease with fewer side effects.

“Why are so many people dying of this preventable, curable disease?” asked Dr. Jonathan Mermin, director of a CDC infectious disease program. “Once hepatitis C testing and treatment are as routine as they are for high cholesterol and colon cancer, we will see people living the long, healthy lives they deserve.”

The CDC estimates that about 3.5 million Americans are living with hepatitis C, and half don’t know it. Similarly, Colorado estimates about 1.3 percent of its residents are infected.

“We think it’s 70,000 people, if not more,” said Daniel Shodell, a deputy director in the epidemiology division.

The new Colorado study found more people are seeking treatment with the new drugs, but estimates that 89 percent are not.

Nationally, a new wave of hepatitis C cases have surfaced since 2010 among young, white people who injected drugs. Those cases more than doubled from 2010 to 2014. But most of those afflicted with hepatitis C are baby boomers — born between 1945 and 1965 — when medical injections and blood transfusions were not as safe as they are today, and before the disease was discovered in 1989.

For that reason, the CDC recommends everyone born between those years should be tested for hepatitis C.

Robert Simon, a Colorado software engineer, is one of the baby boomers who survived.

He had open heart surgery and blood transfusions when he was 6, and again at age 18. He lived for many years after that without knowing he was infected, although he noticed pains in his side and felt exhausted after exercising.

A routine medical visit changed that. “There’s something up with your liver enzymes,” the doctor told him. A test confirmed hepatitis C in his blood.

At the time, the treatment included interferon, a drug associated with depression and other serious side effects.

“It was hard. It really did a number on me,” Simon said. “I couldn’t work for six months.”

But the treatment worked. He has become an avid swimmer. He no longer feels the symptoms preceding the diagnosis. “It appears to be gone,” he said.

Despite the stigma associated with the disease, and his own trials in treatment, he decided to speak out as a grateful survivor.

He would urge anyone with hepatitis C to seek life-saving help.

Health insurers say prices for the new, more effective treatments need to come down.

“The outcomes of some of these new medications are truly remarkable, but unfortunately they are being priced so high it makes it difficult for health plans to offer coverage for them,” said Charlie Sheffield, executive director of the Colorado Association of Health Plans. “This study highlights the need to find better ways to address the increasing cost of drugs, which is a major contributing factor to health care costs overall.”

The Center for Improving Value in Health Care, which published the study, was created by the state and spun off as an independent nonprofit in 2011. It administers the claims database for the state. The database includes comprehensive health care cost, quality and utilization claims data, which is available to the public.

David Olinger: 303-954-1498, dolinger@denverpost.com or @dolingerdp