Neil deGrasse Tyson Getty Images

The universe of late-night television is expanding to include America’s favorite astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson who will host a new series called “Star Talk” on the National Geographic Channel.

The talk show will feature guest celebrities, comedians and other pop culture ambassadors, with Tyson serving as moderator and the voice of science. The show, premiering in April, is a spinoff of his popular “Star Talk” podcast.

Tyson, a veteran of scrappy shows like “Real Time with Bill Maher,” said he doesn’t have an agenda to stir up controversy with his guests, including noted biologist and atheist Richard Dawkins. “The goal is for you to learn, not to watch a fight,” the “Cosmos” host said Wednesday at the Television Critics Association press event in Pasadena, Calif., where Nat Geo and other outlets unveiled new programs.

While Jimmy Fallon has his stage in historic 30 Rockefeller Plaza and David Letterman has the Ed Sullivan Theater, the late-night rookie has a pretty cool setting for his show, which is shooting inside the Hall of the Universe at the American Museum of Natural History.

Nat Geo’s other new shows include “The Big Picture,” a “Freakonomics” style dive into data and maps which is hosted by “Harold & Kumar” star and former White House staffer Kal Penn.

The panelists promoting another show, “American Genius,” about inventor rivalries such as Colt vs. Wesson and Tesla vs. Edison, included Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak, Twitter co-founder Biz Stone and Science Guy Bill Nye. Their defiantly geeky Q&A veered into tangents on the state of America’s education system and the vacuum tubes in Wozniak’s customized wristwatch.

Other Nat Geo programs slated for the spring include “Killing Jesus,” a three-hour movie based on the book by Bill O’Reilly and Martin Dugard. It follows “Killing Kennedy” and “Killing Lincoln,” the two most-watched programs in the channel’s history. Nat Geo says “Killing Jesus” is its most ambitious production yet.