Buy Photo Crystal McGrew of Taylorsville, Ky., received two vastly different bills after her son had ear tubes inserted at two different Louisville hospitals “There are no guidelines or ways to protect people from being overcharged,” said McGrew, shown last year with her boy. (Photo: Michael Clevenger/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

The cost of having a knee or hip replaced varies wildly across the nation, costing up to four times more in some hospitals than others — even in the same area, a report out Wednesday found.

A total knee replacement averaged about $31,000 in 64 markets where Blue Cross Blue Shield analyzed its claims data, but in Dallas, it ranged from $16,772 to $61,584.86. Across the nation, knee replacements cost as little as $11,317 in Montgomery, Ala., and as much as $69,654 in New York City. Knee replacements ranged from $23,078 to $28,183 in the Lexington, Ky., market.

While the price hospitals charge is often discussed, the report is the first time the insurer has disclosed its prices after negotiations with hospitals and doctors.

Spiraling health care costs, higher insurance-plan deductibles and increased cost sharing have made procedure prices more important than ever to consumers. Insurers are also tired of paying ever higher prices for treatment they say shouldn't change so much year to year, and certainly not hospital to hospital in the same region — including Kentuckiana. Although Wednesday's report did not include Louisville, other data show the same issue at play here.

Crystal McGrew of Taylorsville, Ky., saw the issue firsthand when she received two vastly different bills after her son had ear tubes inserted two years in a row at different hospitals.

Although she had the same insurance coverage and doctor, 2012 charges from Kosair Children's Hospital totaled $1,560, while 2013 charges from Jewish Hospital Medical Center East totaled $5,260. There were no complications during either procedure, and officials with both Louisville hospitals said they couldn't say why the bills were so different.

"You kind of trust the health care providers and hospitals are doing what's best ... and there's not some mark-up," she said this week. "We're all talking about health insurance and health costs going up ... (yet) there's no control over what hospitals are allowed to charge. It doesn't make sense. There are no guidelines or ways to protect people from being overcharged."

What drives differences?

Aetna, Assurant Health, Humana and United Healthcare agreed in May to provide data to the Health Care Cost Institute, which plans to launch an online portal for consumers. While BCBS didn't join the cost institute's effort, it plans to release more reports on analyses of its own data. The company, which includes 37 independent, locally operated Blue Cross and Blue Shield companies, insures one of every three Americans.

It pays to pay attention. Deductibles were up nearly 50 percent between 2009 to 2014, increasing from an average of $826 to $1,217, the Kaiser Family Foundation said in a report last fall. It's not unusual now, however, for people with employer-paid or individual insurance through the new Affordable Care Act exchanges to have deductibles of $5,000 or even $10,000.

Some of the health care price differences are expected; rent and other overhead costs are much higher in New York City than in Alabama. But the reasons why hip replacement in Fort Collins, Colo., cost tens of thousands more than in Pittsburgh may have more to do with whatever the market will bear.

"In theory, you should incentivize people to be concerned" about price differences, said Jose Pagan, director of the Center for Health Innovation at the New York Academy of Medicine. But, he notes, people "may go to a more expensive place because they perceive it to be of a higher quality."

Some employer-provided plans reward workers for going to certain doctors and hospitals that have higher quality and lower prices, a practice Blue Cross Blue Shield supports. Maureen Sullivan, the company's senior vice president of strategic services, said the company has found there is "not a direct correlation" between high or low quality and cost.

Sullivan said the level of cost sharing, and issues such as complication and readmission rates, should push consumers toward the highest quality care providers that have the lowest charges.

Health care pricing is "all driven by the reimbursement system," namely negotiations with insurance companies and government Medicare and Medicaid, said Rick Louie, managing director of Hospital Pricing Specialists, a Silicon Valley firm providing price benchmark data to help hospital chief financial officers set prices in line with local markets.

Other factors also go into charges, experts say, including the cost to operate a facility, the payer mix, charity care, national and regional price comparisons and the need for insurers to offer wide networks of providers. Experts say some hospitals feel empowered to charge more because of their reputations or because they can negotiate higher reimbursements with insurers.

Insurers hope that so-called "consumer-directed" insurance plans, where consumers make the decisions, will increase public pressure on health care providers to price more competitively.

Body of evidence

Wednesday's report adds to the growing public disclosures of varying health care prices — transparency some hope leads to change.

In May 2013, the federal government for the first time released Medicare data showing that hospitals nationally and in the Louisville area charge wildly varying amounts for common major medical care. For example, it found that a pacemaker cost $64,511 at Norton Hospital and $26,553 at Floyd Memorial.

Hospital Pricing Specialists publishes periodic reports on the prices of medical treatments, using data from three sources: direct calls to hospitals, patient bills submitted to it and claims data from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services and elsewhere.

The most recent report, released this month, examines the cost of a chemotherapy injection called Rituximab used to treat illnesses such as lymphoma and leukemia at more than 2,000 hospitals. It shows that an injection of a 100-mg dose of the drug cost $5,639 at Atlanta Medical Center in Georgia, $1,506 at Knox Community Hospital in Mount Vernon, Ohio, and $351 at University of Miami Hospital in Florida.

Costs also varied widely within Louisville; the company's data showed that the injection cost $5,389 at Baptist Health Louisville and $2,457 at Jewish Hospital.

Another effort to bring more transparency to health care pricing is the website clearhealthcosts.com, founded by former New York Times journalist Jeanne Pinder. Pinder's New York-based company collects prices for common medical procedures such as MRIs and mammograms by surveying providers over the phone about rates for self-paying patients in seven metro areas, not including Louisville. They found prices vary widely. For example, the lowest price for a mammogram in New York is $50 at All County Radiology in Queens, and the highest is $607 at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City.

Pinder's company also worked with two public radio stations in California to launch PriceCheck, a project creating a database of reported and crowd-sourced health prices in that state.

"We'd like to think transparency will fix a lot of this," she said. "We'd like to see all the prices public. ... The idea we have consumer-directed health care is a big fat joke if you don't have a road map for costs."

CAN I GET A PRICE CHECK?

Here are prices for a 100-mg injection of Rituximab, a chemotherapy drug that treats leukemia, lymphoma and other illnesses, at some Louisville hospitals

•$5,389 — Baptist Health Louisville

•$3,544.66 — University of Louisville Hospital

•$2,457 — Jewish Hospital

•$1,220 — Norton Hospital

Source: Hospital Pricing Specialists LLC, national report on Rituximab 100-mg chemotherapy injectable prices among 2,067 hospitals in the United States.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1BDRLyb