She's never been afraid to take risks with her hair and make-up but Lady Gaga's latest look is not her best.

The 28-year-old singer stepped out in Paris with bleached eyebrows and a ghostly pale face on Saturday, providing a bizarre contrast to her fake-tanned body.

Bright red lipstick further added to the unusual display.

Scroll down for video

Bizarre: Lady Gaga stepped out in Paris on Saturday night sporting bleached eyebrows and incredibly pale make-up which clashed with her tanned body

Gaga's look was in honour of a late-night visit to the Chanel store, where no doubt she shopped up a storm.

Lady Gaga - real name Stefani Germanotta - opted for a plunging blue and black strappy dress, which displayed a great deal of bronzed cleavage.

Black strappy heels and a black jacket, worn off the shoulders, completed her outfit.

The starlet's unusual look even managed to distract attention from her huge, heart-shaped diamond engagement ring.

The Born This Way singer's ring - which was designed by jeweler to the stars Lorraine Schwartz - features a diamond studded setting and band with a message created in the precious stones.

Forgoing an engraved message her fiance Taylor Kinney - who popped the question on Valentine's Day - had the letters T and S separated by a heart symbol put onto the band's base to represent Taylor loves Stefani.

Standing out: She causes a scene wherever she goes and Gaga's trip to the Chanel store on Saturday was no exception

Being engaged clearly suits the talented starlet, who was positively glowing as she left the hotel.

It was recently reported that the Poker Face singer will wed The Other Woman star, 33, at her $23m Malibu mansion and will have pal Tony Bennett there to sing Cheek To Cheek.

The estate is set in the hills above Malibu and is surrounded by undeveloped mountains,' a source told Life & Style.

Kinney, popped the question on Valentine's Day and couldn't resist playing a prank on the Applause hitmaker, who was overcome with emotion even with the fake jewellery.

Lady Gaga said: 'First he gave me a Ring Pop. That was kind of amazing and I was crying, I was so excited.

Distraction: The starlet's unusual look even managed to distract attention from her huge, heart-shaped diamond engagement ring

'I said, "Yes!" right away and then he pulled out the heart-shaped diamond. First it was candy. I was happy with the candy.'

And the smitten singer admitted being engaged has made 'everything better'.

She gushed to Access Hollywood: 'It makes everything better. When you're in love and have love it makes everything better.'