ABC7 has an exclusive interview with Sandra Hoskins, a longtime friend, co-worker and confidant of Dr. Teresa Sievers.

She tells us the moment she first grew suspicious of Teresa's husband, Mark, who was arrested Friday and charged in the death of his wife.

Hoskins worked for seven years in the now-shuttered medical office. She was working the morning Teresa was killed.

"I called Mark, and I said, 'Mark, I know you told me not to go to your house... but I don't know what's going on.' And his words were, 'do not tell anyone the doctor is dead.'"

It was a chilling exchange just moments after finding out her friend had been killed.

Hoskins showed ABC7 text messages sent between her and Mark that very same morning.

"I said, 'Mark, do you want me to go to your house?' And I got one word, 'no.'"

Reporter: "Did that seem strange to you?"

Hoskins: "Yes, yes, because anybody else, the normal reactive behavior would be, 'yes, absolutely, Sandra, please lock up the office right now, I don't care about the patients, I care about my wife.'"

Hoskins grew close to the family during her seven years working at the medical office. The family even went to her wedding.

But it all changed last summer while attending the doctor's funeral. Hoskins said Mark began acting cold.

"His demeanor, and his body language, and his character didn't fall into place with a man who was mourning."

Hoskins left the office a short time later, saying she no longer felt comfortable there due to what she describes as Mark's antagonistic behavior.

"What he portrayed as the Mark Sievers, was not the Mark that I witnessed."

She said that same behavior was on display Friday as Mark walked out of his home in handcuffs.

"I don't think that he has what everyone else possesses, and that's emotions. I've never seen somebody stand there so empty-souled in my life."

Hoskins still thinks about Teresa every day, even keeping the doctor's old stethoscope.

"I have to; I have to talk to her every day. She was my mentor."

A mentor Hoskins said she's glad will get justice.