— With a growing student population and shrinking odds of enrolling in a preferred university, college admissions has become a constant worry for many high schoolers.

But new advanced courses offered at Tampa Bay area high schools should give students an advantage. In fact, they were created with help from admissions counselors from top universities across the nation.

This fall, Countryside, Northeast and Boca Ciega high schools in Pinellas County joined 19 Florida schools and only 100 worldwide in launching programs for Advanced Placement Capstone courses, the culminating courses for students taking a full load of AP classes to graduate high school with a distinguishing AP diploma and — ideally — gaining extra attention from college admissions officers.

Dunedin, East Lake, Gibbs, Lakewood, Osceola, Pinellas Park and Seminole high schools are preparing to join them next school year, with the remaining six Pinellas high schools expected to follow soon. Hillsborough County will launch the program in 10 high schools next fall.

“Students will have an upper hand just for going through this venture, and it will really make them competitive for college admissions,” Pinellas Superintendent Michael Grego said. “Another way to look at this is as competition for our (International Baccalaureate) courses. If the goal is to get into college, the most rigorous classes will provide you the platforms.”

The AP Capstone program is divided into a two-course sequence: AP Seminar for juniors, and AP Research for seniors. The course work is tough and resembles a college thesis course. Students earn the AP Capstone Diploma only if they pass the AP exams for both courses, as well as AP exams in at least four other AP courses.

Those who pass the capstone courses, but don’t meet the other exam requirements, will graduate with a seminar certificate recognizing their special skill set.

In the AP Seminar course, juniors spend much of the year in group work, researching topics of interest to the individual students and to the class, then communicating and defending their own points of view. Students are graded on an individual project, team project and a year-end written exam.

In the AP Research course for seniors, students design and conduct their own yearlong research project on a topic of their choice alongside a faculty mentor.

The two years of collaborative research and writing projects lead to a college-like thesis project.

“That’s pretty intense for our students. But because they’ve got this two-year process that gets them there, that’s really clear on what the structure and process of research should look like, every one of our students that has the work ethic to dedicate themselves to this has a very strong chance to be successful,” said Judith Vigue, Pinellas’ director of advanced studies and academic excellence.

The AP Capstone program was developed in response to colleges and universities for the College Board to develop a program to address academic skills among incoming students. The College Board, which created the AP Capstone program, also administers the SAT college entrance exam.

While the program is in its infancy, it already has been endorsed by 24 universities that are determining how students can earn college credit for their high school work, as they do in other AP courses.

“The college admissions officers I’ve spoken to from around the country are licking their chops waiting for these students to graduate, and have fully endorsed students coming out of these programs as viable candidates for their universities,” Vigue said. “They’re very excited for students to enter their campuses with a stronger set of skills then they’ve seen in the past few years.”

This school year, Harvard only accepted 5.8 percent of student applicants. That number may not be surprising for a top-tier university, but shrinking acceptance rates increase the quality of student application pool, and causes state universities also to tighten their admissions. This year, the University of South Florida only accepted 45 percent of applicants, with an average grade point average of 3.98. The University of Central Florida’s acceptance rate was 48.9 percent, Florida State University’s was 56.8 percent and the University of Florida’s was 46.5 percent.

In a September meeting with the Pinellas school board, St. Petersburg College trustee and former Chairman Deveron Gibbons bemoaned the academic skills of the college’s incoming freshmen. Of the nearly 1,800 students who enrolled at SPC from Pinellas high schools, about 53 percent were recommended for a remedial course.

The Capstone program fits well with the school district’s efforts to expand academic programs, Superintendent Grego said.

Last school year, Largo High added an International Baccalaureate program, becoming the third IB program in the school district, and three other high schools offer the Cambridge Pre-Advanced Certificate of International Education, an internationally recognized diploma, similar to an IB diploma, that counts for college credit.

AP Capstone is similar to the Cambridge program in that it allows students to choose the advanced courses they wish to take instead of being locked into a full schedule of all advanced courses, as the IB program does. The three schools that will pilot the AP Capstone program don’t offer Cambridge or IB programs, and it could motivate more students to stick with their assigned school, Grego said.

adawson@tampatrib.com

(727) 215-9851

Twitter: @adawsonTBO