Associated Press

Bacteria that lives in saltwater infected seven people in southwest Florida, including two who later died.

Lee County health officials say a Florida resident in his 50s died last month after going into the Gulf of Mexico with an open wound.

A tourist who was over 60 years old died in July, also from Vibrio vulnificus.

There are no reported cases of the bacteria infection so far this year in Sarasota County, and two cases in Manatee County.

Neither of the individuals infected in Manatee died, according to information posted Wednesday on the Florida Department of Health Web site.

Two vibrio cases have been recorded in Sarasota County in the last five years, and neither person died.

Sarasota County Health Department spokeswoman Dianne Shipley said it is hard to speculate why there have been so few infections locally, but she noted there is no commercial shellfish harvesting.

Regardless, it is important for local residents to take precautions, Shipley said.

"Don't enter the water, either to swim or wade, if you have an open cut or any kind of lesion and don't eat undercooked shellfish," Shipley said.

Lee County Health Department director Dr. Judith Hartner told the News-Press of Fort Myers (http://newspr.es/1bYwgZN ) that Lee County typically sees about five cases of the bacteria a year. She says most cases are not serious.

Five others were infected with less-dangerous Vibrio varieties.

An 84-year-old woman had her leg amputated at a Naples hospital after becoming infected with the bacteria. But officials say it's unclear whether she became infected in southwest Florida or the Tampa area.

EARLIER — Bacteria that lives in saltwater infected seven people in southwest Florida, including two who later died.

Lee County health officials say a Florida resident in his 50s died last month after going into the Gulf of Mexico with an open wound. A tourist who was over 60 years old died in July, also from Vibrio vulnificus.

Health department director Dr. Judith Hartner told The Fort Myers News-Press that Lee County typically sees about five cases of the bacteria a year. She says most cases are not serious.

Five others were infected with less-dangerous Vibrio varieties.

An 84-year-old woman had her leg amputated at a Naples hospital after becoming infected with the bacteria. But officials say it's unclear whether she became infected in southwest Florida or the Tampa area.

Information from The Fort Myers News-Press

RELATED STORIES

» Seawater bacteria kills central Florida man «

» Health officials warn of harmful bacteria «

» Rare bacteria leaves woman gravely ill «