The Broncos’ offense conceals more blemishes than Clinique. Mediocrity becomes marginalized — at least it did until February at MetLife Stadium — with Denver racing down the field for scores.

Former Rockies manager Don Baylor once said that teams were in scoring position at Coors Field when the batter stepped into the box. Likewise, Peyton Manning is a threat on touchbacks. Of the Broncos’ 49 scoring drives at home last season, 17 covered at least 80 yards.

“Field position still matters,” said Denver offensive coordinator Adam Gase. “It is important.”

And there lies an area for improvement: punt returns. While the Broncos were solid on kickoff returns last year, ranking sixth in the NFL, they lacked consistent production on punt returns. Denver averaged 7.8 yards per punt return, 11th in the AFC and 22nd overall. Trindon Holliday provided electricity — 8.5 yards per return and one touchdown — but crossed wires, making him a threat as much to the Broncos as to the opponent.

With Holliday gone to the New York Giants, a vacancy sign flashes on returns. Leading into Saturday’s scrimmage at Sports Authority Field at Mile High, Ronnie Hillman and Andre Caldwell have fielded kickoffs in training camp. Isaiah Burse, Jordan Norwood, Emmanuel Sanders and Wes Welker are getting the reps on punts, a more pressing need based on statistics.

Burse brings burst and a college résumé with special-teams experience. While playing for Fresno State, he returned 29 punts for 344 yards and two touchdowns. He’s slippery at 5-foot-10 and 187 pounds, and has rebounded after drops early in camp.

“I have to be more consistent,” said Burse, who is trying to extend the Broncos’ streak to 11 consecutive seasons with an undrafted rookie making their opening-day roster. “I know I need to get better and cut down on mental mistakes. It’s coming along. When you get out there, everybody is fast. I can’t lose my focus.”

Norwood didn’t make an NFL team last year and hasn’t played regularly since 2011, when he briefly returned punts for the Browns. He has to show he’s more elusive than Burse. Sanders said both players have performed well in practice, “so they don’t need me right now.” The Steelers didn’t use Sanders on punt returns last season, but in 16 career attempts he has averaged 10.9 yards.

“With this up-tempo offense, it’s tough to have a receiver going back every time,” Sanders said. “But I have said many times, if they need me, I am willing to do it.”

Welker provides a similar, if not more likely, safety net. He fits the profile, which demands returners catch the ball — that’s typically written in 72-point Helvetica bold on the white board in the locker room — and be shifty. Even at age 33, Welker can pull it off. He returned 10 punts last season for 70 yards, with two fair catches, as he and Eric Decker took over for Holliday late in the season.

“I can do it if they want me to,” Welker said. “It’s not something new.”

Welker returned 25 punts in 2012 with the Patriots. He said suffering concussions last season wouldn’t preclude him from the role this year.

Punt returners are bold, fearless. There are those who fly in F-16 jets, as Welker did last month, and those who ride bulls, which Sanders grew up wanting to do as a career, following in his uncle’s footsteps.

No other team matches Denver’s offense. And a better return game producing a shorter field can help it remain prolific.

“If you are going to return punts, or even kicks, you have to have some charisma about yourself,” Sanders said. “You have to have a different mind-set. It’s not for everyone. You need to be a little crazy.”

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck