By Loren Ledin of the Ventura County Star

High school basketball coaches traditionally divide their schedule into phases, as in the preseason, league season and CIF-Southern Section playoffs.

But how about this? They're now in the In-Between Season.

Their league campaigns completed, the playoffs about to begin, coaches and players have the rare opportunity to focus all their attention on practice and preparation. For most teams, there's been a seven-day window between last week's regular-season finale and this week's playoff opener.

"It's like we're back in November," says Calabasas boys coach Jon Palarz. "We get a chance to go back and work on the fundamentals, almost like we're getting ready to play our first game. We need to stay sharp and we need to get fresh. It's a chance to rehash everything we want to do."

Oak Park coach Aaron Shaw concurs.

"The playoffs are all about executing what you do best," he said. "We've got some time to go back to the basics. We'll work on our offense. We'll work on our defense. There's really not a lot of practice time during the season, so we need to take advantage of this opportunity.

"This is our chance to get exactly ready."

Ready or not, here we go. The CIF-Southern Section released its basketball playoff brackets on Sunday. So now, officially, it's the Dream Season.

High seeds, no seeds, league champions, fourth- and fifth-place teams, it no longer matters. All are dreaming about extended runs from here into March.

No fewer than 21 area programs are heading into the CIF-SS playoffs that begin with first-round contests Wednesday.

Included are five all-local matchups. Division 1A: Ventura (12-14) at Camarillo (22-6); Division 2A: Royal (13-14) at Rio Mesa (10-17).

Also in Round 1 is Division 3AA: Moorpark (12-15) at Calabasas (21-6); Division 4A: Fillmore (11-9) at Oaks Christian (13-11); Division 5AA: Santa Clara (12-14) at Grace Brethren (12-10).

League champions Oxnard, St. Bonaventure and Oak Park all earn first-round games at home. So does Pacifica in 1AA and Thousand Oaks in 2AA.

All games are scheduled to tip off at 7 p.m.

At-large entries for Royal and Moorpark means all five Coastal Canyon League teams will compete in postseason. With Westlake receiving an at-large entry in Division 1A and Agoura getting a berth in 2A, five of six Marmonte League teams are in the playoffs.

No two teams may portend as much excitement with the launch of postseason as Oak Park and Calabasas.

As expected, Oak Park, the Coastal Canyon League champion, is seeded No. 1 and Calabasas, the Marmonte League champion, is seeded No. 2 in Division 3AA.

The rematch of their Dec. 10 meeting in the Sierra Canyon Tournament — won by Oak Park, 54-48 — would decide a Southern Section championship.

"We're two programs that are pretty familiar with each other," said Shaw. "I've known Jon a long time. We scrimmage against each other, and we've always played in their summer leagues. We know each other and the players know each other.

"It would be fun, but there's a long way to go before that could happen."

Palarz became Mr. 400 with the Coyotes' 47-36 victory over Agoura in the regular-season finale. The victory was his 400th coaching victory in 21 seasons at five schools.

He's been Calabasas' coach since 2008.

"It's kind of a benchmark number that really belongs to all the players and all the assistant coaches who are responsible for the wins throughout the years," he said. "I'm fortunate to have coached a lot of great players."

Four more victories might set up a matchup with Oak Park in the championship finale.

"I'm sure it would be a great game and we wouldn't have to knock each other out of the playoffs before the championship game," he said. "But there are a lot of really good teams in our division. We've got our work cut out for us."

Oak Park will be home Wednesday against Santa Maria-Righetti.

Two more league champions, Oxnard from the Pacific View and St. Bonaventure from the Tri-Valley League, are set for Round 1.

The Yellowjackets open up at home against Huntington Beach. The Seraphs will play host to Mary Star of the Sea.

Oxnard has been shifted from Division 1AA into Division 1A this season. Any dropoff in competition may not be noticeable.

"Lots of good teams in this division," said Oxnard coach Jeff Staniland, whose team is 20-7. "We'll have 10 days from our last game, so we've got time to get ready and still be rested. Our guys are excited."

Ventura qualifies as the third-place finisher in the Channel League and gets a rugged draw in Camarillo, which finished second in the Coastal Canyon League.

Cougars coach Dan Larson figures his team is playing its best basketball.

"We've played well in the second half of league," he said. "The kids have confidence, and that's what you need in the playoffs."

One team that finished fifth in league was Moorpark. The Musketeers are 12-15 overall and 1-7 in the Coastal Canyon League, but may epitomize the Everybody's-Got-A-Chance Club.

Moorpark lost to league champion Oak Park by three points (49-46) earlier this month. In the regular-season finale, it took second-place Camarillo to overtime before losing by one point, 63-62.

"It's been a challenge for us to play all four quarters," said coach Michael Westphal. "There are spurts when we look unbeatable, then there are times when we couldn't beat anybody. We need to put whole games together."

Here are the other first-round games on Wednesday:

Division 1AA: Bellflower-St. John Bosco at Pacifica; Division 1A: Westlake at Palmdale-Highland; Division 2AA: Santa Maria at Thousand Oaks, Division 2AA: Simi Valley at Temple City, Agoura at Windomar-Elsinore.

Division 5A:, Thacher at Avalon; Division 6: Besant Hill at Santa Maria-Valley Christian, Lancaster-Bethel Christian at Newbury Park Adventist.