LYONS — A massive and diverse public outreach effort during the long-term rebuilding of Lyons will help the town recover from the 2013 September flooding.

That’s the recommendation from a group of students from the University of Colorado-Denver’s College of Architecture and Planning, who presented their findings to the Lyons Board of Trustees Tuesday night.

Trustees thanked the students for their efforts and said their work will be used during the town’s ongoing recovery efforts.

“This will help us shape our community engagement process,” said Mayor John O’Brien.

The 14 students did a crash course on urban development and disaster recovery this summer in an effort to better understand how a community can rebound from a natural disaster. The floods virtually cut Lyons in half and destroyed 100 homes.

The students examained the the entire housing process from site selection to planning and design.

Along the way, “the students learned a great deal about Lyons, its history and development, and the impact of the flood on the town’s housing stock,” said Andrew Rumbach, one of two professors who oversaw the project.

Rumbach emphasized that the students and the university were not paid by the town and that the study’s conclusions were only recommendations.

“We are not here to give you a recovery plan,” said Rumbach.

Students interviewed residents, studied the town’s own recovery work, and produced their own hypothetical solutions. Much of their conclusions were based on of a Housing Needs Assessment done by the town after the floods.

The students found that a variety of media including digital presentation and video story telling can help gauge the housing needs of residents. There is also a place for old-fashioned print surveys and and town hall meetings to weigh opinions.

The last things Lyons needs, said Rumbach, is a “top-down approach” where long-term housing plans are dictated by officials.

“Site design could only occur through a robust public engagement process, not through a classroom of students in Denver,”said Rumbach.

In all, the students and their professors recommended that enough replacement housing should be produced for 100 households.

The students also said that some form of government assistance will be needed to produce enough diverse housing to attact residents back to Lyons. “If it’s left to the market, there is no way some people can come back to this community,” he said.

One of the students, Jenny Mcginnis, said doing on the ground work in Lyons helped her appreciate the scope of the destruction. “It’s on thing to read about it, or see it on television. But to see it in person and look around and see someon’s home that’s been destroyed, that’s when you want to do your best to help them,” McGinnis said.