Q: I’m thinking of cooking up meals for my dog, Oscar. Should I also give him vitamin supplements, like the ones I take? — Jamey W., Portland, Oregon

A: You need to be careful on this one, Jamey. If you feed him a reliable commercial dog food, chances are it will provide sufficient, even great nutrition. Unfortunately, home-cooked meals may seem like a good move, but usually they fall short. One recent study found that 95 percent of made-at-home pet diets were nutritionally inadequate. You can inadvertently make your pooch ill — for example, did you know that avocados contain persin, a doggy toxin?

And giving a dog supplements isn’t easy to do correctly. For example, too much vitamin D could curtail Oscar’s appetite, harm his bones, even make his muscles atrophy. Other supplements also can cause problems: Too much vitamin A may lead to dehydration, aching joints and poor circulation. To get the right dose for any supplement, you need to factor in the age and size of your dog, plus what nutrients he gets from his regular diet — including snacks and treats.

If you’re thinking of cooking homemade doggie meals because Oscar seems lethargic, his coat is shedding more than usual or is dull, he has trouble getting up and down stairs, or has digestive issues, these could be signs of nutritional deficiencies. Ask your vet if Oscar should get a special blood test to check vitamin and mineral levels. And whether or not you opt for that, here’s what we suggest:

■ Rely on nutritionally balanced commercial foods that your vet recommends.

Sure, you can cook for Oscar now and again, but don’t do it without careful consultation with your vet.

■ If your vet offers a prescription dog food that addresses a diagnosed nutritional deficiency (or set of symptoms), dish it up.

■ Ask the vet if it’s a good idea to provide any supplements at all, and let the doc determine the exact dose of each nutrient you give your four-legged friend.

Q: Are my eyes deceiving me, or do they get all itchy and does my vision get blurry when I’m hit with menopausal symptoms like hot flashes and heart palpitations? — Jennifer A., New York

A: Seeing (or not seeing) is believing!

You’re right that your menopausal symptoms may be associated with vision changes.

There are estrogen receptors in the eyes, and a drop in estrogen, which is also a trigger for menopausal hot flashes and heart palpitations, can leave you with blurred vision and dry eye.

Dry eye affects about 60 percent of women during perimenopause and menopause (around 30 percent of older guys get it, too). Dry eye can make your eyes feel itchy and gritty; they also may get runny — those aren’t tears, just water without the lubricating quality of tears. Try some over-the-counter artificial teardrops, and your vision should clear up.

If your vision problems persist or get worse, it’s important that you see an ophthalmologist. You may need a prescription medication for dry eye or have some other issues. Besides falling hormone levels, other eye problems related to age include cataracts and macular degeneration.

Luckily, there are ways to roll back your Real Age so you improve and protect your eyesight.

■ Regular workouts: Just as daily exercise keeps your heart arteries strong, supple and free of plaque, it also keeps your retinal arteries healthy. That’s why walking 10,000 steps a day is good for your vision. (It eases menopausal symptoms, too!)

■ Great nutrition: Getting enough vitamin A through food promotes good vision; it’s in carrots and all orange veggies and fruit.

Other nutrients that protect the eyes include vitamin C (in leafy greens, citrus, berries), lutein (10 mg a day), zeaxanthin (2 mg a day), omega-3 fatty acids (four 4-ounce servings of salmon weekly, or 900 mg DHA-omega-3 supplements daily), zinc, found in skinless turkey and chicken (10 mg a day) and vitamin E in peanuts and almonds (you want 10 IU of mixed tocopherols a day).

Dr. Mehmet Oz is host of “The Dr. Oz Show,” and Dr. Mike Roizen is chief medical officer at the Cleveland Clinic Wellness Institute. Submit your health questions at www.doctoroz.com.