Pump jacks are seen at dawn in an oil field over the Monterey Shale formation where gas and oil extraction using hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, is on the verge of a boom on March 24, 2014 near Lost Hills, California. (David McNew/Getty Images)

"Not sane," "dreadful," "super dumb" – these were the words lawmakers and experts used to describe a Senate plan to sell off the nation's emergency supply of crude oil to pay for highway upgrades.

[READ: Boehner Calls for an End to the Decades-Old Ban on U.S. Oil Exports]

"It would be like cashing in our home insurance policy to pay for repaving the driveway," Sen. Lisa Murkowsi, R-Alaska and chairwoman of the Energy and Natural Resources Committee, told reporters last week. "The Strategic Petroleum Reserve is a vital national security asset that must be maintained in case of serious future supply disruptions."

It could also, she added, potentially be harnessed to support allies whose supplies are cut off.

Yet in a Congress led by Republicans resolved not to raise taxes, senators last week advanced a six-year transportation bill that harnesses the reserve to pay for roads, bridges and transit. That bill follows a House measure passed last month that would fund health care research by selling oil from the reserve.

"The most dangerous place to stand in Washington is between Congress and free money," says energy consultant Bob McNally, former special assistant on the National Economic Council and former senior director for international energy on the National Security Council under President George W. Bush. "Congress has gotten a whiff of that with the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. While I disagree with this, I expect there will be a drawdown."

If either measure is approved, it wouldn't be the first time the reserve was tapped for large amounts of oil – that's happened five times previously – but it would come at a time that booming U.S. oil and gas production has dropped oil to its lowest price in four years, and with no great change expected anytime soon.

"Selling oil at current prices is nuts," says Steven Kopits, managing director of the consulting firm Princeton Energy Advisors (and he of the phrase "super dumb"). "Markets are really fragile right now: If you put a million barrels on the market, you're going to tank prices by $10 a barrel." With oil hovering at around $50, that's as much as 20 percent.

But if the U.S. is sitting atop and producing so much home-grown oil, why is the Strategic Petroleum Reserve necessary anyway? The International Energy Agency, of which the U.S. is a part, calls on its 29 member nations to each hold in reserve the total amount of oil they import over 90 days. But now that the U.S. is by some measures the world's largest producer of crude oil, do we still need it?

Some Experts Say No

The product of 1970s-era energy-supply fears after the Arab oil embargo, the reserve is a vestige of a bygone era that has more in common with nuclear weapons or the gold reserve than any kind of insurance policy, says Fred Beach, deputy director of the Energy Institute at the University of Texas-Austin. "It would be hard to use it any realistic way," he contends. "It was expensive to build, it was an expensive thing to fill, and it's an expensive thing to maintain."

The reserve is not one but actually four sites along the Gulf Coast in Louisiana and Texas. Made up of enormous underground salt caverns – huge gray arenas and tunnels filled with the sweet and sour smells of crude – the reserve can hold as many as 727 million barrels of oil – enough to fill the Empire State Building more than 100 times, with some left over for the Chrysler Building a few blocks away. Just under 700 million barrels of oil was sitting there in July.

But when it comes to deploying all that oil, Beach has a point: While the U.S. only has enough oil to supply about 36 days of demand, it can only pump out as much as 4.4 million barrels per day, the Energy Department says, just a fifth of what's consumed every day.

And that rate has been made even slower by booming U.S. domestic production, experts say. The crude that flows through America's pipelines has switched directions: Refineries that once took imported oil and then injected it through the heart of the country as gasoline, diesel and other petroleum products are now taking in domestic crude from those same regions that are now churning out so much oil. It would take far more than 100 days for the U.S. to empty its reserve.

"Those pipelines have been reversed," says Jim Smith, professor of oil and gas management at Southern Methodist University. "We are hampered now."

[MORE: How Ending Iran Sanctions May Impact Oil Markets]

And even if the U.S. could quickly use its reserve – if, say, supplies from overseas were suddenly cut off, or an earthquake or huge storm ravaged shale producers in the Midwest – there's still the question of how selling the U.S. stockpile would affect the market.

"Are low oil prices good or bad? If you're buying gasoline, you want low oil prices; if you're an oil producer, you want high prices," Beach says. "It's very non-free-marketish because it's controlled by the government, and who wants the government to have such a big hammer to influence prices?"

This gets to a main reason why Murkowski and other senators – long champions of the oil and gas industry – oppose selling the reserve, Beach suspects: "They're answering to their oil constituency. They want to keep the price up by not selling off the SPR," he says.

But Others Are Less Certain

"I'm not sure I'm quite that dogmatic in terms of thinking about markets," says Kopits, of Princeton Energy Advisors.

Oil from the reserve has been released in major quantities five times previously:



In 1991, under President George H.W. Bush during the first Gulf War

In 1996, under President Bill Clinton to counter rising gasoline prices

Two months before the 2000 elections, as — not necessarily in this order — drivers faced higher gasoline prices, home heating oil prices rose and Vice President Al Gore campaigned for the presidency

In 2005, under President George W. Bush after Hurricane Katrina, which ravaged oil and gas facilities along the Gulf Coast

In 2011, under President Barack Obama, to counter disruption of Libyan oil supplies.

None was especially beneficial, and the effects remain debatable, experts say: The U.S. still suffered a short recession in 1991, prices didn't greatly fall (and Gore lost the election) after the sell-off under Clinton, some experts argue it was not lack of oil but lack of refining capacity that led to gasoline and diesel shortages immediately after Katrina, and oil prices in 2011 weren't greatly affected. It came at a cost, too — especially after the Clinton sale.

"In 1996, we sold oil for deficit reduction, and then in 2001 after 9/11, we had to fill it back in a hurry at higher prices," McNally, the former Bush adviser and founder and president of the Rapidan Group, recounts. "In a way, it was a tax on the American people."

But each sale didn't exactly engender disaster, either.

"It was very modest, maybe a little bit helpful," says James Hamilton, economics professor at the University of California, San Diego.

The reason, he and others argue, may have far less to do with the country's actual capacity to distribute the oil than the psychology of simply having all that oil there at all.

"The existence of the reserve, even when it's not drawn on, does provide some calm to the market – that is, that there's not just a black hole in front of us," Smith, of SMU, says. "So it could mitigate some price spikes that some panic-buying would otherwise propagate."

A Third Way?



Forget the oil – even if the reserve could let loose more than 4.4 million barrels a day, the process of simply cracking it open at all moves as slow as molasses.

Barring an emergency, "it has to go to Congress and people have to debate it – it's always late and never enough," Kopits says. What's more, "to influence the price for any given period of time, you have to have an open-ended commitment to sell large quantities."

In other words, he and other experts contend, lawmakers or the president can't simply go ahead and say, "We're going to put 30 million barrels on the market to ease prices." The market generally won't respond in a major way – investors know simply to wait until it's over. To hit any particular price at all, lawmakers would "have to run the SPR as an open spigot" for as long as it takes, Kopits says – and for a politician, that reeks as bad as the rotten-egg smell of sour crude.

So why not have someone else run the reserve? If it's role is to buttress the economy, why not have oil and market experts actively manage it, just as bankers do with the Federal Reserve? And just like the Federal Reserve, why not more closely coordinate these actions with other big countries that also have reserves of their own, from Europe to Asia?

[OPINION Can OPEC Sustain Saudi Arabia's Oil Price War?]

"Right now it's all pretty manual, but you could have a multilateral response that happens on a rule-base: 'If this happens, then automatically that happens,'" Kopits argues. "You can have a standing capability with clear guidelines like the Fed that can maximize employment and minimize inflation."​​​

For as long as the reserve remains subject to the whims of "case-by-case ad-hoc initiatives from Congress," he adds, "it will always be subjected to that hurry-up-and-wait, chaotic and episodic kind of management that we've seen."

Oil Prices Can Cause Chaos

​Oil is prone to price spikes more than just about anything else in the market anywhere. For as long as we've used oil, as early as 1859, its price has given analysts fits. It has what economists call "low price elasticity."

"We are so dependent on oil, if the price suddenly rockets, your consumer is still going to buy gasoline because they have no choice: It's the only thing you can put in your tank to get to work," McNally, of the Bush administration, says. "When supply and demand are just a little bit out of whack, you can get huge moves in prices."

It's a reason he calls for an even bigger reserve, one that might be able to insulate U.S. markets from the kinds of booms and busts we've seen in just the past seven years alone: Benchmark prices as high as $170 per barrel in 2008, $76 in 2010, $124 or so from 2011 to 2012, $46 last year and around $54 this week.

"You would want to have protection from shocks. You want to have quickly available oil, and that could come in the form of strategic stocks," McNally argues.

This is what's known in economics as a "public good" – something that may violate strict free-market principles, but offers enough of a benefit that it may be worth the potential downsides.

"The oil market is subject to very many frequent large disruptions that stem almost all from events beyond our control that are unpredictable, and this is a means by which the major consuming nations have a little bit more energy security to fend off the economic costs that would come with those disruptions," SMU's Smith contends. "It's pretty well known in economics that when you have public goods like that, there is a justification for supplementing markets with those types of public programs."

And at this particular moment the global oil market simply lacks the spare capacity to put more oil on the market quickly – Saudi Arabia, for example, is already producing as much as it can to protect its market share from potentially cheaper competitors, and mothballed U.S. shale rigs, taken offline once prices dropped, take months to start back up.

"If there is a geopolitical disruption in oil supplies, the price of oil will rise very sharply unless there is offsetting quickly producing oil available," McNally argues. "The current situation we're in now – despite the low imports and high production we have – is more dangerous and calls for a bigger Strategic Petroleum Reserve."

Kopits says he disagrees – he would shrink the reserve to reduce some of its costs. But he, McNally and Smith – plus Murkowski and others – all agree: the risk of shocks is reason enough to keep the reserve around. Whether congressional lawmakers can restrain themselves from cashing in, however, is another matter entirely.

"My expectation is that it will be deployed," Kopits says, "just not very well."



Clarified on Oct. 28, 2015: This story has been changed to more accurately reflect the requirements governing the Strategic Petroleum Reserve.