The Obama administration is facing an unexpected backlash from healthcare advocates over its aggressive move to rein in the cost of prescription drugs in Medicare.

The experiment is considered the Medicare agency's boldest move to date on doctor payments, and it's slated to go into effect in some parts of the country this summer.

ADVERTISEMENT

But the proposal is facing mounting opposition from groups that represent people with some of the costliest conditions to treat, including cancer, multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis.

"I think they are shocked by the pushback," said the head of one advocacy group that recently met with the CMS. "They didn't anticipate what was going to happen and now they are really backing up now going, 'What do we do about this?' "

Dr. William Harvey, head of government relations for the American College of Rheumatology, said he has observed a "huge backlash" in large part because many doctor and patient groups felt they had been blindsided by the proposed shift.

"Everyone says, 'No, no, no, this has to be repealed, we can't have this at all,' " Harvey said, adding much of the chaos could have been avoided if CMS officials "would have had conversations with us."

At least one group has met face-to-face with Medicare agency officials, and others say they have tried, though administration officials say their doors have been open throughout the process. Read more here: http://bit.ly/1VkCAnl

HHS PUSHES BACK ON OBAMACARE PREMIUM SPIKE TALK: A new report from the Obama administration finds that ObamaCare premiums rose 8 percent last year, pushing back on warnings of larger price hikes.

The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) report released Tuesday finds that ObamaCare premiums rose 8 percent on average -- from $356 a month to $386 a month -- from 2015 to 2016.

Once the ObamaCare tax credits that help 85 percent of consumers afford their plans are factored in, the average premium increase was even smaller: $102 to $106, or 4 percent.

The report fights back against predictions, often seized on by Republicans, that ObamaCare premiums would spike by double-digit percentages. HHS notes that such predictions often do not take into account that consumers can shop around and change plans so as to find the best deal and that tax credits help lower the burden further by shifting more of the premium cost onto the government. Read more here. http://bit.ly/1VSepf1

GOP LEADERS TOUT FDA BILL AMID ZIKA CASH FIGHT: The House on Tuesday overwhelmingly approved a bill to offer incentives to companies seeking cures for the Zika virus amid Congress's growing battle over funding for the epidemic.

The bipartisan legislation would add the Zika virus to a list of diseases that qualifies for a "priority review" voucher from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). It passed the Senate last month.

Top Republicans, including House Speaker Paul Ryan Paul RyanPuerto Rico debt relief faces serious challenges in Senate Overnight Finance: GOP faces dilemma on spending bills | CEOs push Congress on tax rules | Trump talks energy Overnight Energy: Trump outlines 'America First' energy plan in North Dakota MORE and Energy and Commerce Chairman Fred Upton, are pitching the legislation as their response to the growing Zika threat, while postponing action on funding. Read more here: http://bit.ly/23CDopg

DOCTORS' NOTE TO CONGRESS: TPP STILL BAD: Doctors Without Borders, as part of a 50-group coalition, sent a letter to Congress on Tuesday urging them to reject the Trans Pacific Partnership, known as the TPP, because of what they described as kickbacks for drugmakers.

"In the United States, TPP would tie Congress's hands, potentially for decades to come, preventing policymakers from having flexibility as they formulate sensible policies to promote access and keep medicines affordable," the letter reads.

FLINT WATER STILL NOT SAFE TO DRINK: Recent testing by Virginia Tech researchers found that Flint's tap water will likely remain undrinkable for months.

Groups, including the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC), which are suing the city of Flint over the water issue, released a statement condemning the results: "These disappointing results make clear that federal court oversight is urgently needed to guarantee clean, safe drinking water for the people of Flint in a more timely manner."

ON TAP TOMORROW

The Bipartisan Policy Center hosts a briefing on drug pricing at 10 a.m.

McGraw Hill Financial hosts a briefing at 10 a.m. featuring the chief operating officer of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Mandy Cohen.

WHAT WE'RE READING

Big Valeant bond investors intend to call default (Wall Street Journal)

Priced out of ObamaCare, some opt for short-term plans (CBS News)

Rep. Tom Price pitches alternative to ObamaCare (Rome News-Tribune)

Zika tied to second brain disease (Washington Post)

Amid clinic closures, young doctors seek abortion training (Reuters)

IN THE STATES

Massachusetts health reform turns 10 (WBUR)

Documents detail scene of Colorado Planned Parenthood shooting (New York Times)

Arkansas asks judge not to expand Planned Parenthood ruling (Associated Press)

Connecticut budget asks state workers to chip in for healthcare costs (Hartford Courant)

ICYMI FROM THE HILL

New ObamaCare program seeks freedom for calls, emails from doctors http://bit.ly/1NnbMeq

Send tips and comments to Sarah Ferris, sferris@thehill.com, and Peter Sullivan, psullivan@thehill.com. Follow us on Twitter: @thehill, @sarahnferris, @PeterSullivan4