In a week of major Supreme Court decisions, Johnson v. United States didn’t garner as many headlines as rulings legalizing gay marriage or upholding the Affordable Care Act—but former Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver is arguing the case bolsters his motion to dismiss one of the criminal counts against him.

Mr. Silver’s attorneys Steven Molo and Joel Cohen filed a letter with Judge Valerie Caproni last week, pointing out that a Supreme Court decision that found the Armed Career Criminal Act—a “three-strikes” type legislation that ups sentencing for repeat offenders—was “unconstitutionally vague.”

In a motion to dismiss a superseding indictment against Mr. Silver, his attorneys made the same argument about the law behind one of the seven charges leveled against him: “monetary transactions involving crime proceedings.”

Mr. Silver is accused of presenting as legitimate outside income from law firms what U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara alleges was actually millions of dollars of kickbacks and bribes gained through his official position in Albany, using his influence to steer real estate developers to a law firm that paid him for referrals and to trade research funds for asbestos patient referrals.

In the case of Johnson v. United States, the high court found that the Armed Career Criminal Act’s inclusion of any felony that “involves conduct that presents a serious potential risk of physical injury to another” was too vague—and that the law didn’t have to be vague in every single application for it to be void.

“In Johnson, the Court held that this provision was unconstitutionally vague. The Court specifically rejected the argument—also made by the Government here—that ‘a statute is void for vagueness only if it is vague in all its applications,'” Mr. Silver’s attorneys wrote.

In his motion to dismiss, Mr. Silver’s lawyers argued that the federal charge of “monetary transactions involving crime proceedings,” which essentially means Mr. Silver is accused of profiting off illegal activities, did not meet certain legal standards—including being clear enough that “ordinary people can understand what conduct is prohibited” and that the law is written “in a manner that does not encourage arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement.”