Forcing Change: A decade of civil rights lawsuits against Cleveland police preceded U.S. Justice Department investigation

For a decade before the U.S. Justice Department told Cleveland Mayor Frank Jackson that his police officers too often use excessive force on citizens, people made similar allegations in lawsuits that cost taxpayers at least $8 million to resolve.

In more than 60 lawsuits, citizens accused officers of needlessly shooting at them, beating them during routine traffic stops, shocking them with Tasers while face-down on the ground in handcuffs or arresting them when they had committed no crime.

Beginning today and for the next two weeks, you'll be able to read stories about the cases on cleveland.com. You'll see footage of some of the encounters with police and even hear from some of the plaintiffs, in their own words.

The Northeast Ohio Media Group and The Plain Dealer Publishing Co. have spent weeks examining the lawsuits, combing through public records and interviewing the people who brought the complaints.

The allegations in the suits are strikingly similar to those highlighted in the Justice Department's 58-page report detailing how Cleveland police routinely use force in ways that violate citizens' rights. The report was based on more than 600 incidents between 2012 and 2013, plus thousands of related documents and hundreds of interviews. | Read Leila Atassi's story

Cleveland Mayor Frank Jackson says police use-of-force incidents have declined on his watch

Cleveland Mayor Frank Jackson, in a written response to questions regarding the use of excessive force by police, contends that the city aggressively investigates use-of-force cases and that the number of incidents has dropped precipitously on account of policy changes since Jackson took office in 2006.

The city on Friday posted on its website answers to questions that reporters from Northeast Ohio Media Group and The Plain Dealer Publishing Co. asked as part of a series exploring more than $8 million in settlements and court judgments paid to people who accused officers of unjustifiably shooting, beating, arresting or electrically shocking them. | Read Leila Atassi's story

One year later, Clevelanders try to avoid United Airlines