Dutch Finance Minister Jeroen Dijsselbloem, right, gestures while speaking with Greek Finance Minister Yanis Varoufakis during a meeting of European finance ministers on Monday in Brussels. Virginia Mayo/AP

Greece is running out of money, and its creditors are running out of patience. And while the cash-strapped Mediterranean country began making its latest debt payment slightly ahead of schedule, it's hardly out of the woods just yet.

Greece late Monday began transferring about $840 million to the International Monetary Fund in a scheduled debt repayment that was due by Tuesday, with Finance Minister Yanis Varoufakis signaling his country's intent to pay up ahead of the move.

"Our standard answer is that Greece will always meet its obligations to its creditors," Varoufakis said ahead of a meeting of eurozone finance ministers on Monday, as reported by Euronews.

But "always" is a bold declaration, considering the Greek government is verging on financial catastrophe and seems largely dependent on a just-out-of-reach bailout reserve that its creditors are refusing to hand over.

[READ: Greek Uncertainty a Backdrop to International Monetary Fund Meetings in D.C.]

There was even speculation heading into Monday that Greece may not be able to make its payment, though doing so has allowed officials to temporarily dodge a default.

"The liquidity issue is a terribly urgent issue. It's common knowledge. Let's not beat around the bush," Varoufakis said after the eurozone meeting, according to Agence France-Presse. "From the perspective [of timing], we are talking about the next couple of weeks."

What's going to happen in the next couple of weeks is still unclear, but it's probably nothing good for the Greek government.

The embattled Mediterranean economy isn't expected to make a larger single payment to the International Monetary Fund than the one on Tuesday for the rest of its current bailout cycle, though it's still on the hook for billions of dollars overall in debt repayment, pensions and government salaries. About $1.7 billion total is due to the International Monetary Fund next month, according to The Associated Press.

"They are facing pretty acute liquidity pressure. They need money. We don't know how much money they have, because they've been using cash reserves to pay pensions, wages and IMF repayment," says Diego Iscaro, senior principal economist at IHS Global Insight. "I think we are reaching a point where they are running out of money."

[READ: 5 Things to Know About the Economy This Week]

Iscaro says the Greek government likely left no cushion unturned in pooling every last coin together for its most recent payment. Local governments were required to contribute their own money, he says, and Greek finance officials dipped into most of the funds they'd gained by cutting spending in years past.

"They ran a primary surplus last year, which means that, excluding interest payments, they had a surplus on their government accounts," Iscaro says. "So that money helped increase their cash reserves. So that's one source of funds."

But that surplus (now believed to be largely exhausted, Iscaro says) was achieved by the country's former government, one that was not nearly as vehemently opposed to harsh austerity measures that cap government programs and spending.

The newly elected Syriza party's platform was based in part on scrapping those austerity measures. Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras loudly called for an end to such restrictions, which limit the government's ability to institute a higher minimum wage or a tax break for the particularly impoverished.

But Greece now stands in the uncomfortable position of needing to borrow money in order to pay money back. And while a previously agreed-upon $8 billion is still set aside for the country by its creditors, the Greek government will need to reach austerity and spending compromises with those creditors to access the funds.

[MORE: 1 in 3 Workers Says Work-Life Balance Getting Tougher]

That means Tsipras and Varoufakis may need to leave the negotiating table with their tails between their legs to avoid a default, which could lead to the country leaving the eurozone and facing significant international economic backlash.

"Greece, in the same way that Portugal and Ireland have in the past, they have to go through quarterly reviews. To get more funding you pass a quarterly review with different targets," Iscaro says. "The group of finance ministers in the eurozone are asking Greece to implement reforms, particularly in the pension system and labor market reforms … The Greek government, at the moment, is not agreeing to those points."

After a whirlwind tour of Europe last week to meet with finance ministers ahead of Monday's meeting, Varoufakis said progress was being made in reaching a deal and that Greece's creditors were inching closer to unlocking the bailout reserve.

But Monday passed, and the emergency funds remained out of his government's reach.

And the clock is ticking.