All day Tuesday, KCTV5 News is holding our annual Take 5 to Care event, Healthcare in the Heartland.

For the third year, we are teaming up with Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Kansas City to answer your questions about insurance all Americans are required to have.

We'll guide you through the process. Otherwise, you will face even stiffer penalties than before.

"There are still 200,000 people in our area who do not have medical insurance," said Ron Rowe, vice president of sales at Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Kansas City.

He says, plain and simple, the penalties for not being covered under the affordable care act are going up.

"The penalties are assessed when you file your taxes at the end of the year," he said.

Mark Ciaramitaro, vice president of H&R Block health care and tax services, said last year the penalty was $95 for an adult or 1-percent of your income.

"Now, it's $325 per adult or 2-percent of your income," he said.

And, according to Ciaramitaro, it's only going up from there.

"In 2016 , that penalty goes up to $695 per adult or 2.5-percent of your income," he said.

But, there's a common misunderstanding about the cost of health coverage. There are federal subsidies for many to help you cover the cost.

"A family of four that makes less than $97,000 a year is eligible for a subsidy from the federal government," Rowe said. "We have thousands of people that are paying less than $25 a month because the government pays the rest for them."

Applications opened on Nov. 1 and will only be offered for the next few weeks.

"If you want your coverage to begin by Jan. 1, the deadline is Dec. 15, but last possible date is Jan. 31," Ciaramitaro said.

And even if you have purchased coverage in the past, you may need to re-visit it.

"Subsidies are recalculated each year, so they will be increasing in Kansas City. So it is important to re-enroll, and the amount of out of pocket will go down," Rowe said.

We know this is all very confusing, that's why helped you connect you with the professionals with the answers in our Blue KC Healthcare in the Heartland on Tuesday, Dec. 1.

The event ran from 6 a.m. to 8 p.m.

There are still ways to get answers after the phone lines and chat availability ended. Just contact Blue KC at 816-395-BLUE (2583) or livefearlesskc.com.

Copyright 2014 KCTV (Meredith Corp.) All rights reserved.