At 6:30 p.m. on a recent Tuesday, the office of Dr. Doris J. Day, a dermatologist on Manhattan's Upper East Side, was packed with women in their 30s and up, wearing name tags over their designer clothes.

They had each paid $50 to attend a talk Day had titled "How to Achieve Flawless Skin": a 40-minute PowerPoint presentation that came with wine, cheese, raffle tickets and a bag filled with some of Day's favorite products.

Valerie Rothman, a lawyer, came with her sister.

"It gives us a chance to get away from the husbands and kids while learning about our skin and what we can do to fix it," she said.

After a session with Reveal, a device that shows if there is sun damage under the skin (she had a lot), Rothman, 48, bought two products: TNS Essential Serum ($260) and Lytera ($125), a brightening complex, both by SkinMedica, one of three companies representated at the event.

Kathryn Reichert, 55, who works at a pension fund, said she had seen Day privately for 10 years but still thought the evening would be beneficial.

"I'm at an age where I want to reconsider everything I'm doing to look good," she said.

After her consultation, Reichert made an appointment for a peel.

"This is my first step in feeling better about myself," she said. "I like being educated. Evenings like this let me do that, and it's an excuse to go out and talk to people."

Much of the noise in marketing over the last few years has been about social media, but in the beauty and skin-care industry, in-person beauty schooling seems to be making a comeback.

Karen Young, chief executive of the Young Group, a consumer trend-tracking firm, said this was because of the accessibility of products and information.

"With the Internet, we no longer know what's true," she said. "Dermatologists or well-known skin-care companies who sit with clients offer credibility and power."

The Avon lady has returned, in other words -- only this time she's wearing a lab coat.

"Events like these are about selling products, but in a low-pressure environment," Young said. "Getting attention and feeling taken care of makes us feel special. People are more likely to spend money if you create this kind of atmosphere. It's a very powerful marketing message."

Dr. Eric S. Schweiger, an assistant clinical professor of dermatology at Mount Sinai Hospital and the founder and medical director at the Clear Clinic, said he had not held such events but saw no harm in them.

"Many doctors charge $150 to $200 for consultations," he said. "This is more acceptable and affordable."

Dr. Zein Obagi, a dermatologist in Beverly Hills, Calif., and medical director at ZO Skin Health, a luxury skin-care line, was more skeptical.

"These events can be biased," he said. "Specific skin-care companies offer their own products. Some dermatologists have companies sponsor their events, so those are the products they offer -- which means they're educating you on inventory rather than teaching you about different companies and devices."

Obagi suggested going to several events and evaluating claims, rather than making purchases at occasions designed to be seductive.