Identity theft, fraud and scams were the topic of discussion at the Juneau Chamber of Commerce luncheon on Thursday. Three members from the Better Business Bureau’s Alaska, Oregon and western Washington region spoke on how to identify these scams and what to do about them.

“Identity theft is a widespread problem, and the thieves look for names, addresses and phone numbers, birth dates, mother’s maiden name, passwords and PINs, credit card and bank account numbers, and the holy grail, which is Social Security numbers,” said Michelle Tabler, Alaska Regional Manager of BBB.

With so many ways to track and steal an identity, your identity has become easier to steal, especially with the ever-growing presence of social media. Surprisingly, the most used social media site to get information is Ancestry.com.

“Think about it,” said Tabler. “You have your name on there, your mother’s maiden name, your date of birth, where you were born, what your kids names are, and that’s also used for the ‘grandparent scam.’”

Once an identity thief has your information, they can do almost anything — open checking and savings accounts, gain access to actual accounts, establish a new line of credit, change your address and receive your mail, and they can obtain medical treatment.

Medical identity theft was the leading cause of fraud in the U.S. last year.

In Alaska, the most common form of identity theft and fraud, about 44 percent of all fraud, is done through government documents, or Permanent Fund Dividend checks.

Though people of all ages are susceptible to identity theft, even children as young as 16 years old — 16,000 child identity thefts were reported last year — have had their credit stolen.

The most-targeted age group is those over 50 years old. More than one-third of all victims of fraud are in the age group, which makes Florida the No. 1 state of most reported fraud cases. Alaska sat at No. 45 in 2012.

“They prey on the elderly because they’re much easier to confuse and take advantage of,” said Tabler. “They’re less likely to report fraud because they’re embarrassed or don’t know where to go for help. And if they do report fraud, they’re less likely to remember details.”

Because of this, banks have increased their anti-fraud efforts. One of the classic scams is the “grandparent scam.” That’s when a grandparent receives a phone call in the middle of the night and their grandchild is in jail in Mexico and needs money wired to him right away.

The most common scams come in via email. A Nigerian prince contacts you for money, for example, or someone sends you an email because you “won” the lottery. Some scams are less obvious, such as a seemingly innocent email that gives the option to “unsubscribe.”

Unsubscribing actually does the opposite, confirming to the person on the other end that yours is an active address. The best thing to do, with any unfamiliar address, is to ignore it. These rules also apply to smartphone users: Phones are not immune to scams and data breaches.

Some of the other common scams include phishing emails that ask customers to verify information; Affordable Care Act scams targeted at the elderly to update information regarding Medicare; arrest warrant scams, calling people and asking them to pay their fine over the phone so they won’t be arrested (Hint: The police do not call if there’s a warrant); Microsoft tech support, requesting customers provide login and password info and with the help of their credit card information, the problem can be fixed over the phone.

With the ability to gather important and private information from people over the Internet, it’s important to stay informed and recognize if something doesn’t seem right. Some of the best things to do are to keep track of credit card and telephone charges, check your credit score every couple of months — annualcreditreport.com allows three free scores per year — and shred important documents.

Though Internet scams get attention, the most common identity theft is still by physical means, explained Tabler. For those who use mail boxes and raise the red flag for the mailman, it’s also sending a metaphorical red flag to a thief.

As a resource to help identify credible companies, the BBB outlines businesses that are accredited and customer rated as being satisfactory.

For more information about scams, visit www.bbb.org/alaskaoregonwesternwashington/.