Former BP Chairman John Browne was outed in a lawsuit by an ex-lover in 2007. He’s written a book called “The Glass Closet.” Credit: Kevin G. Hall

By ,

Washington — John Browne reached the pinnacle of his profession while hiding a secret that eventually ended his run as chief executive and chairman of global energy giant BP.

Allan Gilmour rose to chief financial officer at the Ford Motor Co. and was thought a shoo-in to become its next chief executive. It didn't happen. He, too, harbored a secret.

They were gay.

Even as corporate America jumped ahead of the rest of America in its recognition of equal treatment for gays and lesbians, it looked at life differently at its highest levels.

Apple chief executive Tim Cook came out as gay several weeks ago. McClatchy Co. Chairman Kevin McClatchy came out in 2012. Until then, Browne and Gilmour had been the highest-level corporate executives to have openly embraced their homosexuality. And both did so only after leaving their jobs and never discussed their sexuality in professional quarters.

"I did not expect that I was going to get fired, but there was a chance that it was going to be controversial," Gilmour said. "I think that is particularly true in a consumer-products industry."

There was another hitch.

"I didn't want the media to always put gay in front of my name. I thought it would be detrimental, and I'm thinking of the 'far right.' ... I was thinking more the distraction I would be."

Gilmour's sexual orientation was never identified as the reason he was passed over. He was later brought back in another role.

Calling the phenomenon of hiding his homosexuality "The Glass Closet," Browne published a book this year by that title.

His own tale is cautionary. Browne was "outed" after an ex-boyfriend sought to extort money. The relationship itself, and the perjury committed to hide it, said Browne, grew out of living a closeted, bifurcated life.

"You run separate lives," Browne said in an interview, noting that the environment is now better for a gay chief executive to go public. "It's not all roses, it's not all perfect, but it is so, so much better."

"Old people think great progress has been made, and young people think there is a lot to do. Both are right," Gilmour said. "Selfishly, I do wish there were more openly gay CEOs. Sure."

There are reasons executives choose to stay in the closet. Over a 35-year career at Ford, Gilmour routinely used a "married to the job" response to brush off personal questions as he advanced to executive vice president, chief financial officer and vice chairman.

"I suppose with hindsight one was very cautious about spreading what went on outside of work. When you get to chitchatting (it's), 'What did you do over the weekend? ... Wasn't it good that the Tigers won?'" he said. "I think it is true that when one is out, freer isn't the right word, but it's in the neighborhood."

Gilmour inadvertently outed himself in 1996, when, in retirement, he gave an interview to a local gay publication and the word spread across mainstream media. It raised questions of whether his sexual orientation was the reason he was passed up for the top job in 1992.

He retired in 1995 but was plucked back by chief executive Bill Ford for another stint in the executive suite as chief financial officer in 2002, this time openly gay and with a life partner.

It isn't clear to Gilmour that his sexual orientation was the reason he didn't get the top job, but he thinks it was fair game in the discussions.

"When we get to the CEO level, the board and the decision-makers have to be pretty darn sure there aren't any controversial issues," said Gilmour, who eventually retired again and later served as the president of Wayne State University in Detroit.