People Moves of the Week: Silverfern Group, K&L Gates, Sagent Advisors

Silverfern hires new head of capital strategies; Sagent names Bill Kohr and Joseph Donohue co-CEOs

Ballard Spahr LLP — Partner Craig Circosta is set to oversee the Philadelphia law firm's private equity practice. Circosta has been with Ballard Spahr since 2001. Before that, he was an associate at Schnader Harrison Segal & Lewis LLP.

Gavin Solmonese LLC — Anne Eberhardt has joined the New York advisory firm as a senior director in its valuation and litigation consulting practice. Eberhardt's expertise also includes testing compliance and liquidating assets. Prior to joining Gavin Solmonese, Eberhardt worked in the forensics and Investigation practice at Grant Thornton LLP.

Haynes and Boone LLP —Scott Helbing has rejoined the Dallas-based law firm as a partner. In this post, he will act as a finance practitioner on commercial lending and energy finance. He was previously at Strasburger & Price LLP. His first run with Haynes and Boone was as an associate, from 1999 to 2005.

Honigman Miller Schwartz and Cohn LLP — Douglas Kelin joined the Detroit law firm as a partner. He will be a part of the real estate practice. Previously, Kelin was at Lipson Neilson Cole Seltzer & Garin PC in Bloomfield Hills, Mich.

K&L Gates LLP — The Washington, D.C., law firm has tapped Grace Parke Fremlin and Joon Ro Yoon as partners. Previously at Steptoe & Johnson LLP, Fremlin will be a part of K&L Gates' corporate M&A practice, specializing in cross-border technology deals. Yoon arrives from Reitler Kailas & Rosenblatt LLC, and will advise on the formation and operation of patent licensing programs.

Sagent Advisors — The New York investment bank announced that Joseph Donohue and Bill Kohr have been named co-chief executive officers. Donohue and Kohr are succeeding Hal Ritch, Sagent's co-founder, who will remain at the firm as a managing director and chairman of the board.

Silverfern Group Co. — The New York investment firm named Joe Haslip managing director and head of capital strategies. Prior to joining Silverfern in February, Haslip was the managing director for public plan relations at Blue Harbour Group and assistant comptroller for pensions of New York City.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: