Fremont Unified School District's Board of Education voted unanimously June 24 to approve a $327 million budget for the 2015-16 fiscal year, which went into effect July 1. The revenue budget is more than 13 percent higher than last year -- and despite a 5 percent spike in spending, forecasts a surplus of more than $18 million for the rapidly growing district of 42 schools.

Raul A. Parungao, associate superintendent, said the primary reasons for the revenue increase from 2014-15 to 2015-16 are $19.8 million in one-time discretionary funds with the approval of Gov. Jerry Brown's May revise budget, with the district receiving $601 per student in unrestricted funds. Additionally the district's Local Control Funding Formula grew by $27 million, with a $5 million increase in supplemental funds.

"Every year the government says I am going to give you 12 percent (for example) of the difference in the 2015-16 and 2021 goal; it becomes the new base. It is like a stair step ... we just got rebased with the increase and now we are one step higher and the new step is the new base and the next increase will be another step," Parungao said.

The board also approved a $17.2 million budget for supplemental funds, with $12.3 million coming from a Local Control Funding Formula/Supplemental grant and the remaining $5 million coming from base and federal grants that are aligned with Local Control Accountability Plan goals.

Advertisement

The budget forecasts a $14 million jump in expenses, partly due to increases in staffing for the growing student population of nearly 34,500, and as the district moves to reduce student-teacher ratios to qualify for funding from the state; federal revenues being flat; higher contributions to employees' retirement funds; contributions to special education due to reclassification of revenue due to the Local Control Funding Formula; a potential penalty of $2.5 million for violating the Affordable Care Act; California's Clean Energy Job Act implementation through Proposition 39 at $3.3 million, and the $12.3 million supplemental funds.

Based on the goal to reduce the student-teacher ratio to 24:1 in an eight-year period for transitional kindergarten through eighth grade (30:1 fourth grade and above), the district will hire an additional 23 full-time teachers for elementary schools and 16 for secondary schools. For the increased number of special education students, the district is hiring seven full-time special education teachers, almost three full-time psychologists and 11 full-time paraeducators.

Around 53.5 percent of the budget will go to pay certificated salaries, 15.5 percent to classified employees' salaries and 13.6 percent for employee benefits, with much of the remaining 17.5 percent used for books, supplies, services and capital outlay.

The overall general fund expenditures of $308 million include spending from the LCAP, which amounts to almost $12.3 million and cannot be used to pay salaries and benefits of regular classrooms teacher nor any position that is the responsibility of the unrestricted general fund.

Supplemental funds are used on professional service contracts, supplies and other operating expenses that are non-payroll related.

The LCAP supplemental funds have four goals: provide an educational environment that is conducive to learning, increase the academic achievement of all students through challenging and engaging instruction, implement strategies to involve students in their learning and interventions to eliminate barriers to success, and establish partnerships with district families and the community to increase academic success for students.

The Local Control Funding Formula was enacted as a component of the Budget Act for the 2013-14 school year under Assembly Bill 97. It eliminated the revenue limit funding and most of the state categorical funds, and established the new funding formula that provides the same base grant to all school districts. Supplemental funding is provided to address the needs of eligible students (English learners, redesignated English proficient students, low-income students, foster youth and homeless youth).

Fremont Unified's plan provides supplemental materials to increase access to the core curriculum, increased direct teacher to student support through interventions, more time to access the curriculum through an extended day or year, targeted support for students who have skill gaps that need to be addressed, and social-emotional counseling for students who need it.

District staff held a public hearing on the LCAP and the budget at the June 3 board meeting before presenting the final revisions at the June 24 meeting.

This is the second year districts across the state have been implementing the Local Control Funding Formula. Local agencies receive funding based on the demographic profile of the students served to gain greater flexibility in how to use funds to improve student performance.

Last year, the district ended with $288 million in revenue but $294 million in expenses, covering the gap with $6 million from reserves.