AP Photo Priebus: 'Not concerned' about volatile GOP presidential race

The chairman of the Republican National Committee believes all the dust will eventually settle in the crowded, volatile race for the GOP presidential nomination and a Republican will be elected president next year.

“I’m not concerned,” Reince Priebus said on CNN's "State of the Union" about the current division between front-runner Donald Trump and the other GOP presidential contenders. “Every candidate in all these campaigns are going to do whatever they need to do in order to benefit their own campaigns, and I suspect that there will be a lot more things happening over the next several weeks.”

Story Continued Below

Priebus’ response followed news that former New York Gov. George Pataki is refusing to support Trump if he wins the nomination.

The Republican National Committee recently got all candidates — including Trump, who had initially balked — to pledge not to mount a third-party presidential bid, if they lost the nomination.

“One of the undiscussed issues is just, you know, controlling the debate,” Priebus told host Jake Tapper, referring the CNN GOP presidential debate Wednesday. “There will probably be more elbows thrown at that debate, and you’re gonna have your hands full.”

“The way you communicate and tone is very important, and sometimes it’s not what you say it’s how you say it. I think all of our moms have told us that,” Priebus said. “All these candidates are going to have to account for their own mouths and their own words.”

So, he warned all candidates to “proceed with caution.”

And he addressed concern about the state of the GOP that Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul expressed after former Texas Gov. Rick Perry became the first to abandoned the race on Friday.

“What does it say about GOP when a 3 & half term Gov w/ a successful record of creating jobs bows out as a reality star leads in the polls?” tweeted Paul, who is also seeking the nomination.

“It says we have 17 candidates running and just by attrition you’re going to have people dropping out," Priebus said. "I mean, look, there’s not enough hard cash to go around.”

“I think that we’re going to win, and this is just part of the process,” he said.