The SHOP exchanges were put in place under Obama's Affordable Care Act to make it easier for America's smallest employers to offer their workers health insurance. SHOP was designed for employers with fewer than than 50 employees, which is less than the number of employees needed to meet the broader ACA mandate.



SHOP contrasts with broader ACA guidelines, which require larger small employers, with 100 or more full-time equivalent workers, to offer their workers coverage in 2015 or face fines of $2,000 per worker per year for failing to comply. In 2016, those with at least 50 or more full-time workers will fall under that same mandate.

In addition to the 33 federally operated state SHOP exchanges, 17 states and the District of Columbia have set up their own versions of the platforms.

Experts say the biggest speed bump with the health exchanges is that there's little incentive for small employers to use it.

Read More Obamacare's very small business exchange enrollment



There is a tax credit, which applies for those employers like accountant Jeff Valet of Valet Accounting and Tax Service in Logan, West Virginia. Valet has seven employees including himself, all of whom make an average of $50,000 a year or less. And because he is offering them health coverage, Valet will pocket up to 50 percent of the premiums he pays for health insurance.



But the tax credit is very specific. It applies to small businesses with under 25 workers, making an average of $50,000 or less a year, and can give them up to half of what they pay in premiums back in 2014.



"The small-business tax credit is a small carrot," Feyman said of the Center for Medical Progress.



Valet enrolled his workers on the federally operated West Virginia exchange, and said his experience wasn't without hiccups. He says enrollment for his employees took nearly 10 hours, and that each worker had to go in individually to confirm their enrollment status. Valet worked with a local broker, but said there's a general lack of guidance for small employers who want to sign up on the exchange.



"There's really nothing out there that says, 'Do this, and do that,'" Valet said. "It was pretty much trial and error. If one letter or number wasn't correct, an initial was there that shouldn't have been, we were kicked out and prevented from getting everything into the system."



But in the end, the tax credit Valet will receive will make the online headache worth the efforts.

Read MoreBusinesses not 'clamoring' to enroll in Obamacare