BOULDER — Moments after Saturday dissolved into Sunday morning, the Colorado Buffaloes were in a position to knock off Oregon, claim their first conference win in 23 months and give further credence to the argument that the program is turning the corner after years of futility.

But the CU defense looked futile on Oregon’s next possession and Oregon (3-2, 1-1 Pac-12) looked like, well, Oregon.

After CU quarterback Sefo Liufau scored on a 7-yard keeper at 12:02 a.m. that made it a 31-24 game with 10:29 left, the Ducks needed only six plays to go 75 yards for a backbreaking 38-24 lead. Bralon Addison took an end-around 13 yards on third-and-3 from the Oregon 44, and quarterback Taylor Alie hit Jalen Brown with a 43-yard touchdown pass on the next play.

That was the end for CU (3-2, 0-1). Oregon added a field goal with 2:37 for a 41-24 win in a game delayed an hour because of lightning storms.

The evening began inauspiciously for both teams. Liufau was intercepted deep in CU territory on his team’s first possession, but CU defensive back Ahkello Witherspoon picked off Oregon quarterback Jeff Lockie in the end zone to thwart that threat. On the ensuing CU possession, Phillip Lindsay fumbled and gave the visitors the ball on CU 34. Two plays later Oregon running back Royce Freeman broke a 29-yard touchdown run for the game’s first score.

The Buffs tied the game with a sharp, 63-yard touchdown drive that included a 21-yard romp by Lindsay and some hard inside running by Christian Powell, who scored from the 2-yard line.

The Buffs took the lead early in the second quarter by exploiting Oregon’s suspect secondary, traveling 65 yards in five plays with a 42-yard reception by Nelson Spruce and an 8-yard touchdown catch by Shay Fields.

Oregon struck even faster on its next possession, which lasted all of three plays and covered 78 yards. After running back Taj Griffin got loose with an outlet pass for 26 yards, Oregon pulled a double reverse with receiver Addison throwing a 39-yard touchdown pass to Charles Nelson.

The teams added field goals before the half for a 17-17 tie at intermission.

Oregon regained the lead on its first possession of the second half, driving 74 yards in 3:36 with the assistance of two CU penalties. Colorado seemed inclined to respond in kind, driving to the Oregon 35-yard line — including a fourth-down pickup at midfield — but Liufau fumbled while being sacked on a scramble, turning the ball back to the visitors.

Oregon took advantage with a 54-yard scoring drive, punishing CU with runs of 17 yards (Alie), Griffin (14) and Freeman (13 and 8) to go up by two touchdowns with 2:12 left in the third quarter.

The Buffs stopped Freeman on a fourth-and-1 play at midfield to begin the fourth quarter, taking over at the Oregon 45. Liufau led CU on a nine-play scoring drive that included a nifty 14-yard scramble to the Oregon 18, breaking one tackle and sidestepping two other defenders. Six plays later he scored on a 7-yard keeper, reviving Colorado hopes with 10:29 remaining, but ever so briefly.

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or @johnmeyer