Topics: From the Wires, News

PATNA, India (AP) — When the Nobel Committee announced that Indian children’s rights activist Kailash Satyarthi had won the Peace Prize, a skinny 13-year-old boy was running around serving cups of milky tea to customers at a tiny tea stall in eastern India.

By law, Raja Manjhi should not be working at all. But, like millions of other children across India, he has been forced out of school and into a job to help his impoverished family.

Despite the country’s rapid economic growth, child labor remains widespread in India, where an estimated 13 million children work, with laws meant to keep kids in school and out of the workplace routinely flouted.

Satyarthi, who won the Peace Prize on Friday along with 17-year-old Pakistani Malala Yousafzai, accepts that “a lot of work still remains” before children like Raja no longer have to work.

Raja dropped out of school in second grade, when he was handed over to the owner of a tea stall in the eastern city of Patna to pay off his father’s 5,000 rupee ($80) debt. The money was needed because Raja’s mother was sick.

He has no idea what a Nobel Prize even means. And he has no idea when his father’s debt will be repaid so he can go back to his village.

Across India, children — some as young as 5 or 6 — end up working in all sorts of jobs. Many, like Raja, are in bonded labor, bound to their employers in exchange for a loan and unable to leave while in debt, which can last forever.

Others, like 13-year-old Srabani Das, need money so their impoverished families can eat.

Srabani, still a child herself, is a baby sitter for a middle-class family’s 1-year-old girl in the eastern city of Kolkata.

It’s a job she has had for a year and which pays only about 800 rupees ($13) a month, which she sends home to her family of poor farm laborers. Srabani lives with her employers, and has no fixed work days or time off.

Srabani has heard of the Nobel Prize, thanks to receiving a bit more of an education than Raja after studying up to the sixth grade.

She was happy that an Indian had won the award, but added, “It won’t change my life.”

For more than three decades, Satyarthi and the organization that he founded, Bachpan Bachao Andolan, or Save the Children Movement, has worked to rescue children like Raja and create awareness to keep others like Srabani in school.