ABOVE: On June 3, 2013, more than 1,000 people gathered at the N.C. General Assembly for a protest organized by the North Carolina chapter of the NAACP. Over 150 protestors were arrested at the event.

From the impact of "Moral Monday" protests to key races for the U.S. Senate, legislature and the courts, here's a look at 14 North Carolina political stories to watch in 2014.

ABOVE: The School of Public & International Affairs at N.C. State University and the N.C. Center for Voter Education present an examination of upcoming elections in North Carolina.

Democracy in North Carolina

Tuesday's vote is the culmination of a remarkable span in the state' s political history

By Bryan Warner



National observers, more accustomed to watching heated protests and debates on controversial bills play out in such places as Texas or Wisconsin, seemed genuinely surprised last year to discover the typically mild-mannered, mid-Atlantic state of North Carolina serving as a microcosm for the nation’s current right-left struggle.

Time and again, with reports of demonstrators arrested inside the legislature and polemical measures introduced on abortion or voter ID, the question from elsewhere in the country came with consternation, bemusement and alarm: What’s happening in North Carolina?

To take a note from our own Andy Griffith: what it was, was democracy – in all of its messy, often infuriating, and inspiring forms.

Elections & consequences

Republicans were swept into power with the 2010 elections, signaling a seismic shift in North Carolina's political landscape.

The election of 2010 found a North Carolina Democratic Party that had grown somewhat complacent after a century of dominance. Still basking in the afterglow of Barack Obama carrying the state in 2008, Democrats were shocked by a national wave of tea-party-fueled angst handing control of both chambers of the N.C. General Assembly to Republicans for the first time in 100 years.

Still, in 2011 and 2012, Democrats and progressives could look to Gov. Bev Perdue and her “bottle of red veto ink” as a bulwark against the newly enshrined GOP legislative majority, especially since Republicans would usually need five House Democrats to buck their own party to override Perdue’s rejection of legislation. During that two-year period, Perdue issued 19 vetoes, eight of which survived.

But a key area in which Perdue had no veto power – redistricting – would allow Republicans to entrench and grow their majority. In a coincidence of the calendar that could reverberate in North Carolina elections for years to come, the GOP won control of the General Assembly at just the moment when lawmakers would draw new congressional and legislative voting maps.

Democrats had largely ignored calls – often issued by Republicans in the minority – to create a nonpartisan redistricting process, perhaps thinking that their grasp on power would never slip, and certainly not in 2010.

But Republicans did win in 2010 and then did what Democratic majorities had done for years: craft – one might say “gerrymander” – districts to insulate their party from the shifting winds of public opinion. Those maps proved hugely effective in the 2012 election, with Republicans adding to their numbers in the House and Senate, establishing a veto-proof majority in both chambers.

However, that super majority turned out to be far less vital for the GOP with the election of Pat McCrory as the first Republican governor of North Carolina in 20 years. And for the first time since the 19th century, Republicans ruled Raleigh.

A rightward shift

N.C. Senate President Pro Tem Phil Berger and Gov. Pat McCrory, along with N.C. House Speaker Thom Tillis, have led the recent era of Republican dominance in Raleigh.

McCrory, who faced a statewide electorate where Democratic and unaffiliated voters outnumber Republicans 2-1, ran on his record as a right-of-center, moderate mayor of left-leaning Charlotte. While he championed such Republican-friendly issues as voter ID on the campaign trail, he gave a terse “none” when asked by WRAL’s Laura Leslie at a televised debate what additional restrictions on abortion he would support if elected.

Republican legislative candidates largely made no such appeal to the center as they ran in legislative districts stacked in their favor. In fact, the average margin of victory in the 2012 election was 21 percentage points among Republican House candidates and 18 points among GOP Senate contenders who actually faced a Democratic opponent.

As such it should have been little shock – especially after the 2011-2012 session – that the Republican-led legislature in 2013 would pursue a conservative policy agenda, such as rejecting Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act and cutting longterm unemployment benefits. Indeed, it was no secret that legislative Republicans would be unabashedly conservative in their approach – especially given their large majorities.

What may have surprised many Tar Heel political watchers was the rightward tack taken by McCrory, who largely went along with GOP lawmakers in their quest to remake the state into a bastion of low taxes and limited regulation in the hopes of spurring economic growth, but what their critics said would be at the expense of crucial social programs.

Rise of the left

Rev. William Barber, head of the state chapter of the NAACP, has been at the forefront of the 'Moral Monday' protest movement in North Carolina.

As 2013 got underway, North Carolina Democrats were largely rudderless and leaderless.

Perdue, in the face of poor polling numbers, had declined to run for re-election in 2012. Her Democratic predecessor, Mike Easley, had been embroiled in a campaign-finance controversy that resulted in the suspension of his law license. Former U.S. senator and presidential candidate John Edwards’ political career had been destroyed by his marital infidelity.

Nearly all of the Democrats’ longtime legislative leaders, including Marc Basnight, Tony Rand and Joe Hackney, had retired. And Jim Hunt, a former four-term governor and perhaps the single most successful and popular Tar Heel Democrat of the past 50 years, was no longer at the forefront of the political fray.

Infighting plagued the Democratic Party, with an ongoing feud over who would hold its chairmanship. The Democratic establishment, which had dominated North Carolina politics for so long, now seemed lost in the political wilderness.

Then in the spring of 2013, a handful of citizens, led by Rev. William Barber, head of the state chapter of the NAACP, began what was at first a rather modest protest in front of the N.C. General Assembly.

Within weeks, it would grow into one of North Carolina’s largest grassroots movements in decades, with thousands of people coming from across the state to speak out against the legislature, including several hundred who submitted to arrest as an act of peaceful civil disobedience in hopes of drawing attention to the rightward push inside the legislative chambers.

And succeed they did, with cable networks and other national media outlets flocking to the usually tranquil state capital to report on the new front in the political struggle of right versus left.

Much of the “Moral Monday” movement’s success is owed to Barber, whose eloquence and media savvy made him an ideal torchbearer for a North Carolina progressive movement desperate for a way to organize and channel its collective outrage at conservative governance in Raleigh.

What's next?

'Moral Monday' protesters enter the N.C. Legislative Building in May, one of a series of demonstrations over the past two years that has attracted thousands of participants and garnered national media attention.

The question for those progressives – and for the Democratic Party – is how to capitalize on the new injection of vigor. Given the political arithmetic of gerrymandered districts, Democrats face a steep climb in retaking either the state House or Senate in the near future.

Perhaps the biggest winner from the “Moral Monday” protests is Democratic U.S. Sen. Kay Hagan, who is in the midst of a tough re-election this year.

Midterm contests – like the one in 2010 that launched the new GOP dominance of North Carolina politics – have typically seen stronger turnout among Republican voters than Democrats, as compared to presidential election years. And usually top-of-the-ballot races like a statewide contest for U.S. Senate would drive voters to the polls.

But a reverse of that might happen this year, as liberal voters turn out in unusually high numbers to cast a ballot against Republican state lawmakers, and, while they’re in the voting booth, mark the box for Hagan. That could be especially true with Republican N.C. House Speaker Thom Tillis as Hagan’s opponent, making his candidacy a vicarious referendum on the GOP-controlled General Assembly.

The events of 2013 and 2014 are already setting the stage for 2016, with four-term Democratic N.C. Attorney General Roy Cooper signaling his desire to take on McCrory and emerging as the face of the Democratic Party.

In recent years, Cooper has passed on running for the U.S. Senate and in 2012 was among several big-name Democrats to turn down the chance to succeed Perdue in the governor’s mansion. But all indications are that Cooper is a serious contender for the next gubernatorial race, potentially providing his party with a well-known, and well-funded, nominee.

The lingering question is if Cooper can unite the Democratic establishment, and its moderate, pro-business core, with the newly energized progressives who have often times felt alienated by more conservative party leaders.

As for Republicans, it must be said that they largely governed how they said the would govern – firmly from the right – and saw their control grow in the 2012 elections. But while Democrats struggle to re-unite, Republicans may struggle not to come apart.

Single-party rule tends to amplify internal fissures that are largely overlooked in the face of a mutually shared enemy. We have seen early tremors of discontent in ongoing feuds between the House and Senate and between the Senate and the governor’s office.

What remains to be seen among Republicans, and perhaps McCrory in particular, is will they begin to shift to the center in hopes of building their share of the electorate, or will they remain on a rightward course?

If the Republican Party thinks it will stay in power perpetually, it need only look upon the ruins of the once mighty Democratic majority, which for years stood astride North Carolina politics from mountains to sea, but now, like a political Ozymandias, serves as a cautionary tale that no one can rule forever.

In the hands of voters

After a flood of political ads, polls and punditry, voters will ultimately decide the course of North Carolina's political trajectory on Election Day.

So what is happening in North Carolina, this once rather quiet, unassuming state?

After a century of single-party, Democratic dominance in Raleigh and after 30 years of proving reliably red for Republican presidential candidates, North Carolina is now a deep shade of purple.

The state has experienced an explosion in its population, largely driven by an influx of residents from other parts of the country. And with this newfound diversity has come a new dynamism in our politics.

What we have seen in Raleigh has been a Republican majority that governed from the right, as it had promised to do on the way to electoral victories in 2010 and 2012, and thousands of protesters exercising their constitutional freedoms in hopes of pulling the state back to the center, if not to the left.

And now as Election Day 2014 arrives, already a million North Carolinians have participated in the civil sacrament of voting, casting a ballot early, and possibly millions more will do so on Tuesday, giving one side or the other the right to represent them in the halls of government.

Indeed this Tuesday in many ways reflects the culmination of a remarkable span in North Carolina’s political history, in which we have seen controversial and consequential legislation, passionate protests, an awakened citizenry on the right and the left, much sound and fury, signifying that democracy is alive and vibrant in North Carolina.

Bryan Warner is editor of The Voter Update magazine.