With no word on the cause of the the four-alarm fire in January that decimated the New Durham Road Department of Public Works (DPW) facility continues, officials proudly showed off the township's new DPW facility.

Buy Photo Edison Mayor Tom Lankey and members of the Township Council tour the new Department of Public Works facility on Truman Drive, off Kilmer Road in Edison.on Thursday April 23,2015 (Photo: Mark R. Sullivan/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo Story Highlights Edison's new DPW facility features sprinkler systems and WiFi and will have security cameras.

The Truman Drive facility was purchased for about $2 million a few years ago, Business Administrator Maureen Ruane said.

Refurbishments totaled about $300,000, township officials said.

The fire damaged facility on New Durham Avenue will be rebuilt.

With no word on the cause of the four-alarm fire in January that decimated the New Durham Road Department of Public Works (DPW) facility, officials showed off the township's newest DPW facility.

Located on Truman Drive off Kilmer Road on the site of a former U.S. Army vehicle maintenance facility, the new fleet maintenance facility, which will house mainly sanitation and recycling, opened almost immediately after the fire.

The state-of-the art facility joins two other maintenance facilities — the fire-damaged facility on New Durham Road and another on New York Boulevard, township officials said.

The Truman Drive facility was purchased for about $2 million a few years ago, Business Administrator Maureen Ruane said.

Refurbishments totaled about $300,000, township officials said.

"We got this from the government, which was less expensive than the market value would have been," Mayor Thomas Lankey said. "It was a turn-key building. It was almost built to suit. Like anything else that is new and state-of-art, it has a lot of efficiencies. It's moving into the 21st century. It's a huge advantage to the residents of Edison."

Lankey said Jeff Roderman, the director of public works, who is retiring on May 1, was instrumental in planning for the facility.

New Durham Road fire

The fire at the New Durham Road facility began at about 9:50 p.m. Jan. 29. Between 75 and 100 firefighters fought the blaze, which was brought under control at 1 a.m. Jan. 30. Crews from PSE&G were unable to secure a natural gas line to the facility until 8 a.m.

RELATED: $4 million Edison fire under investigation

Numerous vehicles were destroyed in the blaze, including several public works salt spreaders with attached snow plows, street sweepers, repaving vehicles, a road maintenance truck and a fire engine that was awaiting repairs, township officials announced soon after the blaze.

The investigation into the cause of the fire is being handled by the Middlesex County Prosecutor's Office.

The fire-damaged facility also was home to a sign and tire shop, Peter Bartos, foreman of vehicle maintenance, said.

"That was a big hit," Bartos said.

In addition to the equipment, the township lost "every spare tire and every rim for every car and truck we have in town, including the loaders," Bartos said.

The total amount of the damage, which includes the building, is estimated to be between $4 million and $5 million, Ruane said.

The out-of-pocket cost to the township will be minimal, Lankey added.

The township has received a $1.5 million cash advance from the Central Jersey Joint Insurance Fund to help replenish it's fleet, according to an official with the Central Jersey Joint Insurance Fund.

And, since the fire, the council has been rebuilding its DEP inventory. In February, the council made $865,810 in emergency purchases that included a plow truck with a salt spreader, plows, a Mack truck with a plow and a Freightliner cab and chassis.

In March, the Council approved $414,054 for the purchase of two tandem-axle dump trucks with snow plows and in April, the Council approved $365,000 for the purchase of sewer cleaning equipment and $195,365 for the purchase of an Elgin street-sweeper.

The new DPW facility

The spacious, Truman Drive facility, which has been empty for about five years, is equipped with many amenities, including a sprinkler system and WiFi. It also will have security cameras.

"We've been looking for a building for years," Bartos said. "The trucks have gotten bigger and bigger and they didn't fit in the shop anymore. This is much-needed and overdue. This is a great investment to the infrastructure."

The facility has eight drive-through bays, Bartos said.

"We have 16 doors, so we can fit some trucks nose-to-nose," he said.

What was once a tire bay for the Army is now the new welding base.

"It has new electric to provide enough power for the welders," Bartos said. "We now have the capability of welding anywhere in the shop."

The facility also features six new mobile wheel lifts that can pickup 18,500 pounds a piece.

"We can pick up any piece of equipment we have," he said. "We can use them indoors and outdoors."

The facility also includes a workshop, parts room, offices and a conference/training room, as well as a lunch room.

The facility will focus on maintaining larger vehicles, like garbage trucks, Bartos said.

"These are the trucks that really get a workout," he said. "These are the high maintenance vehicles. These are the ones that can cause too much overtime by breaking down down and being short on trucks for the day. We're trying to make a change and minimize overtime."

Also visiting the facility were Council Vice President Sapana Shah and Councilmen Rob Karabinchak and Alvaro Gomez.

"I think it's wonderful," Shah said. "I think we're taking care of a lot of the infrastructure badly in need of repair."

"The garage is a significant milestone in moving Edison forward," Gomez said.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1z2g8Gc