LONG BRANCH — The summer ritual of fireworks and beach balls was not in the cards for some of the biggest spots along the Jersey Shore today, as scattered rains from the tail end of Hurricane Arthur put a damper on the usual Fourth of July celebrations.

Beachgoers in Long Branch mostly camped out inside restaurants or resorts, shunning an outdoor festival along the promenade that has drawn large crowds for nearly a quarter-century. Today, more than 100 businesses were left hanging in the rain.

Howard Steel, president of the Long Branch Chamber of Commerce, said the “Oceanfest” event has usually been a blockbuster in his 24 years organizing it, but this year it was tough to entice the same kind of crowds.

Amid the rain, a magician pleaded with a group of poncho-clad girls to stay until the end of his act, an Uncle Sam impersonator on stilts ambled around the promenade gamely posing for a few pictures, and a dozen restaurant owners struggled to get a good grill groove going in the windy rain.

“It’s always been rain or shine, but this is the worst it’s ever been,” Steel said. (Hours later when things dried out, hundreds of people made it out to Oceanfest.)

In Point Pleasant Beach, once the skies had cleared a bit, a few hundred people turned out to play arcade games, ventured to the bars or toured the aquarium – many of them sporting umbrellas and sweatshirts.

Donna Sukow and her husband and two kids sailed down from Hudson Valley, N.Y., for their first Fourth of July on the Shore. Rain or shine, she said, “we just like to get out of New York.”

Only a handful would venture into the water, and the usual pyrotechnics were postponed until Sunday.

“As opposed to, say, a beautiful Fourth like last year, obviously it wasn’t great,” said Toby Wolf, director of marketing at Jenkinson’s boardwalk in Point Pleasant.

She said the beach staff was dismissed early in the day because of the rain and that the blustery forecast didn’t look good for fireworks, so they were postponed until Sunday.

Dan George, the beach manager in Long Branch, said he put lifeguards in place early in the day, but almost no one ventured into the water, so no one had to be pulled out of any rip currents.

“Once the second set of rain came through, it really discouraged even the most dedicated beachgoer,” George said as he roved along the beach in a pickup truck.

“We moved a couple (lifeguards) into the proper position, but really we have not seen the big surf that they were talking about yet,” he said.

For Janet Debiak, a teacher from Clifton, the Shore was just fine without the sun. She was hitting the arcade games with her husband and a cousin from Austria before heading up to New York City.

“This place is a blast. We come here every weekend,” she said. “I want to retire down here.”