In an attempt to flee police after a hit-and-run, Kristof McCoy, 19, damaged three police cars in his stolen Jeep Wrangler

Kristof McCoy, 19, of Millington has been arrested and charged with four counts of aggravated assault, eluding in a motor vehicle, resisting arrest, possession of stolen property and criminal mischief. (Photo: ~File photo) Story Highlights Middlesex Police pursued Kristof McCoy after a motorist reported a hit-and-run

Investigation determined that McCoy's vehicle was stolen from a residence in Long Hill Township

None of the officers were hurt

LONG HILL TOWNSHIP - Kristof McCoy, 19, of Millington has been arrested and charged with four counts of aggravated assault, eluding in a motor vehicle, resisting arrest, possession of stolen property and criminal mischief.

Middlesex Police received a 911 call at 6:32 p.m. on Friday, Feb. 27 from a motorist who reported that his vehicle was sideswiped by 2013 Jeep Wrangler while on US Highway 22 in Bridgewater Township. The caller reported that the Jeep that impacted his vehicle had left the scene. The caller reported that he followed the hit-and-run vehicle into Middlesex Borough and to the area of Whitney Drive, where he lost sight of it.

Responding officers quickly located the hit-and-run vehicle in the parking lot of the Route 28 Farmers Market at 700 Union Avenue. As police officers closed in on the subject Jeep Wrangler, operated by McCoy, the vehicle sideswiped Officer Thomas Carroll's patrol car. McCoy then rammed Officer Marc Arancio's vehicle, head-on, then backed suddenly and without warning into Officer Sean Flanagan's patrol car.

READ OTHER JERSEY MAYHEM NEW HERE

Arancio exited his patrol car and ordered McCoy from the vehicle. Instead, McCoy accelerated toward Arancio's position. Arancio leapt out of the vehicle's path, narrowly avoiding being struck by the speeding Jeep. The Jeep then struck a shopper's vehicle that was parked nearby as it fled. Flanagan, Carroll, Arancio and Officer James Dolinski gave chase.

The Jeep crashed into a fence and became disabled in the north end of the parking lot. A brief foot chase ensued before the subject was apprehended by Sergeant Stephen Johnson and Arancio. Three police vehicles were damaged during the incident but none of the officers were hurt. McCoy sustained superficial cuts and scrapes to his hands and feet that occurred during his escape from the vehicle. Investigation determined that the vehicle was stolen from a residence in Long Hill Township. McCoy was remanded to the Middlesex County Adult Correctional Center on $150,00 bail.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1AnSkGk