Artist, neighborhood activist, seeks first council term

Jyotsna Raj winds her way through Martin Acres, pointing out the humble post-war ranch houses, the newer scrapes where large homes have risen on now expensive lots, apartment buildings that line the main roads, the pocket parks, the schools, the new transitional housing building for the homeless that went in without much controversy.

Raj, who lived in Martin Acres briefly in the mid 90s, sees a neighborhood with a strong sense of community, one that has welcomed a diverse population when there was outreach and communication, but one that feels under pressure from Boulder's rapid development.

Protecting these types of neighborhoods is a big reason Raj is running for Boulder City Council and why she supports the citizen-initiated charter amendment to let neighborhoods vote on land use regulation changes.

"If there is a serious attempt to upzone, then it's a land use regulation issue," Raj says.

Jyotsna Raj Website: www.rajforcouncil.org Age: 64 Family: Husband, three children, three grandchildren How long in Boulder: 20 years Professional background: Artist, consultant

Meet the Candidates The Daily Camera is profiling each of Boulder's 17 candidates for City Council. The stories will be published each day through Oct. 10.

Is Martin Acres threatened with upzoning? City planning officials and City Council members have said the city's single-family residential neighborhoods are unlikely to change.

"I don't know if it's on the table, but with all the growth and this talk about housing a lot more people, well, you do the math," Raj says.

Raj, 64, an artist and neighborhood activist on University Hill, is seeking her first term on Boulder City Council.

The Daily Camera asked each of the 17 candidates running for five open council seats to take a reporter on a short tour of Boulder that highlights their personal and policy relationship to the community they seek to serve.

Raj starts at her home on the 800 block of 14th Street. It's a historic home with a spacious porch and a rambling garden. When a historic bungalow across the street was threatened with demolition in the early 2000s, Raj and other neighbors worked to establish a historic district that runs just two blocks.

"We wanted to do it in a happy way," she says. "We just went up and down the block with our clipboards and explained the benefits. The best thing was that we did it collaboratively."

Raj joined residents of the 700 block of 12th Street to urge the city to landmark a bungalow there over the objections of the owners, but she says she wouldn't want to force preservation in most cases. Ultimately, a compromise was reached with the city that allowed the owners to split the lot and build an additional home there.

Importance of community consent

Raj would love to see a historic district across most of University Hill, but there is no appetite for it, she says.

One bright spot is the recent submittal of an evaluation form by the University Hill Commercial District to the National Register of Historic Places. Designation would give property owners access to financial incentives to restore historic buildings. Raj serves on the University Hill Commercial Area Management Commission, and she is enthusiastic about the city's efforts to revitalize that area.

From University Hill, Raj heads to a very different Boulder neighborhood, Martin Acres. She points out the shopping centers along Baseline where developer Bruce Dierking had proposed putting "net zero" office and hotel buildings, setting off intense neighborhood opposition. The area is zoned for neighborhood-oriented commercial, but offices and hotels are allowed uses.

Martin Acres has not been averse to all change, Raj says.

She points to High Mar, an affordable senior housing project built by Boulder Housing Partners, and Bridge House's transitional housing program for Bridge House's Ready to Work participants. Raj volunteers with Bridge House's arts programs.

She praises the way Bridge House gives people tools to turn their lives around and the way the organization reached out to residents of Martin Acres about the transitional housing project, even though it was a by-right use that didn't require any special approvals. Executive Director Isabel McDevitt met personally with neighbors. Ready to Work crews worked on neighborhood projects.

"This is the perfect example of a neighborhood where a lot has happened but with the consent of the community," Raj says. "If you have neighborhood plans, if you draw people in, you can accomplish a lot more. You can have a lot more density. You can have more housing types."

Martin Acres doesn't have a subcommunity plan, but Raj supports developing such plans for most of Boulder.

'It shouldn't be too sanitized'

Raj's next stop is the Orchard Grove mobile home park where she has a friend, a fellow artist. Boulder's mobile home parks are ethnically and economically diverse and provide affordable housing for families that the city doesn't subsidize.

But with Boulder's land values rising, the city has had to take steps to protect the remaining mobile home parks. Raj says the city should look for opportunities to buy land for affordable housing.

"Instead of subsidizing (affordable housing) on the rental side, maybe the city could own the land," she says.

From Orchard Grove, Raj heads to north Boulder, which was developed in accordance with a subcommunity plan. She believes the Neighborhood Right to Vote measure will encourage the city to develop more such plans, with the possibility of a vote serving as a backstop.

Raj values the way north Boulder has retained a focus on the arts and hopes redevelopment doesn't take too much edge off the neighborhood.

"I know that this will slowly lose its funk, but it shouldn't be too sanitized," she says.

Raj likes the great mix of housing in north Boulder, from large expensive houses to townhomes to mobile home parks to permanently affordable housing with spectacular views of open space. Homes are close together, but there are parks, greenways and open space.

"This is what good density looks like to me," she says. "It's very livable."

Raj said Boulder has some responsibility to provide more housing, but she doesn't think apartment units getting built through the inclusionary housing ordinance is providing the type of housing desired by those the city most wants to house.

"The population we most talk about, the firefighter, the teacher, I do not think they are going to live in the type of housing provided by our inclusionary housing policies," she says.

On the way back to University Hill, Raj goes past the Boulder Main Public Library. She calls it her second home and a cultural icon for the city.

Raj belongs to a book group that meets at the library, and she volunteers at the library. She knows the challenges the library has faced by serving as the city's de facto day shelter for the homeless. And from her work with Bridge House, Raj sees the city's homeless residents as people who need help, not a problem to be solved.

Raj believes she can bridge the divide between different Boulder communities because she knows the city "organically," through participation in so many community groups and civic activities over the course of decades.

"The first duty of public policy is to see if there is any compromise or coming together," she says. "Sometimes you do have to persuade people of what the right thing to do is, but people do not like to be railroaded."

Erica Meltzer: 303-473-1355, meltzere@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/meltzere