Health spending growth stays below 5 percent

FIRST IN PULSE: HEALTH SPENDING GROWTH REMAINS BELOW 5 PERCENT — Altarum Institute's latest monthly tracker found that national health spending in February 2016 grew just 4.8 percent year-over-year — the fourth consecutive month when health spending growth remained below 5 percent.

And after a bump in service spending related to patients obtaining coverage via the ACA, service spending growth has steadily fallen from the first quarter of 2015.

Story Continued Below

— What it means: Despite fears that Obamacare coverage expansion would end health care's spending slowdown, a "more permanent" change appears to be underway, Altarum's Paul Hughes-Cromwick told PULSE. "Health care price growth is extremely low, but as spending is price times quantity, we can only conclude that utilization has not rebounded as predicted [or] feared." See Altarum's indicators: http://bit.ly/1Ujrn4G

— One interesting nugget: Health jobs grew 3.4 percent year-over-year, while non-health jobs grew just 1.8 percent.

COMMISSIONERS ON URBAN HEALTH: MORE COORDINATION, RESOURCES NEEDED — Speaking at the Association of Health Care Journalists annual conference, public health officials from four different cities — Baltimore, Cleveland, Detroit and St. Louis — all said that recent disasters like Flint's water crisis have highlighted the need for more political will to address public health.

They also discussed the challenge of securing resources and support when success doesn't motivate as much action as a crisis. "Good public health is about non-stories," Detroit Health Commissioner Abdul El-Sayed said.

— 'There no such thing as a non-health sector': Baltimore Health Commissioner Leana Wen, noting that the one-year anniversary of the city's riots is approaching, said that local crime is inextricably linked to local public health, too.

"If you look just underneath the violence, there's deep trauma — and mental health issues that aren't recognized or untreated," Wen said.

THANK GOODNESS IT'S FRIDAY — And PULSE is coming to you from Cleveland, which is rocking with the Association of Health Care Journalists annual conference for the next three days.

Here's a guide to the agenda and follow along at #AHCJ16 on Twitter.

With help today from Jennifer Haberkorn (@JenHab), Joanne Kenen (@JoanneKenen), Brett Norman (@BrettNorman) and Rachana Pradhan (@RachanaDixit).

WHITE HOUSE TOUTS HOW IT'S 'MAKING HEALTH CARE BETTER' — The administration on Thursday kicked off a series of events intended to celebrate how the nation's health system has improved over the past seven years, and where it still needs to go.

Yesterday's event focused on diabetes research, care quality and coverage, and the White House Domestic Policy Council released a report highlighting the administration's progress and goals. See the report: http://1.usa.gov/25Of067

ICYMI: GALLUP SAYS UNINSURED RATE AT RECORD LOW — The uninsured rate among all adults was 11 percent in the first quarter of 2016, a slight decline from 11.9 percent in the fourth quarter of 2015, according to Gallup data released Thursday. It's the lowest level since Gallup and Healthways began tracking the uninsured rate in 2008.

— A tale of three Americas. The Gallup data continues to show that the uninsured rate remains dramatically different among adults of different ethnic subgroups. According to Gallup, the uninsured rate for adults who are:

White: 6.4 percent

Black: 11.4 percent

Hispanic: 28.3 percent

See the Gallup data: http://bit.ly/1Nc8nie

BUT SAFETY-NET EFFORTS ARE STILL NECESSARY — That's according to new research from Georgetown University's Center on Health Insurance Reforms, which concludes that charity care programs are still playing essential roles. Researchers found that even though the programs received fewer patients after open-enrollment season, many returned later in the year because they dropped exchange coverage.

"What was not anticipated was how many people who are eligible for marketplace plans with subsidies, and even those who are enrolled, still need help," co-author JoAnn Volk told POLITICO's Paul Demko. More here.

CA EXCHANGE CLEARS WAY FOR UNDOCUMENTED COVERAGE WAIVER — The California exchange on Thursday moved to send ACA “Section 1332” waiver proposals to the state legislature, including a request to let undocumented immigrants purchase unsubsidized plans on the state-run marketplace, Pro's Rachana Pradhan reports.

The California legislature still needs to pass a bill authorizing the state to submit an application to the federal government, where approval is uncertain even under a Democratic administration. However, some board members indicated the concept was the right one to support. “I haven’t been shy about making clear that this is somewhat symbolic,” California HHS Secretary Diana Dooley said during a board meeting. But she added, “I do understand that symbolism is important.”

… Covered California also approved a novel plan to identify — and possibly ban — providers that provide poor-quality or unjustifiably high-cost care. By 2018, insurers will identify poor performing providers, who could be excluded from exchange plan networks as early as 2019. The exchange will also adopt a payment system intended to link at least 6 percent of hospital reimbursement risk or subject to bonuses based on quality.

Details on the new health insurer contract terms: http://bit.ly/1Vcauup

MedPAC PART D RECS RILE PhRMA, PLEASE GPhA — The Medicare Payment Advisory Commission approved a slate of recommendations Thursday that irked PhRMA, Pro's Brett Norman reports.

What MedPAC wants

— MedPAC would lower the government’s share of Part D reinsurance subsidies, after reinsurance spending in the program has grown 20 percent annually in recent years. MedPAC would also have Congress eliminate cost-sharing for beneficiaries who have blown through their out-of-pocket cap, and wants to no longer count some drugmaker discounts toward that cap.

— The commission would lower co-pays for the low-income subsidy population for generic drugs to encourage broader use of the cheaper products.

— And it would remove the requirement that plans cover virtually every anti-depressant and anti-transplant rejection product as “protected classes” in Part D.

How industry reacted

PhRMA says: “Taken together, these recommendations will significantly harm beneficiaries by eroding coverage and protections for some of the most vulnerable enrollees in the program. MedPAC’s vote also ignores broad stakeholder concerns raised in response to these proposals.”

But GPhA cheered the recommendation on generics, which are used less often by low-income beneficiaries. That lagging rate is “particularly troublesome because, as patients who fall below 135 percent of the poverty line, the [low-income-subsidy] population is particularly vulnerable to lapses in medication adherence due to inability to pay out-of-pocket costs,” Christine Simmon, GPhA’s SVP for policy, said in a statement.

PART B PROPOSAL: BAD FOR OUTPATIENT DEPARTMENTS, GOOD FOR PRIMARY CARE — That's according to a new Avalere analysis of CMS's controversial proposal to change how it pays for physician-administered drugs.

“We have found that $480 is the tipping point for how Part B drug reimbursement would change under this new rule,” Avalere's Adam Borden said in a statement. “Physicians who prescribe drugs that cost more would receive lower Medicare payments.”

The change would mostly hit hospital outpatient departments, which would account for 60 percent of payment reductions if the proposal was implemented nationwide. In contrast, primary care providers and orthopedic surgeons would be among those groups that stand to gain.

See the analysis: http://bit.ly/1SDUuv3

PORTMAN PRESSURES HOUSE ON CARA — Sen. Rob Portman, one of the authors of the Senate's opioid bill, is trying to pressure the House to act on his bill, which was approved by the Senate about a month ago.

"Every day, we lose about 120 Americans to drug overdoses. That means that we’ve lost more than 3,240 Americans since the Senate passed this bill," Portman said on the Senate floor Thursday. "Let me just say to my friends in the House, respectfully, the Senate has made your job a lot easier. We have already done the hard part.”

TENET DROPPED FROM S&P 500 — The for-profit hospital company has seen its stock slide after losing $140 million last year. Why the downturn? Blame a major settlement under the False Claims Act and dwindling returns from ACA coverage expansion.

KFF's ALTMAN ON HEALTH CARE AND THE CAMPAIGN — Writing in the Wall Street Journal, Kaiser Family Foundation CEO Drew Altman discusses new data on how "health care" issues — which include reproductive health, rising drug costs and more — are playing in this year's presidential election. For example, 44 percent of Republican women say that health care issues are "extremely important" to their vote.

"It’s likely that the gender gap on health as a voting issue will carry over to the general election, with women forming the bloc of voters who feel strongest about health-care issues," Altman predicts. He adds that candidates' competing ideas about the future of Medicare could potentially "drown out other health issues and activate senior voters."

Read the column: http://on.wsj.com/1TEXcp8

WHY IT'S HARD TO BE FLUENT WITH PATIENT-GENERATED DATA — The National Quality Forum delved into patient engagement and patient-generated data at its annual meeting Thursday — and found there are so many new forms of patient-generated data that there isn’t yet a common language about it.

One interesting element flagged by POLITICO health editor Joanne Kenen — who moderated the panel — was how masses and masses of data are being gathered and then sliced, diced, analyzed and marketed by data brokers. (Not everyone agreed on its importance or priority for health care, however.) That trove of information about so many aspects of our lives can also reveal a lot about social determinants of health and risk factors for individuals within a patient population. Brad Bowman of Healthgrades said it’s already being used by hospital marketing departments.

Which prompted us to ask — if it’s being used to make hospitals richer, shouldn’t it be used to make us healthier?

THE STORY OF THE WEEK … is this ProPublica investigation into New York's lax regulations for how nurses are vetted and disciplined. Unlike many states, New York doesn't require applicants for nursing licenses to undergo simple background checks or submit fingerprints. Within hours of the story, New York Governor Andrew Cuomo said he'd consider changing the law.

Read ProPublica's story: http://bit.ly/1Xko50C

ON TAP NEXT WEEK — The House Ways and Means Committee on Thursday will hold a hearing on how health tax expenditures affect cost, access, choice and portability in the health care system.

WHAT WE'RE READING

Imagine having your baby switched in the hospital. It briefly happened to a former POLITICO reporter recently: http://wapo.st/1oHwE9D

Big California firms are taking on a local health system over its high cost of care, and it could be a precedent-setting legal battle, Chad Terhune reports: http://n.pr/20cQQOC

Effective, cutting-edge drugs and low costs? We can't have it all when it comes to pharmaceutical innovation, Austin Frakt argues at the JAMA Forum: http://bit.ly/23h0a9c

The controversial head of Google's biotech venture awarded a major contract … to a luxury clinic that he owns: http://bit.ly/1SUbD6r

What surgeons say when they don't think their patient is listening: http://wapo.st/1YibHyp

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **