The War on Women: The real choices women want from government

WASHINGTON, June 22, 2014 — The Democratic Party’s contrived “War on Women” — designed to frame Republicans as anti-woman — misses the mark of women’s concerns on many issues. It thus helps both parties avoid the main concerns of women.

Women, who are 51 percent of the population, want and need to be listened to across a wider spectrum of our backgrounds and experiences.

Women are not chattel property nor is the activity of our wombs around birth control or other personal choices the government’s business for which we should expect others to pay.

Though the women’s vote going forward is again in play, it should not have taken the efforts of CNN pollsters Nicole McCleskey, Linda DiVall and Kellyanne Conway to figure out the obvious: the status quo isn’t working any more for women.

They want substance and solutions:

As today’s youth understand, women know it is all about “the Benjamins.” Money talks and all else walks. Women want control and choices over our lives reflecting who we are.

As managers of our own budgets we can’t spend what we don’t have and would appreciate the government doing the same.

Most of us must work; therefore, equal pay must be tendered for equal, not equivalent, work.

The government must quit creatively taxing us at every avenue and leave us with more money to take home than the government takes while allowing us to fund our own business ventures.

The government’s role relating to our children is a struggle which hasn’t been adequately discussed much less dealt with.

Jobs and the economy sit at the heart of our ability to provide for our families and ourselves, educate our children or have engaging and satisfying futures holding hope for the possibility of retirement.

Obamacare’s one size fits all philosophy limits our choices, costs more than most will ultimately be able to pay for the insurance and doesn’t guarantee access or same provider services.

In their concentration and fights over reproductive health, whether birth control is used, is a choice which Republicans can’t take away, and the individual woman must rightfully retain.

An understanding which Democrats and others won’t verbalize, though they know it is right, and must accept is that in making our choices, nowhere in the US Constitution, does it state the government will be responsible for paying for that individual choice.

This is the gap, not gender but in public policy understandings.

The women’s vote, a right to it was delivered by the Republican Party in 1920, is not monolithic nor are our issues or approaches to them all the same.

We want to participate in an equal opportunity society which while giving us responsibility for our choices and allowing us more flexibility, less regulations over our lives.

Through job growth and personal responsibility, we will find women are not just the life of the party, but per Abraham Lincoln, are the hands which rock the cradle undergirding the nation.

DR. ADA M. FISHER IS THE NC REPUBLICAN NATIONAL COMMITTEEWOMAN, AUTHOR OF THE BOOK, ACOMMON SENSE CONSERVATIVE PRESCRIPTIONS SOLUTIONS FOR WHAT AILS US, BOOK I AVAILABLE THROUGH AMAZON.COM, IS. A PHYSICIAN, LICENSED TEACHER FOR SECONDARY EDUCATION IN MATHEMATICS AND SCIENCE, AS WELL AS A PREVIOUSLY ELECTED SCHOOL BOARD MEMBER, , CONTACT HER AT P. O. BOX 777; SALISBURY, NC 28145; CONTACT HER AT DRFISHER@DRADAMFISHER.ORG