“Gridlock!” a retired Marine with a long gray ponytail hollered. “Gridlock! Gridlock!” the crowd echoed approvingly.

It was predictable that this would not last. Polls consistently show that Americans do not want gridlock; they want Washington to work. And plenty of the people coming to Mr. Paul’s rallies were from the “Keep your government hands off my Medicare” wing of the Tea Party, who were not going to like his approach to spending reductions once it was clear that meant cutting seniors’ entitlements.

By his second year as a senator, Mr. Paul had shattered the illusions of a good number of his supporters.

During the government shutdown of 2013, he was caught on a live microphone advising Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, then the leader of the Republican minority, that the party could win the messaging war if it highlighted its willingness to compromise.

Mr. Paul reversed his pledges on issues like cutting military spending and foreign aid.

He was discussed as a presidential prospect almost as soon as he won his seat. But with each move toward the mainstream, he lost some of the fervid supporters who had powered that win.

In 2010, Mr. Paul ran against the McConnell machine in Kentucky. His opponent in the Republican primary was Trey Grayson, the secretary of state and a McConnell protégé who had the right résumé (Harvard, top of his law school class at the University of Kentucky) but unfortunate timing.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

I followed the Paul campaign as I covered the Tea Party for this newspaper and wrote about it in the penultimate chapter of my book, “Boiling Mad: Inside Tea Party America.” I began hearing about Mr. Paul from Tea Party activists in January, when his candidacy seemed like libertarian fantasy. By the time I spent four days trailing him in April, it was pretty clear that he was going to win. When I returned to see him win the primary in May, his supporters were on Twitter declaring his margin the #randslide. (In between, there were persistent updates from his campaign manager, a local blogger and true-believer libertarian who was replaced soon after the primary win.)

Photo

Mr. Paul tapped into two urgent forces, which I came to think of as raw anger and raw milk.

One was the Tea Party, voters frustrated by the Great Recession who came to rallies with “Don’t Tread on Me” flags and demands to undo the Affordable Care Act. “I was Tea Party before there was a Tea Party!” Mr. Paul said often. “If they had cards, I’d be a card-carrying member.”

On the other side were the libertarians who had long backed Mr. Paul’s father, Ron Paul, a former United States representative from Texas, in his long-shot bids for the presidency and his efforts in Congress to say no to spending. Members of this group preached the minimalism of Austrian economic theory and argued that the Federal Reserve imposed a hidden tax by devaluing the money in circulation every time it issued new currency. They trusted Rand Paul to get the government out of their pocketbooks, their schools and even, through its insistence on pasteurizing milk, their refrigerators.

Supporters were unusually enthusiastic: Mr. Paul campaigned across Kentucky in a recreational vehicle owned by a Nascar driver, Deborah Renshaw, whose brother had become a Paul supporter after what he described to me as a late-night “epiphany” while reading about the Fed on the Internet.

The Paul campaign painted Mr. Grayson as the very model of the country-club Republican, mockingly referring to him by his full name, Charles Merwin Grayson III (a touch of temerity, considering that Mr. Paul was the one with a legacy name). While Mr. Grayson wore shirts with monogrammed cuffs, Mr. Paul, an ophthalmologist and first-time candidate, appeared in rumpled khakis and short-sleeve denim shirts.

He declared his candidacy on the Glenn Beck show and appeared frequently on the radio program of Alex Jones, a self-described paleoconservative with conspiracy theories about a federal government role in the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks and the Oklahoma City bombing of April 19, 1995. Mr. Paul also told a television interviewer that he did not support the portion of the 1964 Civil Rights Act that required businesses and restaurants to serve blacks, because that was not government’s proper role.

Photo

Mr. Paul’s message was almost apocalyptic. “These are the times that try men’s souls,” he said, quoting Thomas Paine. America in 2010, he said, was like the last days of Rome. He positioned himself as possibly the last person who might be able to save it.

His opponent tried to portray Mr. Paul as “Too Kooky for Kentucky,” the name of a blog by a Grayson supporter. Instead, Mr. Paul came off as a regular guy. After a local official introduced him with a rousing speech in a rally at Ol’ Harvey’s Eats, a barbecue place in Lawrenceburg, Mr. Paul ambled up and demurred. “I thought we were going to have some music first,” he said, as his three young sons took the stage with guitars to sing patriotic songs.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

His wife, Kelley, sidled up to me and admired my shoes, French Sole flats in a go-with-everything taupe, which had rubber soles that made them ridiculously indestructible, but which also looked reasonably professional and slipped off easily for airport security. All of this I gushed — I am not one to say a simple “thank you” to a compliment — to Mrs. Paul, who disappeared into the Nascar driver’s camper and re-emerged triumphant to tell me she had just ordered a pair online.

Mr. Paul’s victory party in May 2010 was at his country club — another touch Mr. Grayson might have found rich with irony — with valet parking out front, placid turquoise pools out back and a blazing fire in every room. The senator-elect emerged to speakers blaring “The Spirit of Radio” and talked about a “Tea Party tidal wave.”

He rambled, as he had a tendency to do, about a local man who had raised money for disaster relief and how important that lesson was — as if Mr. Paul imagined funding the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Medicare through DonorsChoose or Kickstarter.

He was a newly minted celebrity. Before his speech, he said, he had taken calls from Sarah Palin and Mitt Romney.

Afterward, his father lingered, accepting congratulations. One woman told him that what Senator Barry M. Goldwater had done for Ronald Reagan, Ron Paul had done for Rand.

Rand Paul had already left the premises.