Topics: Bridgeport, Joseph Ganim, Pleasure Beach, Life News, News

On a windy, damp morning in early April, Steve Hladun stands in front of the gate that protects the tiny island of Pleasure Beach, Connecticut, from unwanted trespassers. His neon yellow raincoat stands out against the grey of the sea and sky around him. Pausing mid-sentence, the city official pats his pockets looking for the keys to the gate. Not finding them, he pulls out a credit card and swiftly picks the lock. Behind him, the city’s harbormaster looks on curiously from the dock. Steve flashes him a nervous smile and pushes the gate open, having successfully broken into the place he is supposed to protect.

Unfazed by the first hiccup of the morning, he makes his way across the center of the island — a once beloved but now desolate 71-acre spit of sand in Long Island Sound. At 33, Steve is surprisingly young to be in charge of a place like this, and his friendly demeanor and laid-back attitude suggest his is a new approach to how the nearby city of Bridgeport, which controls Pleasure Beach, does things. His green eyes scan the surrounding area for anything unexpected; since the only bridge to this island burned down 18 years ago it has been deserted, and nowadays you never know what you might find. Walking down its only road, Steve passes remnants of the island’s former life. A pay phone stands defiantly, nearly hidden in overgrown weeds. The rusted wire fencing of a baseball backstop sticks out of the trees. A large concrete bathhouse stands in the center of the island, graffiti covering its every surface. Finally, he spots what he’s come here for. On the south side of the island, less than half a mile from the gate Steve broke into, seven police divers are standing in the sand, dressed head to toe in protective dry suits and oxygen tanks. For the seriousness of their appearance, the policeman joke around childishly. They have left their guns behind but carry knives, unsure of what they might find once they enter the water.

After chatting with the men for a few minutes, Steve goes over the logistics of the mission: the divers are to walk out 400 feet from the high water mark to feel around for debris that may have appeared in the nearly 20 years since the area was last used for swimming. The divers slowly wade into the 44-degree water, gripping onto a line of rope they hold above their heads. The wind howling, they walk through the water in tandem, looking like Navy SEALs in their facemasks and scuba gear. Steve stands on the sand, watching them silently for a few minutes before exhaling deeply. “That’s bad-ass. That’s just so intense.”

An almost-island in the shape of a scalene triangle — no two sides are the same length — Pleasure Beach is surrounded by water and narrowly connected to the town of Stratford, Connecticut, by a strip of sand jetting out from its skinniest, easternmost point. The vast expanse of Long Island Sound is to the south, Bridgeport Harbor is to the west, and a small strait of water called Lewis Gut sits to the north, bordering Bridgeport’s populous East End neighborhood. The municipal responsibilities for the island (technically an “islet,”thanks to the sand strip) are confusing: Stratford owns the eastern strip of sand, which used to be home to 45 summer cottages. But the City of Bridgeport is in charge of the larger part of the island, to the west, where a theater, carousel and other buildings sat. Now the entire island is empty, save for a couple of abandoned buildings and some personal belongings: a deck chair, a television set, a beach umbrella. This used to be a flourishing vacation community, but hardly anyone has vacationed here in 18 years.

Today, clearing the neglected beach area is an important item for Steve to check off his never-ending to-do list. As Special Projects Coordinator for the City of Bridgeport (arguably the Detroit of New England) his days are often spent like this, arranging for odd missions like police divers, planning beach cleanups and generally braving wind and weather for whatever the state’s largest city requires of him (Bridgeport’s nickname, now somewhat ironic, is “the Park City” due to its large swaths of public land). But bringing life back to this ghost island is a different kind of task. Once a place of relaxation and amusement, Pleasure Beach is now an eyesore, with derelict buildings and trash everywhere. Fixing it is Steve Hladun’s job. It’s also the biggest project of his career.

What happened to Pleasure Beach, and the changes in store for it now, is a story of corruption, tragedy, natural forces and heroic efforts. It is a story about the degradation of a happy place, and maybe, finally, its return to life. Summer communities have long been a staple of New England life, but natural disasters and economic struggles have left their legacy challenged. As the City of Bridgeport prepares to reopen Pleasure Beach this summer, turning it into a public park for a poor community, it has become part of an emerging national debate about land use, urban renewal and barrier islands. While no one in Bridgeport, including Steve Hladun, knows if Pleasure Beach can truly make a comeback, its chance at rebirth is now greater than ever.

*

Part of the challenge for Steve — and anyone else who wants to get to Pleasure Beach — is that the island is virtually inaccessible. Before the bridge burned, the park was only a two-minute walk from Bridgeport’s East End neighborhood, which hugs the Lewis Gut shoreline. To get there today, one must drive to Long Beach West in Stratford, park, and walk more than two miles down a narrow strip of sand littered with millions of seashells. So few people come here anymore that in some parts of the beach the sand is not even visible, hidden underneath shells and driftwood. But the farther one gets down the beach, the more signs of life become apparent. Concrete benches that have managed to survive years of harsh weather rest on the high-tide line, where people once sat to gaze out over the water. The wooden foundations of cottages poke out from the sand, their remaining structures having been bulldozed years ago. The canvas canopy of a beach umbrella sticks out, its colors still vibrant. A plastic foam toy in the shape of a star reads: “Valerie’s Rockin’ Third Birthday.”

Pleasure Beach wasn’t always like this. It first gained notoriety in 1892 when two Bridgeport liquor dealers built up a legend that a pirate had buried his treasure there. Accessing the island by ferry, the businessmen opened a small amusement park. For the next several years Pleasure Beach passed through a series of private owners, each of whom added to the growing list of attractions. Then, in 1919, it was bought by the City of Bridgeport and advertised as a public getaway just minutes from the booming industrial town. In 1927 a quarter-mile long, two-lane wooden plank bridge was built so that visitors could drive to the island via its north side. The bridge swung open horizontally, allowing pleasure boats and small barges to pass through on their way out to the Sound. The water taxis were discontinued. Soon, summer cottages were built on the Stratford side, their owners leasing the land from the town. Residents spent nights on the island, easily commuting back to Bridgeport for work. For the next several decades Pleasure Beach hosted visitors who came for its carousel, roller coaster, skating rink and legendary ballroom. Glenn Miller and Artie Shaw were among the several performers known to put on big shows. There was a beer garden and miniature railroad, and the sandy beaches offered close proximity to nature. Pleasure Beach was an easily accessible paradise, a five-minute drive from downtown.

Now, standing in the midst of a graffiti-covered, black-mold-infested theater formerly known as the Polka Dot Playhouse, it is hard to believe this was ever someone’s happy place. The paint around the open ticket windows is peeling. Exposed insulation and drywall are everywhere, as are piles of trash. The retro carpeting and plush seats evoke signs of a different era for this building, and someone has placed a sticker on the door that says “palace.” The carousel is gone, only its concrete foundation still in place. Nature has taken over and several endangered species, including piping plover shorebirds and eastern prickly pear cacti, have made their home here. Void of people, Pleasure Beach has turned into a different kind of paradise.

The last show to run at the Polka Dot Playhouse was “Laughter on the 23rd Floor,” a Neil Simon play about NBC comedy writers (yes, like “30 Rock”). It was June 1996 and Pleasure Beach’s summer season had started, just like any other, with picnics and sailboats and vacationing families. On June 16, Father’s Day, the island was crowded with summer residents and day visitors alike who celebrated the family holiday with picnics on the beach. All told, there were over 200 people on the island that day when disaster struck.

Just before 2:30 in the afternoon, an unknown motorist or pedestrian carelessly tossed a cigarette butt onto the wooden planks of the connecting truss bridge. Having been doused in creosote to prevent weather damage, the pilings ignited in flames that quickly shot up to the bridge’s center, burning the center of the 200-foot swing span. Residents and visitors looked up to see a dark column of black smoke rising up above the Lewis Gut strait.

“I hoped it was something else, but I was afraid it was the bridge,” one resident, Paul Olivia, told The New York Times following the fire. While one motorist dangerously sped across the creaking timbers before the flames reached the middle, the rest were stranded. As Bridgeport firefighters rushed to put out the flames from the mainland side, residents on the island formed a bucket brigade to stop the fire from getting any closer. The U.S. Coast Guard, along with marine police units from nearby Stratford and Westport, tried to fight the fire from boats, but a low tide made it difficult to get close enough.

While the bridge was burning, police and firefighters infiltrated the island by boat, trying to get as many day visitors off as possible. They instructed people to leave their cars and wait at the island’s pier for help. By 4:30 p.m. state rescue boats began shuttling groups of families back to the mainland as the fire continued approaching Pleasure Beach. At the Polka Dot Playhouse, an audience of three made it in time for the matinee performance of “Laughter,” though most ticket holders were stranded on the other side of the bridge. The show went on, as did the fire, which raged for over two hours.

Immediately after the fire, visitors and theatergoers were escorted off the island, while residents of the 45 summer cottages waited for city officials to make rebuilding plans. The plans never came. Bridgeport’s mayor, Joseph Ganim, made initial claims that the bridge would get repaired, but only a few days passed before officials made it clear that wasn’t going to happen, citing high financial costs. The Port Jefferson Ferry, which runs regular service from Bridgeport to Long Island, donated its services to remove cars and residents, many of whom opted to cancel their summer vacations. Numerous pleasure boats and fishing vessels were also stranded, as officials feared opening the bridge to a swing position might cause it to collapse and block the channel.

Then, things got worse. The day after the fire, Stratford officials decided they would not renew the long-term leases to the land homes were built on, and the leases would expire the following year. On July 1, Bridgeport’s Board of Park Commissioners voted Pleasure Beach closed to the public. Though the burned bridge was small in relation to most vehicular bridges, no money was allocated for even the slightest repair. More than a lost summer season, residents were suddenly losing their community.

But they didn’t go down without a fight. Three months after the bridge fire, cottage residents came together in a lawsuit against the town of Stratford. They charged that the town, which had responsibility to the land they lived on, had failed to provide adequate access to the cottages. They also asked for the town to look at opening up an old road that had run along the Stratford sand strip before being closed to help protect wildlife. They arranged for a donated fire truck to be stationed on the island, but the town said it wouldn’t allow it. It also refused continual offers by the homeowners to take out insurance policies holding the town free of liability for their well-being.

Attorney Ken Bernhard represented the more than 50 plaintiffs in negotiations with the town of Stratford. “We managed to drag it out over ten years,” he says proudly of the case. As the years wore on, many residents continued to spend summers in their island homes. They offered to create a special tax district in return for being allowed to stay, but when the town said no, the homeowners stopped paying taxes altogether. Desperate to keep their piece of paradise, residents pooled $3 million in an offer to buy their land from Stratford. Cash-strapped city officials considered the offer for a while, before once again turning the residents down. Bernhard says the town’s main motivation for eviction was concern over liability issues, even though he had countered that with fireboat offers and the arrangement of release waivers. He also argued that homeowners served as guards for the piping plovers and other protected wildlife. Without the residents, Bernhard protested, there would be no one to keep vandals or other wayward visitors from wandering onto designated breeding grounds. The Department of Environmental Protection favored this claim, but the town of Stratford stood firm. The residents had to go. Finally, on a somber day in May of 2007 — nearly ten years after the bridge fire — the remaining Pleasure Beach holdouts moved their possessions off the island by barge and abandoned their houses, leaving them to the whims of Mother Nature.

*

“Bridgeport, I am longing for you, for you’re a grand old town!” That’s the first line of a song written in 1915 as an ode to Connecticut’s “Park City.” Residents and officials recognized the need for outdoor public space as early as 1851, and Bridgeport’s reputation as a genteel and welcoming place grew well into the 20th century. The home of P.T. Barnum, who served as mayor from 1875 to 1876, Bridgeport prospered as an industrial city with a charming seaside location. European immigrants poured into its working-class neighborhoods, taking jobs at the city’s more than 500 factories. They manufactured sewing machines, automobiles and phonographs; and the Subway restaurant chain, Frisbee disc game, and — thanks to factory unions — eight-hour workday are all products of the prosperous boomtown.

But by the end of the 20th century, the city was singing a different tune. “My city ain’t pretty, full of drugs and crime, most trying to be hood rich pushin’ that good shit,” raps a group of young men in music video called “Bridgeport Anthem.” Images of police cars and liquor stores flash as they rap: “Park City, CT we don’t try to play. You don’t know where I’m from ’cause you drive away. Don’t want to live here, you could die today. Don’t sleep on the porch, stay wide awake.”