JACKSONVILLE, Fla., Jan. 8, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- It's a new year and a new name for a national staffing firm. OnCall Staffing, Inc. is now Agility Staffing, Inc., as of Jan. 1.

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20140108/PH42370LOGO-a)

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20140108/PH42370LOGO-b)

In addition to the name change, former president of OnCall Staffing Mike Rolewicz founded Agility HR Group, Inc., a company launched based on experience with large groups for payroll and best-in-class benefits including health and 401(k) plans.

Agility Staffing selected its new name based on its ability to respond quickly and adapt to its clients' needs.

"An agile company thrives and we pride ourselves on solving the unique challenges our clients face, as well as supplying them with the top talent they need to grow and prosper," Agility HR Group president Mike Rolewicz said.

The company has also recently opened a new Orlando branch, which long-time employee Victoria Henrich will manage as vice president. Henrich will handle leadership and development in the area and supervise its Orlando team, which hired Janis Godlewski as account executive.

Completing immediate employment transitions for recent FDIC bank acquisitions has enabled Agility to be extremely responsive, quick-acting and efficient with such critical and timely transitions. Agility employs its clients' staff and operates as a strategic human resources partner for its clients, keeping them fully compliant while managing the day-to-day HR and labor forces.

The companies expect to enjoy high demand in 2014 for Agility HR Group, offering comprehensive payroll and benefit solutions, and Agility Staffing, providing contingent and permanent staffing placements. Agility also anticipates that many companies will need its assistance navigating the complications and compliance of the Affordable Care Act.

Founded in 1995 by Michael Rolewicz, Agility Staffing, Inc. (formerly known as OnCall Staffing, Inc.) and Agility HR Group, Inc. have Jacksonville headquarters and branch offices in Orlando and Tampa. Agility Staffing, Inc. provides staffing solutions to the medical, administrative, legal, accounting and IT industries, including temporary employment in call centers, office administration and legal and medical fields, as well as upper-level employment in accounting, finance, project management and IT. For more information, call 904-281-0010.

For additional information, interview and image requests, contact the public relations firm.

Read more news from Agility Staffing.

Media Contact:

Darby Underwood for Agility Staffing, Inc.

888-773-4768, ext. 311

SOURCE Agility Staffing, Inc.