BUFORD - A 2-year-old boy and his father died Wednesday after both suffered gunshot wounds at the end of a roughly 19-hour standoff in a Buford subdivision, authorities said.

A SWAT team rescued the boy from his father Wednesday afternoon, but both were later confirmed dead by Gwinnett County Police after separate hospitalizations.

The SWAT team entered the barricaded master bedroom of the home around 4:40 p.m. Wednesday after hearing a gunshot from the room. The child, Philip Nguyen, 2, and his father, Thy Ho, 43, both had gunshot wounds.

The SWAT team on Wednesday sealed off the neighborhood in Gwinnett County, a few miles south of Hall County, to deal with what police called a “barricaded gunman” holding the boy inside a home, authorities said.

The SWAT team was responding to the subdivision off Beyers Landing Drive after 10 p.m. Tuesday, west of Spout Springs Road and near Interstate 85.

The standoff began late Tuesday night, when a teenager called police to report that a man was threatening to shoot everyone at the home and then take his own life, Gwinnett County Police Cpl. Deon Washington told reporters at the scene.

SWAT team members contacted the suspect inside the home by phone and text messages before entering after hearing a gunshot.

“Upon their entry, the suspect shot himself,” Gwinnett County Police Cpl. Michele Pihera said in a news release. “The officers quickly grabbed the baby and noticed that he had received a gunshot wound.”

A helicopter took the child to Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta, while the father was taken to Gwinnett Medical Center.

Wednesday morning was the first day of a new semester in the county’s schools after the holidays, but school buses were not allowed into the neighborhood, which was on lockdown, school system spokeswoman Sloan Roach said.

Roach said she didn’t know how many students were affected by the lockdown, but they attend three schools in the area — Mill Creek High School, Jones Middle School and Ivy Creek Elementary School.