Photo

After Martha Graham’s death, a bitter and protracted legal dispute erupted over who had the rights to the revolutionary modern dances she created. When Merce Cunningham died in 2009, his dance company went on a farewell tour and then disbanded, according to his wishes.

Now Paul Taylor, who is among the remaining pioneers of the modernist movement that transformed dance in the mid-20th century, is shaking up his company as it celebrates its 60th anniversary — in the hope, he said, of keeping it going for “at least” another 60 years.

After six decades in which the Paul Taylor Dance Company existed to dance almost nothing but Paul Taylor works, Mr. Taylor said that he wanted to broaden its mission to include presenting past masterworks of modern dance and works of contemporary choreographers in addition to his oeuvre and the dances he plans to continue to create.

“I want to bring back great works of American modern dance that have been done in the past, so that today’s audiences can see them,” Mr. Taylor, 83, said in a telephone interview. “And I want to encourage future choreographers of modern dance.”

His idea startled the company’s board when he first broached it with them in the fall, at a meeting in a 50th-floor conference room atop the McGraw-Hill building in Midtown. Since then, the board has been working feverishly to iron out the plan, said John Tomlinson, the executive director of the Paul Taylor Dance Foundation. The troupe plans to announce the details of its vision to create what it is calling “a new center for American modern dance” on March 13, the day of its gala at the David H. Koch Theater.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

After the board presented Mr. Taylor with a five-year plan for restructuring the company, he raised an objection. “He said to me, ‘There’s a problem with this plan,’ ” Mr. Tomlinson recalled. “I don’t want to take five years. I want to do this now.”

Mr. Taylor said that he had been encouraged by the support he had gotten from the board. “They seemed to like the idea,” he said. “I think a lot of them had been wondering what would happen to the company if the time comes that I can’t crank out something.”

That time has not yet come. The troupe will present two new Taylor dances this March in its three-week season at the Koch Theater. “One of them I just finished the other day,” he said, explaining that it was called “Marathon Cadenzas” and set to music by Raymond Scott.

Mr. Taylor said that his decision to restructure his company and plan for the future had been influenced by his dismay at the disbanding of Cunningham’s company. “That was sad,” he said. “I didn’t want that to happen. I would like the company to continue.”

His proposal to reorganize the troupe raises a host of interesting questions, from how to choose canonical works from modern dance’s past to whether his dancers are suited to other kinds of dance.

Mr. Taylor said that many details were still being worked out, including which contemporary choreographers would be chosen, which past works would be revived and whether those works would all be danced by members of his company, or by others. Asked what choreographers from the past he would be interested in presenting, he mentioned the possibility of Graham, whose company he danced in; Doris Humphrey; and José Limón.

“Those are a few,” he said.

Mr. Taylor has become a fixture in American modern dance, especially in New York, where his company has managed to have regular annual New York seasons for decades, even as it has regularly toured the nation and the world. He danced for seven seasons with the Martha Graham Dance Company, and was a guest artist at New York City Ballet in 1959, where George Balanchine choreographed “Episodes” for him.

Since founding his own troupe in 1954, Mr. Taylor has created 140 dances, including works like “Esplanade,” “Aureole” and “Company B,” and his pieces have been performed by other companies including the Royal Danish Ballet, American Ballet Theater, San Francisco Ballet, Miami City Ballet and Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater. In 2010, Alastair Macaulay wrote in The New York Times, “It is fair to say, though few have done so, that Mr. Taylor’s work became the mainstream of American modern dance more than 35 years ago.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Tomlinson said that the first inklings of change would be apparent next month when Tiler Peck and Robert Fairchild, New York City Ballet dancers, perform excerpts from Mr. Taylor’s “Airs” at his company’s gala. Mr. Tomlinson said the changes would be reflected in the 2015 season.

The company has made a number of other plans to celebrate its 60th anniversary. For a special performance on March 11, it is selling all tickets at the Koch Theater for just $6. And at a March 23 performance, several dozen alumni of the company plan to join current members for a performance of Mr. Taylor’s “From Sea to Shining Sea.”

“It will be like old home week,” Mr. Taylor said.

He said that there were times when the company almost folded. “Sure, it’s been a struggle, all along,” he said, noting the financial pressure around dance. “And nowadays it’s still a struggle.”

But he said that he was still excited to choreograph new dances, and plans to continue creating two new works each year.

“I’m already thinking about the next new piece,” he said.