Rafael Ynoa’s pivot, step and dive to stonewall a hard-hit grounder in the sixth inning was the kind of stunning defensive play that can send off the Rockies from Coors Field better than any fireworks show.

Even in September, in the Rockies’ final home game of a 2014 season that long ago stumbled sideways, the art of a cross-diamond throw-out stands out. Nevermind that Ynoa was playing third base only because Nolan Arenado caught pneumonia.

The Rockies, a team far less star-studded now than when they started in March, capped a four-game sweep of the Arizona Diamondbacks at Coors Field, winning 8-3 behind a pair of two-run doubles from Ynoa and Brandon Barnes.

Colorado (65-91) won a sixth consecutive game. The Rockies have won 17 of 22 at Coors Field since Aug. 14. The Diamondbacks lost a 10th straight on the road, their worst stretch outside Arizona since 2010.

Everything is clicking for the Rockies at the wrong time. Now 24 1/2 games out of first place in the National League West — although now not in last place, after leap-frogging Arizona (62-94) — the Rockies rolled through their final homestand.

In seven games at Coors Field against the Dodgers and Diamondbacks, the Rockies averaged 10.2 runs per game. The Rockies looked like, well, the Rockies.

It didn’t take them long to jump on Arizona. DJ LeMahieu’s single to center in the second inning scored Drew Stubbs. Barnes’ double to right in the third with the bases load scored Josh Rutledge and Wilin Rosario. And Ynoa’s double to center in the fifth brought home Rosario and Stubbs. Michael Cuddyer added a lead-off homer in the seventh.

The Rockies’ late rise has run parallel to a surge by Rosario.

Colorado’s beleaguered catcher — he very well may have played his final game at Coors Field — is on a September tear. He’s hitting .514 this month with 10 RBIs and 10 runs in 35 at-bats. He went 2-for-3 with three runs on Sunday.

All these wins lately had Coors Field feeling generous. After Rockies starter Christian Bergman gave up a two-run homer to Mark Trumbo in the sixth — the first of two HRs for Trumbo — the rookie righty got the axe and a standing ovation.

Bergman finished after 67 pitches over 5 2/3 innings, with two earned runs and six hits. It was more than good enough for his third career victory.

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke