Obama: 'Gloomy' Republicans 'Down on America' Like 'Grumpy Cat'

President Obama today accused Republicans of being "down on America" like "Grumpy Cat."

That, of course, is a reference to a Siamese named Tardar Sauce who became an Internet celebrity thanks to her underbite and perpetually grumpy expression.

Obama was talking to the DNC's Women's Leadership Forum Annual Issues Conference in Washington, where he was giving his standard stump speech gloating about his administration's accomplishments.

"Today, America is leading the world in confronting new threats -- making sure Iran doesn’t get a nuclear weapon. America is leading the world in global action on climate change. America is leading the world to write smarter and stronger trade rules for the 21st century. We’ve begun a new chapter of engagement with the Cuban people," he said.

"...But we've got a lot of folks who are attacking the right of women just to have basic health care in this country and to be able to make decisions about reproductive freedom without having some member of Congress or some governor or some other elected official try to intrude."

Obama said his "overall" point is "we’re making enormous progress. And it does make you wonder -- why is it that Republican politicians are so down on America?"

"I mean, they are gloomy. They’re like Grumpy Cat. Everything is terrible, according to them. We’re doomed! I mean, I know it’s political season, but you listen to them and they’ve constructed this entire separate reality -- it’s like the Twilight Zone. And according to their story, their narrative, everything was terrific back in 2008 -- when unemployment was skyrocketing, and uninsured rates were rising, and folks were losing their homes and their jobs, and we were engaged in two wars, and bin Laden was still at large. If you were listening to them, those were like the good old days. The golden years. And then I came in and the Democrats came in -- no, but according to them, that’s when everything all went to heck," he said, topping off his Grumpy Cat comment by making a Grumpy Cat face.

"...I mean, just look at the facts. Don’t take my word for it. Go back and take a look at, all right, here’s Bill Clinton’s presidency, and then there’s Bush presidency, and then there’s my presidency, and take a look."

The president quipped that "you’ve got to feel bad for the fact-checkers for the Republicans because they’ve got to spend hours trying to keep up with some of the crazy stuff that their candidates are claiming."

"And the reason they have to make up stuff is because they don’t have a record to run on," he said. "...I think the way they approach climate change is a good illustration of the problems that they’re having."

Obama said the Democratic primary debate in Las Vegas made the party "proud" because the candidates "weren’t just saying crazy stuff."

"We are right on most policy issues. Our arguments are the right ones. But at our core, what I’m really proud of is the fact that we believe in this country that everybody has a fair shot, that everybody has got to be able to get ahead."