Akean Benjamin (Photo: Courtesy of South Brunswick Police Department) Story Highlights A Gulf gas station on Route 130 was robbed by an armed man around 4 p.m. April 24.

The robber demanded cash before fleeing across Distribution Way toward the FedEx parking lot.

The robber was described as a man wearing a tight, green sweat suit with a hood.

A North Brunswick man has been arrested in connection with an alleged daytime armed robbery at a Route 130 gas station last month.

South Brunswick Police Chief Raymond Hayducka said Akean Benjamin, 24, has been charged with robbery, possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose, and terroristic threats. He is being held at the Middlesex County Correction Center in North Brunswick on $310,000 bail set by Municipal Court Judge Spiro Kalambakas.

Benjamin was arrested following an investigation by South Brunswick Detective Monica Shearer into the armed robbery of the Gulf gas station, 2043 Route 130, on the corner of Route 130 and Distribution Way.

Around 4 p.m. April 24, police received a 911 call from a worker who said the station had just been robbed. Police said the robber displayed a handgun and demanded cash from the attendant before fleeing across Distribution Way toward the FedEx parking lot. The robber was described as a man in his 20s, about 5-foot-10, wearing a tight, green sweat suit with a hood.

Shearer sent still photographs from the gas station surveillance video to area police department. East Brunswick Detective Joe Bauer recognized Benjamin as the man in the photo. Bauer also recognized the sneakers the man was wearing. South Brunswick police executed a search warrant at Benjamin's home and vehicle, and recovered a starter pistol and clothing that matched the robber's clothing in the photo and video.

"This arrest was the result of great police work. It is highly unusual to have this type of brazen crime in our community. The collaborative effort between all the law enforcement involved resulted in stopping any more criminal activity by this suspect," Hayducka said.

The police chief thanked the East Brunswick and North Brunswick police departments, along with the Middlesex County Prosecutor's Office for their assistance on the case.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1RdldRI