Republican Sen. Roger Wicker of Mississippi (right), chairman of the Republican Senatorial Campaign Committee, greets Louisiana Repuiblican Sen. Bill Cassidy on Seersucker Day on June 11, 2015 on Capitol Hill. Wicker says national Republicans aren't taking Louisiana's 2016 Senate race for granted after Democrat John Bel Edwards won the state's governor's race last year. (Photo: Deborah Barfield Berry, USA TODAY)

WASHINGTON — Bill Cassidy and other Republican freshman senators seem to be in high demand by donors these days.

The 12 freshmen helped their party win control of the Senate last year, and some — like Cassidy of Louisiana and Thom Tillis of North Carolina — prevailed in tough races that put them in the national spotlight.

Sen. Roger Wicker of Mississippi, chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee, said that helps explain why he's turning to the GOP newcomers more often these days to raise money ahead of next year’s elections.

"We found with the freshman class there's a good bit of star power,’’ he said. “A lot of our freshmen are doing the surrogate work for me because major donors want to get to know them."

In recent weeks, Cassidy has called supporters, dined with donors in New Orleans and met with others in New York City.

Cassidy said he and the other freshmen usually don’t ask for money directly. Instead, he said, they talk to donors about issues important to them. For Cassidy that’s dyslexia, mental health and repealing the Affordable Care Act.

"(Donors) come because they want to support a conservative agenda, but they also wish to discuss that agenda," said Cassidy, a physician who defeated Democratic Sen. Mary Landrieu. “So when you go, it isn’t, ‘Hey can you support us financially?' It’s, 'Let’s talk about mental health.'"

Besides Cassidy and Tillis, the GOP newcomers include Joni Ernst of Iowa, Tom Cotton of Arkansas, Cory Gardner of Colorado, James Lankford of Oklahoma, Shelley Moore Capito of West Virginia, Ben Sasse of Nebraska, Steve Daines of Montana, Mike Rounds of South Dakota, David Perdue of Georgia and Dan Sullivan of Alaska.

“There were a lot people interested in states like North Carolina, and Colorado and Arkansas,'' Tillis, who unseated Democratic Sen. Kay Hagan, said of the 2014 elections. "So we found ourselves — many of the freshmen members — traveling across the country to convince potential supporters that we would win a majority."

Gary Peters of Michigan was the only non incumbent Democrat to win a Senate election in 2014.

Wicker said GOP donors "are very responsive to the newcomers because they like what they see. It’s old hat to see people like (Utah Sen. Orrin Hatch) and me. They know what we’re likely to say."

Wicker said it helps that freshmen like Cassidy have a medical background, particularly as the GOP pushes to repeal the Affordable Care Act. Cassidy and his wife, Laura, a retired surgeon, know health issues “inside out,'' Wicker said.

"So frankly when somebody is spouting the company line, it’s helpful to have a Cassidy speak up and say, when the rubber meets the road on this particular health issue, here is how it's actually going to go down," he said.

Larry Sabato, director of the University of Virginia Center for Politics, said it makes "perfect sense" for Wicker to tap his freshmen for help with donations.

“It’s a smart move because the Republicans elected some stars in 2014 — people who have broad national appeal," he said. “The Republicans need these younger people with pizzazz to impress donors. Donors want to know that they’re giving to a cause that will be successful."

Next year, Republicans will defend 24 Senate seats. Democrats will defend 10.

National Democrats don't have a deep bench of freshman members to tap, but they say the battle for money is far from over.

“We’ve out raised the NRSC eight out of 10 months this year despite being in the minority, and that’s a sign of how strong our candidates are," said Lauren Passalacqua, a spokeswoman for the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee.

Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-La. (Photo: Courtesy)

The DSCC has raised $42 million this election cycle, compared to $35 million for the NRSC, according to reports filed with the Federal Election Commission. Democrats have $9.6 million with $5.7 million in debt. The NRSC has $10.3 million with no debt.

Tillis said helping the NRSC is a priority. He said without the committee's support last year he might not have won his race.

“I’ll go anywhere the (committee) needs me to go to help them be successful in November," he said.

Cassidy said he also welcomes “any opportunity to make our case" to donors.

“They’re just folks who are interested in supporting conservative causes,'' he said. "We’ll continue to travel the country."

Contact Deborah Barfield Berry at dberry@gannett.com. Follow @dberrygannett on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://www.theadvertiser.com/story/news/2015/12/09/sen-bill-cassidy-plays-key-role-gop-fundraising/77041522/