A public hearing and possible vote on the fate of the squad is scheduled for Jan. 20

Spotswood Borough Council members will decide if Spotswood EMS services should be outsourced. (Photo: ~Courtesy of Spotswood EMS) Story Highlights The Affordable Care Act has made it necessary to look for an outside service.

The borough also has to provide benefits to those who log more than 30 hours.

Robert Wood and Monoc have submitted bids.

An online petition to keep the service in house has been posted online.

SPOTSWOOD - The Borough Council has come under scrutiny after a proposed ordinance to abolish and outsource its EMS to a private paid service was unanimously approved at first reading Wednesday night.

A public hearing and possible final vote on the proposal is scheduled for the Jan. 20 council meeting.

According to the proposed ordinance, the borough conducted a feasibility study with regard to the viability of retaining the EMS Ambulance Division as an in-house function and determined that for reasons of economy and health, safety and welfare of residents, the borough should contract with an outside vendor for EMS services.

An online petition at change.org, started by former Helmetta council member Yvette Bruno, opposes the ordinance and calls for the council to keep emergency services in house. The change also impacts Helmetta residents, who also use the service. Helmetta is now contracting with Spotswood to use the service on a month-to-month basis, officials said.

"I was on Helmetta's public safety committee and I feel it is important to keep the services in town because I don't personally want my family members to have to wait for longer response times," Bruno said. "Police, fire and emergency services are the most important services in any town."

Bruno, who posted the petition Thursday morning, plans to present it to Spotswood council members at the Jan. 20 meeting. The petition has received hundreds of signatures in support of keeping the service in house.

"EMS is a vital service not a business," wrote borough resident Robert Drako.

"My daughter has a rare disease and I rely on the Spotswood EMS who are knowledgeable about her disease and here immediately, if needed," wrote borough resident Laurie-Anne Weiner.

Spotswood Borough Council members will decide if EMS services should be outsourced. (Photo: ~Courtesy of Spotswood EMS)

"The decision to keep EMS should be based on more than just dollars and cents. The borough should not be looking to make money by providing a SERVICE to its residents. The five council members are elected to represent the best interests of the residents not what they personally feel. Put this issue on the ballot and let the residents decide the fate of this vital service," wrote borough resident Chris Hager.

"When my husband had a problem not only was the response time for Spotswood EMS extremely quick, but the knowledge our EMS workers possess was comforting as well," wrote borough resident Cindy Solomon.

"We need emergency service close by. There are other areas where funding can be cut," Lenore Marko of Helmetta wrote.

At issue

Council President Curtis Stollen said the Affordable Care Act (ACA) has made it necessary to look for an outside service to replace the EMS.

"They cut Medicare payouts, and a lot of the basic plans don't cover transport," he said.

Another major contributing factor is that the borough now has to provide benefits for EMS employees who log over 30 hours a week.

“With those things, our current model cannot exist any longer," he said. "We were already scraping by by paying EMTs per diem, $11 per hour and no benefits. It has become increasingly difficult to obtain qualified candidates at that pay rate. We have a revolving door where many people come and go. We are constantly training new people."

Last year, the borough put out a request for proposals or RFPs. Two bidders, Robert Wood and MONOC, responded.

Robert Wood would provide services for $301,000 a year, with no increase for five years, Stollen said.

MONOC came in with a bid of $250,200 for the first year that would increase to $261,000 in year five, he said.

"Nothing is going to change from how we currently bill," he said. "They would accept insurance payments and won't require additional payments from residents."

Stollen did not provide a figure on how much it would cost to sustain an in-house EMS but said the cost for the borough to keep its EMS in house would be more than double the cost of going with the higher bidder.

"We have had some numbers, but we are still fine-tuning them with facts and figures," he said. "It's pretty clear that this would be an increase from what our current costs are, but we can't keep it as it is."

Stollen said the move is not one that members on the dais take lightly.

"The health. safety and welfare of our citizens is our top priority," he said. "We've always been active in making sure that our residents had emergency services in a timely manner."

He said other avenues have been explored but are not feasible.

"We would still not achieve the quality and breadth of service they would be able to provide," he said, adding that there is also the issue of equipment costs.

"It's no secret that the public sector currently has higher salaries, wages and benefits than the private sector and they increase every year," Stollen said. "We also wouldn't have the resources of a very large regional provider that is at our beckon call should be have some type of emergency. There will be no interruption of service and when a resident calls 911, there is going to be someone there to take care of their needs. We are going to make things better and we are going to do it at the most reasonable cost we can. "

Stollen said a lot of what residents are reading on social media is false. He also said that while some details have had to remain confidential, public discussions on the issue have been ongoing.

Regardless of the council's decision, the borough's budget will increase.

"Our taxes are going to increase, but do we want to spend more money and have less or spend less money and have more," Stollen said.

The squad

Spotswood EMS employs Director Miriam Barbarise and 24 EMTs, including four supervisors.

The squad lost one of its members, Hinal Patel, 22, of Piscataway, who was killed in July when the ambulance she was riding in was struck by a car in East Brunswick,

The squad responded to 1,303 calls last year in Spotswood, Jamesburg, East Brunswick, Helmetta, Jamesburg, Monroe, New Brunswick, Old Bridge, Sayreville and South River, Barbarise said.

"In the last few months of the year, the schedule was a little erratic because people were leaving and it does take time to replace those who have left," she said.

Staffing has had its challenges, but, she said, "as of January, the schedule is under control. Everyone is under hours. I have enough employees to cover my schedule and not let the calls we have go to mutual aid."

Barbarise, who became director in May 2015, said one of the issues plaguing the squad is the pay rate.

"It is very low," she said. "Most of my people here are only making between $11 and $12 per hour and can can only work up to 24 hours a week. Some are college students, nursing students and medical students and depend on this job. Some have other jobs. Some of my staff work at Robert Wood (Johnson University Hospital). They are dedicated, qualified and hard-working individuals. If they don't stay long, it's because they have to find a better-paying job. Those that have stayed like the camaraderie, the community and the atmosphere."

She said there are problems with the facility and equipment.

Spotswood EMS is housed in a warehouse on American Way. The old emergency services building on Devoe Avenue suffered structural damaged during Hurricane Irene in 2011.

But the squad is well equipped to respond to calls, the director said.

The department's budget last year was $430,000, but Barbarise said the squad brought in close to $300,000 in revenue.

There are many advantages to having an in-house EMS, Barbarise said.

"We have a quick response time," she said. "In the last two weeks alone, because of the quick response time from police and our squad, we have saved two lives. The people in the community are getting qualified, personalized care. A lot of the staff has been here long enough to know the community. They know the town."

Barbarise said the squad also attends special events in town, including parades, carnivals and football games.

"We do it all," she said. "When I took over as director, I spent much of the year restructuring and reorganizing. We have so many plans in place for 2016 as far as training and drills. The morale here has gone down a little bit since the RFP's went out, but I still have a committed staff that is dedicated to this town. They still come in knowing their jobs are in danger. The council has no idea how we operate. I wish they had reached out to me, so we could have come up with a more suitable plan."

Mayor Nicholas Poliseno, who said only the council will be voting on the matter, also came out in support of the squad.

"I personally would like to keep our EMS," he said. "I understand there is a tax increase to that, but I think the residents need to know what the cost will be to outsource compared to what it would cost to keep the EMS in house. I wanted this to be on the ballot as a public question. I wanted the residents to be able to compare the costs. I think residents should know that information before the Jan. 20 meeting. This way they can decide if they want to pay the extra money. The residents have been extremely vocal that they want to keep Spotswood EMS. It's my duty to look out for what the residents want."

Regardless of the council's decision, Poliseno said that taxes will rise in the borough, "but it will go up more if we keep it in house."

Poliseno said he would like to see the squad stay in house with six full-time employees and a full-time director.

"We could back-fill shifts with part-timers," he said. "If a full-timer leaves, in order to become a full-time employee, you would have to be a part-time employee in good standing, and that would prevent people from calling out."

Bruno's petition can be viewed at https://www.change.org/search?q=Spotswood+EMS.

Find more of today's headlines in the News Break below

Stocks rise after a positive jobs report, China's rebound; Man charged with Sandy fraud; Star Wars box office records

Staff Writer Susan Loyer: 732-565-7243; sloyer@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search “MyCentralJersey” in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1OURvw6