By of the

Los Angeles — Will Smith ended a great personal first half on a tough note on Sunday afternoon.

The left-hander surrendered a two-run home run to Adrian Gonzalez on an 0-2 pitch in the eighth — the first allowed by the left-hander all season — and that proved to be the difference as the Milwaukee Brewers headed into the all-star break with a 4-3 loss to the Los Angeles Dodgers at Dodger Stadium.

“It sucks,” said Smith after the Brewers dropped to 30-1 when leading after seven innings. “It sucks we were winning and we go into the all-star break with a bad taste in our mouths.”

The Brewers took an early lead on a pair of home runs, including one by Ryan Braun, and held a tenuous 3-2 lead heading into the decisive inning.

Howie Kendrick led off the bottom half with a single to center off Jeremy Jeffress, the third reliever used by manager Craig Counsell to that point on the day.

Carlos Gomez overran the ball, allowing Kendrick to advance to second on the error. That brought up Gonzalez, and Counsell countered by calling on Smith, who quickly got ahead in the count, 0-2.

On his fourth offering, Smith hung a slider enough for Gonzalez to reach out and golf it just over the wall in right to give the Dodgers their first lead of the day at 4-3.

“He’s a good hitter,” Smith said. “We weren’t going to walk him there. I just gave it up. That’s it.”

Said Counsell: “We had the matchups we wanted late in the game. It worked as good as we could have hoped. We had our guys pitching to who we wanted them to pitch to. A good hitter, a good pitcher.

“It was just a slider that Will left in the zone, 0-2. He threw two good ones to get to 0-2, and he just left a slider in the zone.”

Smith (4-1) came into the day with a 1.62 ERA in 41 appearances and had posted an ERA of 0.87 over his previous 22 appearances. He hadn’t surrendered a homer since Sept. 11.

“You feel good about your first half, but that’s in the past. Once the day’s over, the day’s over,” Smith said. “You’ve got to get the job done that day, and I didn’t do it today.”

Jonathan Broxton relieved Smith and finished the inning, but Kenley Jansen pitched a 1-2-3 ninth to close the Brewers out for his 16th save.

The Brewers managed just one base runner over the final five innings — a fifth-inning single by Jonathan Lucroy.

Milwaukee got onto the board quickly in the first, with Braun celebrating his sixth selection to the All-Star Game earlier in the day by hitting a booming homer to right-center.

The Dodgers got the run back quickly against Kyle Lohse, as Jimmy Rollins led off the bottom of the first with a double, moved to third on a groundout and scored on a single back through the box by Justin Turner.

The Brewers got another homer in the third inning to grab the lead back, this time from an unlikely source — Hernan Perez, whose shot to left was the first of his career.

The homers also came against an unlikely pitcher, as Dodgers left-hander Brett Anderson entered the game having allowed just seven all season and only one other time surrendering two in a game.

Anderson also led the majors with a 68.2% ground-ball rate.

“He works really fast,” said Braun of Anderson. “A lot of movement, especially for a lefty. I can see why he gets as many ground balls as he does — it’s really difficult to hit the ball in the air against him. There’s a reason why he’s been as successful as he has.”

Three consecutive singles to open the fourth by Adam Lind, Aramis Ramirez and Jean Segura kept the pressure on Anderson.

Perez upped the Brewers’ lead to 3-1 with an RBI groundout, but Ramirez was easily thrown out at home on a bunt back to Anderson by Lohse, and Khris Davis grounded out as well to leave Milwaukee to settle for the lone run.

Lohse, meanwhile, settled in after the first. He retired nine of 10 after Turner’s first-inning single.

A.J. Ellis — an off-season resident of Franklin, Wis. — led off the Dodgers’ fifth with a homer to center to cut the Brewers’ lead to 3-2.

Lohse finished out the inning and then departed in favor of Michael Blazek, who combined with Neal Cotts to keep Los Angeles scoreless in the sixth. Lohse allowed four hits and two runs (earned) while striking out six in an 81-pitch outing.

As for the Brewers (38-52), there’s plenty to improve upon heading into the second half. Being in position to sweep the Dodgers on the road for the second consecutive season, then losing the series, was a tough way to finish up.

“They’re tough games, man,” Counsell said. “We’ve been in a bunch of tough games lately. But that’s the game — you put one of your best pitchers against one of their best guys, and you watch the matchup.”