Floyd County’s two hospitals are among the 67 percent in Georgia that will pay a Medicare fine for having too many discharged patients return within a month for additional care.

The nonprofit Georgia Health News produced a report this week analysing the penalties — which are part of an Affordable Care Act provision aimed at improving treatment outcomes and saving money.

Fines are capped at 3 percent of a hospital’s Medicare reimbursements for a fiscal year, which runs from Oct. 1 through Sept. 30.

At 1.02 percent, Redmond Regional Medical Center’s fine is one of just 10 in the state that top 1 percent, according to a national spreadsheet prepared by Kaiser Health News.

Floyd Medical Center will be assessed 0.30 percent, equal to about $84,000, according to Dr. Joseph Biuso, FMC’s executive vice president and chief medical officer.

That’s well below the state average of 0.47 percent, but Biuso said the hospital has been making changes to reduce the problems.

“In my mind, it’s not about the money, it’s about doing what’s best for the patients,” he said. “We don’t want patients to return unless it’s an appropriate return.”

Polk Medical Center, which is run by FMC, is exempt from the assessment because of its status as a small, critical-access hospital, Biuso said.

Hospitals in nearby counties did a little better in their readmission rates.

Cartersville Medical Center in Bartow County will pay a penalty of 0.10 percent; Calhoun’s Gordon Hospital will be assessed 0.02 percent; Hamilton Medical Center in Dalton will see a fine of 0.18 percent; and Hutche­son Medical Center in Fort Oglethorpe won’t have its reimbursement docked at all.

Biuso said the penalty provision is an element of the overall shift in medicine from episodic care — going to the doctor when you’re sick — to preventative care that keeps people well. That fits with his, and FMC’s, approach to patients, he said, although it can be challenging for a public hospital.

“We take care of everybody in this community, whether they have insurance or they don’t,” Biuso explained. “The literature is clear that people who don’t have insurance are not in preventative mode, but we have programs where we try to keep them out of the hospital.”

One way, he said, is through a discharge call team that follows up with patients to ensure they are taking their medicine, can afford their prescriptions and are able to get to appointments.

FMC officials also are linking the hospital’s wide network of physicians. A first step is to make sure patients have a timely appointment with their primary care physician once they’re discharged, Biuso said, but the connections flow in all directions.

“Whenever there’s a transition of care — when patients move from one level of care to another — it’s important to have good communication,” he said. “We have docs talking to docs.”

The Medicare assessments use a formula that looks at readmissions of patients hospitalized for heart attacks, heart failure, COPD, pneumonia or elective hip or knee surgeries.

“At Redmond Regional Medical Center, quality care is always our top priority. We remain committed to enhancing care through our quality initiatives. Through these efforts, we have already demonstrated improvement. Our current hospital-wide readmission rate is below the national rate as found on hospitalcompare.gov. We expect to see this continued improvement going forward," said Redmond Regional Medical Center Chief Medical Officer, Dr. Julie Barnes.

The most recent Medicare Hospital Compare report indicates Redmond’s readmission rates differed from the national average only in regards to elective surgeries.

Unplanned readmissions were at 6.4 percent, compared to an average of 4.8 percent nationally.

Georgia Health News, a nonprofit 501(c)3 organization, tracks state medical issues on its website georgiahealthnews.com.