A kitten was thrown from a car at a crowd of animal rights activists.

At an animal rights demonstration this weekend, a kitten was thrown from a car, where it broke its leg as it landed, and died in spite of what little witnesses could do. This show of animal cruelty happened in Charlotte, NC, on Sunday where animal rights protesters were gathered in support for Japan Dolphin Day. This event was coordinated to raise awareness of dolphins being slaughtered in Japan, but the activists gathered never expected this.

Organizer Bruce Pinckney told Channel 9 reporters that the kitten was thrown from a car near the intersection of Trade and Tryon. He said he couldn’t believe what happened, as he recounted the events:

“A guy stopped and threw a kitten out into the street in front of us. When the kitten impacted the street, its leg broke, it panicked, it ran in like a semicircle and was in obvious extreme pain. We immediately ran out and scooped the cat up, and we brought him back up here to this corner. We basically tried to comfort him the best we could.”

The kitten thrown from the car was six to eight weeks old, and died about ten minutes after it hit the street, breaking its leg on impact. Police are using uptown traffic cameras to try and find the person who committed such a travesty, using a picture they took likewise of the car used in the act.

Animal Care and Control said the tabby did not have a microchip or any kind of ID attached to it, so there is no telling who may have owned it or where the kitten had come from. Veterinarians determined that the kitten died of internal blood loss.

While the police and investigators try to figure out who did it, the protesters only wonder why it happened. Bruce Pinckney said he guesses whoever threw the kitten from the car did it because they thought it was funny to commit animal cruelty in front of animal rights activists.

The car used in the act was a silverish Hyundai Sonata with tinted windows. Police are asking that anyone with information on who threw the kitten from the car please contact Crime Stoppers at 704-334-1600.