Planned Parenthood's political arm is turning its attention to Iowa with a new TV ad blasting Republican Senate candidate Joni Ernst.

ADVERTISEMENT

Planned Parenthood Votes announced Tuesday that it will spend $450,000 on its first Iowa TV buy highlighting Ernst's positions on birth control and abortion.

In the 30-second spot, set to air in the Des Moines market, women around a kitchen table criticize Ernst on a slew of women's health issues.

"I had no idea her record was this bad. Joni Ernst thinks my boss should have control over whether I get birth control? … Bottom line, Joni Ernst just does not trust women," individual women say in turn.

Ernst, a member of the Iowa state Senate, is running neck-and-neck against Rep. Bruce Braley Bruce BraleyGOP group enlists public with opposition research app 10 rising stars in the energy and environment world DC delegate plans to confront GOP lawmaker calling for Washington recession MORE (D-Iowa) for the seat being vacated by retiring Sen. Tom Harkin Tom HarkinDo candidates care about our health or just how much it costs? The Hill's 12:30 Report Mark Mellman: Parsing the primary processes MORE (D-Iowa). A new poll out Wednesday morning gave her a 6-point edge.

Planned Parenthood hopes that highlighting Ernst's opposition to abortion rights and support for the Supreme Court's Hobby Lobby decision will boost Braley in November.

Its first ads of the cycle blasted Republican Senate candidates Cory Gardner Cory GardnerOvernight Defense: Pentagon chief fears sequestration's return Overnight Cybersecurity: Watchdog report dings Clinton email security Senate GOP ties Iran sanctions fight to defense bill MORE and Thom Tillis, who are running against Sens. Mark Udall Mark UdallEnergy issues roil race for Senate Unable to ban Internet gambling, lawmakers try for moratorium Two vulnerable senators lack challengers for 2016 MORE (D-Colo.) and Kay Hagan Kay Hagan10 Senate seats most likely to flip in 2016 Senate Republicans are feeling the 'Trump effect' Washington's lobby firms riding high MORE (D-N.C.).