Sammy Armato (right) plays the clarinet with fellow musicians (from left) Joe Aaron on clarinet, Steve Lewandowski on guitar and Bob Maynard on vibes. Credit: Family photo

SHARE Sammy Armato (left) with jazz musicians Chuck Hedges (middle) and Joe Aaron. Family photo

By of the

For much of his life, Milwaukee musician Sam Armato could be found on New Year's Eve on the stage of a packed club blowing his horn — usually the clarinet, but he also played a mean sax.

Armato, who traveled the country performing with the likes of Big Band legend Woody Herman and the Andrews Sisters, played well into his 90s, until Alzheimer's disease robbed him of even that.

Armato died on Dec. 31 at 98. He drifted off reading a book, a gift from his wife, on the famed jazz clarinetist and bandleader Artie Shaw.

"He lived and breathed music," said Janet Armato of West Bend, his wife of 30 years.

"I used to tease him that I know my place," she said, laughing. "First comes the clarinet, and then comes Jan."

Samuel Armato — Sam or Sammy to his friends — was born in Rockford, Ill., and raised between there and Chicago. He was the oldest of four children and began studying solfeggio, a kind of vocal exercise, at the age of 5, according to Janet Armato. And he picked up his first instrument — the violin — at 10.

Armato earned enough in a youth jazz band to buy a saxophone at 12. And four years later, he persuaded his father to let him take his talents on the road — first with St. Louis-born bandleader Joe Kayser, then the renowned Dixieland trumpeter "Wild" Bill Davison.

Armato performed or toured with Chicago bandleader Maurie Sherman, the Andrews Sisters and Milwaukee native Woody Herman.

He served in the Pacific during World War II, playing clarinet and jazz tenor saxophone in the U.S. Army Air Force Band.

He spent several stints in Milwaukee over the years, directing his own band at the Miami Club and Chateau Country Club; working as a staff musician at local radio stations, including WTMJ; and performing with Dick Ruedebusch and the Underprivileged Five.

He served as WTMJ radio's music librarian from 1965 until he retired in 1981. And he continued to perform locally well into retirement, with such bands as Grant Krueger's Orchestra and Bill Sargent's Swing Kings.

"He was an amazing musician ... a consummate professional. This guy was really a giant," said Mike Drew, a longtime Milwaukee Journal jazz critic and columnist.

Milwaukee flutist Rick Aaron, whose late father, Joe, played clarinet and saxophone with Armato, called him "one of the sweetest human beings you would ever meet."

He remembers Armato coming out to see him as a young musician, offering words of support and an album of a contemporary flutist.

Armato, he said, was his father's "tenor saxophone hero."

"My dad would get done with a gig, and he would run to where Sammy was playing to listen to him."

Though music in some ways defined him, it was Armato's kindness — his sensitivity and empathy for others — that drew the former Janet Sandison to him.

Nearly 30 years his junior, Janet Amato first met her would-be husband in 1972 when they both worked at WTMJ radio. They used to play chess at lunchtime. She returned to school in Boston. But they reconnected at the funeral of retired WTMJ general manager Joseph Killeen in 1982.

She asked about his wife, Bernice, and learned of her death. Amato had retired in 1981, she said, in part to take care of his ailing wife.

"I felt terrible. I can't remember exactly, but I asked if he wanted to just get together, maybe play chess," she said. "We had lunch, and it turned out that there was more than a friendship there."

They married in 1984, and she settled happily into life as second fiddle to a clarinet.

In time, Armato's mind began to falter, and he was diagnosed with Alzheimer's in 2008 at the age of 92.

She remembers his last official gig as a September wedding three years later. But he continued to sit in with other performers — at the South Shore Farmers Market or a gospel brunch at the Riverwest Public House — as recently as 2012.

Armato stopped playing about a year and a half ago.

Armato died in the Alzheimer's unit of a West Bend retirement community where the couple lived. When the nurse checked on him, he was reading, and when she returned, he had slipped away.

"I think he died in his sleep and that it was peaceful," Janet Armato said. "He always said he wanted to die in his sleep. So it was a relief to me in a way that he got what he wanted."

In addition to his wife, Samuel Armato is survived by sisters Lillian Orlando and Angelina Koell and nieces and nephews.

Samuel Armato

Visitation will be from 10 a.m. to noon Monday at Feerick Funeral Home, 2025 E. Capitol Drive, Shorewood, with a service at noon. Interment will be private at Holy Cross Cemetery. Memorials may be made to the Milwaukee Rescue Mission, 830 N 12th St., Milwaukee, WI 53233 or the Alzheimer's Association, 620 S 76th St, Suite 160, Milwaukee, WI 53214.