Democratic primary

Terry Adams

Home: Knoxville

Knoxville Age: 43

43 Occupation: Attorney and title company owner

Attorney and title company owner Family: Wife Phillis Burnett

Wife Phillis Burnett Campaign website:http://adamsfortn.com/site/

Gordon Ball

Age: 65

65 Home: Knoxville

Knoxville Occupation: Attorney

Attorney Family: Wife Happy; they have five adult children between them

Wife Happy; they have five adult children between them Campaign website:http://www.gordonballsenate.com/

Larry Crim

Home: Nashville

Age: 58

58 Occupation: CEO, Christian Counseling Centers of America Inc.

CEO, Christian Counseling Centers of America Inc. Family: Wife Annette; two children, five grandchildren

Wife Annette; two children, five grandchildren Campaign website: http://www.larrycrimussenate.com/

Gary Gene Davis

Age: 60

60 Occupation: Financial adviser; also works part-time at a bakery

Financial adviser; also works part-time at a bakery Family: Wife Jay

Wife Jay Campaign website: http://www.votegarygenedavisfortheussenate.com/home

U.S. House of Representatives District 4

Republican Primary

U.S. House District 4

The focus is on the Republican primary where Rep. Scott DesJarlais of South Pittsburg faces a heated challenge from state Sen. Jim Tracy of Shelbyville as he seeks a third term. DesJarlais came to Capitol Hill as part of the tea party Republican class of 2010 and has had to overcome an onslaught of negative publicity he received in late 2012 about past relationships, when documents from his divorce in 2001 were released. The disclosures have hampered fundraising that usually comes easy to an incumbent. In his legislative work, DesJarlais was one of the first House members to point to a wording issue in the Affordable Care Act that has become the basis of four federal lawsuits against the legislation.

His main challenge in the Republican primary is state Sen. Jim Tracy of Shelbyville, who mirrors DesJarlais' staunch conservatism on budget and social issues. Tracy has maintained a large fundraising advantage.

Other Republicans running are David Tate of Whitwell, Robert Dogart of Signal Mountain, John Anderson of Bell Buckle, Michael Warden of Fayetteville, Oluyomi "Fapas" Faparusi, Sr. of South Pittsburg and Steve Lane of Mufreesboro.

The only Democrat running is Lenda Sherrell of Monteagle, who will face the Republican winner in November.

Scott DesJarlais, Republican

Age: 50

50 Home: South Pittsburg, Tenn.

South Pittsburg, Tenn. Occupation: U.S. House member, physician.

U.S. House member, physician. Family: Wife Amy, three children.

Wife Amy, three children. Campaign website: www.scottdesjarlais.com

Jim Tracy, Republican

Age: 57

57 Home: Shelbyville

Shelbyville Occupation: Insurance agency

Insurance agency Family: Wife Trena, three sons.

Wife Trena, three sons. Campaign website:www.tracyfortn.com

Senate District 13

Republican Primary

Bill Ketron, unopposed

House District 34

Republican Primary

Rick Womick, unopposed

House District 37

Republican primary

Eddie Smotherman

Age: 56

56 Home: Murfreesboro

Murfreesboro About: Smotherman was elected to the Murfreesboro City Council in 2012 and also serves on the Parks & Recreation Commission and the Murfreesboro Airport Board.

Dawn White

Age: 38

38 Home: Murfreesboro

Murfreesboro About: White is a former kindergarten teacher who now owns of an online seller of vacuum cleaners and sewing machines. She was elected to the legislature in 2012.

House District 48

Republican primary

Three Republicans are running for the open seat in western Rutherford County that state Rep. Joe Carr leaves as he runs for the U.S. Senate.

Adam Coggin, a county commissioner from Murfreesboro, leads the fundraising battle, with more than $100,000 for the race. Meanwhile Rick Peppers, a Lascassas cattle rancher who has played host to Carr's annual T-Bones & Politics fundraiser, and Bryan Terry, a physician from Murfreesboro, have each raised more than $50,000, through self-financing and outside donations.

The GOP winner ought to have the upper hand in the general election. The last time the seat was contested, Carr defeated his Democratic challenger by 25 percentage points.

Adam Coggin, of Murfreesboro

Coggin represents the 15th district on the Rutherford County Commission and chairs its Steering, Legislative, and Governmental Committee.

Rick Peppers, of Murfreesboro

Peppers used to own an engineering firm before he retiring to raise cattle on the Five Peppers Farm in Rutherford County. He attends World Outreach Church.

Bryan Terry, of Murfreesboro

Terry is a physician from Oklahoma and member of the Choctaw Nation. He's a past president of the Tennessee Society of Anesthesiologists Resident Component. Like Peppers, he attends World Outreach Church.

Democratic primary

Bill Campbell, of Murfreesboro, unopposed

House District 49

Republican primary

Mike Sparks, 47, of Smyrna

Sparks is business consultant, former Smyrna and Rutherford County commissioner, and a former member of the Smyrna Municipal Planning Committee.

Robert Stevens, 29, of Smyrna

Stevens is a lawyer and member of the Rutherford County Commission, representing the 12th District and serving on its Public Safety and Public Works committees.

Democratic primary

Mike Williams, of Smyrna, unopposed

Circuit Court Judge 16th Judicial District Division 1

Jeffrey L. Peach, Republican

Mark Rogers, Independent

Circuit Court Judge 16th Judical District Division 2

Nathan Nichols, Republican

David Bragg, Independent

Circuit Court Judge 16th District Division 3

Keith Siskin, Republican, unopposed

Circuit Court Judge 16th District Division 4

Royce Taylor, Independent, unopposed

Chancellor 16th Judicial District

Howard W. Wilson, Republican, unopposed

District Attorney General 16th Judicial District

Jennings H. Jones, Republican, unopposed

Public Defender 16th Judicial District

Gerald L. Melton, Republican, unopposed

County Mayor

Although the race for sheriff is generating the most attention among countywide elections on the Aug. 7 ballot, also contested are races for county mayor, Circuit Court clerk and county clerk.

Two of these races include competition between Democratic and Republican nominees, but incumbent County Mayor Ernest Burgess faces competition from two independent candidates, Heather Ann Brown and Teresa St. Clair.

Burgess loaned $150,000 to his primary campaign in May and received nearly 60 percent of the vote against challenger Jimmy Evans. Burgess is seeking his third term in office.

Brown describes herself as a former business owner, and St. Clair and her husband, Ralph, owner a business that designs and manages employee benefits.

The county mayor serves as the chief executive officer for Rutherford County government. The county mayor serves as chairman of the County Commission, but has a vote on the commission only in case of a tie.

Republican: Ernest G. Burgess:

Elected Rutherford County Mayor in 2006. Lifelong resident of Rutherford County. Retired as Senior Vice-President of Operations with National Healthcare Corporation (NHC). Married for 50 years, three children, seven grandchildren.

Independent: Heather Ann Brown:

Challenging the current administration because she's concerned about debt and growth in the county. Claims developers run the county. Says she has "an informal self-taught doctorate, P.h.D. if you will in common sense." Made news earlier this year when a dead possum was hanging from one of the signs in her yard that rails against Burgess. She wouldn't say whether she put the dead possum there.

Independent: Teresa St. Clair:

Along with husband, Ralph Weber, St. Clair owns and operates Route Three Benefits where they design and implement and manage employee benefits across North America. She specializes in asset recovery. Calls herself a Constitutionalist who is pro-2nd Amendment and pro-life.

Sheriff

The four candidates for Rutherford County sheriff have impressive resumes and more than 90 years combined experience in law enforcement among them.

Despite their impressive resumes, incumbent Robert Arnold and challengers Bill Kennedy, Jim Tramel II and Dale Armour have also run afoul of departmental policies in their careers.

Kennedy was suspended for one day in March by the Lebanon Police Department after an investigation into "serious criminal activities" revealed the allegations were unfounded but that he violated policy when he left his patrol area without telling anyone.

Kennedy also quit the RCSO in 2010 after Arnold became sheriff.

The animosity between the two men dates back to 2009 when Arnold, who was serving as a SRO, was disciplined by then Sheriff Truman Jones and then SRO commander Kennedy for failing to properly investigate a student's claims that another student had a gun on campus.

Independent candidate Dale Armour was also disciplined for a 2012 incident when he initiated a traffic stop on Thompson Lane in Murfreesboro. After questioning the female driver, showing her his TBI badge and releasing her, she reported to the Murfreesboro Police Department that a police imposter had pulled her over and cursed at her.

After a TBI investigation into the incident, Armour requested that his rank and pay be reduced, according to his personnel file. His superiors granted the request.

Tramel was fired in June 2013 for violating the department's policy against harassment and discrimination. Tramel claimed in a federal lawsuit he was fired for wanting to run for sheriff.

Republican: Robert Arnold:

Has spent more than 14 years, the past four years as sheriff. As a deputy, he served as a detention officer, a patrol officer and a school resource officer.

Democrat: Bill Kennedy:

Has more than 25 years of experience with the Rutherford County Sheriff's Office and, most recently, the Lebanon Police Department. As a deputy, he served as a detention officer, a patrol officer and a SRO, as well as the SRO commander.

Independent: Dale Armour:

Has 35 years of experience Armour with the Murfreesboro Police Department and Tennessee Bureau of Investigation, also working with U.S. Marshals Service and FBI task forces.

Independent: Jim Roy Tramel II:

Worked at the RCSO for 16 years as a patrol officer, SRO and detective in the criminal investigations division as a property crimes, domestic violence investigator.

Rutherford County Commission

In the races for County Commission, the Republican Party in May for the first time held a primary to select nominees. Contested races include Republican nominees versus independent candidates except for the District 21 race in which the Democratic incumbent is facing a challenge from the GOP nominee.

Rutherford County Commission District 1

Republican: Doug Shafer:

Served as a captain in the United States Air Force, flew 200 F-4 combat missions over North and South Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia during the Vietnam conflict. Later flew air defense in Germany during the Cold War. Has lived in Rutherford County for 35 years.

Rutherford County Commission District 2

Republican: Steve Pearcy:

Unseated Jack Black in the GOP primary. Black's term ends in August. Pearcy is a lifelong Lascassas resident who operates his family's business, Pearcy's General Merchandise store in Lascassas community; also serves as a bus driver for Rutherford County Schools.

Rutherford County Commission District 3

Republican: Will P. Jordan:

Incumbent Jordan is a graduate of Oakland High (1982) and MTSU (1985) and is a local business owner.

Rutherford County Commission District 4

Independent incumbent Robert Peay faces challenges from Republican nominee Jon Jacques and independent Jon Frazier.

Rutherford County Commission District 5

Republican: Carol Cook:

Has served for more than 25 years

Rutherford County Commission District 6

Republican: Joe Frank Jernigan:

Defeated Matt Harvey in the GOP primary to keep his seat. Harvey is launching a write-in candidacy in the general election.

Rutherford County Commission District 7

Republican: Michael D Kusch

Won the GOP primary. Will take place of Gary L. Farley, who is retiring when his term ends this year. Kusch is director of technical marketing for large pretest concrete company that does civil-engineering infrastructure projects, such as bridges and drainage ditches for storm water.

Rutherford County Commission District 8

Republican: Edward Phillips:

Husband of Tiffany Phillips who holds the office and isn't seeking re-election. Calls himself a "fiscal Conservative, social Conservative, working toward a more efficient and effective government."

Independent: Pettus L. Read:

Long-time agriculturalist, writer and newspaper columnist. Is a sixth-generation Rutherford County native residing on his family's farm located on the same road where his ancestors settled in 1802.

Independent: Steve Spence:

Is a 26-year employee of the Rutherford County Sheriff's Office, where he is a captain of training.

Rutherford County Commission District 9

Republican: Joe A. Gourley:

Won GOP primary to replace Steve Sandlin, who is retiring from seat after 24 years.

Gourley graduated from Smyrna High in 1965; earned a bachelor's degree from MTSU in 1969 with a major in chemistry and minors in physics and math.

Will be retiring from the Rutherford County Emergency Management Agency at end of December and is working on completing an emergency communications upgrade for county; worked for Tennessee Emergency Management Agency for more than seven years; worked for Tennessee Highway Patrol for 13 years; worked as senior engineer in cellular industry for Sprint for 12 years; in addition to emergency management communications, worked as engineer in tire industry for about four years

Rutherford County Commission District 10

Republican: Brad Turner:

Incumbent who won GOP primary. Manager of content operations for HealthStream who earned a bachelor's degree in political science from Trevecca Nazarene University in Nashville. Recently applied for vacant Rutherford County election administrator position.

Rutherford County Commission District 11

Republican: Rhonda Allen:

Incumbent who defeated Preston Sparks in GOP primary. Smyrna business owner.

Rutherford County Commission District 12

Republican: Robert Stevens:

An incumbent who is running unopposed for his commission seat, Stevens is also running against Mike Sparks in the 49th district of the Tennessee House of Representatives.

Rutherford County Commission District 13

Republican: Paul Johnson:

Won GOP nomination. Previously held seat. Gave it up in 2006 to make an unsuccessful bid for sheriff.

Independent: Chris Deal:

Facility coordinator at Rutherford County Sheriff's Office.

Rutherford County Commission District 14

Republican: Charles Baum, incumbent

Independent: Tony B. Gaines

Rutherford County Commission District 15

Adam Coggin is leaving the seat to run for 48th District of Tennessee House of Representatives against Rick Peppers.

Republican: David Nipper

Independent: Tim Roediger

Rutherford County Commission District 16

Republican: Phillip Sugg Dodd:

Unseated Matthew Young in GOP primary. Attended Murfreesboro's Reeves-Rogers Elementary, and Rutherford County's Central Middle (now Central Magnet School) and Oakland High, where he graduated in 1981; earned bachelor's degree from MTSU in 1986 with a major in university studies with an emphasis in liberal arts. Has worked as an area manager at Nissan auto factory in Smyrna the past three years; prior to that worked as a youth minister at St. Rose of Lima Catholic Church in Murfreesboro for a couple of years; also started his own business, Dodd Construction, in 1986, and ran it until 2009.

Rutherford County Commission District 17

Republican: Jeff Phillips

Rutherford County Commission District 18

Republican: Allen McAdoo: Has served for 37 years.

Rutherford County Commission District 19

Republican: Shawn Kaplan:

Is replacing retiring Joyce Ealy. Graduated from Clarksville High School in 1996; earned basic engineering degree from Tennessee Tech in 1998; earned bachelor's degree in university studies from MTSU in 2000 with an emphasis in environmental health and science. Has been a licensed mortgage banker for 14 years.

Rutherford County Commission District 20

Republican: Trey Gooch

Rutherford County Commission District 21

District 21 provides the only race between a Democrat and a Republican. Incumbent Democrat Chantho Sourhino is facing a challenge from Republican nominee Patsy L. Briley.

Republican: Patsy L. Briley

Democrat: Chantho Sourinho

Trustee

Republican: Teb Batey

General Sessions Judge Part 1

Republican: Kevin Hodges

Independent: Ben Hall McFarlin Jr.

General Sessions Judge Part 2

Republican: Barry Tidwell

Independent: David Loughry

General Sessions Judge Part 3

Republican: Toby Gilley

Democrat: Larry D. Brandon

Juvenile Court Judge

Republican: Donna Scott Davenport

Circuit Court Clerk

The Circuit Court clerk is responsible for maintaining all records of the Circuit Courts.

Republican: Melissa Harrell:

Defeated incumbent Laura Bohling in the May Republican primary. Owns a private investigations firm and a bail-bonding firm

Democrat: Avent Lane:

A consultant in manufacturing and technology management and is a bassist with the Eclectics musical group

County Clerk

The county clerk is the clerk for the County Commission and also is responsible for the issuance of marriage licenses as well as the collection of wheel taxes and vehicle registration fees among other duties.

Republican: Incumbent Lisa Duke Crowell:

Seeking her second term. Resident of Rutherford County for the past 38 years. Realtor for the past eight years with Coldwell Banker/Barnes/Snow & Wall and a member of the Middle Tennessee Association of Realtors.

Democrat: Pierrecia Lyons:

Holds a law degree, works with the Office of Professional Laboratory Experiences in the MTSU College of Education

Register of Deeds

Republican: Heather Dawbarn

County School Board

Zone 1

Independent: Aaron B. Holladay: A La Vergne resident, is completing his first term on the board.

Zone 3

Independent: Veronica Buchanan:

A lifelong resident of Rutherford County, Buchanan left her job at Nissan in the mid-1990s to open a day care. This is her second campaign for the Zone 3 seat.

Independent: Howard Jones:

Works as a supervisor at Johnson Controls. He was one of the applicants who sought to hold the seat in the interim following the death of Helen Blankenship.

Independent: Lisa W Moore:

Involved with two grassroots organizations, including Tennessee Textbook Advocates, an independent review of school textbooks. She was also a plaintiff in a lawsuit that sought to stop construction of the Islamic Center of Murfreesboro.

Zone 4

Independent: Wayne R Blair:

Vice chairman of the school board, Blair has held the seat since 2006. He is vice president of Smyrna –based Raborn Insurance Company.

Independent: Eric Tuttobene:

Is not actively campaigning for the seat, having deferred to Blair earlier this year. He is president and CEO of CornerStone Financial.

Zone 7

Independent: Jody Lynn Bond:

Spent 22 years as a bus driver.

Independent: James C. Estes:

Retired from Oakland High after 21 years in education.

Independent: Gabriel Fancher:

Is a financial planner and former adjunct professor who taught accounting, finance, business, college algebra and economics.

Independent: Patrick McCarthy:

Served on the Murfreesboro City Board of Education, from 2004 to 2008 and is director of MTSU's Center for Organizational and Human Resource Effectiveness.

Independent: Paul L. Peavy:

A minister, Peavy is seeking office for the first time.

Town of Smyrna, Town Court Judge

The Smyrna Town Court is at the Smyrna Justice Center at 400 Enon Springs Road East along with the Smyrna Police Department and the Town Court clerk's office. The Smyrna Town Court is not only the municipal court for the town of Smyrna but the Town Court judge also has the authority of a General Sessions judge. The Town Court judge, who has a term of office of eight years, conducts preliminary hearings on felony charges and hearings on misdemeanors municipal code violations. Also the court administers the Smyrna Traffic School at the Smyrna Justice Center.

Incumbent Judge Keta J. Barnes, first elected to the post in 2006, faces challenges from four opponents.

Independent: Lynn England Alexander

Independent: Keta J. Barnes

Independent: Jeremy Gourley

Independent: Cherie W. Meece

Independent: W. Alan Rose

Town of Smyrna, Town Court Clerk

The Smyrna Town Court clerk, who has a term of office of four years, has all the duties of a General Sessions clerk and all the duties of a municipal court clerk.