Proclaiming Hillary Clinton "the best change-maker I have ever known," former President Bill Clinton on Tuesday told a crowd at an Evanston synagogue his wife was the most experienced and best-qualified candidate to serve as the nation's next commander in chief.

In a 45-minute speech, the former two-term president also offered a spirited defense of President Barack Obama's tenure while making the case that Hillary Clinton would carry on the legacy "so finally we can all rise together."

He mentioned Clinton's Democratic rival, Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, just once and mostly ignored the chaos of the Republican nominating contest, other than to compare it with "sixth-graders having a fight at recess."

As he is wont to do, Clinton spent much of his address delving into various policies, how his spouse would approach them and why her position was the best.

Speaking just blocks away from Northwestern University, Clinton drew the biggest distinction between the two candidates on the issue of making college more affordable.

Clinton argued Sanders' plan to "subsidize tuition" is problematic during an era when many public universities in states led by Republican governors and legislatures already are hiking tuition costs because of cuts to state funding. But he did not mention the current drought in funding for Illinois public universities driven by the ongoing budget standoff in Springfield between Democrats and Republican Gov. Bruce Rauner.

Bill Clinton praises Hillary in Evanston: 'My argument for Hillary is pretty simple' Former President Bill Clinton campaigned for his wife in Evanston on March 8, 2016, saying, "As long as I've known her, she's been the best change maker I've ever known." (WGN-TV) Former President Bill Clinton campaigned for his wife in Evanston on March 8, 2016, saying, "As long as I've known her, she's been the best change maker I've ever known." (WGN-TV) See more videos

"(Sanders) wants free tuition for everybody at state universities. (Hillary Clinton) wants everybody to be able to graduate without debt, from public or private institutions," Clinton told about 500 people at the Beth Emet The Free Synagogue. "I think her idea is better for one simple reason: If all we do is subsidize tuition, it will just lead to an inflation in tuition costs."

He also lauded his spouse's plan to work to improve upon Obamacare without directly mentioning Sanders' plan to scrap the Affordable Care Act in favor of a universal Medicare-for-all program. Clinton did note that "a little red light" should go off for voters when they hear candidates talk about creating a new health care system, because that would require a filibuster-proof 60 votes in the U.S. Senate, an unlikelihood in the near term.

The former president's appearance was aimed at getting out the vote in Illinois ahead of next Tuesday's primary election. A Chicago Tribune poll published Tuesday showed Clinton at 67 percent and Sanders at 25 percent with 8 percent of voters undecided. Clinton has strong Illinois ties, born in Chicago and raised in suburban Park Ridge. Sanders, who was a student at the University of Chicago in the 1960s, spoke late last month at a packed rally at Chicago State University, which has been hit hard by the state budget impasse.

Clinton and Sanders squared off in Democratic primaries in Michigan and Mississippi on Tuesday as the former secretary of state sought to build on her lead in presidential nominating delegates that's been padded by commitments from hundreds of superdelegates.

Throughout his speech, Bill Clinton characterized the former secretary of state, U.S. senator and first lady as someone with a track record of achieving change, even when it has required working with Republicans when he was in the White House.

"You might say, 'Why have they been so mean to her since she left the secretary of state's office,'" he said of Republicans. "You have to understand this is their method of operation. They're scared to have to run against her, because they know if she becomes the president, she'd be the grown-up in every room and she'll find a way to get them to do something good."

He also noted Hillary Clinton's support for changes to policing and immigration, and her support for protections for the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community — all popular applause lines before a room full of lakefront liberals just north of Chicago city limits.

The former president was introduced by local Democratic U.S. Rep. Jan Schakowsky, who proclaimed Hillary Clinton the "most qualified candidate since George Washington."

"I don't know if that's quite true," Bill Clinton joked later, "but it's pretty close."

But more than experience, Clinton said, the top reason to vote for his wife is that she can build on the work Obama has done to rebuild the nation's economy, "often with one hand tied behind his back."

"She knows we can't do it unless we have inclusive economics, inclusive social policies, an inclusive national security policy. You ought to vote for her … not because she'd be the first woman president, although I think that'd be a grand thing," Clinton said in his closing remarks. "I know something about the job, and I believe I can claim to have made a pretty good difference in people's lives. The most important reason to vote for her is that we cannot wait any longer. Finally, we can rise together."

Earlier Tuesday, Clinton made a stop at MacArthur's Restaurant on the West Side, where he pressed the flesh with a few surprised diners, political types and kitchen cooks.

As word spread of Clinton's arrival, a group of four barbers from His & Hers Barber School made their way across Madison Street to get a firsthand look at the former president.

"Fortunately, I still have some hair left to cut," Clinton joked to the barbers.

As they posed for a picture, one of the barbers gave the thumbs-up sign and then turned to Clinton and told him, "You're the best president of all time. You know that, right?"

Clinton just flashed a toothy smile.

bruthhart@tribpub.com

Twitter @BillRuthhart