(Yes, presidential terms began in March back then. An awfully long lame-duck period for the outgoing administration. And one of the great many things that changed for the better during Franklin D. Roosevelt's early days.)

It was also a day when fair amounts of both malice and charity were on display at Utah's Capitol.

Especially if by "charity" we mean not just gifts to the poor but more generally, as defined by Webster and probably as meant by Lincoln, "benevolent goodwill toward or love of humanity." And if by "malice" we mean the Utah House of Representatives.

First, the charity.

Utah legislators, Republican and Democrat, joined representatives of state and national gay rights organizations and several right honorable potentates of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to announce a breakthrough deal.

It's a law that would extend the protection of the state's anti-discrimination law to include gays, lesbians, bisexual and transgendered human beings in the list of folks who cannot be discriminated against in housing or employment. And it will do so without, its authors hope and profess, unnecessarily trampling on the rights of religious organizations to, well, discriminate.

The law doesn't address the homophobic florist scenario one way or the other. Utah, unlike some other states, doesn't have a public accommodations law of any kind. And it skillfully encompasses the many rental properties around Brigham Young University, those that have to meet LDS standards in every unit in order to put BYU students in any of them, in a kind of West Berlin for No Gays Allowed.

It's still a big deal, where folks on both sides of what had been a very sharp divide worked long and hard to find common ground. Sure, it's a deal for the sake of a deal. But that's better than fighting for the sake of fighting.

Other legislative acts of charity, accomplished or proposed, include bills to reform the criminal justice system in ways that stress treatment over punishment, to allow certain forms of medical marijuana and laws that would allow physician-assisted suicide and give certain seriously ill people a chance to use experimental medicines.

Now the malice.

The Senate had passed Healthy Utah, another long and painstakingly negotiated agreement, this one between Gov. Gary Herbert, who didn't want to just expand Medicare as the Affordable Care Act wanted, and the Obama administration, which did. The chances of bringing thousands of Utahns, most of them good and decent people from working families, out of the cruel cold of being without access to health care seemed within reach.

But House Speaker Greg Hughes wasn't buying it. First he said the House wouldn't even hear the bill. Then he sent it to the House Business and Labor Committee, which cold-heartedly ignored all the facts about how Healthy Utah is morally, medically and fiscally sound before voting it down. The next day, House leaders spitefully blocked a perfectly legitimate attempt to have the whole House consider it anyway.

No, I'm not going to try to tell you that Lincoln would have favored Healthy Utah. In his day, there was little point in health insurance, subsidized or not, because all our expensive medicines, procedures and devices were a century or more away. Then, the inequality between rich and poor in times of illness was mainly the comfort of the bed you died in.

But Honest Abe would have seen through the lies at the heart of the House's so-called Utah Cares alternative. A truth in advertising provision would demand that the plan be called Utah Doesn't Give A Rat's Behind.