Justice Even John Yoo Says The Court Decision Rejecting Obama’s Immigration Policy Is Problematic CREDIT: AP Photo/Susan Walsh, File

A federal judge’s decision declaring President Obama’s newly announced immigration policy unconstitutional has an unexpected — if somewhat tepid — critic: torture memo author John Yoo. Yoo, who once argued that the president’s power to act unilaterally is so expansive that the chief executive could order interrogators to crush a child’s testicles, wrote on Tuesday that Judge Arthur Schwab was wrong to “reach out and decide the action’s constitutionality.”

To be clear, Yoo’s objection to Schwab’s decision is entirely procedural. Yoo, who once argued that the executive can use many forms of torture despite the fact that federal law explicitly forbids such activities, believes that President Obama’s decision to allow immigrants to remain united with their families is executive overreach. Yet Yoo also criticizes Schwab for opining on the immigration policy’s constitutionality when the issue was not properly before his court. As Yoo notes, “[t]his is not a case where the executive order applies, because the Obama administration is not allowing an illegal alien to remain in the country.” Thus, the case presents “no real dispute over the law, because regardless of whether the executive order is constitutional or not, it would make no difference in [this defendant’s] case.”

Though Yoo also says that he “sympathize[s] with Judge Schwab on the merits of his decision against President Obama’s executive order,” the actual discussion of legal merits of the immigration policy in Schwab’s opinion is quite thin. Judge Schwab did not cite a single judicial precedent supporting the most crucial part of his analysis, and he ignored Supreme Court decisions stating that the executive has “broad discretion” on matters of deportation and that federal agencies are “far better equipped than the courts to deal with the many variables involved in the proper ordering of [enforcement] priorities.”

Setting aside Yoo’s procedural objections to Schwab’s order, the former Justice Department attorney’s transformation from a proponent of largely unchecked executive power under Bush into a man deeply concerned with government action under Obama is not a new phenomenon. Yoo has argued that the Supreme Court decision upholding much of the Affordable Care Act “did great violence” to constitutional limits on federal power. Yet, during the Bush Administration, Yoo offered a view that, if followed to its logical conclusion, would grant President Obama the authority to implement many provisions of Obamacare even if Congress had never passed the law in the first place.

During the Bush years, Yoo argued that the Constitution permits the president to judge what steps are “necessary” to prosecute a war. The executive’s power to torture people, he claimed, flowed from the fact that torturing someone is less severe than killing them:

Look, death is worse than torture, but everyone except pacifists thinks there are circumstances in which war is justified. War means killing people. If we are entitled to kill people, we must be entitled to injure them. I don’t see how it can be reasonable to have an absolute prohibition on torture when you don’t have an absolute prohibition on killing.

This rationale, however, leaves few, if any, limits on presidential power. If torture is permitted because it is a less severe sanction than killing, then requiring someone to purchase health insurance is also a less severe sanction than killing them. So is taxing someone in order to buy insurance for someone else who cannot afford it. Under Yoo’s theory, it’s not at all clear why President Obama cannot simply declare everyone in the United States who lacks health insurance an enemy combatant and then use the full force of the United States military to force them to purchase such insurance.

Of course the idea that millions of Americans could be declared enemy combatants for something that has little to do with their conduct on a battlefield may seem absurd, but Yoo also believes that people labeled “enemy combatants” by the president should be given extraordinarily limited access to due process enabling them to contest their designation. According to one former Bush Administration official, under the actual processes used to evaluate suspected terrorists, “of the initial 742 detainees that had arrived at Guantánamo, the majority of them had never seen a U.S. soldier in the process of their initial detention and their captivity had not been subjected to any meaningful review.” We now know that many of these detainees were innocent.

So Yoo seems particularly willing to advocate in favor of expansive powers for presidents of his party and narrow contractions of federal power when Democrats are calling the shots. Until recently, however, Yoo was widely viewed as an outlier even among conservative lawyers. In 2004, the torture memos were repudiated by the new head of the Justice Department office Yoo once worked in. After Yoo returned to Berkeley law school, where he is a tenured professor, the law school came under considerable pressure to fire him for his involvement in justifying torture. Though the law school’s dean, Christopher Edley, defended the school’s decision not to fire Yoo on academic freedom grounds, he criticized the torture memos themselves for reducing “the Rule of Law to the Reign of Politics.”

Today, however, Yoo looks less and less like an outlier and more and more like a harbinger of a new legal era. Data shows that the best predictor of whether a lawsuit challenging portions of Obamacare will succeed is whether a majority of the judges hearing the case are Republicans. Justice Antonin Scalia authored an opinion that provided a clear rationale for upholding the Affordable Care Act several years before he joined another opinion attempting to repeal the entire law. Judge Schwab rejected Obama’s immigration policy without even feeling the need to cite precedents supporting the core of his reasoning.

Yoo’s flexible approach to the law, in other words, is hardly limited to Yoo himself. It is increasingly easy to find on the federal bench.