With the first year of health plans offered under the Affordable Care Act winding down, now is a good time for an assessment. AL.com is looking beyond political battle lines to examine how well the ACA worked during its first year of offering health plans for the individual and family market. Hundreds of Alabamians have shared specific personal experiences with AL.com that help explain what's good and what's bad about the new law. These stories are helping to guide and inform our reporting.

Name: Patricia Fox

Patricia and Thomas Fox



Age: 63

City: Mountain Brook

After the first year, was Obamacare better, worse or about the same as you expected?

"Since I expected the worst, I definitely got the worst. Our premiums increased 44 percent each month and the copay went up from $750 for each of us to $2,000 for each of us. And it was for essentially identical coverage that we had the year before -- it covered flu shots and annual checkups 100 percent; mammograms 100 percent. Everything they touted for this wonderful new program? I had it all, for 44 percent less."

What happened in the past year?

Fox and her husband are both in their 60s, and she said their roughly $800 a month premium shot up to the mid-$1,200s under Blue Cross Blue Shield of Alabama.

"We just couldn't afford it. It was much too expensive," Fox said. So they dropped it.

[ SHARE YOUR STORY: What's your experience with Obamacare? Tell us what you think of first year ]

So Fox looked into alternatives that complied with the ACA -- and found a health cost sharing program called Christian Care Ministry. She said they're saving $500 a month on the program.

"It's an out to Obamacare. With this coverage, you aren't in danger of being fined," Fox said. "There are several groups out there that offer what they call health cost sharing -- where you pool your money with a lot of other people, and from that pool, your bills are paid."

It's not as commonly accepted as BCBS, but Fox said she has had great experiences with the new doctors she's tried within the network.

It comes with more strings attached than your average insurance plan -- to keep costs low, participants have to lead healthy lifestyles. Fox is overweight, and once she meets certain goals, her cost will go down further.

Overall, Fox says she's very happy with her new program. But she's frustrated that she had to find it because her insurance costs increased.