Bocce ball group at Arbor Glen in Bridgewater helps senior citizens stay socially connected and physically fit

Buy Photo Marcy Young smiles at her teammates as residents of Arbor Glen in Bridgewater play bocce indoors. (Photo: Kathy Johnson, Kathy Johnson/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo Story Highlights The Arbor Glen Bocce Ball group was officially established in 2006 by late resident Ed Malone

The senior citizens play indoor and outdoor, depending upon weather conditions

The group began with four players, but has grown to 12

Senior citizens at Arbor Glen, a continuing care retirement community in Bridgewater, will not give in to their aches and pains, limited mobility or other challenges they face as they age. Determined to remain agile and connected to a fit and fun lifestyle, they’ve made bocce ball one of their favorite activities.

The group meets Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays from 9:30 am to approximately 11 am, playing indoors and outdoors.

Marcy Young, 83, an Arbor Glen resident for 12 years, said that the activity originated on 28-acre campus of the facility in the fall of 2006 when resident Ed Malone, who passed away a year ago, was practicing his golf swings on a grassy area in front of the campus gazebo.

“He thought it would be a good place to have bocce ball games,” she said.

The number of players advanced from four to eight to the current steady crop of 12 residents, according to Young. She said that they use Malone’s bocce ball set, as well as one that was purchased in May 2007.

At the beginning of 2009, a gravel court was installed because the number of players was growing.

In the spring of 2010, Don Pruess, 76, who has been an Arbor Glen resident for five years, began to take over duties of preparing the playing area for his fellow seniors, setting up the court and freeing it of leaves, keeping it smoothed out, free of rake marks and rolled it out when fresh gravel was added.

He also acquired three benches for players’ seating as well as a storage bin for bocce ball supplies.

Although diabetes has limited him as he advances in age, Pruess shared that he hopes to keep committed to his responsibilities which were originally held by Malone. When not enjoying bocce ball, Pruess attends various meetings on campus about activities and operations at Arbor Glen.

Young recalled how, as the bocce ball group was beginning to flourish, resident Al Polizzi, who lived to be 100 before dying in May of 2010, lent his expertise and enthusiasm to the game.

“He was a sweet man. I’m told he had a barbershop for at least 50 years in Westfield,” said Young of Polizzi, who was often known to don a soft brownish tan beret-type cap with brown tweed sports jacket.

Buy Photo A participant picks up her balls as residents of Arbor Glen in Bridgewater play bocce. (Photo: Kathy Johnson, Kathy Johnson/Staff Photographer)

“I was one of the original group and he joined us soon and quickly became our bocce guru. I’m not sure how he did it, but he maneuvered beautifully with his cane – out to the court and over the side board into the court to toss the ball, still supported by the cane,” reported Young.

“He was quite a character, we loved him,” she said, adding that the bocce group has, over the years, built a strong sense of camaraderie among its members.

“Bocce ball has even become part of our exercise program,” she added, with many of the bocce ball moves used to help the residents in our entire community.”

Freddie Oakley, 85, a seven-year resident of Arbor Glen, said that bocce ball has captured the interest of many of the seniors who prefer to play indoors instead of outdoors due to inclement weather.

“We bought an indoor bocce ball set and sometimes we have more players than we can handle,” chuckled Oakley, adding that the seniors catch sight of the bocce ball games on their way to the dining room or auditorium and are eager to join in.

PVC pipe and brightly-colored ribbon have added to the construction of the indoor setting with two temporary indoor courts to make for an equally entertaining backdrop for the seniors’ favorite game.

Buy Photo Residents of Arbor Glen in Bridgewater play bocce three times a week. (Photo: Kathy Johnson, Kathy Johnson/Staff Photographer)

“We have lots of laughs,” said Oakley when asked about what sets the activity apart from the various others offered at Arbor Glen. When not playing bocce ball, she can often be found enjoying a game of bridge.

According to Young, Arbor Glen residents do not employ a formal social director; rather, activities are generated and executed by residents, even those off-campus day trips and arts and entertainment programs.

“Bocce ball keeps us moving and keeps us social,” added Young, who also takes continuing education classes at Rutgers University and Raritan Valley Community College. “While we haven’t competed in any tournaments we are competitive but gather really just for fun.”

“You have to move your whole body for bocce ball and have to pick up the balls,” added Pruess.

“If you can’t pick up the balls, you shouldn’t be playing,” advised Young, who helps recruit new members to the group as they become residents of Arbor Glen.

“If you don’t use it, you lose it,” she concluded.

About Arbor Glen

Arbon Glen is a Friends organization, founded in Somerset County in 1990 as a CCRC (continuing care retirement community) committed to the expression of Quaker regard for dignity, equality and ethical business practices. It is a not-for-profit corporation accredited by CARF-CCAC.

For more information about Arbor Glen, call 908-595-6500, email marketing@arborglen.org or visit www.arborglen.org.

​

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1UF1LvT