Topics: Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, Media Criticism, Neuroscience, News, Politics News

Donald Trump will be the Republican presidential nominee — at least, if all the media attention paid to his candidacy has anything to do with primacy and caucus results. A recent analysis found that he has received over 50 percent of the summer media coverage of Campaign 2016.

Yet Trump’s position in the polls for the Republican nomination is far lower than the 50 percent mark, in the 20-30 percent range. The Republican establishment is set against him. As a result, the large majority of political analysts suggest that there is a low probability of Trump being nominated.

Of course, there are many who blame the media itself for its supposedly excessive coverage of Trump, whether media analysts or Republican presidential candidates such as Rand Paul.

But here is the dirty little secret: Trump, as an expert entertainer and performer, knows what viewers want and he gives it to us. We should blame ourselves, and specifically the emotional part of our brains, for Trump’s rise. This emotional part of our brain can lead us to make systematic and costly bad decisions that we would be wise to avoid.

What do I mean by the emotional part of our brain? Intuitively we feel our mind to be a cohesive whole, and perceive ourselves as intentional and rational thinkers. Yet cognitive science shows that in reality, the intentional part of our mind is like a little rider on top of a huge elephant of emotions and intuitions. This is why researchers frequently divide our mental processes into two different systems of dealing with information, the autopilot system and the intentional system, also called System 1 and System 2.

The autopilot system corresponds to our emotions and intuitions. This system guides our daily habits, helps us make snap decisions, and reacts instantly to dangerous life-and-death situations with a fight-or-flight response. However, while the snap judgments resulting from intuitions and emotions usually feel “true” because they are fast and powerful, they sometimes lead us wrong, in systematic and predictable ways.

The intentional system reflects our rational thinking, and helps us handle more complex mental activities. While the automatic system requires no conscious effort to function, the intentional system takes deliberate effort to turn on and is mentally tiring. However, the good news is that we can use the intentional system to address situations where the autopilot system is prone to make errors, especially costly ones.

Trump knows how to play to the way our brains are wired through provocative, emotion-inducing statements. As a result, his statements are very well tuned to trigger our autopilot system, and get our attention. For instance, he accused undocumented migrants of bringing drugs and rape to the United States. These statements were not based on facts, but were well-designed to appeal to emotions, namely the kind of fears that lead to a fight-or-flight response. In another well-known incident, Trump publicized Lindsey Graham’s personal cell phone number. This appealed to our emotional brain’s curiosity and surprise.