This Week in Crain's: December 16, 2013 Listen to the Podcast or Download

Mandatory name tags to encourage more courtesy. Moving sidewalks to reduce pedestrian congestion. Car periscopes to allow drivers to see oncoming traffic jams.



No, these aren't ideas left on Mayor Michael Bloomberg's cutting-room floor, but rather some of the schemes cooked up by Jerry Seinfeld and his neurotic Upper West Side pals over the course of their nine years on the air. But the fact that they sound like semi-credible Bloomberg proposals speaks to the past 12 years of furious innovation that the mayor inspired.



Not even Kramer could have predicted the pace of innovation that has gripped the city: smoke-free bars, a mile-long park in the sky, Times Square transformed into a bustling back porch.



Navy yards became laboratories; rail yards, stadiums. A tiny island in the East River will become the next MIT.



Bill de Blasio did not run as the “ideas” candidate, but his “tale of two cities” mantra about lifting up the city's most impoverished residents has heightened expectations for his administration that are about as tall as his son Dante's Afro—or even the mayor-elect himself.



“It's important for New York City to continue to innovate because so many American cities, and frankly global cities, watch what New York does,” said Bruce Katz, vice president of the Brookings Institution and co-author of The Metropolitan Revolution. “The speed of replication today is much, much faster. Cities watch each other, and then they adapt and tailor what they perceive to be the best innovations.”

[Bright ideas: Six ways to build a better New York]

Mr. de Blasio has set his sights on universal prekindergarten, paid for by taxing the wealthy, and building 200,000 units of affordable housing. To pay for these social programs, he'll need New York to retain its status as a global zenith of art, finance, fashion and technology.

Good jobs

[Bright ideas: How to give city workers their raises]

If government is to help, Mr. Katz said, the next administration's ideas will need to serve two functions. First, they need to spur the city's growing science and technology sectors to produce good-paying jobs, while ensuring that the city's workforce has the skills to fill those positions. And second, the next administration will need to redouble its investments in infrastructure, especially in an era of an unreliable federal government.



“In a way, New York City needs to step back now and say, 'OK, we understand we're the finance capital of the world, but what are these other driving sectors?' “ Mr. Katz said.

[Bright ideas: A tale of too many transit systems]

'Times for being bold'

Other ideas, such as repurposing the city's “vestigial infrastructure,” like pay phones, rail yards and old warehouses (even subterranean pneumatic tubes), will also be important, said Andrew Essex, vice chairman at cutting-edge advertising firm Droga5. “That's another broad approach, to take our vestigial manifestations of an earlier century and do some kind of judo-throw,” he said. “The High Line, of course, is the ideal example.”

[Bright ideas: It's a pay phone time machine, dude]

At a recent speech for the Partnership for New York, Mr. Bloomberg credited former Deputy Mayor Daniel Doctoroff's push to bring the Olympics to the city as the impetus for many of the “big ideas that really make the city what it is.” The pitch failed, but the result was still transformational, he said.

[Bright ideas: Citizens' brigade to tackle next Superstorm]

Mr. Doctoroff is still churning out ideas. In a recent speech, he said the next mayor should move the Javits Center to Queens and link the Brooklyn and Queens waterfronts via light rail.



Mr. Doctoroff, now the president of the mayor's media company, told Crain's that the next administration will need to innovate with an eye toward broadening the tax base—echoing Mr. Bloomberg's recent comments about wanting to attract more billionaires to the city.



“You've got to be prosperous to be progressive,” Mr. Doctoroff said.



Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel has been praised for ideas like supplanting his city's decades-old “sister cities” agreement with Mexico City with one that includes economic-development agreements. In an interview with Crain's, he said he hopes Mr. de Blasio can pluck from some of Chicago's best concepts, just as Mr. Emanuel has from Mr. Bloomberg.



“I think these are times for being bold, and times for practical solutions to solve people's problems—it's not one thing,” Mr. Emanuel said. “You've got to do it all.”



He added, “I'm sure Bill will do it.”

Crain’s asked dozens of experts for innovative ways Mayor-elect Bill de Blasio could make New York City a better place to work and play. The result is our list of more than 40 bright ideas, which can be viewed by category: Land Use, Transportation, Public Safety, Social and Health Services, Government and Labor, Technology, Education, Infrastructure and Environment, and Taxes.

Get Crain's Morning Insider Sign up for the Morning Insider email and receive political news and musings every morning at 6 a.m. More Newsletters ›

Comments