Ask your local member of Congress to move legislation that would recognize pharmacists as healthcare providers.

By Charles Kray

Following the 2010 inception of the Affordable Care Act, we have seen many changes in health care in this country. Just for instance, we've seen such new terms as Accountable Care Organization and Medical Home enter the lexicon.

Hospitals, long term care facilities and physicians have changed the way they treat patients. The system isn't perfect and it is very complex, with far too many layers to work through.

Within this layering, one glaring flaw has been the underutilization of pharmacists as an integral component of cost containment and quality of care.

Pharmacists interact with patients much more frequently and, given long wait times and appointment back logs, are far more accessible than most specialists or even primary care physicians.

Not only are we well-versed in each patient's medication regimen, we have face-to-face interactions often on a weekly or monthly basis; the benefits of actually knowing a patient beyond what their chart says cannot be overvalued.

Moreover, pharmacists are trained to provide many services including administering vaccines, medication management, handling chronic disease management, administering health screenings and aiding in health and wellness programs that reduce hospital readmissions.

Clearly pharmacists are an incredible resource to their patients and a major opportunity for savings in the healthcare system, yet reimbursement by Medicare or Medicaid for providing these services remains unavailable to pharmacists.

Further, there is the looming potential of patient resources and physician accessibility growing increasingly strained.

The Association of American Medical Colleges has predicted a shortage of as many as 91,000 doctors nationally by 2020. Meanwhile 95 percent of Americans live within five miles of a pharmacy.

Ease of access to pharmacists coupled with an overburdened healthcare system presents an obvious solution.

Pharmacists are providing dynamic front line care already and are best positioned to provide further benefits and savings to patients, payers and the healthcare system overall.

But we can't be expected to do so at the cost of our own bottom line. It should be easier for people to get basic medical care, and the providers of that care should be reimbursed.

Several states have begun programs designed to better leverage the unique pharmacist expertise and patient access pharmacists possess.

The results in quality and cost savings have been nothing short of incredible.

A Minnesota study involving Medicaid and state employees showed a 600 percent increase in diabetic patients' blood sugar control, resulting in far greater patient quality of life and a reduction in health system costs.

In Ohio, a study of Medicaid managed care patients showed that for every one dollar spent on pharmacist medication management, the system saves $4.40.

It's a solution that makes a lot of sense and could reduce health care costs by reducing hospital readmissions and managing chronic illness before more expensive care is required.

There is already growing Congressional support across both sides of the aisle for legislation supporting this concept.

The Pharmacy and Medically Underserved Areas Enhancement Act has huge bipartisan support with 264 cosponsors in the House and 41 in the Senate.

While it is great to see so much support for the bill, now it is time to turn it into law. With such huge support in both chambers, and the obvious benefit to Americans at large and particularly in medically underserved areas, it's time that this bill sees a vote.

Many members of the Pennsylvania delegation have signed on to this bill, and I urge them now to call upon their leadership to move the legislation forward.

Please be an advocate for making full-spectrum healthcare more accessible and affordable for all.

Please ask your local members of Congress to help make healthcare better by moving this legislation forward and recognizing pharmacists as healthcare providers.

Charles Kray, of Hershey, has been a pharmacist for more than 30 years. He earned his degree in Pharmacy from Duquesne University in 1975.