OGDEN — Back in the good old days, Weber County promised its employees 100 percent of their accumulated sick leave and five years of health insurance coverage when they retired.

That policy changed in 2008 as the economy crashed — but those payments are now coming due and will continue to drain county coffers for the next 10 to 20 years.

Weber County comptroller Scott Parke delivered that sobering information during Tuesday night’s presentation of the county’s tentative 2016 budget.

When employees hired before 2008 retire, the county gives them one-third of their sick leave in cash as they go out the door and deposits the other two-thirds in a “bank” to help cover their qualified medical-related expenses.

By the end of 2014, the county’s sick-leave liability had reached almost $6 million, and that amount will continue to grow for several years as pre-2008 hires continue to stockpile sick leave and start to retire.

“It’s going to be a significant cash expenditure in the next few years,” Parke said, noting that employees hired after 2008 can only accrue 600 hours of sick leave at retirement, a move that addressed that liability going forward.

But the sick-leave conundrum pales in comparison to the county’s other post-employment promise.

“For employees who started before 2008, we offered five years of paid health insurance when they retire,” Parke said. “This liability is really significant,” he said — climbing to almost $20 million by the end of 2014.

Parke projected that in 2016, the county will pay more than $700,000 for those benefits, and by 2020 that annual cost rises to $1.2 million.

“It continues to grow every year for the next 10 to 15 years when we’re going to crest that hill as more and more employees start to retire — and then it will eventually come down,” Parke said. “We’ve already taken steps to prevent new employees from being dumped into that bucket, but we still have to pay for all these employees to whom we’ve already made this promise, and that will be a significant drain on our cash flow as we go forward.”

At the same time, Weber County is wrestling with rising health insurance premiums. In 2010, the county paid just less than $6 million to cover its full-time employees, but by 2016, that price tag rises to almost $9 million.

“Our county is one of the few counties that continues to pay 100 percent of the premium,” Parke said. “And we pay that for every employee, even if the employee’s spouse is already covered under somebody else’s insurance.”

Coupled with the premium benefit package, the county offers lower than market-rate wages, making it difficult to attract and retain workers.

“So you have people who come in and see a $12 to $13 starting salary when they’re making $16 right now, and they’re forgetting that they’re paying for their own health insurance and have to save their own money for a 401K,” Parke said.

The bottom line, Parke added, is that five years down the road, the county will either need to start spending down its healthy fund balance — kept in place in case of emergencies — or raise taxes.

Story continues below graphics.

In addition, the county’s two main sources of revenue — property and sales tax — have been slightly anemic. While new property values grew by seven percent in 2007, that growth plummeted to one percent by 2014. Sales tax revenues rose from $8 million in 2010 to just over $10 million in 2015. That steady four percent increase each year is good to see, Parke said, but sales tax revenue can also be very volatile depending on the economy, making it “a scary source to count on.”

The tentative 2016 budget contains no cost of living or merit increases for employees.

Commission Chairman Kerry Gibson largely blamed the Affordable Care Act for the county’s rising health insurance costs.

“That’s one of the things that’s really killing us. The Obamacare increases have made it very hard for our budget to handle, so we have to figure out a plan forward in future years as to how we’ll deal with that,” Gibson said.

• RELATED: Republican states that expanded Medicaid have stuck with it

Brad Dee — a state lawmaker and head of Weber County’s Administrative Services division — said the county employs 961 full-time staff and about 85 part-time workers.

“There are many reasons for those (premium) escalations,” Dee said by phone, pointing to medical inflation that typically runs about eight to 10 percent every year. That is coupled with a three- to four-percent annual increase the past two years related to insurance entities covering themselves for additional enrollees and growing risk pools under the Affordable Care Act

One of the bigger factors, Dee added, would be pharmaceuticals, drug costs and new drugs that become available through research and development.

“Those are usually extremely costly drugs,” Dee said. “Lastly, I think usage — in Weber County we’ve found that our loss ratios have been fairly good, but sometimes we have spikes . . . which means that our rates will escalate a little bit.”

Eden resident Jan Fullmer attended Tuesday’s budget meeting and said she retired from the health care industry.

“Health care costs, especially for insurance premiums, have far exceeded the cost of living,” Fullmer said, suggesting the county consider cutting back on funding gold and platinum policies for employees and instead boost salaries and allocate an extra pocket of money for merit increases based on performance.

Commissioner James Ebert said that ongoing discussions revolve around balancing taxed wages with nontaxed benefits.

“We’re walking that line and those will be decisions that we’ll continue to look at over this next year as to what works best for our staff and employees,” Ebert said.

The County Commission is scheduled to approve the final 2016 budget Dec. 22.

Contact reporter Cathy McKitrick at 801-625-4214 or cmckitrick@standard.net. Follow her on Twitter at @catmck.