PA Dems Chair Burn on Short List for State Senate

Written by Brittany Foster, Deputy Editor

Pennsylvania’s Democrat-in-Chief is considering a run for Jim Ferlo’s seat after the State Senator retires at the end of this term.

Senator Minority Leader Jay Costa (D-Allegheny) and the Senate Democratic Campaign Committee have been recruiting Burn, said Aren Platt of the SDCC.

Burn told PoliticsPA that he is open to a run, but that it is “on the back burner.”

“I think my best option is what I have been telling party members for the past few months,” Burn said. “Seek another four year term as the party chairman.”

He stated that his main priorities in the next year are defeating Tom Corbett and maneuvering a Democratic takeover of the House and Senate that would put Costa in Senate leadership. He is committed to finding the best candidate for vacant seat. Could it be him?

“Never say never,” Burn said.

Ferlo cited his new district as the reason for his departure. Widely considered one of the most liberal members of the Senate, redistricting made the 38th senatorial district much more conservative and virtually unwinnable for Ferlo.

Gone are the Pittsburgh neighborhoods and Allegheny River mill towns that made the 38th district solid blue. In their place are deep red pockets in the North Hills of Allegheny County.

The new SD-38 is good for Republicans. Mitt Romney beat Barack Obama there by 6.4% there in 2012 despite losing the state overall by 5.4%. However, it’s not a sure thing for the GOP. Sen. Bob Casey won the district by 0.6% and Kathleen Kane won by 5.8%.

If he runs, Burn would face State Sen. Randy Vulakovich (R-Allegheny). Despite his mostly party-line voting record, Vulakovich enjoys a good rapport with local Democratic officials and labor groups.

Jim Burn has been the chairman of the Pennsylvania Democratic Party since his election in 2010. He served 12 years as Mayor of Millvale, and was elected to Allegheny County Council in 2005. Burn served as President of the County Council in 2011.

As state party chairman, he’s attended Democratic National Convention events where he’s built strong relationships with donors and supporters across the country.

If he does run, he may scare off Democratic primary challengers and turn the general election into a high profile race. Any other challenger for the seat would have a difficult time matching Burn’s rolodex.

Close ties to the Democratic party could also be a risk for him. Republican opposition researchers would find a treasure trove of material to work with. As a party spokesman Burn appeared on television numerous times to boost policies from the Affordable Care Act to abortion rights.

In 2013, Democratic party members voted to include call for a moratorium on natural gas drilling into the party platform. Burn opposed the move, but it would be difficult to squeeze such nuance into a 30 second campaign advertisement.

November 19th, 2013 | Posted in Front Page Stories, Top Stories | 5 Comments