Sen. Susan Collins, R-Maine, takes a congratulatory phone call from President Barack Obama after her re-election victory Nov. 4. "My focus, despite my opposition to the [Affordable Care Act], is to try to fix it, and this is a good place to start," Collins says of efforts to define full-time work as 40 hours. Bill Sikes/AP

House and Senate lawmakers Wednesday presented measures seen as attempts to undercut the Affordable Care Act instead as bipartisan efforts to fix a flawed but salvageable law.

In the House, legislators reintroduced a bill to repeal the medical device tax, which levies a 2.3 percent tax on items like artificial joints and MRI machines. Lawmakers in both chambers also announced bills to formally define full-time work as 40 hours, up from the act's current 30-hour threshold.

Notably absent from press conferences announcing the measures were the familiar tirades against a "broken," "job-killing" law that keeps patients away from their doctors of choice. (Newly installed Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., still took the time in his opening floor remarks Tuesday morning to slam Obamacare, though.) Instead, Republican Sens. Susan Collins of Maine and Joe Donnelly of Indiana, as well as GOP Rep. Erik Paulsen of Minnesota, described their respective bills as aimed at parts of the controversial law where members of both parties can find common ground.

"The good news is that both Republicans and Democrats recognize the device tax is harming our economy and stifling innovation," Paulsen said. "Repealing this tax has strong, bipartisan support across the political spectrum."

Donnelly and Rep. Ron Kind of Wisconsin, a Democrat and primary co-sponsor of the medical device tax repeal in the House, both voted for the initial passage of the Affordable Care Act and said they supported keeping key portions of it in place. Collins on Wednesday acknowledged her continuing desire to see most or all of the law repealed and replaced.

[READ: Businesses Push for 40-Hour Workweek in Obamacare Definition]

"Although I have voted to repeal the bill and still believe it would have been far better if we had drafted a bipartisan health reform bill in the first place, we know the president is going to veto a bill that repeals his signature accomplishment," she said." I don't even know if we could get it through the Senate, so my focus, despite my opposition to the law, is to try to fix it, and this is a good place to start."

Back in 2012, the White House threatened to veto a repeal of the medical device tax, which has passed the House several times. But the new measure has nearly 250 co-sponsors, including 25 Democrats, and is seen as the best chance for rolling back part of the law.

The bill's current language does not yet provide a way to counter revenue lost from cutting the tax, but Paulsen said he expects sources to be identified when the bill comes before the House Finance and Ways and Means committees. The full-time measure is facing tougher headwinds, and so far is co-sponsored by just Donnelly, GOP Sen. Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, and one Democrat: West Virginia Sen. Joe Manchin.

After a one-year delay, the so-called employer mandate requiring companies with at least 100 employees to provide health insurance to their full-time employees took effect Jan. 1.

Supporters and business leaders are eager to see the employer mandate go, claiming it forces them to cut hours of part-time employees and discourages hiring, ultimately creating a "nation of part-time workers." They also say its repeal would put money back into the pockets of those workers who are already part-time, and who have seen their hours cut in response to the mandate.

[MORE: Jeb's Likely Message on Obamacare: Repeal but Replace]

"This is like getting a raise for folks," Donnelly said. "Instead of working for 27 hours and then having to get in a car and drive to another job … this is about making the lives of the citizens of this country easier."

However, the White House this week said Obama would veto the bill if it came to his desk, saying it would incentivize businesses to make more of their employees part-time, in order to avoid paying for their health care or a fine.

"By moving the threshold to 40 hours, this legislation could cause the problem it claims to solve by greatly increasing the number of workers for whom employers may have an incentive to reduce hours to avoid the requirement," a White House statement said.

Collins called the administration's justification "bogus."