Dr Ray Jones travels to remote rural areas as a Locum Doctor and can spend weeks away due to the shortage of doctors in rural NSW. Picture: Frank Redward

BUSH locums are earning up to $2200 a day for fly-in, fly-out work in rural towns — and the crumbling rural health system would completely collapse without them.

Locum doctors are employed by NSW Health when jobs or shifts are unable to be filled by permanent staff, overtime or casual employees in country hospitals. Some can earn $200,000 a year by working just two days a week.

In 2012, the NSW State government paid over $104 million to locum doctors, up 15 per cent on the previous year’s bill of over $90 million.

General Practice Rural Incentive scheme discourages doctors from the Australian outback

Molong has raised more than $1 million for anyone in the town who falls ill

Dr Ray Jones, a Grafton-based doctor who regularly works locum shifts from Bourke to Boggabri, said the regional health system would collapse without locums.

“The locum industry is keeping regional hospitals going, but the government has got to work this out because it’s totally crazy,” he said.

“Doing it with locums is very expensive, locums go for a week or two and then come home and take time off. I recently worked with an anaesthetist who works two weeks and then goes home to Perth to have two weeks off,” Dr Jones said.

Rural and regional towns are mostly serviced by overseas trained doctors who have to work out a 10-year bond in the bush as part of their registration.

But many foreign-born doctors have no anaesthetic or obstetric qualifications, meaning they cannot work in bush hospitals, said Dr Ian Kamerman, president of the Rural Doctors Association.

“A whole lot of towns are serviced by doctors who do not participate in hospital work, they do 9 to 5 in towns like Hay, so the town is often bypassed after hours because doctors at the general practice do not have admitting rights to the hospital,” Dr Kamerman said.

Among the dozens of jobs advertised, locum recruitment services are currently offering a locum job in Hay for $2000 a day as a fly in fly out doctor working 12 day blocks.

Meanwhile, the Rural Bonded Medical Scholarships, a federally funded system bonding medical students to serve six years in regional and rural Australia in return for their scholarship, is failing in its intent because many can serve out their time in outer metropolitan hospitals.

The rural placement is reliant on the District of Workforce Shortage Scheme, a tool used to identify need based on Medicare receipts, but some outer metropolitan areas such as Penrith, Springwood and Heathcote in the Sutherland Shire are listed as DWS, meaning doctors can serve out their six-year bond in a city.

“DWS is now essentially an outer metropolitan workforce program but at the same time a town like Inverell is no longer DWS but after hours it relies on fly in fly out locums because the GPs in the town do not work after hours in the hospital,” Dr Kamerman said.

####