The Georgia-based transportation broker that has been managing medical transportation for many of New Jersey's poorest, sickest patients has seen a steady rise in complaints over late arrivals and other issues, but it still boasts a rate of complaint-free rides at better than 99 percent, records show.



Records provided by the broker, LogistiCare, and kept by the state Department of Human Services, show that complaints about late arrivals rose from just under 12,000 to more than 25,000 in the three years from 2012 through 2014.



Overall complaints nearly doubled, from about 16,000 to 31,800, according to an analysis of the records by NJ Advance Media.



But the company maintains a rate of complaints per trip that is below the state's threshold, representatives say. And it's maintained that rate despite Medicaid enrollment expanding under the Affordable Care Act.



"In a system of increasing complexity, marked by a nearly three-fold increase in the number of members, the one discernible trend is that our percentage of complaint-free rides remains comfortably ahead of state standards," said Lori Bonderowitz, general manager of LogistiCare's New Jersey operations.



LogistiCare's rate of complaints over all trips has risen, but still is well below 1 percent. They peaked at 0.63 percent in April, 2014, the records show.





The company's performance record is an important consideration for state officials, who are preparing to seek bids for a new five-year broker contract worth approximately $165 million a year.



The current contract was to end June 30. The department extended LogistiCare's deal through as late as June 30, 2016, as the state has been slow to produce a formal request for bids. The human services department can cancel the extension with 60 days notice once the new contract is awarded, said spokeswoman Nicole Brossoie.



Under the contract, LogistiCare does not provide the actual rides for Medicaid patients going to doctor's appointments, chemotherapy, dialysis and other planned trips; rather, it orchestrates them through private transportation companies.



The task of getting from point A to point B might be simple, but coordinating that for some of the sickest of New Jersey's 1.7 million Medicaid members is not. Among other things, the broker has to find the most efficient route, track the carrier's performance and ensure that the rider is qualified for service — all while dealing with patients who might need assistance getting in and out of the vehicle, not to mention New Jersey traffic and weather.



LogistiCare says it has saved New Jersey taxpayers millions of dollars through improved coordination of services. Before the 2009 contract, Medicaid patients called transportation companies to schedule service. Now, they call LogistiCare, which has an operations center in Edison employing 200 people.



Circumstances changed significantly over the five years LogistiCare has held the broker contract. It began serving three counties in 2009 and expanded to the whole state about two years later. Then the state opened Medicaid to more residents, growing membership by about 500,000 people.



Between 2012 and 2014, gross trips, which include canceled rides, increased 6.5 percent to 6.7 million, LogistiCare reports show.



According to LogistiCare's reports to the state, late arrivals are by far the most common complaint. Other complaints include no-shows for the provider or patient, suspected fraud and safety issues.



But with so many rides a year, LogistiCare officials and a spokeswoman, Melissa Speir, said the company's performance has been admirable.



"I would challenge you ... to find a company that would have a 99-percent (complaint-free) rate," Speir said.



She noted that LogistiCare lowered its own rule for determining which calls constitute complaints, so that more incidents are investigated and fixed, if necessary.



However, riders and Medicaid advocates, who have been critical of the transportation system in public forums leading up to the new contract, say they've given up complaining in some cases.



"You get to expect a certain level of performance," said Marilyn Mock, social services director for Northgate II, a low-income high-rise in Camden. "If you're used to people being late, that becomes the norm, so they don't complain."



Anthony Phoenix, a resident of Northgate II and the health care Team Leader for Camden Churches Organized for People, said residents and LogistiCare officials have met often about improving service.



One of the main improvements involved making several transportation companies exclusive providers for Northgate. Now that a relationship has been developed, he said, residents say service is better, drivers are more courteous and they benefit with a telephone reminder the day before the ride is scheduled.

Speir said LogistiCare's performance has been on-time 91 percent of the time since January to Northgate and that trips were 99.7 percent complaint-free.



However, Phoenix said the service is not 99-percent complaint-free. "I hesitate to endorse anything above 80 percent," he said.



Tim Darragh may be reached at tdarragh@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @timdarragh. Find NJ.com on Facebook.