Kathy Dench, left, Steve Knox, right, and their mom, Janet Knox, center, stand on the sandbar on the south end of Lake Loveland with fossils they found in that area 50 years ago when the lake was lowered for maintenance. Janet Knox thought of the fossils recently when she learned the lake would be lowered this winter to allow the sandbar to be removed. ( Pamela Johnson / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Kathy Dench and Steve Knox both remember the day, 50 years ago, when they found fossils on the south end of Lake Loveland with their mom, Janet Knox of Loveland. (Pamela Johnson / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Kathy Dench and Steve Knox vividly remember the day, about 50 years ago, when they were exploring the lake bed on the south end of Lake Loveland and found shell fossils.

"It was really fun," said Kathy, a Loveland native and retired teacher. "I think we were getting sand for our sand box."

Their find, more than a dozen fossils, earned the then grade-schoolers a picture in the local newspaper and stuck with them as a fun childhood adventure. For Steve, it launched an interest in the rocks and land on which we live.

The memories came rushing back to their mom, Janet Knox, when she recently read that water levels at Lake Loveland will be lowered this winter to remove the large sandbar deposited on the edge of the lake by the 2013 floods.

After all, that is the same spot she and her children found the fossils all those years ago during another time the lake was lowered for maintenance.

At the time, experts estimated that the fossilized shells dated back millions of years, which fits with the history of the area.

"This whole area used to be a sea," noted Roger Schlack, member of the Fort Collins Rockhounds, a group that searches for special rocks and fossils.

That was millions of years ago, before the sea dried out, during an era when tectonic plates shifted and formed the Rocky Mountains, long before settlers and Native Americans, and even longer before the Front Range as we know it today.

But pieces of that time still remain throughout Northern Colorado.

Advertisement

Schlack said members of his group have found clam shells in an area behind the north Loveland Walmart and have found ancient rocks north of Fort Collins, past Ted's Place.

And of course, there are fossilized shells in the aptly named Fossil Ridge Open Space. However, people are not allowed to disturb or remove fossils on any Larimer County open space. If they do, they face a $50 fine.

Some public lands, however, do allow people to find and keep certain kinds of fossils. The Colorado Bureau of Reclamation allows finders to keep "reasonable amounts" of invertebrate fossils and petrified wood from Reclamation properties. But fossil hunters are prohibited from collecting vertebrates or archeological finds without a special permit, according to written rules.

As time passes, however, it becomes more and more difficult to find public lands on which to search, places that aren't developed or protected.

For Kathy and Steve, they were just eight and seven in 1964, the year they believe they found the fossils, which remained stored in their mom's home — not outside in the rock garden like originally mentioned in the 1960s newspaper article.

Their father, the late Forrest Knox, had told the family stories before they went to the lake that day of finding fossils in the lake 20 years earlier, in the 1940s, at another time when water levels were lower.

"I never took him too seriously until I happened to start finding them myself," Janet Knox said, according to the 1960s newspaper article. "Some had to be chipped away from the sandstone. But some were on the beach or in the water."

Pamela Johnson: 970-669-5050, ext. 526, johnsonp@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/RHPamelaJ.