6 Investigates introduced you to Dr. Michael Pendleton last year when we found people sleeping on the ground outside his Weber Road practice. We checked back.

Pendleton says there’s still a problem and it’s only getting worse. An internist, Pendleton begins most days by picking up the trash which litters his office lawn.

It’s an odd job for a medical doctor but Pendleton says it’s just a part of the daily routine. Hundreds still come to his office each week, prompting critics to argue Pendleton is cutting corners.

But Pendleton says he is meeting a need left by a healthcare vacuum created by these three factors:

a growing uninsured or underinsured population

funding shortfalls which shift the burden of care to County Health Districts

low reimbursement rates for physicians

We asked where Pendleton’s patients – who number in the hundreds each week and who are mostly adult with either chronic illnesses or injuries – where they would go if he chose not to see them.

“I’m not sure,” was his reply. And then, “ I think the large need for primary care, does drive that engine."

Dr. Mary Dahlen Peterson of the Nueces County Medical Society, agrees. “I think we do have a shortage of primary care physicians. Especially, adult primary care."

Peterson also noted another trend: With stroke and mental health needs on the rise, Corpus Christi is increasingly short on Neurologists and Psychiatrists, too.

And the Texas Medical Association tells us that about 6 million Texans are not insured. That’s the highest in the nation.

Combine that with Texas’ decision to opt-out of Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act and, according to a TMA board member, and it puts a “severe economic burden to the state as well as these patients.”

Not to mention, Medicaid reimbursement rates are so low some doctors cannot afford to care for Medicaid patients. Pendleton says any primary care doctor or internist must choose another motivation for staying in business.

“(They) may not get the glory but they will get some satisfaction. And it'll help the community."