KentuckyOne Health's parent company said Friday it plans to cut up to 1,500 jobs across the nation, but hasn't yet determined where the reductions will be made — and local officials say they don't plan "large-scale" cuts in Kentucky.

Denver-based Catholic Health Initiatives says it's making the cuts because of "lower than expected operating and financial performance in the first quarter of the 2015 fiscal year."

CHI officials said in a statement that the cuts represent less than 2 percent of their total workforce of more than 90,500. They said laid-off workers will receive severance packages, career guidance and outplacement services to help with job searches.

"CHI has not yet determined which positions will be eliminated, primarily focusing on administrative and support staff. That process is ongoing and will continue through the end of January 2015," officials said. "These reductions are being undertaken to sustain and strengthen CHI's mission to build healthier communities and to ensure that the vital services provided by the organization are protected and sustained."

In response to questions from The Courier-Journal, KentuckyOne officials released a statement Friday as well: "As you are aware KentuckyOne went through a significant workforce reduction this past spring. As a result, we are not planning another large scale-reduction in force."

KentuckyOne laid off about 500 people in February to help close a $218 million deficit in a rapidly-changing healthcare industry marked by job cuts across the nation. At the time, officials also said the company would not fill 200 vacancies to further reduce costs.

KentuckyOne, whose majority owner is CHI, was formed in 2012 by the merger of Jewish Hospital & St. Mary's HealthCare and St. Joseph Health System of Lexington.

KentuckyOne Chief Executive Officer Ruth Brinkley attributed the changes largely to a trend away from sick care, which revolves around hospitals, to a greater focus on wellness and disease prevention. She said at the time that the trend preceded the Affordable Care Act, but has been reinforced by the federal law. She also said hospitals face declining reimbursements from Medicare and Medicaid.

Layoffs are not limited to KentuckyOne. Challenger, Gray & Christmas, a Chicago-based global outplacement and career transitioning firm, has seen a rise in healthcare job cuts in recent years, with 52,637 healthcare job cuts in 2013, compared with 27,373 in 2011.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1zKjZDl