Finding that perfect hostess gift

hello

Here are some holiday host or hostess gifts that cost $25 to $75: Top row: Musketeer dish sets. Middle row, from left, French chicken roaster, Oyster subscription, swimmer speaker, Stubble & ëStache Beard Care Starter Kit. Bottom row: Cheese and crackers set. Photo by Mark Finkenstaedt for The Washington Post

No one wants to show up to a party empty-handed. But when it comes to host or hostess gifts, creativity often gives way to dressing up a bottle of wine. Not this holiday season! We have gift ideas in a range of prices that will help your hosts keep the parties going all year long.

Less than $25

Personalized notecards (starting at $11)

Writing out thank-yous just got a lot more fun. Choose from more than 30 designs that can be personalized with a name, initials or a photo. Available in mini or traditional sizes. www.peartreegreetings.com

Hallmark wine bottle carrier and tags ($15)

Add a little pizazz to a classic host gift with this reusable bag that's two presents in one. The snowflake wine tags can be used right away to decorate a plain glass and identify everyone's drink. Local Hallmark stores







Ballerina flat slippers ($26)

After a day of preparing for guests, sometimes all a hostess wants to do is relax. Help her out with these cozy slippers that are just as festive as she is. www.dearfoams.com

3-in-1 soft coasters ($15 for 4)

Solve two constant party challenges: helping guests remember which glass is theirs and getting everyone to use a coaster. These handy reusable coasters slip onto the bottom of a wineglass and have a spot to write each guest's name in chalk. (Chalk pencil sold separately.) www.greatusefulstuff.com

Bamboo napkin rings ($25 for 4)

These napkin rings serve double duty on a dinner table. Each one holds a napkin and features a mini chalkboard to write the name of each guest. (Chalk pencil sold separately.) www.greatusefulstuff.com

Red riding hood and wizard coat hooks ($18 each)

Kids will be excited to welcome friends with these hooks that will hold their coats and bags. Choose from 10 characters illustrated by artist Anne-Françoise Carouge. www.quelobjet.com

- Photo by Mark Finkenstaedt for The Washington Post Here are some holiday host or hostess gifts that cost less than From5: Clockwise from left, personalized notecards, Hallmark wine bottle carrier and tags, ballerina flat slippers, 3-in-1 soft coasters, bamboo napkin rings, red riding hood and wizard coat hooks.





From $26 TO $75

French Chicken Roaster ($70)

One thing every host knows is there is never enough serving ware. This roaster adds fun to a table and can be used to hold a whole chicken, serve a tasty casserole or pass around a party snack mix. revol.bridgecatalog.com

Musketeer dish sets ($30 each)

Make the kids' table special with a dish set illustrated by artist Anne-Françoise Carouge. Each set is available in six characters, includes a microwaveable and dishwasher-safe bowl and plate, and comes with a fairy tale that explains the character's origin. www.quelobjet.com

Oyster subscription ($10 a month; $25 for poster)

Winter is the perfect time to settle in with a book or 500,000. The "Netflix for books" offers a range of e-books that your favorite person can curl up with. Pair a monthly gift subscription ($10 for one month, $30 for three months or $120 for the year) with a limited-edition poster: Choose from "Moby-Dick," "The Secret Garden," "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" and "Peter Pan," available for $25 until Dec. 14. www.oysterbooks.com

Swimmer speaker ($60)

Looking for a present for the cool kid at the party? Give the gift of music that goes anywhere. This Bluetooth speaker streams music from a phone or tablet and comes with two ends: a flexible extension that can loop around a backpack or bike handle, or a suction cup to stick to a shower or bedroom wall. Bed Bath & Beyond, Apple stores or www.boommovement.com

Stubble & 'Stache Beard Care Starter Kit ($54)

Whether your host sports a year-round beard or is just holding on to his "No-Shave November" growth, these two products, face wash plus conditioner and moisturizer, will help him pamper his face. It firms the skin, softens the beard and supports a local business, as it's made in Alexandria, Virginia. www.stubbleandstache.com

Cheese and crackers set ($56)

No party is complete without a cheese and cracker spread. This two-piece set comes with a tray for cheese and a curved dish for bread and crackers. Use chalk to label the cheeses, write a message or draw a fun design. While it looks like slate, this set is made of microwave-, oven-, refrigerator- and dishwasher-safe porcelain. revol.bridgecatalog.com

More than $75

- Photo by Mark Finkenstaedt for The Washington Post Here are some holiday host or hostess gifts that cost more than $75: Top row: Warby Parker glasses, Normal earbuds. Middle row: Smithsonian castle clock, Itís 5 Oíclock cocktail set. Bottom row: brass tic-tac-toe set, ceramic dachshund bookends.

Warby Parker glasses (starting at $95)

Give the gift of sight. Warby Parker glasses come in men's and women's optical and sunglass styles. But they aren't just for the fashionable: Each pair counts toward donations to Vision Spring, a nonprofit group that helps train people in developing countries to give basic exams and to sell eyewear at affordable prices. Purchase a gift card for the value of one pair. www.warbyparker.com

Smithsonian Castle Clock ($175)

Bring a little piece of Washington to your host or hostess. The glass clock is modeled after the circular window between the Smithsonian Castle's north front towers. Mouth-blown and hand-engraved by Simon Pearce, it will look elegant on a desk, bookshelf or coffee table. www.smithsonianstore.com

Brass tic-tac-toe set ($195)

What's a party without games? This marble board, with brass X's and O's, adds a classy spin to a scratchpad standard. www.jonathanadler.com

Normal earbuds ($199)

These earphones are as personal as your host's taste in music. They're tailored to fit the wearer's ears, using 3-D printing technology. The recipient takes an ear selfie using the Normal phone app and chooses a color. The earphones are printed and coated with a soft-touch material, then shipped in a personalized case. www.nrml.com

It's 5 O'clock Cocktail Set ($100, cups sold separately)

Here's a cheeky take on the classic party cup. This punch bowl (matching cups are $15 each) is made of porcelain and can hold warm or cold drinks. revol.bridgecatalog.com

Ceramic Dachshund Bookends ($150)

Add new meaning to the term "dog-eared books" with these funny and functional bookends. They're sure to be a conversation starter year-round. www.jonathanadler.com

- Photo by Mark Finkenstaedt for The Washington Post The Ride-On Race Car from www.quelobjet.com would be a hit for young and old at a holiday party.

Ride-On Race Car ($165)

Entertain the kids at the party and provide plenty of adorable photo-ops with this 1920s-inspired race car. The steel frame is 30 inches long and weighs 12 pounds. www.quelobjet.com