As a practicing obstetrician-gynecologist in California, I have long been concerned with the failings of programs intended to help women in need access quality health care. I am increasingly concerned that the expansion of Medicaid through the new health care law, known as Obamacare, will exacerbate the system’s existing problems, and make it even more difficult to obtain medical care at reasonable rates as the strain on the program grows.

Expanding Medicaid is neither caring nor affordable. Despite the program’s high cost to taxpayers, it provides patients with inadequate care. There are a number of reasons it falls short, but one in particular stands out: low provider re-imbursement rates which discourage doctors from accepting Medicaid patients. This in turn leads to poor continuity and quality of care and increased fraud.

I’ve witnessed the problem first-hand while taking care of pregnant women covered by Medi-Cal, California's Medicaid program. I have sometimes felt alone in treating these high-need patients, since Medi-Cal, as it currently stands, covers only obstetrical aspects of medicine. My colleagues in other specialties do not take Medicaid, which often fails to cover the cost of care provided. Should one of my patients have a non-obstetrical problem, such as an abscess on her tonsils or recurrent loss of consciousness, it is unlikely she will find an appropriate provider that accepts Medi-Cal in a timely manner.

[See a collection of political cartoons on Obamacare.]

Although Medicaid is a compromised and inadequate program, we still pay an enormous cost for it. It is the single-largest item in most state budgets. In California, it’s projected that about 40 percent of the nearly 4 million who are currently uninsured will be on public insurance by 2016. This will inevitably add pressure to our already strained budget, further hindering our ability to support and develop other programs which provide a better education for our children, ensure that our neighborhoods are safe or protect the environment. Similar scenarios will undoubtedly play out across the United States.

In short, the plan to expand Medicaid is fraught with hazard and should be cause for great apprehension. Fortunately, there are better options available, some of which are outlined in the new Mercatus Center book "The Economics of Medicaid: Assessing the Costs and Consequences." I contributed a chapter based on my experience working with patients, in which I argue that increasing our reliance on Medicaid is a step backwards. And a diverse set of health care policy experts analyze new approaches with the potential to liberate those in poverty from low-quality care.

We must address Medicaid’s bureaucratic inflexibility, which prevents recipients from seeking out the care that is best for them. Instead, Medicaid should be financed as a block grant by the federal government, giving states better flexibility to care for their own residents. Allowing the poor to use direct funding to shop for their own insurance on the private market would enable them to access the same health care that is available to the rest of us. Market forces should be brought to bear on the industry in order to improve patient health outcomes, hold providers accountable for quality, and foster innovation and cost cutting.

[See a collection of political cartoons on the Catholic contraception controversy.]

It is important to remember that health insurance is only a small piece of the puzzle. The provision of prenatal care, for example, is just one factor in the outcome of my patient's pregnancy. Poverty, unpredictable employment, minimal education and other social stressors have an even larger role. The short time these women in poverty spend with a health care provider can be like putting a Band-Aid on the gaping wound of a harsh daily life.

Similarly, on the national scale, socioeconomic factors such as educational opportunity, neighborhood safety, and income are all crucial determinants of people's health. We must ask ourselves if sacrificing funding for programs critical to our well-being to expand an already-failing Medicaid program is money well spent. State and federal governments consumed with paying for medical bills may not be able to provide all of the services that people in poverty rely on—and which may one day allow them to escape poverty altogether.