Think Obamacare will cover your next colonoscopy or flu shot? Think again.

Depending on how the procedure is coded, you very well could receive a bill.

A girlfriend got dinged with charges for doctor’s office visits when she took her daughters to get flu shots last fall. Both my mother and a friend were charged balances on their mammograms. And for a recent colonoscopy, I had to push an appeal with my insurance company to pay some $500 owed my doctor and an outpatient surgery center.

Under the Affordable Care Act, insurance companies are required to fully cover A- and B-level preventive services recommended by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, which include annual physicals, screenings and immunizations. For those services, consumers theoretically don’t have to first meet their out-of-pocket deductibles or pay co-pays or co-insurance; those preventive services are covered 100 percent. But in reality, it’s often a different story.

In my case, my G.I. doctor’s office -- though I’d tried to head this off beforehand -- coded my colonoscopy as diagnostic with a “history of polyps,” based on a benign polyp removed in my initial colonoscopy screening five years earlier. The surgery center followed her lead and coded accordingly. But the anesthesiologist coded the procedure as a preventive screening, so my insurance company paid her in full, with no cost-sharing for me.

After my insurer received my appeal, a reviewer called and asked me if I’d withdraw it, saying his hands were tied because of the way the procedure was coded. Back down? No way. I was ready to take my appeal to the mat, especially after I learned how arbitrary these things are. If I‘d had the colonoscopy at a hospital, for example, it likely would‘ve been coded as a screening, because that‘s how hospitals routinely screen it. I also learned that this issue with colonoscopies is not uncommon, with other consumers’ doctors agreeing to refile claims with screening versus diagnostic codes.

My surgery center told me upfront that it turns over unpaid accounts to collection agencies after 90 days. Bring it on. I have a perfect credit history and was prepared to take that hit, if I had to take one on principle. Thankfully, it appears my insurance company paid both outstanding bills. Or, maybe those providers wrote off the respective balances. I’ll never know. It’s all such a bureaucratic mess.

Consequently, it came as no surprise to me when I recently received results of a study that basically indicates consumer-driven health care has little impact on lowering health care prices.

Although 43 percent of annual health care spending is for services in which consumers could shop for based on price, less than 7 percent of total spending is paid out-of-pocket by consumers for shoppable services, according to the new analysis from the Washington, D.C.-based Health Care Cost Institute (HCCI).

"While we strongly believe that consumers are entitled to price information and to know what they are going to pay prior to any health care service, we shouldn't rely on price transparency as a way to create savvy shoppers to save health care dollars," says Amanda Frost, an HCCI researcher who authored the report.

Frost and her colleagues say more attention should be paid on directly engaging providers and payers -- both insurers and employers -- since gains from consumer price shopping are limited.

HCCI's report, "Spending on Shoppable Services in Health Care," examined 2011 claims data for people under age 65 with employer-sponsored health insurance. Researchers looked at total spending on health care services that can be scheduled in advance, including flu shots, non-emergency hip or knee replacement, colonoscopies, urinalysis and blood and strep tests. The analysis didn’t include prescription drugs and devices.

Study highlights include:

* In 2011, about 43 percent of the $524.2 billion spent on health care services for commercially insured people was considered shoppable.

* About 15 percent of the total spent on health care for the commercially insured -- nearly $81 billion --- was spent out of pocket.

* $27.7 billion, about 7 percent of the total, was spent out of pocket on shoppable services.

* Most out-of-pocket dollars (44 percent) were spent on shoppable ambulatory doctor services.

Researchers found more price variation in inpatient services than in outpatient services.

The authors say shopping for knee and hip replacement is not a bad idea but it really depends on where you live. A knee replacement in Palm Bay, Fla., for example, costs $16,822 more than the same surgery 180 miles away in Miami.

The researchers say that payers, employers and other stakeholders should focus on targeting spending more directly. "Consumer shopping is important but it should not be at the fore of delivery system design. Since providers are setting the prices, it makes more sense to directly engage them and payers because they are in the best position to exert downward market pressure on prices," says HCCI's David Newman.

Mind Your Own Busness @ home and @ the office.