Once again congressional Republicans are trying to manipulate the courts into overturning health care reforms that they have been unable to block in the normal political process.

Conservative lawyers backed by Republicans got a well-deserved rebuke in June when the Supreme Court ruled that people in every state are eligible for tax-credit subsidies to help them buy insurance on new exchanges, regardless of whether the exchanges are set up by the state or the federal government.

This week, however, House Republicans got a court to allow them to move forward on a baseless lawsuit they filed to block subsidies that keep deductibles and co-payments low for more than five million low-income people. The Affordable Care Act requires insurance companies to reduce cost-sharing for people buying health care on exchanges based on their incomes, with the federal government reimbursing the insurers for the cost.

The suit was filed last November by the Republican-dominated House, which argued that the Obama administration had violated the Constitution by providing cost-sharing subsidies that Congress had never specifically approved. It seeks to stop the administration from distributing some $136 billion to the insurers over a decade.

Photo

The administration contends that it has the authority under the reform law to distribute the money without getting a specific annual appropriation, and that it is simply carrying out the law.

Before the suit could proceed, the House had to show that it had standing to sue. Many legal experts argued that the plaintiffs could not meet that requirement, since the House is only one chamber, not the entire Congress, and that courts are reluctant to intervene in political battles between branches of government.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Judge Rosemary Collyer of the United States District Court, who was appointed by President George W. Bush, however, ruled on Wednesday that the House could proceed despite those objections.

She said that the House was sufficiently affected to have standing to sue, even without the Senate joining in. And she said the lawsuit was the only way for the House to preserve its constitutional power to control federal spending. The White House said it would appeal the decision and expected the courts to dismiss it.

The judge said she was not ruling on the merits of the case, which she will determine in a later proceeding. In truth, this lawsuit seems to be an effort to get around a legislative defeat — basically a typical, garden-variety political dispute — that has no business being in the court system. If the Republicans want to end all cost-sharing subsidies, they could make that explicit by rewriting the health reform law.

A few years ago Jack Balkin, a Yale Law School professor, described how “off-the-wall” legal arguments, which most mainstream lawyers think clearly violate legal precedents, have been taken up and legitimized by judges sympathetic to them. It would be a travesty if this lawsuit ends up creating the same havoc as other baseless challenges to the Affordable Care Act, which took up enormous resources and time, only to be struck down by the Supreme Court.