Party City Holdco Inc. booked better-than-expected sales growth at existing stores in the fourth quarter, thanks to a solid Halloween season, though the company warned sales may slow this year.

The Elmsford, N.Y.-based party-supply retailer, which operates about 900 stores across North America, went public last April. The company benefited from the Disney movie "Frozen" as party planners snapped up themed supplies and costumes, but that boost has faded and sales have slowed.

Like many other recently public companies, Party City's stock has stumbled since its IPO--erasing more than half its value through Wednesday's close. In premarket trading Thursday, shares took back some ground and rose 5%.

In the fourth quarter, Party City logged 2.8% sales growth at existing stores, a faster clip than the 1.5% rate analysts expected. The company credited a strong Halloween season for the better-than-expected results. Some analysts suggested the latest "Star Wars" movie release would provide a modest lift, but the impact isn't in the same league as Frozen, according to J.P. Morgan analyst Mark Beck, and same-store sales slowed sharply from the 7.6% rate notched a year earlier.

Party City cautioned Thursday that comparable sales would be flat to up slightly this year and offered revenue guidance that fell short of analysts' expectations. The company's earnings guidance was in line with estimates.

Chief Executive James Harrison said the company intends to beef up its store base this year and increase its international presence while continuing to fold in two businesses it bought last year--a plastics manufacturer and a costume maker.

Over all for the quarter, Party City reported a profit of $86.5 million, up from $79 million a year earlier. On a per-share basis, earnings declined to 72 cents from 83 cents due to a larger share count.

Total revenue slipped 2.8% to $781.5 million. Analysts projected 75 cents in profit per share and $783.2 million in revenue, according to Thomson Reuters.

For the year, the company forecast $1.17 to $1.25 in adjusted earnings per share, bracketing the $1.19 analysts are looking for. Sales are expected to come in between $2.35 billion and $2.42 billion, versus the $2.44 billion average analyst estimate.

Write to Lisa Beilfuss at lisa.beilfuss@wsj.com

More from MarketWatch