THE BIG SPLIT

Was Obamacare responsible for the breakup of Captain and Tennille? Known for their seventies hits Love Will Keep Us Together and Muskrat Love, Toni Tennille, 73, filed for divorce from musical mate Daryl Dragon, 71, in their home state of Arizona after 39 years of marriage. Among the legal documents pertaining to the pending divorce was a notice dealing with health care. In 2009, Tennille blogged that her husband had been diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease. In 2011, she said that her husband’s condition had worsened to the point that he could not go out in public, which has some people speculating that his health-insurance coverage would be better if they split. Despite the divorce announcement, Tennille and Dragon still live together in the same house.

Source: WSJ MarketWatch

SHOE SHINES

Despite his arrest for DUI and other charges, Adidas is standing by Justin Bieber, for the time being. The shoe company told TMZ, “Nothing is changing in our relationship with Mr. Bieber at this time.” Bieber signed an endorsement deal with Adidas in 2012 along with then-girlfriend Selena Gomez, who are the celebrity faces for the firm’s NEO line of sneakers. No salary details of the Adidas deal were revealed. Bieber also has endorsement contracts with Beat by Dr. Dre headphones, Proactiv acne cream and several other products, none of whom have yet announced they are pulling out of the deals.

Source: TMZ

WALKING AWAY

Retiring from The Tonight Show wasn’t any easier for Jay Leno the second time around. CBS News has released a preview clip from this Sunday’s edition of 60 Minutes in which Leno admits that walking away from the late-night talkfest wasn’t his call. “It’s not my decision and I think I probably would have stayed if we didn’t have an extremely qualified, young guy [Jimmy Fallon] ready to jump in.” Leno also said that he hasn’t completely forgiven NBC for pushing him out of the late-night franchise the first time in 2009: “I was blindsided,” he says. “[NBC executives said] ‘You’re out’ and I went, ‘Okay’.” Leno’s last episode of The Tonight Show airs February 6. New host Jimmy Fallon takes over on February 17.

Source: Zap2it

ROYAL RUMBLE

The Denver Broncos and Seattle Seahawks won’t be the only ones clashing heads on Super Bowl Sunday. U.S. president Barack Obama will face off with Fox News host Bill O’Reilly in an interview that will be featured in Fox’s pregame show on Feb. 2 (the full interview will air one day later on The O’Reilly Factor). Obama has made a tradition of granting a yearly interview to the broadcaster of the Super Bowl. O’Reilly previously sat down with the U.S. President in 2011.

Source: Mashable

L’AMOUR PROTECTION

French president Francois Hollande may be miserable about having an alleged affair with an actress thrust into the public eye, but it’s working out great for a motorcycle helmet manufacturer. The helmet company Motoblouz has publicly thanked Hollande for wearing their Dexter helmet en route to his alleged trysts with French actress Julie Gayet. Motoblouz CEO Thomas Thumerelle took out a quarter-page ad in the national news daily Liberation this week to personally thank Hollande. Reads the ad copy: “Thank you Mr. President – for having used our helmet for your personal protection. We salute your choice of a French-made helmet for your scooter outings. And you will find other models on our website for your future escapades. You will also see that we have a collection of women’s jackets, which would make an ideal Valentine’s Day gift.”

Source: France24

METHOD MAN

Actor Aaron Eckhart says he once pretended his child died to help him prepare for an intense film role. The I, Frankenstein star says he employed the dark mental imagery to film the 2010 drama Rabbit Hole, in which he and Nicole Kidman played parents coping with the death of their young son. During an appearance on The Howard Stern Show, Eckhart admitted he even attended support groups for grieving parents. “It’s very sensitive to go in there, of course it is,” said Eckhart. “The gathering is very quiet. There’s 10 people, couples. Their children had passed away very recently. You’re sitting in sort of a circle.” For the record, Eckhart has no children in real life.

Source: BANG Showbiz

Report Typo/Error