Additionally, finish line is now moved to 13th and Pearl streets

This was the projected run course map released in June when it was first announced that Boulder would be hosting an Ironman Triathlon in 2014 (Courtesy Ironman)

Race organizers have announced that a short section of the running course for the upcoming 2014 Boulder Ironman triathlon will be rerouted to avoid treading on recently-repaired flood-damaged areas.

After receiving City Council approval, World Triathlon Corp. this past summer announced that Boulder on Aug. 3 would host a full-length triathlon as part of the company's 10-race Ironman series.

The announced course consisted of a 2.4-mile swim in Boulder Reservoir followed by a 112-mile bike ride that will pass through three counties before concluding at Boulder High School and finally a marathon run completely on the Boulder Creek Trail.

Following the devastating impacts of September's historic flood however, organizers reassessed the course, according to an update posted Thursday morning on the Ironman Boulder Facebook page. The cycling course was deemed OK, but the running course is facing some tweaks.

"We are working hard on that now and hope to have a new course to announce by end of February," Race Director Dave Christen wrote in the Facebook update. "It takes time to plan and logistically organize a new route and we need some more time to hammer out the details and make sure we really prepare well."

Christen said the eastern-most portion of the course, where it continues along the Boulder Creek Path parallel with Pearl Parkway before crossing 55th Street and circling back westward, has been eliminated. Crews have been performing flood-related environmental work there, and Christen said organizers felt it was best to steer clear even though the race won't take place for eight months.

"We want to cooperate with the agencies in town and make sure we respect everyone's space," he said, noting that city officials, including City Manager Jane Brautigam, have been a pleasure to work with on the race. "We don't want to trample on everyone's work zones. I think it's just better for us to stay away."

Christen estimated that the reroute will cost the course 4 miles, or about 2 miles per lap. While the new route has not been finalized, two areas where Christen felt would be ideal to add some length are north of Pearl Parkway, in the general direction of Valmont Bike Park, and also further south along the Skunk Creek Path near the intersection of Baseline Road and Broadway.

"We're thinking of going a little further down there near Baseline," he said. "There are some good pathways and it kind of goes alongside the (University of Colorado) property so it kind of showcases the CU grounds."

Boulder crews are working with the Army Corps of Engineers to improve wetland and prairie habitat along 4,000 feet of Goose Creek between Foothills Parkway and Cottonwood Lake, located near the southwest corner of Pearl Parkway and 55th, according to city spokesman Mike Banuelos.

The project is "substantially complete" and is expected to be finished by the end of January, reopening the entire area to public use, Banuelos said, but city officials appreciate the consideration of Ironman organizers when planning the running route. All multi-use paths along the work area are already open to the public.

Dieter Bruhn, president of the Boulder Triathlon Club, said he has already signed up to run in the Boulder Ironman. He has previously taken part in Ironman triathlons in Arizona and Cozumel, Mexico and said he is excited to try to improve on his time in his own back yard.

As for the planned rerouting of the running course, Bruhn, who volunteered with the Boulder Mudslingers group on flood cleanup projects, said he fully supports race organizers' decision to do so. He noted this will be Boulder's first Ironman, so it's not as though tradition will be broken when the course is updated.

"I think a lot of us forget how badly certain areas were impacted by the flood," he said.

Bruhn said he was very pleased to hear of another slight tweak to the course announced in Thursday's Facebook update: the triathlon's finish line has been moved from near 13th Street and Canyon Boulevard to 13th just south of Pearl Street, alongside the Wells Fargo building.

"Just having Ironman coming to Boulder, it seems like the natural place to have it," he said. "Having it finish in the center of town is going to make it that much better. I think it's going to draw a big crowd."

Ironman already hosts three shorter events in Boulder known as the Boulder TriSeries. Industry organization Triathlon Business International is holding an online vote for best events around the world and the Boulder TriSeries is a finalist in the best race series category.

Votes can be cast online at https://surveymonkey.com/s/B3XFHCV through Tuesday.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Joe Rubino at 303-473-1328, rubinoj@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/RubinoJC.