Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump speaks during a campaign event, Monday, April 4, 2016, in La Crosse, Wis. For months Trump has dominated the political scene like no other. But listen to endangered Senate Republicans as they campaign for re-election and you might not even know he exists. (Photo: Paul Sancya, AP)

The Wisconsin primary election on Tuesday is drawing huge attention from pundits and the press. Having twice lived in Wisconsin, I have witnessed intense competitions there, from watching Sen. Joe McCarthy's anti-Communist hearings on TV when I lived in La Crosse, to ushering at Green Bay Packers' games while in graduate school at Marquette in Milwaukee.

Studying about politics in the Badger state was equally fascinating, where I delved into the "Progressive" reform movement of Republican icon "Fighting Bob" La Follette and the role of the socialist mayors of Milwaukee, who held sway over the Beer Capital of America for five decades, from 1910 to 1960.

Since Wisconsin pioneered the political primary election process, it seems only appropriate that its role in the presidential selection process has been amazingly consequential in past years. In 1960, Wisconsin was a key showdown state in the race between Sens. John Kennedy and Hubert Humphrey, with the former's victory part of the demonstration that a Catholic could be a serious candidate for the nomination and election in November.

The year 1976 was likewise a key battleground in the Ronald Reagan insurgency to deny the nomination to the un-elected sitting president,Gerald Ford. The latter came out ahead, retaining the momentum that allowed him to be the eventual Republican candidate.

But for me the most impactful and consequential Wisconsin primary was the 1968 Democratic race. President Lyndon Johnson had seemed to be on course for renomination and likely election to a second full term in the White House. Having succeeded to the presidency in November 1963 when Kennedy was assassinated, Johnson had overwhelmed Barry Goldwater in the 1964 race, and was constitutionally eligible to run again. With a unified southern Democratic base and a legacy of passing civil rights legislation that attracted northern liberal and working-class Democrats, Johnson seemed a lock as 1967 ended.

I was in my fourth month of Vietnamese language training at the State Department Foreign Service Institute in Washington, but uncertain if I would really be deployed since intense negotiations were underway in Paris to end the war. Suddenly, that war burst into the political process on Jan. 30 with start of the Tet offensive. When Viet Cong forces were able to penetrate the American embassy in Saigon, despite the presence of more than a half a million U.S. troops in the country, it sent a political paroxysm across the country.

Suddenly, the outcome of the conflict became uncertain and the sacrifice of young American soldiers seemed pointless to many. And when Walter Cronkite, the avuncular CBS news anchor sighed during his broadcast and expressed uncertainty about the war being winnable, Johnson famously said to his political advisors that "...if I've lost Cronkite, I've lost middle America."

As protests on campus and anti-draft rallies grew in size and intensity (dissidents would subsequently blow up an ROTC building on the University of Wisconsin campus in Madison), pressure grew for an effort within the Democratic Party for a candidate to give voice to these dissident feelings. Into this vortex stepped Sen. Eugene McCarthy, who started to attract large gatherings.

As the April 2 Wisconsin primary approached, the unthinkable suddenly loomed. It appeared from party polls that McCarthy would beat Johnson. With an apparent deep-seated desire to not be seen as losing that election and re-nomination, Johnson stunned the country when he went on national television on March 31 to announce that he would not seek re-election.

McCarthy did win that Wisconsin primary by almost 20 points, but eventually could not deny the nomination to his fellow Minnesotan, Vice President Hubert Humphrey, at the party convention in Chicago that was beset with violent protests. The tumult within the Democratic Party and conflict over policy on Vietnam opened the way for Richard Nixon's political resurrection and victory in November.

A week after the election I boarded a plane for Saigon and the start of my six-year experience in the war zone. It is impossible to know what might have happened to the negotiations that were underway early in 1968 to achieve a cease fire in Vietnam had Johnson remained in the race and been re-elected to the Oval Office.

What is clear, however, is that 1968 Wisconsin primary set off a chain of events that represents one of the most turbulent periods in recent American political history, culminating six years later with the fall of Saigon, Watergate and Nixon's resignation, which I personally witnessed in the East Room of the White House.

Others will have to assess the impact of the 2016 Wisconsin primary. But one interesting aspect of this year's contest is that one party has a socialist candidate (recalling all those Milwaukee mayors), while the other party has a candidate who is endeavoring to attract the same working-class demographic group that kept those socialist mayors in office for 50 years.

KENNETH QUINN is president of the World Food Prize and former ambassador to Cambodia. Contact: www.worldfoodprize.org

Ambassador Kenneth Quinn, president, The World Food Prize Foundation (Photo: Special to the Register)

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1RUFVWy