Topics: 50 Cent, courtney kemp agboh, curtis jackson, Power, starz, TV, Entertainment News

Curtis Jackson, better known as the rapper 50 Cent, is a man of many talents. He came to prominence in the early 2000s as a corner kid turned rap artist, climbing an uncertain path to success perhaps best encapsulated by the title of his breakout album, “Get Rich or Die Tryin’.” “In Da Club” and “P.I.M.P.” are club bangers that define the first few years of the 21st century, making lines like “we’re going to party like / it’s your birthday” into standard-issue bro refrains. His skill at writing rhymes brought him to the limelight; his astonishing success has kept him there.

As the title of that 2003 album suggests, the tension between success and survival is a potent one for 50 Cent. In 2000, the fledgling rapper was shot nine times at close range—a remnant of his past as a criminal rearing its head as he attempted to make a living on the right side of the law. Other rappers with similar life experiences have shed their hood trappings with gusto; Jay Z, for example, once a street drug dealer, is now every inch the well-heeled, white-shoe businessman. 50 Cent is somewhere between getting rich and dying trying. He’s got the success and the fame, but his creative instincts seem to return, again and again, to the person he didn’t end up becoming—a career criminal that died at the wrong end of a gun.

Perhaps as a result of that obsession, 50 Cent has turned away from music. His fifth studio album, “Animal Ambition,” failed to make a dent with either critics or listeners, and the long-awaited “Street King Immortal” has been delayed for four years. Instead, he’s turned to film and television. He starred in a roman à clef about his own life, “Get Rich or Die Tryin’,” in 2005. And last year, Starz debuted “Power,” an original TV series from the network that features Jackson as an executive producer and recurring cast member. The show’s main creative force is Courtney Kemp Agboh, who worked, most notably, on “The Good Wife.” 50 Cent brings the star power. In Season 1, his character, Kanan, played a restless, imprisoned drug kingpin, threatening the happiness of Ghost (Omari Hardwick). In Season 2, debuting June 6, Kanan’s finally out of prison. I caught up with the rapper to talk about the transition from rap to cable TV, what appeals to him about telling this particular story, and the “Empire” business model.

One of the things that interested me about the story of “Power” is that you’re playing someone who has been a prison inmate. That’s a story about this criminal sort of life that seems like the “die trying” part of “Get Rich or Die Tryin’,” not the “get rich” part. Is that one of the reasons this appealed to you?

The story itself was created by communication between myself and Courtney Kemp [Agboh]. So a lot of the characters in the story are portions or behaviors from real people that I’ve come across in my life. Courtney, it wouldn’t be what it is without Courtney. Because she designed it, and even the pace of the first season is her creative choice. That allowed you to focus on other areas outside of what the person’s life choices were—career-wise, or for financial situations. They allowed you to be more invested in Ghost’s struggle, about if he’s done things the right way. It offers compassion, because people see him not wanting to be a part of a lifestyle that he’s chosen.

He’s really trying to break out of it.

Yeah. Overall, I think that it’s impossible for you to create these things and have people identify with it without having some sort of insight. Courtney is able to take the pieces that matter out of the conversation and put them in the right places. It’s been so exciting to do it, because—everything resonates differently to me, because I know where the pieces came from. We’ll be having a conversation and she’ll go, “Wait, say that again?” And then it ends up somewhere in the series. She just likes different parts. Even portions of things that some of them say—literally, they came out of my mouth before they ended up in different characters’ mouths.

When I was first hearing about the show, I was thinking that the character of Ghost actually sounded a little bit like your narrative.

She created Ghost based on my journey, and her father’s. The whole energy of coming from not having very much and making it to that point, she had those references prior, from talking with her dad. That wit, the instincts that you get—you can’t get it out of a book, the experience of being around people and watching them, how they maneuver or do things. She was able to give Ghost a real identity like that.

Right, this survival instinct, I think, that I think he shares with Kanan, which I think is one of the things they have in common.

Ghost is a little more complex. Kanan is manipulative, but it’s from being around the lifestyle so often. There’s points where he needs to get it done, versus him doing it. He’s the kind of guy, he’s out on the street, it’s “Get it done,” and it’s, “All right, I’ll do it myself. It’s not a big deal. Plus, I wasn’t sure if that guy would have told on me, but I’m sure I won’t tell on him.” [Laughs.]

Sounds like you relate to that a little bit.

Yeah, it’s real life at that point. People are willing to do things—like the way I grew up and the things that I’ve come across—when there’s not a lot of finances around. It seems like the answers to all your problems. Relating any actions or activities to the right amount of money, it can happen in that environment. It makes it authentic to that. From the first season, I was going, Where is this going to go? It’s great, but it feels like someone’s going to get caught. They’re already figuring it out—she knows that Tommy’s looking at him like he’s Ghost—but it’s close enough for a case to start to happen, once you’ve got facial recognition. Going into Season 2, the intensity of the finale is carried all the way across the 10 episodes. It doesn’t die down. I know people are going to be at the edge of their seats going, “Yo!” The first season was, like I said, her pace was slow enough for you to identify with who everybody is and what their aim is. Now all the action from Pink Sneakers [a mysterious assassin in the first season] is directly translated over to Kanan.