America's Bitter Pill by Steven Brill, Random House, 515 pages, $18

Brill explores the Affordable Care Act, looking at how the law was written, how it is being implemented and how it is changing — and not changing — the health-care industry. Brill looks at the battle in Washington and across the country to pass the bill, and how many of the issues the law intended to fix are still problematic.

The Girl Next Door: A Novel by Ruth Rendell, Scribner, 289 pages, $16

In the summer of 1944, a group of friends discover a tunnel in their neighborhood outside of London where they play. On the same land 60 years later, construction workers discover two skeletal hands — one male, one female. The friends are drawn together to tell of their childhood to a detective, but as the investigation continues, the threads holding their relationship together unravel and the truth is revealed.

The Carrier: A Zailer and Waterhouse Mystery by Sophie Hannah, Penguin, 471 pages, $16

Gaby Struthers is forced to share a hotel room with Lauren Cookson when their plane is delayed overnight. Lauren blurts out that an innocent man is going to prison for murder. The man is Tim Breary, the only man Gaby has ever truly loved, but who confessed and provided the police with the murder weapon — without providing a reason or motive.

Crazy Love You: A Novel by Lisa Unger, Touchstone, 368 pages, $15.99

Ever since childhood, Ian has known Priss to be dangerous. Nonetheless, she was his best friend, shielding him from bullies and from his family's secrets. As adults, Ian has a successful career, but Priss is still indulging in booze, drugs and sex. When Ian meets Megan, he begins changing, but Priss hates change, and when Priss becomes angry, terrible things happen.

Infidel Kings and Unholy Warriors by Brian A. Catlos, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 390 pages, $16

Catlos offers a history of the Mediterranean during the era of the Crusades. Citing examples of Christian, Jewish and Muslim leaders, Catlos argues that the period from 1050 to 1200, commonly thought of as one fueled by religious extremism, was in fact driven by a mix of political self-interest, personality and ideology.

jmikula@chicagotribune.com | @jeremymikula