Incumbent GOP Sen. John McCain of Arizona says people’s anger with politicians in Washington has him running “as hard as I’ve ever run in my entire political career.”

McCain said Sunday in Phoenix that voter’s anger with Washington that is fueling the presidential momentum of Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders is having a similar effect for his campaign as he seeks a sixth term in office in November.

“There is an anger and dissatisfaction with Washington out among millions of Americans, Republicans as well as Democrats,” he said.

[RELATED: Bush bust as Cruz, Rubio, Clinton get million-dollar boosts]

[SPECIAL SECTION: Race for the White House]

"This is the most tumultuous and unpredictable (national) campaign I’ve ever seen," McCain added.

McCain is expected to face strong primary opposition from the Tea Party.

On another issue, McCain said mismanagement complaints at the Veterans Affairs Hospital join a list of 500 other veterans cases pending in his office.

“We have handled thousands of cases of veterans ranging from they didn’t get their medals they deserve to problems with disability,” he said.

Surgeries at the VA Hospital are expected to resume on Monday. We first reported information on Thursday about how VA insiders say they brought a dust concern to their attention months ago and nothing was done about it.

“It’s inexcusable,” McCain said Sunday. “It’s a huge bureaucracy. There are so many problems.”

[RELATED: No response from VA about mismanagement complaints]

He added, however, there have been some improvements, like more hiring, among other things.

“We do have veterans able to go out with a choice card and see a health provider of their choice,” McCain said. “We have seen some more hiring. But we have got a long way to go. The key is to make the choice card apply to every veteran so that veterans can go to the VA or go to a health care provider of their choice.”

McCain calls for removing the geographic limit placed on the program.

McCain said of the VA’s problems, nobody is holding people responsible.

“There’s been series of problems,” he said. “I think there will be more problems. The people that work there are wonderful people. The system is broken. This continues to be a hard slog.”

McCain also weighed in the government’s battle with Apple to allow the FBI hack into an encrypted iPhone used by the gunman in December's mass shootings in California.

“Suppose there was some information in someone’s home that could lead to the prevention of an attack on the U.S.,” McCain said. “The standard procedure would be to go to federal judge and get a court order to allow law enforcement to go in there and get that information.

“This is the same kind of thing,” McCain said. “Should we allow information that would prevent an attack on the U.S. that our law enforcement and national security people would not have access to? We need to sit down and work this out with the high-tech community. I don’t think they’re unpatriotic. But they are in business.”

[RELATED: US would let Apple keep software to help FBI hack iPhone]

McCain called for a commission to come up with recommendations.

“Believe me, there will be another attack on the U.S. and that’s what the director of the national intelligence told the armed services committee a week and a half ago,” McCain said. “That’s because with this flood of refugees, ISIS is sending people into Europe and telling them to come to the U.S.”

McCain said the No. 1 change that needs to happen is “to screen every person coming into this country who is a refugee.”

As for the fight to stop ISIS, “This president has failed,” McCain said. “This president is the worst president in history on this issue.”

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.