HASBROUCK HEIGHTS, N.J.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--With 30 million Americans seeking chiropractic care annually, it is important that the public recognizes that services provided by a doctor of chiropractic (DC) are usually covered by many health insurance plans, including major medical plans, workers’ compensation, Medicare, some Medicaid plans, Blue Cross Blue Shield plans for federal employees and more. The Foundation for Chiropractic Progress (F4CP), a not-for-profit organization dedicated to raising awareness about the value of chiropractic care, strongly advocates for greater understanding of this issue.

“While musculoskeletal conditions rank among the costliest in health care, chiropractic care is documented to yield reduced costs, coupled with improved clinical outcomes and higher patient satisfaction,” states Sherry McAllister, DC, executive vice president, F4CP. “The public deserves to know the facts about cost and coverage of services, and should always consult directly with their insurance providers to determine the parameters of their benefits.”

As a result of the Affordable Care Act, chiropractic care is now a covered benefit in nearly all traditional insurance policies. According to research:

Up to 87 percent of all insured American employees have coverage for chiropractic care included within their health care plans

Chiropractic services are available to members of the armed forces at over 40 military bases in the U.S., and at nearly 30 veteran’s administration medical facilities

U.S. Congress has authorized that certain chiropractic services for all Americans be covered by Medicare and Medicaid

“When evidence-based chiropractic care precedes other options, specifically medical or surgical interventions, costs per episode of treatment can be reduced by up to 40 percent,” continues Dr. McAllister. “Ultimately, once patients have a better idea as to what percentage of chiropractic service is covered by their plan, they can then contact a local DC to check and see if their insurance is accepted.”

To locate a doctor of chiropractic in your area, visit www.f4cp.com/findadoctor/.

About Foundation for Chiropractic Progress

A not-for-profit organization, the Foundation for Chiropractic Progress (F4CP) informs and educates the general public about the value of chiropractic care. Visit www.f4cp.com; www.yes2chiropractic.org; call 866-901-F4CP (3427). Social media: Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Pinterest, YouTube.