Patti Magnon grew up on the other side of the Rio Grande — in the adjacent Mexican city known as Nuevo Laredo.

But the border here has never been a barrier, and Magnon, who has lived on the U.S. side now for years, feels at home in both. “Proud to be an American & a Catholic!” proclaims her bio on Twitter. “Love my Mexican heritage! An immigrant is not the same as an illegal immigrant.”

These days, Magnon sometimes feels she has more in common with Americans elsewhere across the country than with Latino families here in Texas, and that started when she told people she was voting for Donald Trump.

Election 2016 | Live coverage on Trail Guide | April 26 primary election results | Track the delegate race | Sign up for the newsletter

“They bash you,” said Gina Gil, who’s also joined a small but enthusiastic group of people here on the border who like what Trump has to say — especially about immigration, a subject that, here on the banks of the Rio Grande, they feel they know as much about as anybody.

“I find it insulting when people say people who follow Trump are uneducated, unintelligent,” said Magnon.

“Te aventaste!” Gil exclaimed. “You hit it.”

Across the country, only a small minority of Latinos have backed Trump, and even here in Texas, a plurality of Latino Republicans voted for home-grown U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, who won the March 1 primary with 44% of the overall vote to Trump’s 27%. Now as ever, most Latinos vote Democratic, and in Texas, where Latinos make up more than a quarter of the electorate, up to 71% of them backed Hillary Clinton, according to exit polls.

It was here on the border that Trump scored his biggest Texas victories, capturing Laredo’s Webb County, which is 95.3% Latino, and Zapata County next door (94%), as well as Terrell County (49 17.4% Latino Hispanic) and Hudspeth County (78%), which are farther west.

“It’s the hardworking people,” said Miriam Cepeda, 24, a history major at the nearby University of Texas-Pan American who is leading Trump’s campaign in the Rio Grande Valley east of Laredo. What she hears, she says, is a lot of resentment aimed at undocumented immigrants who receive government services. “Those that pay the taxes and do what they’re supposed to say, ‘Why do I have to pay?’”

Trump supporter Patti Magnon Ilana Panich-Linsman / For The Times Trump supporter Patti Magnon of Laredo, Texas, began life across the border in its Mexican sister city, Nuevo Laredo. Trump supporter Patti Magnon of Laredo, Texas, began life across the border in its Mexican sister city, Nuevo Laredo. (Ilana Panich-Linsman / For The Times) (Ilana Panich-Linsman / For The Times)

Magnon and Gill voted for Trump in the Texas primary, plan to vote for him in the general election, and are waging their own kind of ad hoc citizens’ campaign, praising him on radio shows and online, recruiting friends and family.

The two women met last summer when Trump came here, to the Southwest border’s third-most populous city, behind El Paso and San Diego.

Magnon drove her 7-year-old daughter, Allie, to the small local airport to see the real estate magnate. They were greeted in this majority Democratic, heavily Mexican American town by a crowd of opponents chanting into megaphones: “Dump Trump!”

See the most-read stories this hour >>

Both Magnon, 44, and Gil, 49, are former Democrats — working mothers with community college educations who say they’re alarmed about welfare fraud, illegal immigration and the rising costs of healthcare. Magnon almost lost her health insurance when Obamacare took effect. Gil seethed at paying an $800 penalty under the new federal healthcare law, but insurance would have cost even more.

Trump promised to run the country like a business and repeal Obamacare. They didn’t think he was racist when he promised to build a bigger border wall to keep out Mexican “rapists.” They thought he was right — and were delighted to find that others around town agreed with them.

“I was surprised other people in Laredo think like I do,” Magnon said.

Trump's Texas

Gil’s father was an electrician, her mother a day-care worker. Raised on the south side of town near the river, she was a cheerleader in high school but was pregnant with the first of five children at age 16. She helped her husband start a bakery. But the union was not a happy one, and Gil eventually left, working multiple jobs, training as a paralegal, buying rental properties and businesses.

The tough-talking single mother relied on undocumented Mexican migrants to watch her children and run her businesses — but at least none of them were on welfare, she says. “I could never have done it on my own,” she said. “I’m not Wonder Woman. You have to keep your boat afloat.”

She says she spent many years working so hard that the only time she saw her children was when she drove by her house and waved at them through the front window.

Gil still lives near the Rio Grande. Tooling around in her custom 2015 white Audi recently, she pointed to homes and businesses she had bought, all for cash. When she stopped to pick up her blood pressure medication, $71.75 for a month’s supply, she pointed to the button for the state welfare benefit, “Lone Star,” for those who are receiving state assistance.

“Do I press ‘Lone Star’? Ha!” she said, then paid out of her own pocket.

Gil called a local bilingual radio show recently to praise Trump’s promises to crack down on welfare cheats.

“Trump is right. Just because he’s a billionaire — well, he worked hard for what he has,” she said.

Unless someone stops the flow of illegal immigration and stabilizes the economy, Gil worries, “Our kids are going to be working like psychos for the deadbeats.”

Patti Magnon with daughter Allie Ilana Panich-Linsman / For The Times Patti Magnon, with daughter Allie, 7, in Laredo, Texas. The family hasn't visited Nuevo Laredo, Mexico, in years for fear of violence. Patti Magnon, with daughter Allie, 7, in Laredo, Texas. The family hasn't visited Nuevo Laredo, Mexico, in years for fear of violence. (Ilana Panich-Linsman / For The Times) (Ilana Panich-Linsman / For The Times)

Magnon worries about many of the same things. She and her siblings spent their childhood in Laredo’s Mexican sister city, Nuevo Laredo. Her father worked for an import-export business, her mother for a chain of retail stores. The family had an extensive staff including a driver and housekeeping staff.