LANGDON — It’s hard not to laugh with brothers Jeff and Steve Holmes. They are fourth-generation farmers, their souls and bodies bound to the land, their minds Ivy League sharp, their humor unrelenting.

If you’re seeking the droll, Yankee farmer stereotype with the craggily face frozen in a frown, well, you took a wrong turn. They are not dour farmers.

They employ clever humor, not in the context of Eddie Albert and “Green Acres,” although they did put down pitchforks when a visitor arrived Thursday afternoon.

Holmes Farm is 200 acres of mostly rolling greenery, draped hillside on one of the most unsung scenic roads in the Monadnock Region. Drive past the farm to the top of Ball Hill Road, peer across the valley, and you’ll see six ski areas spread before you. The air is so serene that ruffling leaves sound amplified.

The farm and all its accessories, including a nine-bedroom farmhouse, are steeped in character. You can see it, feel it and, of course, smell it. It is a farm, after all.

They have 65 registered Jerseys, and also bale and sell hay. In addition to the 200 acres, they own about 150 acres of wood lots nearby and rent another 150 acres split into smaller parcels.

The farm has been in the family since 1873, when it was known as “Langdon Elms.” They may even name a female calf, born Tuesday, “Elm.” The house itself, built in the 1700s, was moved across the street in 1842.

“I grew up upstairs and moved downstairs,” Jeff jokes of his worldly travels.

Steve is the first Holmes family farmer in four generations who isn’t living in the house. “I thought I was a world traveler — I moved a quarter-of-a-mile away,” he says.

The Holmes brothers could conceivably have chosen many other professions, aside from comedy. While they’re quick with a quip, they are world wise. Jeff is a graduate of Cornell University and president of the N.H. Farm Bureau Federation. He easily recounts the 100-year history of the organization, how it functions, and its importance in farming.

Jeff’s wife, Lisa, is a speech and language aide in the Walpole schools; Steve’s wife, Jody, works as a tutor in the Monadnock school district. Jeff’s daughter, Erica, graduated from Cornell and works in hotel management in Washington, D.C.; son Evan is a senior at Cornell.

“He bred true,” Steve notes of his brother.

Steve, who doesn’t have children, attended the University of New Hampshire for a year, and is intently involved in the science of breeding cattle through genomics, the genetic mapping and DNA sequencing of sets of genes. “To me, it’s fascinating,” he says.

Steve has also been the New Hampshire representative in the New England Jersey Breeders Association for 33 years, serving as president for two years. “It’s not a big-time deal, but it’s a lot of fun,” he says.

All breeding cows on Holmes Farm are artificially inseminated with not a bull on the premises. Steve delves into the intricacies of husbandry, of the 11 characteristics that define the perfect cow and how he’s particularly finicky about udders.

“As we get older, we like them higher,” Steve says. “I refer to the low ones as shin-slappers.”

As the afternoon wears on, their 93-year-old father, Royal Holmes, drives up and parks. He sits in his car for 15 minutes without being acknowledged by either brother. He’ll forget what he came for, they say. Royal drives away and returns about 20 minutes later, parks and sits. Finally, Steve approaches the car.

Yup, he says upon returning. Dad forgot why he came.

It’s actually a story of endearment, an act that’s clearly been played out many times among the three. Royal was married to Marion for 57 years before she died at age 80, and has since been remarried for 12 years. He was slowed by a stroke suffered three years ago.

Royal never wanted his four sons or two daughters to go into farming.

“Our dad strongly discouraged us from doing it,” Steve says. “He said, ‘You’re nuts.’ ”

In fact, when Steve and Jeff were in junior high school, Royal had a deal on the table to sell the farm. The teens convinced him to keep it and give them a shot someday.

“Even as early as high school we were making key decisions about the future of the farm,” Steve says.

Now the brothers have hit their 50s (Jeff is 50, Steve 51), so the “pings and dings” of aging are fair game for complaints and a series of jokes. They rarely take vacations and lament that the first seven or eight hours per day are spent doing chores before the work begins. They have part-time help, but it’s limited.

“This morning (Thursday) was fine. Yesterday, for the first three or four animals, I was hurting,” Steve says, rattling off his aches and pains. “My wife asks, ‘Have you thought of anything else you want to do with your life? If you do, you better get cracking.’”

Dairy-wise, they’ve had their best year in the last seven. Prices that collapsed to $11 per hundredweight (equivalent to about 11½ gallons of milk) in 2009 are now $30. But that could swing the other way just as quickly, Jeff says.

He is finishing his seventh term as president of the state farm bureau and is running for an eighth and final year (term limits are in effect) in November. The bureau is active in lobbying, scouring the Legislature for bills related to farming and taking pros and cons stands.

Jeff has been involved politically in farming causes since graduating, beginning with the National Young Farmers’ Coalition for farmers ages 18 to 35. They had an uncle who was president of the group for about 10 years in the 1960s and 70s. “I was pretty much indoctrinated in it,” he says.

Steve is a former selectman in Langdon and Jeff is the town’s moderator. He jokes that being moderator keeps him neutral and negates him from running for more time-consuming panels, such as selectmen or school committee.

Just how long the farm will stay in the family is unknown, yet neither brother is bothered by the prospect of giving it up. They say they are proud that they were never delinquent on their taxes and always paid their bills, even if there were times when they didn’t cash paychecks.

As for farming itself, it’s a love of the land, a feeling that doesn’t transcribe easily into words, even after 30 years of working together day after day, year after year, decade after decade.

“There’s just some attraction to having a fourth-generation farm — seeing it, if not thrive, at least survive,” Jeff says.

And that’s no joke.