Dr. Mehmet Oz was slammed by Senators during testimony in which he defended claims made by him about benefits of dietary and health supplements on his TV show.

The FDA released draft guidelines dealing with what drug and device companies can and cannot say on social media.

Both Novartis and Pfizer have submitted applications to the FDA for vaccines against meningitis B infections, which have been blamed for recent outbreaks at U.S. universities.

More than 130 members of the House -- representing both sides of the aisle -- have signed a letter submitted to the Obama Administration, urging Medicare coverage of low-dose chest CT scans for older people with an increased risk of lung cancer, as recommended by the US Preventive Services Task Force.

The U.S. healthcare system came in last out of 11 industrialized countries, according to a report by the Commonwealth Fund.

The Texas Medical Association has established a registry of physicians who are willing to provide office-based care for veterans.

An FDA advisory committee voted 6-2 -- with one abstention -- that the benefits of the Maestro Rechargeable System for the treatment of obesity outweighed the risks. There was broad agreement about safety but less certainty about efficacy.

A 6-year-old girl in Bolivia suffered from uncontrollable laughter, and doctors found a brain tumor that was to blame, CBS News reported.

Boehringer Ingelheim and Eli Lilly have resubmitted the New Drug Application for the type 2 diabetes medication empagliflozin, which was turned away by the FDA in March because of deficiencies seen at a manufacturing plant.

An Ebola outbreak in west Africa has now spread to the Liberian capital of Monrovia, Reuters reports.

Recent survey data suggest that the number of people with non-group health insurance policies that were canceled because they were not compliant with the Affordable Care Act was lower than originally estimated, according to post on the Health Affairs Blog.

In a Q+A, the founding president and chief executive of the American Hospice Foundation -- which will soon cease operations -- talks about selecting a hospice.

Merck has ceased clinical development of the anticancer drug-conjugate ventafolide and returned worldwide development rights to Endocyte.

A Toronto woman used her smart phone to record a video of her own transient ischemic attack after personnel at a local hospital had told her the symptoms were stress related.

Morning Break is a daily guide to what's new and interesting on the Web for healthcare professionals, powered by the MedPage Today community. Got a tip? Send it to us: MPT_editorial@everydayhealthinc.com.