About 191,000 people in Alabama fall into the "coverage gap" between Medicaid and the Affordable Care Act, according to a study released today by the Kaiser Foundation.

The study ranks Alabama as second in terms of the percentage of uninsured adults who still do not qualify for health coverage under either Medicaid or the Affordable Care Act. That's 36 percent in Alabama.

That gap is only wider in Mississippi, where 37 percent of uninsured adults still do not qualify for coverage under either program.

Kaiser reports that, as of last month, Alabama was one of 26 states that had decided not to expand Medicaid. That expansion was a key part of the design of the Affordable Care Act.





Medicaid traditionally has been reserved for certain low-income individuals, especially children, parents, the elderly and the disabled.





In Alabama many low-income adults have jobs and make too much money to receive coverage under Medicaid. Yet they also earn too little to qualify for tax credits under the Affordable Care Act.





According to the Kaiser study, Alabama has the lowest threshold for Medicaid coverage in the nation. Kaiser reports adults without children in Alabama must earn less than 16 percent of the federal poverty level to qualify for Medicaid coverage. That sets a maximum annual income of just $3,221 for an individual without children or disability.





Medicaid expansion would raise the income ceiling to 138 percent of the poverty level, or $15,415 a year for an individual.





The federal government has proposed paying for the Medicaid expansion for three years, then paying 90 percent of the cost in subsequent years. But the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in 2012 that states can opt out of Medicaid expansion. Gov. Robert Bentley has opposed expansion in Alabama.





“I have a long-term goal for this. My long term goal is to resist the implementation of the Affordable Care Act and I believe we are going to succeed in that,” Bentley said last month.





Here's a closer look by AL.com at the coverage gap in Alabama and some of the people affected.