COLORADO SPRINGS — Her dominance already is attracting attention outside her sport, and if she becomes the first American woman to win an Olympic gold medal in wrestling this summer, she probably will become one of the major American personalities of the Rio Games.

First, though, Adeline Gray has to get there.

A Bear Creek High School graduate and daughter of a Denver police officer, Gray is a three-time world champion and five-time world championships medalist, but she’s not an Olympian. She didn’t make the team for the 2012 London Games, even though she won her first world championships gold medal seven weeks later.

She knows how much is at stake — for her and for women’s wrestling in the U.S. — but for all that to happen she must win her weight class Sunday at the Olympic Trials in Iowa City. Only one wrestler at each weight goes to Rio.

“I’m an Olympic-caliber wrestler, I’ve beaten Olympic champions, I’m the best girl in the world right now in my weight division, but I do not have an O-word by my name,” said Gray, who is on a 35-match winning streak going back to July 2014. “Women’s wrestling has this influx of sponsors, of support, and USA Wrestling thankfully picked me to help head that. It’s been an awesome opportunity and an awesome journey. Little girls know my name. I am just so excited to have that platform and to be in that position.

“But I haven’t made an Olympic team, and it’s going to mean something when I do. That title is special. It’s crazy that I can be as successful as I’ve been. It comes down to timing. If this year doesn’t go great, it’s unfortunate, but I peaked too soon. My two great years were 2014 and ’15, not that ’16 year that really matters.”

It’s hard to overstate the magnitude of the opportunity Gray will have if she wins in Rio.

“She already is the face of our program, but she can really etch that in stone,” said Terry Steiner, the women’s national team coach since 2002. “I really think she’s like a Billie Jean King. In 30-40 years, that’s how you’re going to be talking about Adeline Gray. She has that kind of charisma, she has that kind of ability to reach the population.

“And she loves that spotlight. Some people, they want to win and do their thing, but they don’t want that spotlight and that kind of attention. Adeline, I think she revels in it. She understands there’s a lot more than an Olympic gold medal at stake.”

“I remember having a blast”

Seven years before women’s wrestling made its Olympic debut at the 2004 Athens Games, Gray took up the sport by joining Bear Creek Junior Wrestling, where her uncle, Paul Delmonico, was the coach. Her father, George, helped him.

Adeline was 6 years old, smitten from the start.

“We had like 50 kids under the age of 8,” Adeline recalled. “It was this crazy hodgepodge of people running around and coaches trying to keep kids calm. It was so fun. I remember having a blast. My uncle would run the practice. He would be: ‘OK, these are the techniques we’re going to learn, pair off and do this.’ Half of us would go and screw around and the other half would be pulled by our parents, their dad would be like ‘You’re going to pay attention. OK, what are we learning today?’ Dad would break it down for me.”

Wrestling was good for Adeline because she was “super-hyper” as a child. She never wanted to go to sleep at night. She couldn’t sit through a meal. She had too much energy to sit still in class.

“To this day, if I don’t work out for a couple days, I can feel this buzzing energy,” said Gray, 25. “I radiate this overwhelming energy. People are like ‘You’ve just got to stop, you’ve got to chill out.’ It’s this craziness that probably is ADHD. My parents were like ‘This kid is going to need to be medicated, or figure something out.’ “

Wrestling gave her an outlet for all that energy. It tired her out so she could fall asleep at normal times. It gave her an activity to help focus her attention.

“If I didn’t want to go to bed, I would do push-ups and sit-ups until I was so tired or bored that I wanted to go to sleep,” said Gray, the oldest of four girls in a family with no brothers. “That’s weird in middle school, and it would have been weird to do if I didn’t have something where I was like ‘This is going to make me stronger.’ I could rationalize how to control my overhyperness and have it work for me. I could get up and do a two-hour bike ride before school and be like ‘I’m cutting weight for practice,’ but actually it just helped me pay attention in class.”

When she started wrestling, Adeline and Delmonico’s daughter, Arenet, were the only girls in the program. A couple years later, one of Adeline’s sisters, Geneva, joined them. Adeline would learn to wrestle by practicing against boys.

A big junior tournament in those days might attract three to five girls. Now those same tournaments can have 100.

“At that point, there’s really no difference between boys and girls,” Adeline said. “The fact that I had to deal with my hair was pretty much the biggest obstacle. There isn’t a muscle difference. I actually think I had an advantage as a female because we mature a little bit faster than the boys do. I had an attention span of about five seconds, where the boys had about three.”

In high school, bodies develop differently. Boys gain more upper body strength. Girls develop lower centers of gravity. Adeline had been training with boys for eight years, so she could handle herself competing with them in high school — at Bear Creek her freshman year, then at Chatfield her sophomore and junior years. After winning a junior world title at age 17, she moved to an Olympic development program at Northern Michigan University.

“I learned so much in high school, getting beat up, getting the boys to make me better,” Gray said. “It was an opportunity for me to have to figure it out. I have girls on the Olympic stage that are stronger than me, girls that are bigger and faster. It definitely feels escalated when you’re on the mat against a boy sometimes because those differences are larger. You look at a 140-pound girl, she’s going to be softer than the 140-pound boy, especially when he turns 17, 18 years old.”

Living the dormitory life

For the past eight years, Adeline has lived a dormitory life at the Olympic Training Center in Colorado Springs. She has her own bedroom and bathroom, sharing a living room with another wrestler, Jennifer Page. She eats her meals in the OTC cafeteria.

“People keep asking me, ‘What are you going to do to win the Olympics?’ ” Gray said over an oatmeal breakfast there last month. “I’m like ‘Nothing that I haven’t done.’ I’ve been working hard for years. This has been me getting better for eight years. It’s been a great thing to know it’s coming to that peak right now. This is my year, and the platform’s kind of set up through wrestling and this culture we have that’s budding with women’s sports being more important and pushing to have more role models for young girls.”

Sunday represents a crucial step in that process. As the reigning world champion in her weight class — the heaviest of the three women’s divisions at 75 kilograms (165 pounds) — Gray gets a bye to the final at the Olympic Trials. About a dozen women will wrestle off for the right to face her.

There are advantages and disadvantages to the bye. She will be well rested, but the woman she faces in the final might be on a roll.

“You can’t take the trials lightly,” said Steiner. “Everyone is going to come swinging. They may not be as experienced, they may not have the notoriety, but they’re not going to hand over an Olympic spot.

“But from what I see, Adeline is on task. She’s on track. She’s a professional athlete. She knows what her job is. I don’t have to worry about Adeline as far as doing what she needs to be doing. She’s very self-driven and self-motivated. She knows what’s at stake.”

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or @johnmeyer