BATON ROUGE, La. — You knew this would be a different type of road trip when you stepped off the plane at the airport serving Louisiana’s capital city, and were greeted by a welcome sign in garnet and black.

It was only a hint of what was to come, on a game weekend which was supposed to be in another SEC capital city, but was moved from South Carolina due to flooding in Columbia. So if facing seventh-ranked LSU and Heisman Trophy favorite Leonard Fournette wasn’t bad enough, now the Gamecocks have to do it in Tiger Stadium, which for this first-time visitor easily ranks among the most physically imposing home fields in all conference, if not the nation.

And yet, this trip is very different from many road games, where so many opponents relish the opportunity to rub the Head Ball Coach’s nose in it for perpetrated offenses real or imagined over the course of his career. Louisiana well knows what it’s like to be displaced by a natural disaster, having moved its 2005 home opener against Arizona State to Tempe, Ariz., due to the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, and the next season postponing another game due to another storm. As luck of the schedule would have it, USC relocated this game to the one school which can most understand what the Gamecocks are going through now.

That appreciation is evident all over Baton Rouge. “Our home is your home,” the sign at the airport read. “Geaux Gamecocks” flashes on some electronic billboards around town, and other messages of support are evident on business marquees. Palmetto State and USC banners flew on a flagpole high above Tiger Stadium, where a virtual South Carolina state flag fluttered on video boards in the hours before the game. When people here find out you’re from South Carolina, you get a “How are you doing?” followed by a look of concern.

This was supposed to be USC’s home game, and LSU has added a few touches to maintain that spirit. LSU’s United Airlines charter plane flew to Columbia to pick up the Gamecocks on Friday, and is scheduled to bring them home Saturday after the game — an act of charity, to be sure, but likely also one of practicality since the aircraft was already booked for what was supposed to be an LSU road trip.

The USC equipment staff arrived at Tiger Stadium to a barbecue spread. The seat-assignment placards in the press box were those used at USC, and read “Welcome to Williams-Brice Stadium (Tiger Stadium edition).” The LSU band will play USC’s fight song and alma mater, there will be a moment of silence honoring flood victims, and the Gamecocks are scheduled to run onto the field first to a video introduction — which might even be “2001,” given that we heard a snippet of that anthem over the sound system in the hours before the game.

The LSU folks have been incredibly accommodating in every way, even dropping off media credentials and parking pass to USC beat writers at their respective hotels. Tigers athletic director Joe Alleva is an old friend of Steve Spurrier’s going back to their days at Duke, and that relationship is perhaps another reason why the Tigers are pulling out all the stops (save repainting the field, which Alleva says they couldn’t do because of a home game next week against Florida). The cynic would add that LSU really has nothing to lose by being overly hospitable, given the Gamecocks are 19-point underdogs. Would they be doing the same for, say, Alabama?

In this situation it really doesn’t matter. From a football perspective, this unexpected trip to the banks of the Mississippi River only heightens the degree of difficulty in a Gamecocks season which is in serious danger of becoming Spurrier’s first losing campaign at USC. Drop this one, and South Carolina is 0-4 in conference play for the first time since Lou Holtz went 0-11 in 1999, and has to win four of its final six — a stretch which includes three top-11 opponents — to salvage bowl eligibility.

Given the opponent, that’s a reality the Gamecocks seem likely to face leaving Baton Rouge. But reality also includes Columbia still lacking clean drinking water as the city continues to grapple with repairing a breach in the canal which supplies much of the water to the city. Reality is more rain Saturday in Columbia, and more flood warnings in the Midlands, and further overnight curfews. Safe to say, police officers around Columbia continue to have their hands full, and didn’t need to be managing game-day traffic around Williams-Brice Stadium.

So here we are in Tiger Stadium, in a situation which feels welcoming, to be certain, but also a little odd. LSU didn’t sell some of the upper-deck areas of Tiger Stadium for this unexpected home game, and Alleva on local radio Friday sounded pained that only 38,000 tickets in the 102,321-seat edifice had been sold. USC will receive the revenue from this game after LSU deducts its expenses, and that net amount will certainly be lower than expected now that the crowd in this facility will seem more like that of a spring game.

“We’ll cover our expenses, they’ll still get money, but it’s nowhere close to what I was hoping we could give them,” Alleva told Baton Rouge’s 104.5-FM. LSU has been banging the drum for ticket sales, even enlisting Spurrier for a commercial which aired in Louisiana. But with so many fans evidently having made other plans, it’s proving a tough sell. Three hours before the game, parking lots around Tiger Stadium were half-empty at best.