More options: Share, Mark as favorite

There’s a growing refrain that we have a crisis when it comes to drug costs. Yet the average net cost of branded drugs grew 5.5% last year, according to data from the IMS Institute. That’s the lowest annual level of drug price inflation in five years.

To be sure, there are examples of drugs that are priced inappropriately high. This is especially true when it comes to certain old drugs that should be subject to vigorous competition, and priced very low, but are not. In many cases, it’s a consequence of regulatory failures that create too many perpetual monopolies for medicines that should otherwise have many generic options. The higher cost of getting a generic drug approved by regulators means that many old medicines don’t face competitors. It’s only after substantial price hikes that these drugs offer enough revenue to offset the rising generic entry costs, and start to entice competition.

Certain orphan drugs targeted to rare conditions are also being priced very high, as they also deliver increasingly transformative medical benefits. But for the vast majority of drugs, prices are being held in check in recent years. So what’s going on?

On the whole, it’s not rising prices that are leaving most consumers pinched, but skimpier insurance coverage for these costs. What has changed most abruptly in recent years is the type of coverage that insurers offer for branded drugs.

Obamacare plans have substantially raised the amount of cost sharing they require for drugs. Often they don’t cover any specialty drug costs until a patient has hit their deductible. Then there is the issue of the dwindling number of specialty drugs that health plans include in their formularies, and provide any coverage for. Almost all of the “Silver” plans offered under Obamacare sport closed drug formularies, where there’s no coverage for drugs not listed on the narrow formulary lists. This means, when a drug doesn’t make a health plans list, consumers are completely uncovered.

In the past, consumers had “co-insurance” that picked up some of the cost of drugs not listed on a plan’s formulary. But Obamacare plans are doing away with this cost sharing. What consumers spend on “non-formulary” drugs doesn’t count against their deductibles, or out of pocket limits, either.

That’s what it means to have a closed drug formulary. Consumers bear the full brunt of the costs. They’re completely on their own

I examined how the Obamacare plans covered drugs to treat multiple sclerosis to get one snapshot of these emerging trends. In all cases, plans provided no coverage for a substantial number of important drugs. The rare possibility of being diagnosed with a debilitating disease like multiple sclerosis is precisely why we take out health insurance. Yet the ACA health plans are leaving whole categories of MS drugs off their formularies and rendering consumers completely uninsured for these costs.

More on the multiple sclerosis drug data later. What the evolving debate over drug costs reveals is the peculiar, if not cruel economics of Obamacare. The health plans find themselves in a tight economic predicament having cut a Faustian bargain with the Obama Administration over adoption of the Affordable Care Act. The plans have long lists of regulatory costs foisted on them, such as mandates for first dollar coverage of progressive ideals like free surgical sterilization. The result is that the health plans have to cut costs wherever the feds let them. In most cases, it means narrowing the networks of doctors they offer, and whittling down drug lists.

Afforded the political cover to adopt these practices in Obamacare, many insurers are starting to roll out the same constructs in their commercial health plans.

Now some argue that Obamacare offers the kind of “high deductible” health plans that were long favored by conservatives. A real high deductible, “consumer-driven” health plan aims to expose consumers to the incremental cost of their healthcare choices. The idea is to make consumers more cost-conscious, and healthcare more responsive to market signals around the price and value of healthcare goods.

But the Obamacare plans are not consumer-driven health plans at all. They provide first dollar coverage for a disparate mix of politically favored healthcare products and procedures. They couple that with often skimpy coverage for everything else, including the “catastrophic” healthcare costs associated with serious illness.

A real high deductible plan preserves choice so consumers can shop for lower cost, higher value options. This is how it leverages market principles to improve efficiency. The ACA purposely constrains choice as a top down means of cost control. Obamacare isn’t a consumer driven, high deductible scheme. It’s hollow coverage.

This distinction between Obamacare and high deductible health plans is especially salient in view of a comprehensive health reform plan that my colleagues and I released today. That plan isn’t confined to replacing the ACA. It includes comprehensive reforms to Medicare, Medicaid, the tax treatment of employer-sponsored insurance, and other features of our system. The cumulative effect, as we write today in Health Affairs, is to “decisively reorient health care policy away from bureaucratic regulation and toward the preferences of patients and consumers.”

According to a budget estimate released by the Center for Health and Economy, the plan would cost $350 billion less than the ACA and cover more people, in part through much higher enrollment in catastrophic insurance plans. The estimate also shows very sizeable savings in Medicare. Here it’s important to distinguish between the heavily regulated yet meager coverage made fashionable by Obamacare, and the consumer driven plans that would be more prevalent under our proposal.

The fact is that the kind of federally regulated health coverage mandated by Obamacare includes a lot of ancillary services that sound great on paper, but end up eating away that the premium dollars left over for genuine insurance against more serious illness. Prior studies have found that health plans can support most of the cost of specialty drugs aimed at catastrophic illness if they were freer to share with consumers more routine costs attributable to ordinary, day-to-day drug spend.

These are the sorts of insurance structures that are advocated by proponents of consumer-driven health plans. These approaches personify the trade-off between the mandate-heavy yet hollow coverage offered by Obamacare, and the type of coverage that would be more prevalent under our health reform plan.

Which brings me back to the issue of drug costs, and the data on drugs for Multiple Sclerosis that I’ll be releasing in more detail early next week. I looked at 20 Silver health plans sold across five states. In each state, I examined the plans marketed in the state’s most populace county, selecting the median-priced Silver plan offered by each carrier in that market. I examined how the plans covered the 12 leading oral and injectable drugs for treating Multiple Sclerosis. What I found was discouraging.

All of the plans were closed formularies. None of the plans provided even partial coverage for all of these drugs. That means that for each plan, certain patients would be forced to foot the entire bill for their medicine. What patients spent wouldn’t count against their deductible or out of pocket limits. One of the insurance plans covered 11 of the drugs; three of the plans covered 10 of the 12 drugs; and four of the plans covered only 9 of the drugs. Aetna, on the whole, was the best insurer.

The rest of the results fell off sharply.

Of the remaining 12 health plans; three covered just eight drugs; three covered only seven drugs; and another three covered just six of the drugs used to treat Multiple Sclerosis. Of the remaining two health plans, one of the plans only provided coverage for four drugs; and the final plan provided coverage for just three of them.

In almost all cases, when the plans did cover these drugs, they put these medicines on their fourth or fifth drug tiers, meaning that consumers were saddled with high co-insurance and would, in most cases, end up maxing out their deductibles and hitting their out of pocket limits (which averaged more than $13,000 across the different plans. This spending would come on top of what people paid in premiums).

The Center for Health and Economy predicts that our new plan would widen access to providers. Part of that opportunity comes from the savings achieved by making the market for insurance more competitive, and allowing consumers to choose from a wider variety of coverage. This includes high deductible plans that leave them with more options when it comes to catastrophic costs, but also mean that consumers bear more responsibility for their routine expenses. These are choices that individuals should be allowed to make in a competitive and dynamic marketplace. Under Obamacare, Preferred Provider Organizations that were once popular, and offer a wider choice of doctors, have been virtually eliminated from the exchanges.

Obamacare extinguished competitive choices in favor of one federally mandated insurance design, and politically preferred outcomes. What has resulted aren’t high-deductible plans in the traditional sense of that concept, where consumers take more charge of their routine costs, but are covered when they get really sick. What has resulted instead is the worst of both outcomes — high deductibles, high premiums, and hollow coverage when it comes to the serious stuff. Obamacare has made insurance costlier and far less comprehensive. That is some economic feat.