The position that handles the most serious civil lawsuits is up for grabs. The judge of the 345th District Court in Texas hears disputes between people who are not being charged with a crime. Whomever takes that spot will replace current judge Stephen Yelenosky, who is retiring.

"The whole idea of the civil courts is to have a place to go peacefully resolve disputes,” said Jan Soifer, 345th District Court Judge candidate. “So that people don't resort to wild west tactics."

Jan Soiffer works in Travis County as a trial lawyer, with 33 years of experience.

"And I've been chair of the Travis County Democratic party, so I have been very active in Democratic politics here in Austin."

Now, Soiffer says her democratic values have led her to run for district judge.

"Giving everybody a fair shake. Making sure there's a level playing field,” Soifer said “And that we're not favoring the rich over the poor."

Soifer says her main focus would be providing legal aid “because the system of justice doesn't work if everybody doesn't have equal access to it."

Soifer's democratic opponent is Melissa Mather, an Assistant Texas Attorney General with a diverse legal background.

"I have handled cases that have been covered in the New York Times, I've also been present when the state of Texas has executed someone who I fought for,” Mather said. "You really need that breadth of experience to really understand the types of cases that come forward."

Mather's focus is listening.

"As judges and as lawyers, we're really used to talking,” Mather said. “But really what judges do best is they listen."

"I'm really going to try and listen to you and understand what it is you need, what it is you're looking for; why you're here in front of me, and try and make sure we give that to you."

Both women strongly believe in a fair system of justice.

"You really want someone on the bench who is going to be fair and respectful and knowledgeable about the law,” Mather said. “And that's what I want to provide to the people of Travis County."

And just like in court, only one will come out on top - securing their name on the November ballot.

"They're not going to leave mad,” Soiffer said. “They may leave disappointed, but they'll feel like they got their day in court and they got a fair shake. And so I think I'm the person who can do this in this race."

There is no one running for this position on the GOP side. Early voting starts on Feb. 16, and the primary is March 1.