Jess Bluvan started learning to make balloon animals to keep kids amused at a church event, but the hobby has grown into a business.

Bluvan and his wife, Darlene Bluvan, own Bumble Balloons, which offers custom-made balloon decorations and on-site balloon “twisting” for events. He said the children at church responded positively to simple balloon animals, so he started watching online tutorials and attending balloon classes and conventions before attempting his own designs.

“I really enjoy the challenge of somebody saying, ‘Make me my logo,’ or something different,” he said. “When you learn advanced twisting, the balloon becomes kind of like clay.”

Custom pieces he has done include a balloon version of Ariel from Disney’s “The Little Mermaid,” a spider, a chain saw and a version of Lightning McQueen from Pixar’s “Cars” that is large enough for a young child to sit in, Bluvan said. He also is working on a dress made from weaving balloons like fabric, with balloon hooks to hold it together.

“I want to show people a professional and adult side of balloons,” he said. “And besides, balloons make everybody happy.”

Most balloon sculptures last about one week, though it depends on the types of balloons needed to make the design, Bluvan said. Latex-free options are available for some types of balloons.

Cost for on-site balloon twisting at events is $50 per hour for one twister or $85 per hour for two twisters. Centerpieces start at $10 and balloon archways start at $120. Prices vary for custom pieces. For more information, visit www.BumbleBalloons.com or call (785) 969-0807.

Hotel project

delayed again

A hotel project near S.W. Wanamaker and Huntoon has been delayed again and won’t open until next year, according to a spokeswoman for its parent company.

The exterior of a hotel sits next to the Hampton Inn at 1515 S.W. Arrowhead Road, but little progress has been visible to the naked eye in recent months, and vegetation has grown several feet high on the lot around the hotel. It isn’t clear whether more work has been done inside the building.

Arif Chaudry, who manages the Hampton Inn next door, said in January 2013 that the new hotel would be a Homewood Suites, which is an upscale extended-stay hotel chain owned by Hilton. He said at the time he thought the hotel would open in August or September.

A spokeswoman for Homewood Suites said in May 2014 that the hotel would open in the last quarter of this year. Adriana Infante, another spokeswoman for the Hilton chains, said Thursday that construction is ongoing and the hotel will open next year.

“The upcoming Homewood Suites by Hilton in Topeka is still under construction and is slated to open in the first quarter of 2015,” she said.

Infante said the opening date was pushed back because the hotel hasn’t met construction deadlines.

When the project was announced, Chaudry described the rooms as having one-bedroom and studio floor plans, with each room having a small kitchen.