WASHINGTON -- President Obama announced plans for proper training to make sure clinicians have sound opioid prescribing habits and Congress is being asked to act on an imminent Medicare Part B premium hike.

Obama Announces Steps to Combat Opioid Abuse

Federal healthcare providers will now be required to undergo training in opioid prescribing, and federal employee health plans must not have barriers to medication treatment for opioid addiction, President Obama said during a speech in Charleston, W. Va. on Wednesday.

"We're ensuring that federal agencies train federal healthcare providers who prescribe opioids; it's a commonsense idea that you're already implementing here in West Virginia," said Obama. "Congress should follow that lead and make this a national priority, and we look forward to working with governors and the medical community as well." The president was visiting West Virginia because the state has the country's highest rate of overdose deaths in the nation.

"There is evidence that shows medication-assisted treatment, if done properly in combination with behavioral therapy and other support counseling, and 12-step programs ... can work," he continued. "It can be an effective strategy to support recovery. We're going to identify barriers that still exist that keep us from creating more of these treatment facilities and incorporating them into our federal programs."

FDA Approves Hyperkalemia Drug

The FDA has approved patiromer for oral suspension (Veltassa) for treatment of hyperkalemia.

Patiromer, a powder to be mixed with water, is a non-absorbed polymer that binds potassium in exchange for calcium, predominantly in the distal colon where the concentration of free potassium is the highest.

In a study published in the New England Journal of Medicine, 76% patients treated with patiromer achieved the target potassium level of 3.8 to 5.0 mmol/L within 4 weeks. The most frequently reported adverse event was constipation.

Dueling Visions for Medicare Presented at Conference

Medicare will be new and improved next year, but what that will look like depends on who you're asking, as an audience at the Hospital of Tomorrow conference here found out earlier this week.

Andy Slavitt, acting administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), noted Tuesday that "We've committed to having 30% of [Medicare] payments linked to quality and accountability the first of next year." He noted that Medicare's Pioneer model of accountable care organization -- which emphasizes payment based on quality and outcomes -- has saved $384 million in 2 years of operation, and that CMS actuaries have certified the model for expansion.

But Rep. Kevin Brady (R-Texas), chair of the powerful House Ways and Means Health Subcommittee, said he thought the 30% goal wasn't doable. "I'm not sure they're going to hit that goal -- and more importantly, I don't think they'll hit it the right way, but from the discussions we're having with healthcare stakeholders, I'm convinced we can save dramatically in Medicare."

Instead, he said, "Next year, we want to start into the smarter, simpler, more tailored Medicare, which could be combining parts A and B with an out-of-pocket cap, making it much more simpler for seniors to understand the way Medicare is delivered to them." He also praised the premium support model, in which seniors would be given a fixed amount of money to buy a health plan, "which is the model for Medicare Advantage and Part D coverage ... It gives an option for seniors to choose Medicare that's more tailored to them."

Medicare Advantage: Room for Improvement

The Medicare Advantage program hasn't quite worked out as promised under the Affordable Care Act (ACA), according to healthcare policy experts.

They discussed the impact of the ACA on the program, as well as ways the Medicare Advantage delivery model could be improved, at the National Conference on Medicare and Medicaid and Dual Eligibles Summit, sponsored by America's Health Insurance Plans.

While designed to target the shortcomings of traditional fee-for-service Medicare, the idea that Medicare Advantage (MA) could reduce costs through better care coordination hasn't played out as intended, said Mark Miller, PhD, executive director of the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC).

Next Week

On Tuesday and Wednesday, the FDA's Pharmacy Compounding Advisory Committee will meet to discuss five bulk drug substances nominated for inclusion on the compounding list.

On Wednesday, the Senate Committee on Veterans' Affairs will discuss access to mental healthcare within the Department of Veterans Affairs.

On Wednesday, the next Republican primary debate will be held at the University of Colorado in Boulder, hosted by CNBC.

On Thursday, the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions will discuss mental health and substance use disorders in America.

On Friday, the Alliance for Health Reform will hold a briefing about high-need and high-cost patients on the Hill.