Topics: Climate Change, Dinosaurs, endangered species, extinction, Mass Extinction, Sustainability News

What with everything else going on, you might not have realized that Earth’s currently undergoing a mass loss of life — the so-called Sixth Extinction. The Fifth Extinction was the asteroid that collided with Earth some 66 million years ago, killing off the dinosaurs. This newest extinction is far less dramatic, at least in the fire-and-brimstone sort of way — which explains how it’s been happening right under our noses.

Nonetheless, by the end of this century, scientists believe, up to 20 to 50 percent of the plant and animal species on Earth could be gone forever. Only there will be no giant asteroid to blame for the loss. This time — in a “Twilight Zone”-worthy twist of fate — the giant asteroid is us.

Ever since we first began to migrate and multiply, we humans have been crowding out everything else living on Earth, leading for thousands of years a (largely) unintentional campaign against other species that, in more recent times, has gotten much, much worse.

“Right now,” journalist Elizabeth Kolbert writes, “we are deciding, without quite meaning to, which evolutionary pathways will remain open and which will forever be closed. No other creature has ever managed this, and it will, unfortunately, be our most enduring legacy.”

With remarkable journalistic prowess, Kolbert, a staff writer at the New Yorker, traveled the world to document mankind’s undeniable role in this world-changing catastrophe, drawing insight from the Amazon rainforest, the Great Barrier Reef and the changing landscape of the United States. “The Sixth Extinction: An Unnatural History” underscores the global scale, and urgent importance, of everything she saw.

Kolbert spoke with Salon about extinction’s controversial history and uncertain future. This interview has been lightly edited for length and clarity.

Back in 2009 you wrote a New Yorker article entitled “The Sixth Extinction?” I noticed the question mark’s been removed from the book. Are scientists more certain now that this is something that’s happening? What does that consensus look like?

I don’t want to claim that a tremendous amount has changed since 2009. I think there is a pretty broad consensus that we’re in the midst of a mass extinction, or a certainly a period when extinction rates are way, way above normal for the geological record, what’s called “background rate.” Now, whether we are on the verge of a major mass extinction, the beginning of one, or in the middle of one, different people have really different ideas about how you can calculate that. We get past mass extinctions from the fossil record and we don’t have the fossil record of the present yet, so it’s not that easy to compare apples to apples.

But scientists are definitely convinced that humans are causing this, that it isn’t just something that happens cyclically?

Oh yes, absolutely — it doesn’t happen cyclically. There was a theory at one point that gained a certain amount of notoriety, maybe 20 years ago, that maybe there were these cyclical extinctions that had to do with — I know it sound kind of crazy and sci-fi-y — but that maybe we passed through some kind of asteroid belt that caused a lot of damage every 26 million years. That theory has been pretty thoroughly debunked, even by the people who forwarded it at the time. I don’t think anyone subscribes to it anymore.

The general consensus is that these events are not cyclical at all; they’re quite random, and there’s no one cause. In fact, some people have concluded what is so dangerous about these events that turn out to be mass extinctions is that they’re unprecedented. They’re just weird, out-of-the-blue events. So in a sense, we, humans, are a weird, out-of-the-blue event.

Right, we’re kind of like that giant asteroid that came down and killed the dinosaurs, but at the same time the effect that we’re having is a lot slower.

That parallel is definitely being drawn. And in a geological sense, well, an asteroid impact is really, really fast — but we’re really, really fast, too. We’re not quite as fast as an asteroid, but we’re still fast. So, for example, what we’re doing to the climate and to the oceans — pouring CO2 into the oceans, causing this phenomenon known as ocean acidification — we’re doing that quite possibly faster than it has even happened before. We’re releasing CO2 at a rate that has never happened before in Earth’s history. So we are pretty fast.

I guess from a human perspective it’s hard for us to recognize how rapidly that’s happening…

Yes, exactly, and that is another interesting part of the sort of mismatch of all that. We are in the middle of it, and yet we’re doing things which to us seem incredibly ordinary. Well, okay, there are 7 billion people and X billion of them are driving cars, and that seems really ordinary, but in fact, geologically speaking, what’s happening by transferring all that CO2 from underground, basically, to the air, is really, really unusual in geological terms.

And it’s not like you can watch things happen from one day to the next — although in some sense we almost are. Things are happening at a rate that many scientists will tell you they were taught in graduate school was impossible, and now they’re seeing them actually happen.

So it’s something that’s been accelerating?