STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- Election Day is here -- 120 days without a representative in Congress, and voters on Staten Island and in parts of southern Brooklyn will cast their ballots for their next congressman.

Republican District Attorney Daniel Donovan, Democratic Councilman Vincent Gentile and Green Party candidate James Lane are vying for a seat in the House of Representatives.

The seat has been empty since Congressman Michael Grimm resigned on Jan. 5 — the day before he was to be sworn in for a third term.

Having faced a 20-count indictment, Grimm pleaded guilty to one count of federal tax fraud and will be sentenced in June.

THE CANDIDATES

Donovan has been the Staten Island district attorney for 12 years, previously chief of staff to Borough President Guy Molinari and deputy borough president to Borough President James Molinaro. Before that, he was an assistant district attorney in the Manhattan DA's office under Robert Morgenthau.

Gentile has represented his Brooklyn council district for 12 years and represented parts of Staten Island while in the state Senate for six years. Previously, he was also an assistant district attorney for the Queens DA's office under Richard Brown.

Lane is vice president at a digital media company and lives in Park Slope, Brooklyn, outside the 11th Congressional District. He said if he wins, he'll move to Staten Island.

CANDIDATE PLATFORMS

Donovan has focused his race on low taxes, little government interference and creating jobs. He touts his time in office as leading to Staten Island being the safest borough in the city.

With a baby on the way, Donovan has said he wants to go to Congress to create a better America for his child.

Gentile has focused his campaign on middle-class tax reform, a minimum wage increase and dislike for Republican proposals on Medicare, Medicaid and the Affordable Care Act. He believes his 18 years as a lawmaker makes him fit for the job.

Lane is an adoptee, who found his birth mother after years of searching an adult, and wants to see reform in that area.

He wants to see a $15/hour federal minimum wage, wants to stop climate change and wants more green jobs and energy. He also supports justice system reform and opposes the grand jury's decision not to indict in the Eric Garner case.

ERIC GARNER CASE

When asked about the divisive Garner case, Donovan points to the 23 members of the grand jury as the ultimate decision makers.

He repeats that he never entered the grand jury chamber, never interviewed the witnesses, but that his employees simply presented evidence to the jury, which decided not to indict the police office in the case.

Gentile has not criticized the grand jury's decision, but rather said that Donovan should have been more vocal about the decision and should support releasing the grand jury minutes to show how they arrived at their conclusion.

But the councilman has not made the Garner case a focus of his campaign.

Lane too is frustrated that there was no indictment and has made Eric Garner's name a big part of his campaign.

AFFORDABLE CARE ACT

Touting the 16 million more people with health insurance now than before, Gentile wants to keep the Affordable Care Act.

But Donovan, like most Republicans, wants to repeal the act, citing burdens on businesses and individuals to meet the mandate and broken promises from the Obama Administration that people will be able to keep their doctors.

Donovan has repeated that he likes two portions: allowing parents to keep their children on their policies until age 26 and covering people with pre-existing conditions.

He only recently clearly stated that he was in favor of repealing, while including those two provision in a future health care act.

Lane said he wants a "Medicare for all" system.

NATIONAL SECURITY

While Gentile supports sending American funds to groups overseas fighting ISIS, Hamas and other terrorist organizations, he doesn't support putting American troops on the ground.

Donovan has not stated exactly what he would support, saying he would consult military experts and use their advice to shape his vote.

Lane wants less money being spent on the military altogether, instead spending it on social programs like those that provide health care and insurance.

IMMIGRATION

Both Gentile and Donovan agree that America's southern border with Mexico must be secured to stop people from crossing illegally.

But Gentile wants to see an amnesty program, wherein the estimated 12 million people in the country illegally can pay penalties and become citizens.

Donovan doesn't support amnesty, instead he said he wants to "reward" those who have gone through the immigration system legally and said America should reform the system that takes too long and encourages people to break immigration laws.

COMMON GROUND

Both Gentile and Donovan said they would seek federal funding for transportation investments in the congressional district and all three candidates said there needs to be more help for people affected by Hurricane Sandy.

DEBATES AND ENDORSEMENTS

All three candidates debated in a Brooklyn forum last month and only Donovan and Gentile faced off in a live, televised debate on Staten Island.

Donovan has gotten the endorsements of Bridge and Tunnel Officers, NYPD Captain Endowments Association, NYPD Lieutenants Benevolent Association, United Fire Officers Association, Uniformed Firefighters Association, New York State Court Officers Association, Port Authority Police Benevolent Association, U.S. Chamber of Commerce and more.

Gentile has been endorsed by the New York Hotel and Motel Trades Council, the Staten Island Democratic Association, 1199SEIU United Healthcare Workers East union, 32 BJ SEIU, NYC Allied Printing Trades Council and Young Democrats of Richmond County.

The Southern Brooklyn Democrats and Socialist Alternative New York City Committee have endorsed Lane.

Sample Ballot 2015