The trial of a former nonprofit CEO accused of health care fraud has been ordered delayed after a federal judge agreed it was "complex."

The trial of Jonathan Dunning, 51, is now set to start June 8 in U.S. District Court in Birmingham. It was previously scheduled for April 6.

"The indictment contains 112 counts, relating to a complex defrauding of the government based upon extensive accounting evidence related to the use of more than 80 bank accounts and loans," wrote U.S. Magistrate Judge T. Michael Putnam in an order filed Monday. "The government's investigation lasted two years and involved multiple indictments of other alleged co-conspirators."

Dunning was arrested Feb. 2, pleaded not guilty and is out on $50,000 bond.

The indictment, unsealed the date of his arrest, contains allegations that over the course of six years, $14 million in federal money has been diverted to private businesses controlled by Dunning.

In their motion asking for case to be declared complex and for the delay, Dunning's lawyers stated that the government has produced 16 CDs of discovery, covering more than 150,000 pages of data, and 40 grand jury transcripts.

"Defendant's attorneys have been advised by the United States that there is one entire Credit Union that was a central part to the alleged scheme/conspiracy and all those records will need to be reviewed," Dunning's motion stated.

AL.com had previously reported that federal regulators pointed to poor management and a "serious conflict of interest" for the melting down of the Birmingham Financial Credit Union in 2011 while being run by Dunning.

Dunning faces charges of conspiracy, wire fraud, bank fraud and money laundering in connection with his employment or involvement with Birmingham Health Care, Central Alabama Comprehensive Health, the credit union and a string of for-profit businesses known as the Synergy Entities, according to the government.

Dunning is the fourth person charged in connection with Birmingham Health Care and Central Alabama Comprehensive Health in Tuskegee.

Indicted earlier on various charges were former chief financial officer Terri Mollica; former bookkeeper Sheila Osborne Parker; and her son, James Parker.

Mollica has pleaded not guilty to various fraud and money laundering charges; the Parkers pleaded guilty as part of a plea deal.

Birmingham Health Care started in 1985 as a nationwide pilot project with federal and private foundation backing. It is one of about 1,300 community health centers nationwide that have been called the "backbone," or safety net, of the Affordable Care Act's goal of providing health care to all.

Problems were first reported by AL.com and the Birmingham News in 2012 when it was revealed that Central Alabama Comprehensive Health and Birmingham Health Care paid more than $2 million to Dunning's private companies for contracting service, including while Dunning was CEO of the companies.

READ MORE: Money trail leads to criminal probe of community health centers, the backbone of Obamacare: AL.com investigates