Politics

U.S. Rep. Henry Waxman's Retirement Marks End Of L.A.'s Jewish Political Era

U.S. Representative Henry Waxman (D-Ca.) will turn 75 next month and will retire by the end of the year after 46 years of political service. His retirement will not only mark the end of a lifelong career in elected office, but will also be the end of an era of Los Angeles Jewish politicians.



Waxman is the last Jewish politician in Los Angeles after Rep. Howard Berman lost to Rep. Brad Sherman during a reelection and L.A. County Supervisor Zev Yaroslavsky's retirement this year.



Like Us on Facebook

In an interview with JTS, Yaroslavsky said that it was "the end of an era."



The county supervisor added that he, Rep. Berman and Rep Waxman, were all part of the same generation of Jewish politicians.



President Obama said Waxman was "one of the best lawmakers of his or any era," after the representative announced his retirement in January.



Waxman has spearheaded several legislations like 6the Affordable Care act and has propelled the revision of the Clean Air Act.



The representative has also headed hearings regarding the policy on AIDS and tobacco.



In a statement released by Pat Brown Institute executive director Raphael Sonenshein of Cal State Los Angeles, he said Waxman may be the most accomplished representative who served since the Johnson era.



"He may be the greatest warrior in the last 50 years of federal social policy," Sohenshein added.



Despite Waxman's mellow manner of speaking and his moderate height, he has established himself as a political giant in the House of Representatives, according to Haaretz.



During an interview, Waxman told JTA that he has already accomplished most of his goals, including the acts and policies that he has pressed.



Waxman's district office is near the Jewish area of Boyle Height where he was born and is only a few miles away from West Los Angeles where he and his fellow Jews moved and prospered.



©2016 Chinatopix All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission