Topics: Affordable Care Act, Editor's Picks, GOP, Kay Hagan, Medicaid, Medicaid expansion, North Carolina, Obamacare, Republicans, The Right, Thom Tillis, Politics News

In early 2013, the North Carolina general assembly passed legislation rejecting the expansion of Medicaid within the state under the Affordable Care Act. Leading the opposition was Speaker Thom Tillis, now the Republican candidate for Senate, who argued that expanding Medicaid would only hurt taxpayers in the state. “This bill puts the interests of our taxpayers and Medicaid patients first,” Tillis said at the time. “It is clear that North Carolina’s Medicaid system is broken. This bill is rightly focused on repairing Medicaid to better serve our citizens, rather than expanding a broken program.”

A few months later, Democrats in the state legislature tried to get Republican Gov. Pat McCrory to reconsider the decision and call a special session to take up the Medicaid expansion. McCrory refused, and he had the full support of Tillis. “An expansion of Medicaid would cost North Carolina taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars through 2021,” Tillis said in a statement. “If these liberal activists were truly serious about reducing the cost of health insurance, they would be in Washington protesting Obamacare, an abomination that has caused insurance premiums to skyrocket for working families.”

In campaigning for Senate against Democratic incumbent Kay Hagan, Tillis presented himself as an implacable foe of the Affordable Care Act. His campaign website calls the law “a cancer on our national economy.” He backed efforts in the Senate to defund the law that ultimately led to the 2013 government shutdown. “I believe Obamacare is a mortal threat to our economy. It will decrease healthcare quality and raise healthcare premiums and Republicans should do everything in our power to undo it.” During the Republican primary for the Senate nomination, Tillis aired ads boasting that he “stopped Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion cold. It’s not happening in North Carolina, and it’s because of Thom Tillis.”

You get the idea: Thom Tillis, enemy of Obamacare, vanquisher of expanded Medicaid.

And so it was surprising, but only slightly, when Thom Tillis appeared on TWC News’ “Capitol Tonight” last night and said North Carolina should definitely consider expanding Medicaid under Obamacare:

Asked if he thought it would be likely that the state legislature would expand Medicaid coverage after refusing to do so previously, Tillis said it might make sense once the state has better control of the financing of the program, which is notorious for its cost overruns. He said he didn’t have an ideological objection to expanding the coverage. But he said when the state auditor told the previous governor that money was being wasted on it, the appropriate response would not have been to make it bigger and more costly. “I would encourage the state legislature and governor to consider it if they’re completely convinced they now have the situation under control,” Tillis said.