Sherine E. Gabriel has been appointed dean of Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in New Brunswick, effective August 2015.

Gabriel currently serves as dean of Mayo Medical School at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, a position she has held since 2012. She is also professor of medicine and professor of epidemiology at Mayo Medical School, where she has held the William J. and Charles H. Mayo endowed professorship since 2005.

Gabriel, who has been associated with the Mayo Clinic in a variety of academic and leadership roles for nearly 30 years, is also an established NIH-funded investigator in the epidemiology of the rheumatic diseases.

Photo: Courtesy Sherine Gabriel Sherine E. Gabriel, who becomes dean of Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in August. High Res

“Our search committee recognized the combination of assets that Sherine Gabriel brings,” said Brian Strom, chancellor of Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences . “She has exceptional strengths in medical school education administration and instruction. In addition, she is a noted researcher with a strong background in research administration and has played significant roles in the success of Mayo Clinic’s business development activities.”

During her first year as dean of Mayo Medical School, Gabriel launched a program to design, implement, and disseminate an education model to help future physicians achieve better care, healthier patients and communities, and more affordable health care – an initiative recognized by the American Medical Association through a competitive award.

Her largely NIH-funded research has resulted in more than 250 peer-reviewed original scientific publications addressing the costs, determinants and outcomes of the rheumatic diseases.

Gabriel is recognized, in particular, for her epidemiologic studies examining the risks of connective tissue diseases among women with breast implants, population-based studies characterizing the epidemiology of nearly all major rheumatic diseases, and her studies defining the economic impact of rheumatoid arthritis. Most recently, her research has focused on the risks and determinants of heart disease among persons with rheumatoid arthritis. She is past president of the American College of Rheumatology.

She has served on many governmental committees and advisory boards, including the FDA Drug Safety and Risk Management Committee. Gabriel was appointed by the U.S. Government Accountability Office to the methodology committee of the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI), created by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010, and served as the committee’s first chair.

Gabriel received her undergraduate education at the University of Regina, Saskatchewan, Canada, and the College of Pharmacy at the University of Saskatchewan Medical School before earning her medical degree at the University of Saskatchewan.

She began her association with the Mayo Clinic in 1983, first with a residency in internal medicine, and later with a fellowship in rheumatology, at the Mayo Graduate School of Medicine. She earned a master’s degree in clinical epidemiology at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario, and has attended graduate executive education courses at the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania and the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University.

Gabriel became a senior associate consultant in the Mayo Clinic’s Department of Internal Medicine in 1990. Among subsequent appointments there, she was chair of the Mayo Clinic’s Department of Health Sciences Research, medical director of its international office and medical director of its Office for Strategic Alliances and Business Development. She also served as a member of the Mayo Clinic executive board.