Photo

WASHINGTON — If anyone needed proof that Washington has exhausted its interest in deficit reduction, and given up seeking some bipartisan grand bargain, it came on Wednesday: At the annual fiscal summit meeting of the antideficit Peter G. Peterson Foundation, where V.I.P.s and reporters once flocked for budget news, the newsmakers’ talk often veered far from the fiscal. The main news was politics.

Former President Bill Clinton, a featured speaker at all five summit meetings, responded to recent speculation from Karl Rove, the Republican strategist, that Hillary Rodham Clinton might have suffered a “traumatic brain injury” in a 2012 fall that would preclude her from being president.

“First, they said she faked her concussion, and now they say she’s auditioning for a part in ‘The Walking Dead,’ ” Mr. Clinton said, addressing the issue for the first time.

“As far as I can tell, she’s in better shape than I am,” he added. “She certainly seems to have more stamina now. And there’s nothing to it. I was sort of dumbfounded.”

Mr. Clinton said that this was “just the beginning” of Republicans going after Mrs. Clinton, and suggested the sort of counsel he might give her as she weighed whether to seek his former job. “I’m still waiting for them to admit there was nothing to Whitewater,” he said. “It’s just part of the deal.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

He did acknowledge that Mrs. Clinton had suffered a “very serious concussion,” and that it had taken her months to fully recover. Mrs. Clinton was hospitalized for a few days at the end of 2012 after sustaining a concussion, which led to a blood clot in a vein between her brain and her skull behind her right ear.

Following Mr. Clinton on the stage, Gov. Chris Christie, Republican of New Jersey, said a quick yes when asked whether he was considering running for president — even as new questions about his state’s budget woes combined with a continuing political scandal to complicate a potential candidacy.

With New Jersey facing an annual deficit approaching $1 billion in a roughly $34 billion budget, Mr. Christie said: “I’ll make an announcement next week about how do we fix it. We will fix it.” But he ruled out tax increases, saying wealthy residents were already taxed too highly there.

The event’s timing was awkward for both Mr. Christie and his hosts at the Peter G. Peterson Foundation, which invited him on the program for his experience “balancing difficult fiscal choices,” and to discuss the federal budget outlook, not New Jersey’s.

Photo

A day earlier, Moody’s Investors Service announced the latest of a series of recent downgrades of New Jersey’s creditworthiness by major ratings firms, all of which have criticized it for annually overestimating revenue collections and relying on one-time deficit-cutting measures rather than tax or spending changes that would have a continuing impact to limit budgets.

While New Jersey’s revenues have fallen short for several years, Mr. Christie focused on 2013 in explaining the latest shortfall. He blamed state economists for not anticipating how much high-income residents, like those who work on Wall Street, would shift income into late 2012 to avoid higher federal income taxes on the wealthy that took effect last year.

Mr. Christie said the economists told him they were sorry, and he replied, “Yeah, sure you are, but I’m the one who has to fix your miss.”

His questioner, Bob Schieffer of CBS News, followed the volley of queries on New Jersey’s budget woes with a few on the scandal involving the role of former Christie aides in days of politically motivated traffic jams. Asked what impact the scandal and continuing investigations would have on his political ambitions, Mr. Christie quickly said, “I think it will have none because I didn’t do anything.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

While he and Mr. Clinton both drew interest for their potential parts in the 2016 election, each addressed the approaching midterm elections for Congress.

Mr. Clinton said Democrats should not run away from the Affordable Care Act in their campaigns, but embrace it for its benefits and promise improvements where needed. “Nobody could have done this perfectly,” he said, given the complexity of the health system.

And citing benefits and improved insurance coverage that millions of Americans are receiving, he said, “I think we’re rocking along pretty good here.”

Mr. Christie was critical of congressional Republicans’ opposition to any increase in the federal minimum wage. He said he favored an increase, just not in one step but in stages to give businesses time to adjust. In general, he said, Republicans should be “explaining ourselves and not appearing to be intolerant.”

If Republicans take control of Congress in this year’s midterm elections, Mr. Christie said that Republican lawmakers as well as President Obama will be tested, since they will have to work together if anything is to get done.

He suggested that for Mr. Obama to have a more productive final two years, “The argument is for a Republican House and Senate.”