Advertisement - story continues below

President Obama said Friday that data showing the U.S. economy added 242,000 jobs in February shows that “plans we have put in place to grow the economy have worked.”

“America’s businesses are creating jobs at the fastest pace since the 1990s. America’s workforce is growing at the fastest pace since the year 2000. It is showing the kind of strength and durability that makes America’s economy right now the envy of the world,” he said.

“Right,” wrote John. S. Roberts on Young Conservatives. “Nothing says you care about your fellow Americans like implementing job killers like Obamacare.”

Advertisement – story continues below

“How can he explain his choice of words to the 90 million-plus who are out of work?” Roberts wrote. “How can he explain his words to the most Americans on food stamps the nation has ever seen?”

Obama maintained that “the facts don’t lie.” However, there are other numbers not trumpeted by the White House that attracted the attention of Financial Times writer Shawn Donnan, who said the trends at work below the headlines show why the economy is a seething issue for average Americans.

Although the official national unemployment rate in January was 4.9 percent, the labor utilization rate — which counts individuals not officially registered as looking for work and those working part-time — is 9.9 percent.

Advertisement – story continues below

Viewed that way, Donnan wrote there are 15.9 million Americans without full-time jobs.

“That is more than five times the 2.9 (million) Republicans who voted for Donald Trump across 11 states on Tuesday,” Donnan wrote.

As for long-term unemployment — individuals out of work for more than 26 weeks — that figure has hovered around 2 million Americans since June 2015, Donnan wrote.

“… the long-term unemployed still make up more than one in four of the total unemployed in the U.S. And a million more Americans are still battling long-term unemployment than before the (economic) crisis,” he wrote.

Advertisement – story continues below

Donnan also did the math on wages, and found that the picture was not very rosy.

“Adjusted for inflation, the real median household income in 2014, the latest year for which data are available, was $53,657. That was roughly equivalent to the median American household income in 1996,” he wrote.

h/t: Young Conservatives