WE all know who the champion state is when it comes to the beautiful game of rugby league.

Eight and zero says it all for Queensland really, and I am sure they will recreate some more of that winning magic when Origin roll around again this year.

But it’s not just the field where the mighty Maroons will be victorious.

We could also win it in a SuperCoach State of Origin showdown.

When I put together the best Queensland SuperCoach team I could afford, I did not base my side around a single player.

TAKE PART IN OUR SUPERCOACH CHALLENGE!

Supercoach: Centres 3:18 Play video Lara Pitt and Tom Sangster analyse where the value is in the centres.

I decided to base my team on exactly that — the concept of a team.

To be more precise, I based it onf the team that took Queensland’s streak to eight series in a row last year.

I adopted the mighty front-row combination of Cameron Smith, Matt Scott and Nate Myles.

Unfortunately in the second row I had to drop the overly expensive Corey Parker but I was able to make up for it with one of the Maroons’ best in Matt Gillett, who came off the bench last year.

I also subbed Ben Te’o into the starting side for his Rabbitohs teammate Chris McQueen, purely based on price.

Supercoach: Halves 3:24 Play video Lara Pitt and Tom Sangster take a look at where the value is when it comes to the crucial halves positions, and who to avoid.

When it came to the halves, I knew I could not go wrong with Johnathan Thurston and Cooper Cronk. The same goes for my SuperCoach centres, Greg Inglis and Darius Boyd.

Given the tough salary cap constraints however, I had to make changes to my backline and dropped Billy Slater, Brent Tate and Justin Hodges for Ben Barba, Justin O’Neill and Dane Gagai.

That’s just how lucky we are up in Queensland though.

You can drop some of the biggest and best names in the state and it doesn’t matter. You just replace them with some other talented blokes.

Supercoach: Fullback 3:29 Play video Lara Pitt and Tom Sangster check out who are the best options when it comes to Fullback.

See, as I was creating this Queensland side, that’s what I was so impressed with — the guys we have waiting in the wings.

In my eyes Gagai is the next Hodges, and even if Mal Meninga has banned him from the real Origin team, he can still have a place in mine.

I am also happy to have been able to make room for Chris McQueen on the bench as he’s a definite smoky for 2014.

But the reserve I picked first wasn’t McQueen. It was Rooster Dylan Napa.

That kid is going to be a star I reckon, and I think if he gets plenty of game time for the Roosters this year, it won’t be long until we see him in the maroon jumper too.

TALLIS’ SUPERCOACH TEAM: