Surrounded by friends and supporters and standing in front of the

United States Court House where he once worked, Ken Sukhia announced his candidacy

as a Republican for the U.S. Congress, District 2 seat. The former United States Attorney

representing North Florida highlighted his lifelong fight for conservative principles and

his desire to answer the call to defend those now embattled values.



“Just a few months ago, I had no intention to run for Congress. But I fear our nation is on

the brink of social, economic and political ruin. I am running for Congress to take part in

the battle to preserve our American principles and way of life. I believe I would serve our

district well, because I am the only candidate with a proven lifetime record of fighting for

conservative principles. I want to know that when the foundations were under attack I did

all I could to fight for the core American principles of personal and economic freedom,

religious liberty, and personal responsibility,” said Mr. Sukhia.



Mr. Sukhia was appointed by President George H.W. Bush to serve as U.S. Attorney.

During that time, he ran one of the most productive offices in the country and sent violent

criminals to prison, including both foreign and domestic terrorists. In private practice,

Sukhia fought Planned Parenthood in court in their challenge to Florida’s Parental

Notification of Abortion Act. He successfully fought for the rights of our military to have

their votes counted during the 2000 Presidential Recount. He assisted the former Florida

Attorney General in the case challenging the constitutionality of Obamacare. He headed

Florida’s First Joint Medicaid and Medicare Fraud Task Force, fought in Washington for

passage of the Internet Decency Act and defended in court Florida’s school voucher

program.



During this campaign, Sukhia will specifically address his plans to: fight illegal

immigration; defend both our religious and 2nd Amendment freedoms; fight terrorism;

and repeal of Obamacare.



A review of Mr. Sukhia’s credentials confirms his front line experience in some of the

major battles of our day:



• U. S. Attorney in one of the most productive offices in the nation.

• Fought Planned Parenthood in Trial Defending Florida’s Parental Notice of

Abortion Act

• Fought Gore as Federal Trial Attorney for Bush in the 2000 Recount Election

Battle

• Stood up in Court Battle to Defend Florida’s School Voucher Program

• Assisted Florida Attorney General in fight against Obamacare

• Went to Congress to Urge Passage of the Internet Decency Act to Protect Children

• Testified Numerous Times in U.S. Congress for Stronger Criminal Justice System

• Fought Battle in Congress to save Terri Schiavo from Forced Death

• Testified in DC Opposing Obama’s Criminal Justice Policies

• Headed the State’s first Joint Medicare and Medicaid Fraud Task Force

• Named by President GHW Bush as one of top 3 US Attorneys Prosecuting

National Pornographers

• Fought for our military’s right to have their votes counted during 2000

Presidential Recount.

• Sent violent criminals to prison including both foreign and domestic terrorists.

The new 2nd Congressional District runs throughout Northwest and North Central

Florida. It includes all or part of Bay, Calhoun, Columbia, Dixie, Franklin, Gilchrist, Gulf,

Jackson, Jefferson, Lafayette, Leon, Levy, Liberty, Marion, Suwannee, Taylor, Wakulla

and Washington counties.



For more on Ken Sukhia’s background and campaign platform, visit his website at

www.FightWithKen.com.