Urban Center Alex Runner’s blog was part of our Purple Wisconsin project. A former city policy advisor, Runner is an advocate of pragmatic government innovation that cuts through ideological divisions. SHARE

By

When most of us read about the failures of the Milwaukee County Mental Health Complex under Scott Walker, we think the stories are tragic – and then we go about our business. But if you watched the well being of your own mother significantly diminish in that facility, you can't just go about your business. This is what turned one likely Walker supporter into a powerful critic and champion for mental health reform:

Shaina Franzen.

You're passionate about mental health in Milwaukee, due to your firsthand experience. Tell us about it.

As I was growing up, my mom has had bipolar disorder all her life, so she was always in and out of the mental health complex. In 2008, when I was 16 years old, she went there for treatment and ended up being there more than a year – where she became so physically ill, she had to be sent to a nursing home in Muskego at age 55; she has been bound to a wheelchair since her stay at the complex. So, to say I had to grow up fast as a teenager is an understatement. But I consider my mom to be one of the lucky ones, because she didn’t die there. Other families have not been so lucky, and it’s been heartbreaking to read about.



We all know about Scott Walker the politician. What about Scott Walker the administrator? How was he at running the mental health complex?

Well, first I want to start off by saying that problems at the mental health complex have existed for decades. So, it’s not fair to say that one county executive or county board is to blame for all these problems. But with that being said, Walker was in charge for eight years, and I think it’s important to mention that budget cuts are not some abstract idea. They have a real impact on real lives. For example, from 2002-04, the county required that social workers check up on us whenever my mother was released from the complex. But by 2008, due to cuts, that didn't happen anymore.

Based on the emails released from the first John Doe investigation, then-County Executive Walker seemed primarily concerned with media attention, rather than the people affected. At one point he simply says, "Keep me out of it." Is that the sense that you got?

It doesn’t surprise me that he was concerned about media attention. (Let’s be honest, I’m sure ALL elected officials worry about from time to time.) As far as him trying to stay out of it, I don’t think he did a very good job, because I remember Journal Sentinel stories from that time period about him refusing to fire the former mental health complex administrator, John Chianelli, only demoting him, etc. Tom Barrett also ran attack ads about Walker's management of the mental health complex. So, though Walker wanted to stay out of it, this definitely became an issue just before the election.





In one of the emails released, Walker's deputy chief of staff says: "No one cares about crazy people." How did you feel when you read that?

Unlike most stunned Wisconsin citizens who read that, I experienced firsthand the failure of that place, so I couldn’t help taking it a bit personally. It got me pretty angry and upset more than anything, and it’s almost like it opened an old wound. Everything my mom went through there happened under Walker's administration, and here you have one of his top staff showing total disregard for the vulnerable people they were supposed to be serving. Anyone who has had a family member go through that system would probably feel the same way. Would she have said that if it was one of HER family members going there for treatment?





You're a strong Christian and you're pro-life. It would seem like you'd be a likely voter for Governor Walker. Is his mishandling of mental health issues the main reason you don't support him?

It’s funny you say that, because the 2010 governor’s race was the first election I ever voted in, and had the mental health complex not been an issue, I likely would’ve voted for Walker – partly because I am pro-life. I knew little about politics at the time, but I figured since he couldn’t properly manage a mental health hospital, he wasn’t fit to manage the state. As 2011 went on, I saw more and more reasons to dislike him as governor, and he’s the reason I ultimately became a card-carrying Democrat. I will say, though, I’m thankful to him, in a way, for making me become politically engaged and involved like I never was before. I absolutely love following and blogging about local and state politics now, and I’m usually the youngest person at political fundraisers. So that’s the bright side to all of this.

In the image above, Shaina stands with State Representative Joe Sanfelippo, who is spearheading legislation to reform the mental health complex. Shaina is a strong supporter of this bill.

And here is a video of an earlier interview that Shaina did with the Journal Sentinel for a series about the Mental Health Complex.

Editor's Note: Purple Wisconsin is a collection of community bloggers with views from across the political spectrum. The Journal Sentinel hosts these blogs as a way to encourage thoughtful debate about the important issues facing Wisconsin and the Milwaukee region. The opinions voiced here are those of the individual bloggers alone; they are responsible for their posts. The Journal Sentinel does not edit or direct the bloggers in any fashion.