Practicing optometry is a family affair for me. In 41 years as an optometrist, I have secured contact lens design patents and run national clinical studies. But the most important thing I do is strive to maintain excellence in patient care. My passion stems from my optometrist father, who always ensured high quality care for his loyal patients. My daughter, niece and cousin also followed in his footsteps.

When I began practicing, optometrists were not even allowed to place dilating eye drops in patients' eyes.

With expanded education and clinical training, we now provide comprehensive eye health care. We diagnose and treat serious, chronic eye health problems such as glaucoma, as well as acute eye infection and inflammation. In addition, we identify signs of systemic and often life-threatening diseases such as high blood pressure, diabetes and cancer. We cannot ignore a patient's systemic health because vision and eye health are dependent on good overall health.

When I encounter a problem that I cannot or do not choose to treat, I consult appropriate physician and surgeon colleagues. The governing credo is to do what is in the best interest of the patient.

This is not about egos or territorial lines in the sand. It is about patients.

Advertisement

Other states and health care organizations are embracing the role that all qualified providers can play in helping improve access to health care. In California, state Sen. Ed Hernandez, D-Los Angeles, has introduced SB 622 to help alleviate a growing doctor shortage by expanding the services that doctors of optometry can provide, allowing them to practice to the full extent of their training. It passed in the Senate with overwhelming bipartisan support and awaits action in the Assembly.

It will provide a pathway for optometrists to undergo additional training to perform additional health services if they choose to do so. Specifically, it will allow optometrists to treat minor lumps and bumps on the eyelid, immunize patients over the age of 18 against influenza, pneumonia and shingles, and provide simple laser therapy for specific diseases that optometrists are already allowed to treat.

Patient safety is at the heart of SB 622. It requires extensive postgraduate and clinical training. SB 622 also requires optometrists to follow the same requirements and standards as pharmacists to be certified to offer flu, shingles and pneumococcus immunizations for adults.

We are fortunate to have caring, highly trained physicians and surgeons here. But there aren't enough to go around, especially as our population ages.

One-third of our medical doctors are older than the age of 55, a quarter of them are older than 65. Meanwhile, the Affordable Care Act is promising access to quality health care to millions of Californians.

California optometrists already provide 81 percent of Medi-Cal eye care. SB 622 will allow our partners in eye care, ophthalmologists, to focus on patients who need specialized services only they can provide.

This measure is supported by the California Association for Nurse Practitioners, the Bay Area Council, Western University of Health Sciences, the California Pharmacists Association, California Health System Pharmacists and Blue Shield of CA.

I am proud to be an optometrist in California. As the health care landscape changes, our role is evolving. Together, all health care professionals can work cooperatively to ensure that all Californians have access to quality care.

Ronald G. Seger, O.D., F.A.A.O, owns Shoreline Optometry and has been providing vision care in Mountain View since 1988. He wrote this for this newspaper.