Introducing the Next Generation Service Technology Designed to Enhance the Consumer Experience

HOFFMAN ESTATES, IL--(Marketwired - Jan 25, 2014) - ADP Dealer Services, Inc. a division of ADP® and a leading global technology solutions partner dedicated to helping dealerships drive measurable results across every area of their operation, announced today an enterprise license agreement with Ford Motor Company ( NYSE : F) for the ADP ServiceEdge solution.

Ford will rebrand the ADP solution for Ford and Lincoln dealers as Ford & Lincoln SMART Technology powered by ADP. These applications were designed specifically with the customer experience in mind.

"Ford and ADP have recognized that we're reaching a new era in the service department where the customer is more empowered and expects more control, transparency and personal treatment," said Bob Karp, ADP's SVP North America Operations and Sales. "The ADP ServiceEdge technology enables this transformation, plus it gives dealers a consistent process to drive their growth in service."

Ford has begun a national rollout campaign to announce the first component of SMART Technology, SMARTT Appointments -- Ford's new, DMS-integrated, online solution, which helps Ford and Lincoln customers schedule service appointments at their preferred dealership by simply visiting Ford and Lincoln websites, including Fordowner.com and Lincolnowner.com. Customers can select their preferred Service Advisor, maintenance package and method of transportation. Also, appointments are recorded seamlessly into the Dealer Management Systems, and automatic reminders are emailed to customers in advance of every visit.

Additional SMART Technology system modules will be announced later this year.

About ADP

With more than $11 billion in revenues and more than 60 years of experience, ADP® ( NASDAQ : ADP) serves approximately 620,000 clients in more than 125 countries. As one of the world's largest providers of business outsourcing and Human Capital Management solutions, ADP offers a wide range of human resource, payroll, talent management, tax and benefits administration solutions from a single source, and helps clients comply with regulatory and legislative changes, such as the Affordable Care Act (ACA). ADP's easy-to-use solutions for employers provide superior value to companies of all types and sizes. ADP is also a leading provider of integrated computing solutions to auto, truck, motorcycle, marine, recreational vehicle, and heavy equipment dealers throughout the world. For more information about ADP, visit the company's Web site at www.adp.com.

The ADP logo and ADP are registered trademarks of ADP, Inc. ADP ServiceEdge is a service mark of ADP, Inc. All other marks are the property of their respective owners. Copyright © 2014 ADP, Inc.