This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

... one day away from Christmas one of the holiest place Christine found that ... only look back at the yet how religion shape the wealth and how it might shed in twenty fifteen to help us with half of a jolt Martin joins us from the police on the touch on the other side of Manhattan this bother you and thank you my much was coming back from a good to be here Simon aam ... has been a lot going on and on in the world than it has been shaped implying ... by religion in many ways ... now one other things that you mention is of Obamacare ... the of the Affordable Care Act powerhouse not been checked by religion ... well it's been the story of confrontation tree New bomb administration in the Catholic Church in particular although a lot of for the ... processing groups that involve two ... of ... the little sis is for a religious order of nuns that run it from being compelled ... to offer contraceptive an abortive patient bills ... to their employees and they said no and this became a cut of the signature fight in the church ... I know those nuns ... they serve the ... for the elderly to run nursing homes ... of but they're also very devout Catholics of the someone I can do this over ... the legal fight has really shaped the Catholic church's stance as regards its administration ... of when I can be pushed around ... and some on the heels dug in that I've done much into ... the hills in every city every sense of the what that Obama can still do still that they're taking a long though but maybe with some I'd actions well waiting for some Supreme Court decision about state funding of the things of federal funding of state exchanges that they set up ... the thing is a mess in my opinion but certainly is a religious leader I say ... we don't want the government telling us how we conduct their operations ... that was also a Pope Francis ... has been very ... active ambition to become very popular not just within the Catholic Church but ... of the month of the wanted us of religious community on the busters in an unknown Christie ... yes the fact that it's a very interesting unique impact he said on the non Christian world of by his style to start with a non Orthodox ... he's not the traditional papal figured he'd he does things that people don't expect ... he went to Brazil this past summer made a tremendous impact ... of he's had a great impact precisely because he's approachable he's friendly ... and ... he's wise he's a man has lived a long life to be sharing their wisdom and an all out and he'll say was cleaning up the Vatican Bank and the Vatican Bank might do ... some more interesting and innovative things and next year ... I'm in terms of looking at money management yet sexy this is a very important story for the church the Vatican Bank was a lot of problems because it was kind of a close the mysterious defensive opaque sometimes the Vatican but it did is that he's even also that would be analysts say the black hole the located in the Holy see but ... the Pope wanted to clean that up from the start he named Australian cargo Cardinal George Pell ... who is brought in professional managers and the they performed at the are going to get into money management for religious orders and dioceses ... and that's a very smart move in the diocese and that will control by the Vatican financially ... so if they are investing money in different places that they can centralize on the Vatican ... had good greater return and then the other prophets will then go back to the church wedding it's a great idea about that is above our operational like it particularly looking a bit ... the Vatican but now that the puzzle Synaptics McConnell who also gone will summon the shape of this year a whole lot was the rise of Islamic states ... that isn't going away anytime soon so that's can it continue to shape the world in twenty fifteen is that it is and this is a real problem for the Islamic world ... because ... this is a fanatical version of Islam that is seemingly attractive at today's prices is attracting least fighters including Europeans going over there to fight ... it's the it's a horrible perversion of religion ... to claim that God wants is to cut children's heads off when they don't convert to Christianity which is from Christianity Islam which is precisely what to do when ... it's barbaric and to ... the civilized world has to rise up ... the problem is you can pray these people out of existence you base have to fight them a mean this in the just war theory of the Catholic Church starting with St Agustin ... is absolutely verify here ... evil men who want to kill innocent people must be stopped and thought Sobel equally on on on on let's hope that they won't think of RGS Christmas ... father Gerald of my right