Owners get a guilt trip at the vets to add to bill

PET owners are being pressured by guilt into spending hundreds of dollars for expensive and unnecessary tests, says the RSPCA.

Some vets go straight to costly diagnostic testing without offering any alternative. according to the society’s Victorian president Hugh Wirth.

“A vet should identify what treatments are available for each condition and the costs and benefits of each option,’’ Dr Wirth said.

“They shouldn’t make clients feel guilty if they choose the lower-cost option. Only where the problem isn’t straightforward should blood tests and so on be ordered.”

He said pet owners should ask more questions of vets and even seek a second opinion.

His comments came in the wake of a new claim of “over-servicing” in the veterinary industry, drawing an angry reaction from some vets, as preventive pet healthcare and hi-tech diagnostics are now the “gold standard” taught in veterinary schools.

“If you are happy with receiving cut-price, low-quality care for your animal despite your highly educated vet advising you otherwise, I cannot stop you from seeking that,” one vet wrote in response.

OPINION: A trip to the vet shouldn’t include a scalping

Yvonne Merritt took her cat to the vet for a dental clean. She was told it would cost her $500 because the cat would need a general anaesthetic.

Before she picked up her cat, the vet called her and said he needed to put three stitches in an old wound that she knew had healed. For that she was quoted an extra $450.

“I didn’t pay the extra. It was ridiculous. I’m a self-funded retiree — you don’t expect to be taken for a ride by your vet,” said Mrs Merritt. She has found a new vet.

“But the whole industry is getting a bad name because the minority do the wrong thing.”

Mrs Merritt was one of dozens of pet owners to contact the Sunday Herald Sun after an opinion piece published this week suggested some vets used owners’ ignorance and guilt to sell treatments. They told of:

A VET who refused to put down a very old and incontinent cat and instead offered a three-month course of anti- depressants;

THE owner of an eight-week-old Chihuahua was told it needed operations on both its back legs — at $2000 a leg. The operation was refused and, several years later, the dog has no leg problems; and

A SPECIALIST rabbit vet charged $700 to file a pet ­rabbit’s teeth.

Australian Veterinary ­Association president Ben Gardiner welcomed what he said was a “reasonable debate” highlighting the issue.

Where problems weren’t life-threatening, vets should not make people feel guilty for opting out, particularly because of cost, he said.

“I’d be concerned if any vet in the association was doing that,” he said, adding that sometimes pet owners should think on the options overnight.

ruth.lamperd@news.com.au