Tax cuts and business incentives are expected to be the hot topics as the Florida House and Senate work through the differences in the separate spending plans they approved this past week. But mental health, long starved of adequate attention and resources by Tallahassee, deserves a spot at the top of the agenda.

Florida is in the cellar among states in financing mental-health services. Its funding per state resident in 2011-12, the most recent year for national rankings, was just 30 percent of the U.S. average. State dollars dedicated to mental health have crept up since then, but only by single-digit percentages.

This shortage of funding creates a shortage of treatment, and undermines the care that is available. In a report last year, Florida's lead mental-health agency calculated the unmet need for services in the state at $356 million. Last year a Tampa Bay Times and Sarasota Herald-Tribune investigation found that $100 million in cuts at state mental hospitals since 2009 had left them plagued by violence and injuries amid staff shortages and crumbling facilities.

Mental-health advocates have highlighted Florida's failure to provide adequate funding for care, but so have the business-oriented budget watchdogs at Florida TaxWatch. In a report issued in March 2015, TaxWatch concluded that Florida lawmakers would have to come up with $130 million more for mental health just to get back to the state's funding level in 2001.

That figure is an important benchmark when evaluating the increases now on the table in Tallahassee. Florida's budget for mental-health hospitals and community services in the current fiscal year is about $1 billion. Gov. Rick Scott's budget proposal for the year that begins July 1 included a $19 million increase for mental-health and substance-abuse treatment. Last week the House approved a budget calling for $34 million more for mental hospitals and community treatment. The Senate's budget, also passed last week, called for an additional $38 million.

Can Florida afford to do more? Consider that House and Senate budget negotiators are still weighing proposals from Scott for $1 billion in tax cuts and $250 million in business incentives. Clearly, the answer is yes.

If Florida taxpayers want relief over the long term, they might get more from investing in mental health. Currently, many Floridians who don't have access to regular treatment wind up seeking much more expensive, acute care at hospital emergency rooms, where one of eight visits is related to mental illness. Or they're thrown in jail, also at far greater cost to the public.

Or, worst of all, Floridians who can't find treatment for mental illness take their lives. In 2011, suicides cost Florida's economy $4.3 billion, according to TaxWatch.

State leaders could have made mental-health treatment available to tens of thousands more Floridians by accepting billions of federal dollars offered under the Affordable Care Act. Tragically, a bipartisan Senate plan to use the money to provide private health insurance was buried last year by Scott and House Republican leaders.

Meanwhile, most other states that, like Florida, cut mental-health funding in the aftermath of the Great Recession have made substantial investments since then to replenish the lost dollars — even some states that turned down the Obamacare money. Texas, for example, increased its funding for mental health by more than $250 million in 2014.

Florida's leaders must end their chronic neglect of mental health. It's the humane and fiscally responsible thing to do.