Birda Pratt was evicted from her home in 2010 and for four years lived on the streets of the Bronx.

Pratt, 56, has asthma, hypertension and arthritis and gets sinus migraines. She suffers acutely when the weather changes, something she felt more viscerally when she was living outdoors.

Her chronic conditions and acute pain made her a frequent visitor at Montefiore Medical Center's emergency room, where she would end up roughly seven times each month.

She'd be stabilized and released back out onto the streets only for the cycle to repeat again, and then again.

Her issues were never too serious, but each trip to the E.R. cost Medicaid, the health insurance program for low-income residents paid for by the state and federal government, $172, or about $1,200 a month.

Then, last December, Montefiore paired Pratt with Maggie Williams, a social worker at the Bronx medical center, to help coordinate Pratt's care.

She hasn't been back to the E.R. since.

Williams helps schedule appointments and makes sure Pratt gets to the doctor and takes her medications. Montefiore pays for a bed at Comunilife, which offers transitional housing, while Williams and her team work to find Pratt permanent housing.

This is good for Pratt's health and it's also good for Montefiore, which can free up emergency department resources for patients who truly need emergent care. And it is good for taxpayers because decreased utilization and improved health usually saves money over the long term.

Yet this model of care, sometimes called care management, is only now being embraced by many hospitals around the state and across the country as health systems and insurers look for ways to slow the growth of health care costs.

Nationwide, 1 percent of Medicaid recipients are responsible for 22.7 percent of the program's costs, according to the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, and 5 percent of patients account for 50 percent of the total costs.

Dealing with that skew means addressing what public health officials call the social determinants of health—the everyday things not directly related to clinical care. In Pratt's case, she wasn't just sick, she was homeless.

And it was the lack of stable housing that was doing as much damage as any malady listed in a medical text book.

This works financially for Montefiore because Pratt is in a care management system, which eschews the traditional fee-for-service model in favor of paying a set amount for each patient each month. It's in Montefiore's financial interest to keep Pratt out of the hospital.

New York State has been pushing Medicaid recipients into managed care arrangements for the past few years, hoping to rein in the exploding costs of the nation's most expensive Medicaid program. It is using $6 billion of federal money to incentivize even greater levels of care coordination with the ultimate goal or reducing hospital visits by 25 percent over the next five years.

And last month, the federal government, the nation's largest insurer, announced its intention to move Medicare, the insurance program for the elderly, toward value-based payments, or care management models, by 2018.

The idea is simple: to force hospitals and other providers to share in some of the risk and provide them an incentive for lowering their own volume.

In a care management model, a health system like Montefiore receives a certain portion of the insurance premium regardless of how much, or the type of care it provides. If Montefiore can keep that person healthy for less than the premium, it keeps the difference. If it can't, it eats the loss.

These arrangements provide both risk and opportunity for health systems in ways that have never before existed.

So far, Montefiore has been one of the nation's success stories.

It was one of only 32 health systems in the nation—and the only one in the state—to join the Pioneer Accountable Care Organization, a pilot Medicare savings program created by the Affordable care Act. The health system reported saving Medicare $24.5 million in its first year, utilizing some of the same strategies on thousands of patients that it does on Pratt.

Still, it's hard to generalize based on Montefiore's experience, because the health system is unique in a number of ways, said Greg Burke, the director of innovation strategies for United Hospital Fund.

For example, more than half of participants in the Pioneer A.C.O. program dropped out.

“It's not a strategy other people can just pick up," Burke said.

Montefiore has been at this for 20 years, an outgrowth of treating a patient population that is among the poorest in the country and with some of the worst health outcomes in the city.

Its success was in some sense a matter of survival, because Medicare and Medicaid make up more than 80 percent of Montefiore's patient population. More than half of New York-Presbyterian patients, by contrast, have commercial insurance.

Montefiore was forced to realize long before many others that its business could not survive in a fee-for-service model, which works great when a significant percentage of your patients have commercial insurance but makes less sense when Medicaid and Medicare are the dominant players.

The success is also a product of history.

In the late 1970s and early 1980s, physicians were leaving the Bronx in droves, meaning Montefiore was losing its referral base.

Montefiore's former C.E.O., Spike Forman, in an effort to induce physicians to work in the Bronx, offered salaried positions in Montefiore's community-bases primary care centers across the borough. This gave Montefiore an unusual amount of control over the culture of practice and made it much easier to manage population health because doctors were more inclined to align with the interests of the health system.

It wasn't, and isn't, that way at New York City's other major health systems.

At the city's other academic medical centers, physicians often work for the medical school and affiliate with a hospital.

Many are specialists in their field and benefit from a fee-for-service model. They have not been trained—and are less inclined—to manage population health.

This is beginning to change, in part, because of the insistence from state and federal governments who, more than ever, are balking at ever-increasing health costs.

The recession strained public budgets and expedited calls to address a fee-for-service model that provided a strong financial incentivize for hospitals to perform more services.

As the emphasis on value-based payments has grown, health systems have responded by trying to assert more control over their physicians and better position themselves to manage population.

Mount Sinai's acquisition of Continuum Health Partners provided it with 260 primary care physicians located around New York City.

NYU Langone's move to become an “active parent” of Lutheran Medical Center has a lot to do with Lutheran's network of Federally Qualified Health Centers, more than two dozen school-based clinics and, crucially, 86,000 patients who show up for 530,000 visits each year.

And the state's Delivery System Reform Incentive Payment (DSRIP) program is a multi-billion dollar experiment in trying to see if health systems across the state can coordinate with one another as well as primary care physicians, community based organizations and other social service providers to manage just every one of the six million Medicaid recipients in News York State.

“The goal is really structural reform of health care delivery,” Jason Helgerson, the state's Medicaid director, has said. “It's about breaking down the silos that exist between behavioral health and acute care, between long term care services and other services for populations such as the developmentally disabled. We believe the [Medicaid] waiver funds that come with this program are uniquely situated to help us ensure that we get the kind of collaboration that is necessary to really meet the needs of the medicaid population … It's about addressing the social determinants of health.”

That, essentially, is the model Montefiore began adopting in the mid-1990s.

Its hub is a nondescript building in Yonkers filled with cubicles and flooded with fluorescent light.

This is where programs are coordinated for the 300,000 patients Montefiore looks after.

Case managers, pharmacists and others call patients to make sure they've filled their prescriptions and see if they need transportation assistance to make their next appointment.

An initial assessment can take as long as two hours and often requires more than one session. This is where Montefiore staff pick up the medical, psychosocial and socioeconomic issues.

“A care plan is set up and is assigned to an accountable care manager and that care manager has responsibility for making sure the interventions get carried out,” said Anne Meara, a registered nurse and associate vice president of network management. “So we have criteria that says if a person is on X number or more of medications, we want a pharmacist to be looking at that. We have people who know how to deal with things like your rent is in arrears. We have other people who know what to do if you are about be evicted.”

Patients call if they need assistance scheduling appointments. They call because this month they got fewer food stamps than last month and they don't know why. They call for help with navigating public transit or the bureaucracy of the city's human resources administration.

James Watley calls because sometimes he needs a friendly voice.

“Sometimes my head is not where it is supposed to be,” said Watley, a 53-year old cancer patient who recently had a bone-marrow transplant. “We end up getting into 15-, 20-minute conversations and by the end my head is in a different place.”

Montefiore also assisted him with LogistiCare, so he had transportation to and from the hospital.

For years, public health officials have been decrying the role poverty plays in poor health. Lack of access to healthy foods is only a small, though often-discussed, aspect of the problem.

Transportation is a big issue, particularly for the elderly. Nutrition is a problem for patients who can't afford or access the foods they need, assuming they even know what those foods would be.

“There is a rule with cancer,” Watley said he has recently learned. “If you can't peel it, you can't eat it.”

Montefiore hosts "brown bag clinics" where patients are told to bring all their medications for review. Prescriptions, over-the-counters, herbal supplements are all supposed to be brought into Montefiore.

One of the things pharmacists look for is whether there are any over-the-counter medicines or herbal supplements that have been recommended by friends because those can work against what has already been prescribed.

“Most of their issues aren't driven by their clinical situations as much as their social situations and how their medical challenges are dealt with in that context,” said Stephen Rosenthal, vice president of network management. “So if you're poor and have limited resources and an unstable environment, they all create challenges in the delivery of clinical services. If you can begin to address those you can actually have an impact.”

And then there is the question of compliance, one of the most persistent challenges for health care providers.

It doesn't do any good to have the right diagnosis and follow the best practices for treatment if the patient isn't taking the medication or doesn't know how to use an inhaler or is too busy juggling two jobs to make it to the next appointment.

That sounds obvious, but for decades it was not in the hospital's financial interest to care about compliance, because the nation's health system paid for each service provided.

If that is to change, as the state and federal government desire and leading health executives insist, then physicians need to tackle non-compliance.

“I think a lot of times we assume people understand the consequences but the truth is people are so busy they don't get all the education,” said Dr. Henry Chung, chief medical officer of Montefiore Medical Center’s Care Management Organization. “Health systems in general have not traditionally said 'that's part of our job.' It's only now when you put systems at more financial risk are they saying 'maybe it is on me and I have to get that piece either through a partnership with people who can do that or I have to build that capacity myself.'”