Call me a cynic, but watching the Republican establishment get its collective undershorts tied in a knot over Donald J. Trump's presidential candidacy is the best entertainment money can't buy.

The bilious billionaire from the five boroughs is giving the rest of America's political class a lesson in how to sell ideas to a disbelieving public.

Who can blame them for embracing his overly simplistic approach to the country's problems? Let's face it: America is having a collective nervous breakdown born of joblessness, the steady erosion of our purchasing power and an increase in terrorism on the homefront. This is not the change the electorate had in mind when they put Barack Obama in the White House.

Take Trump's suggestion that a ban be imposed on Muslims seeking to come to America until the federal government can get a better handle on the process of screening political refugees coming from the Middle East. The Washington crowd is having fits, calling him a "racist" and a "bigot," distancing themselves on a bipartisan basis from the suggestion as fast as they can and having deep discussions about how his idea violates the Constitution. Yet if you go out to America and talk to guys on the loading dock and women at the lunch counter, what you generally hear is, "Yeah, sounds like a good idea to me."



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Donald Trump]

What the politicians in both parties fail to understand is that America is fed up with what has become business as usual in Washington where nothing is getting done. The Republicans have failed to deliver on their promise to repeal Obamacare – though in fairness they are still trying, just not as enthusiastically as some would wish. They haven't got a handle on the economic problems they said they would fix, and there aren't very many new ideas getting people excited about the GOP.

For the other party, it's even worse. If you look around the country, you'll see the party of Kennedy and FDR and Clinton is hemorrhaging, losing governorships and state legislative seats faster than at any time in the last 100 years. If the GOP has no new ideas, then the Democrats have no ideas period. Their entire raison d'etre boils down to, "Trust us and don't let the other guys be in charge."

Part of this is Obama's fault. He's not lived up to the expectations that were raised when he first ran for president. Instead of being "The One" (Question for Oprah: Are you still standing by that assessment?), he's becoming the one we'd like to forget we voted for. There's an argument to be had whether things are actually better now than they were when he came into office, but most people don't seem to feel that's the case. It's pretty clear the roller-coaster ride he's taken the country on over the last seven-plus years is something the American people would probably not like to repeat.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Barack Obama]

Part of it is the GOP's fault. Nobody's leading – except for Trump, who has the courage to say what's on his mind which, parenthetically, happens to what's on the minds of so many people. There are a whole bunch people standing around and saying, "Never mind the nonsense, just fix things. We're dying out here!" The Donald and Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders over on the Democratic side seem to be the only ones who can hear them. They are genuinely, authentically different, and they've struck a chord – for good or for bad – with the voters.

The guys in charge of the GOP these days – whomever they might be – are wasting their time trying to stop Trump. That's something only he and the voters can do. The more he says what's on his mind, the stronger he gets. The more the stories appear about overt efforts to attack him, destroy him or run away from him, the weaker the people behind these efforts appear. You can't tear him down for coming across like a jerk. For some people, it is part of the attraction. If he has to knock a few heads together in Washington (just like he took over the renovation of the Wollman Ice Rink in New York's Central Park) to get things fixed, then he will, and they are okay with that.

The political class (and this includes most of the professional media) is too insulated to know what's really going on in this country right now. People are scared and for plenty of good reasons. Don't look at the polls; they're just as unreliable here as they are in the rest of the world at this point – which means, ironically, that Trump might not actually be in the lead. All the furrowed brows at the Capitol Hill Club might be for naught, but the way he's caught on is real and, for a country that badly needs to have the sclerotic institutions of its government shaken, that's not such a bad thing.