Afternoon storms Tuesday that rolled into the Front Range — especially in southern Colorado — dropping torrential rain and causing damage are expected to continue into the night.

Heavy rain is forecasted to pass through Pikes Peak region again Tuesday night starting at 9:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m., the National Weather Service in Pueblo said.

Impacted areas could include the Waldo Canyon burn scar, according to the service.

“We expect a very busy evening and night,” the service said. “Lots of strong storms expected into the early morning hours.”

Two vehicles were stuck in a mudslide near the pass at Poncha Springs that shut down U.S. 285 in both directions, according to a tweet from the Colorado State Patrol in Alamosa early Tuesday evening.

There are no injuries, but the mud is reported to be several feet deep. The patrol estimated the road, which closed at roughly 6 p.m., will remain closed into Wednesday.

The service issued a flash flood warning for northwestern Las Animas County that will last until 8:15 p.m. A thunderstorm producing heavy rain near Walsenburg is expected to produce flash flooding.

A flash flood warning for eastern Larimer County has been canceled as of 4:40 p.m., but there is potential for more storms later in the evening.

There is also a flash flood watch through the evening for the Pikes Peak region, which includes Pikes Peak, El Paso County, Monument Ridge and the Rampart Range.

“A very moist atmosphere will remain in place over the area today,” the watch advisory summary said.

The watch includes the Waldo Canyon burn area.

Any thunderstorms which develop this afternoon and evening will have potential to produce heavy rain up to 2 inches in a short amount of time, according to the watch advisory summary.

There is a flash flood warning for the Arkansas River at La Junta. Two to three inches of rain have fallen across parts of the river basin in the last 24 hours which will lead to minor flooding. The river is expected to crest late Wednesday morning at more than one foot above flood stage.

Hail was falling in Boulder around 2:10 p.m. according to the National Weather Service’s Twitter account. It is pea to marble sized hail.

Areas that saw heavy rainfall on Monday will be more susceptible for flash floods on Tuesday.

Monday’s storms were widespread but included less hail. Fort Collins and the surrounding areas saw up to 2 inches of rain Monday night; Denver International Airport saw only 0.05 inch.

Jim Kalina, a meteorologist with the service, said this weather is typical for July,with some areas like the airport being relatively dry while others are more wet.

“It just depends on where you are,” he said.

Corrie Sahling: 303-954-1223, csahling@denverpost.com or twitter.com/corriesahling