Mark Cuban hits Capitol Hill — Habershaw to Bully Pulpit — Inside the NFL's lobbying offensive

With Anna Palmer and Cate Martel

PI SCOOP ... CUBAN HITS THE HILL: Dallas Mavericks owner Mark Cuban is meeting with a slew of lawmakers this week on Capitol Hill. Cuban met with members of both the Senate and House Judiciary Committee earlier this week. Florida Democratic Rep. Ted Deutch also organized an "open discussion" with Cuban Tuesday afternoon for lawmakers and staff to "discuss the economy, innovation, technology and other topics of interest," according to an invite. Cuban also met Tuesday with some members of the energy and commerce panel to discuss technology and net neutrality. Cuban opposes net neutrality and pushed why he believes Congress should handle the issue instead of the Federal Communications Commission. He also met with Republican chiefs of staff Wednesday to talk about his Wall Street Journal opinion piece on why he wants to be a Republican. Verizon's Robert Fisher was spotted in the Capitol complex walking with Cuban.

Story Continued Below

Coincidentally — Cuban's D.C. visit comes as Donald Trump, with whom he is friendly, is holding a rally on Capitol Hill about the Iran deal. Some have even floated Cuban as a possible 2016 Trump running mate.

GOOD WEDNESDAY AFTERNOON. Today Queen Elizabeth II becomes the longest-reigning monarch in British history, surpassing Queen Victoria. She's ruled since 1952, when President Harry S. Truman was in the White House and Prime Minister Winston Churchill had just started his second stint at 10 Downing Street. Please send your tips, complaints and unverified lobbying gossip to tmeyer@politico.com.

NFL LOBBYISTS GO ON OFFENSE: From POLITICO’s Darren Samuelsohn: "After a tough year in the headlines, the NFL is going on offense this fall with Washington policymakers — starting with a series of closed-door meetings with key House and Senate committees this week. Cynthia Hogan, the league’s top lobbyist and a former senior attorney to Vice President Joe Biden, told POLITICO the NFL would be briefing the House Energy and Commerce Committee and Senate Commerce Committee on player safety and pro football’s new efforts to pay for research into head injuries. The two panels have jurisdiction over sports-related commercial issues." http://politi.co/1VNpkFn

THE FLURRY OF STAFF MOVES CONTINUES:

— HABERSHAW TO BULLY PULPIT: Ann Marie Habershaw, an Obama campaign veteran, is joining Bully Pulpit Interactive as chief operating officer, the firm announced today. Habershaw previously served as chief of staff for the Office of Personnel Management and has also worked as COO for the Democratic National Committee and the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. "With an MBA and many years of campaign experience, Ann Marie brings the perfect blend of business and politics to BPI." Andrew Bleeker, Bully Pulpit's founder, said in a statement.

— SENATE FINANCE STAFFER TO GLOVER PARK GROUP: Jocelyn Moore, the deputy staff director for the Senate Finance Committee, is heading to the Glover Park Group as a managing director, the firm announced today. Moore worked for Sen. Ron Wyden and former Sen. Jay Rockefeller before joining the Finance Committee. “You name the issue — health care, tax, trade, Social Security — and Jocelyn has been a pivotal policy player on all of them for the last decade,” Joel Johnson, the head of the firm's government relations practice, said in a statement.

— FEINSTEIN'S CHIEF COUNSEL TO BROWNSTEIN: Neil Quinter, chief counsel to Sen. Dianne Feinstein, is headed to Brownstein Hyatt Farber Schreck, where he'll work on technology and judiciary matters, as well as issues with California ties. Quinter also supervised the Senate Judiciary Committee staff.

— HOLLAND & KNIGHT NABS TRANSPORTATION STAFFER: Michael Friedberg, the staff director for the House Subcommittee on Railroads, Pipelines and Hazardous Materials, is heading to Holland & Knight as a senior policy adviser, working on transportation issues, the firm announced today. Friedberg has also worked as a staffer on the House Transportation, Housing and Urban Development Appropriations Subcommittee, and for the Office of Management and Budget. Holland & Knight's Rich Gold said in a statement that Friedberg's "knowledge of the executive branch’s budget and regulatory processes, familiarity with the authorizing and appropriations committees in the House and expertise in the transportation industry is unmatched on the Hill.”

— FORMER WHITE HOUSE LAWYER NOW AT MONUMENT: Stephanie Martz started at Monument Policy Group last week, the firm announced today, fresh off a stint as senior counsel in the White House counsel's office. Martz previously worked as chief counsel to Sen. Chuck Schumer.

— BRANSTAD'S CHIEF OF STAFF TO CORNERSTONE: Matt Hinch, who stepped down as Iowa Gov. Terry Branstad's chief of staff last month, is headed to Cornerstone Government Affairs as a vice president in its Des Moines office. Hinch previously worked for the Greater Des Moines Partnership, outgoing state House Speaker Kraig Paulsen and former Rep. Tom Latham.

PUSH FOR OBAMACARE FIX GAINING SUPPORT: From POLITICO's Paul Demko: "There's growing bipartisan support to roll back a looming Obamacare provision that could raise health insurance costs for thousands of midsized businesses, but the law's complicated politics could derail congressional efforts to approve a fix." But many Senate Republicans are holding out for full repeal of the Affordable Care Act and oppose any changes to the law — especially the four GOP senators running for president. "'It’s always an opportunity for them to gum up the gears,' said one lobbyist tracking the small group issue. 'There is a very strong lobby on this, from the Chamber on down, but that doesn’t always resonate with the ones who can be problematic.'" http://politico.pro/1Qn9b6x

GOODLATTE PUSHING PATENT REFORM: Rep. Bob Goodlatte, the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, was set to speak at a Software & Information Industry Association panel on patent reform at noon today. Also speaking: Beth Provenzano, the National Retail Federation's vice president for federal government relations.

ELSEWHERE IN THE INFLUENCE WORLD:

ADELSON READY FOR 2016: New York magazine's Jason Zengerle goes deep on the Sheldon Adelson primary. http://nym.ag/1IYBhin

A LOOK AT JINDAL’S BIGGEST DONORS: "Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal’s presidential campaign has been propped up by the $4.6 million he helped two supposedly independent outside groups raise in the first half of 2015," The Huffington Post's Paul Blumenthal reports. "The majority of the funds raised by these groups comes from people and companies that have benefited from Jindal’s administration or continue to lobby his office." http://huff.to/1NpNiVY

BILL CLINTON IS BACK FUNDRAISING: Bill Clinton will headline a big fundraiser for his wife in Chicago on Sept. 17, CNN’s Jeff Zeleny and Jeremy Diamond report. http://cnn.it/1g9uuvj

NEW JOINT FUNDRAISING COMMITTEES

None

NEW PAC REGISTRATIONS (Type of PAC)

Social Democratic PAC (Unclear)

NEW LOBBYING REGISTRATIONS (Firm: Client)

None

NEW LOBBYING TERMINATIONS: (Firm: Client (Type of Termination))

Bridge Street Group LLC: Corning Inc. (Q3 termination (no activity))

Don B. Miller PC: Stockbridge-Munsee Band of Mohican Indians (Q3 termination (no activity))

** A message from the National Retail Federation: Retail is more than great products, or the sound of a cash register. More than a storefront, or a website. It’s working together as a community, creating the things people want, today. It’s the smile at the end of every transaction and the effort and innovation that customers don’t see. Retail businesses – 98% of which are small businesses – are at the heart of many towns and neighborhoods nationwide. That’s why when retail thrives, communities thrive. Think you know retail? Think again: http://bit.ly/this_is_retail #thisisretail **