Dave Reid could be accused of being a bit biased, having played with Joe Sakic and Patrick Roy.

But it has been 13 years since Reid last wore an Avalanche sweater, and he has been a top NHL analyst for Canada’s TSN Network for several years now. In his opinion, the Avs improved with their recent flurry of moves.

To recap: Paul Stastny, P.A. Parenteau, Andre Benoit, Cory Sarich, Brad Malone and a couple of draft picks are out; Jarome Iginla, Daniel Briere, Brad Stuart and other depth players are in. Iginla and Stastny are the big names, the ones most people will debate. But to Reid’s thinking, the Avs bolstered an area that needed more help than the center position Stastny plays, and they were smart with their payroll.

“It was financially prudent not to get caught up in high dollars for Paul Stastny,” Reid said. “Are the Avs better than last year up front? Well, Nathan MacKinnon is not a rookie anymore. So, yes, they are better.”

Losing Stastny’s point production and strong two-way game — for nothing in return — is a blow. But if the Avs could afford to lose a quality player it was at center. Stastny, MacKinnon, Matt Duchene and Ryan O’Reilly are natural centers. But MacKinnon and O’Reilly played mostly on the wing last season. Stastny, Duchene and John Mitchell mostly made up the top three up the middle.

The Avs could have dealt Stastny at the trade deadline this spring. But Sakic, their executive vice president of hockey operations, and Roy, their coach and front-office VP, didn’t like the offers the Avs received enough to pull the trigger on a deal. They also didn’t like the idea of disrupting the chemistry of a team in the late stages of a storybook season. The decision was made to keep Stastny and hope he would take less than market value to stay in Denver. But optimism was never high among Avalanche brass that he would stay.

“We knew we couldn’t get to what he got in St. Louis,” Sakic said. “It was his right, and he’s going home. I had a pretty good idea of what was going on with Paul. I knew there was a great possibility he was going to move on.”

The Avs made Stastny a good offer, but it was no match for the $7 million per season over four years that Stastny received from St. Louis.

“I’m not disappointed. It was Paul’s right,” Sakic said.

When it was clear to Sakic that Stastny wouldn’t be back, he moved aggressively on Iginla, making contact with his agent, Don Meehan, soon into the five-day courting process that started June 25. A good two-way center was leaving, but MacKinnon, Duchene and Mitchell would still be around, plus O’Reilly can play center if needed. What the Avs had seriously lacked since Chris Stewart was traded to St. Louis in 2011 was a power forward on the right side.

Iginla, 37, potentially fills a bigger hole than the one Stastny will leave at another position. That’s the hope, anyway.

“Jarome Iginla can still score and is definitely a first-line right winger,” Reid said. “Daniel Briere is very good on the power play and in the playoffs, and will be a big asset. Parenteau was in and out of Patrick Roy’s doghouse, so a change was needed there.”

At a charity golf tournament in Quebec the other day, Roy told a group of reporters: “The addition of Iginla for us is very important. I think he’s going to help our younger players continue to grow. It’s extremely positive. Brad Stuart on defense will provide stability. He’s going to play some big minutes and can play with Erik Johnson on the top pair. We’re very confident with these additions. I think we improved the team in an important way.”

Adrian Dater: adater@denverpost.com or twitter.com/adater