Gov. John Bel Edwards dropped a big dollar number during his address to open the regular session of the Legislature on Monday (March 14), and for once, it wasn't a budget cut, a shortfall or a deficit.

The number was $100 million, and it represents the savings that Edwards said the state will reap from expanding Medicaid eligibility to as many as 450,000 people. Edwards' Medicaid expansion policy was a cornerstone of his gubernatorial campaign and is expected to become an early hallmark of his administration.

Edwards said Monday that enrollment will begin in June and the expansion will take effect on July 1.

But until Edwards' speech, it wasn't clear whether the state would break even, lose money, or experience savings as a result of expanding Medicaid eligibility. In fact, Edwards' go-to line throughout the campaign was about how much money Louisiana was throwing away because of Gov. Bobby Jindal's refusal to accept Medicaid expansion, not how much the state could save.

That changed Monday.

After getting a big applause line for the $100 million figure, Edwards went on to add that Medicaid expansion will "improve our workforce ... because access to health care keeps people working and contributing to our economy."

What Edwards didn't mention is that in some areas, costs will rise for the state. Under the Affordable Care Act, states that have accepted Medicaid expansion are scheduled to start sharing the costs with the federal government on Jan. 1 (had Louisiana accepted Medicaid expansion earlier, it would have received several years of the feds covering 100 percent of the costs.)

The Department of Health and Hospitals is projecting the cost share to top $51 million next fiscal year, including administrative costs, after subtracting taxes on health insurance premiums. But the savings, according to DHH will far outweigh the increased costs.

Here's a look at where the state will find the savings:

Shifting Medicaid participants into the "expansion population."

Savings: $24.8 million

Once the Medicaid expansion takes place, there are two key groups to consider when it comes to how the state pays for caring for people in the program.

The first group includes people who are currently eligible for Medicaid under the state's Bayou Health program, mostly pregnant women and children.

Health care services for people under that umbrella are paid at a rate that costs the state more: The federal government pays 62 percent of the costs, and the state pays 38 percent. Paying for health care for that group of people, who are eligible because their earnings place them above the federal poverty level, has been one of the biggest cost drivers for Louisiana.

The second group will be what's known as the "expansion population" -- mostly people who will become eligible in the expansion because they aren't covered by health insurance at their jobs and they are at 138 percent of the federal poverty level.

This group will be covered by 100 percent federal funding until Dec. 1; it will drop to 95 percent after that.

Clearly, DHH would prefer to move as many of the people under the non-expansion population under the umbrella where costs are more favorable for the state. Women who become pregnant present the greatest opportunity in this area, because if those women are already on Medicaid when they become pregnant, they'll be covered at the more favorable 95 percent federal funding rate.

People who become disabled may also help the state save money by entering the Medicaid program as part of the expansion population. Under the state's pre-expansion Medicaid program, people who become disabled would often apply for Medicaid at the time they were applying for Social Security benefits, but the determination can take time.

If the person decides to apply for benefits and is also eligible as part of the expansion population, the state will pay for the person's care under the more favorable rate. Currently, most disabled people have to wait for a determination before they qualify. Under the expansion, they'll automatically qualify if they're considered above the federal poverty level.

Reducing payments for uncompensated care.

Savings: $37.7 million

One of the biggest problems Louisiana has faced in not expanding Medicaid has been the high number of uninsured people who seek treatment at hospitals across the state. Louisiana has relied heavily on federal funding to compensate the nine safety net hospitals designated to treat the poor and uninsured -- including University Medical Center in New Orleans -- but the state also has to provide 38 percent of matching funds.

The safety net hospitals -- the legacy of the former charity system -- receive more than $1 billion in payments when state and federal funding is combined.

Under Medicaid expansion, the state expects the cost of uncompensated care will decrease as more people get Medicaid cards. Current projections show the state will pay $37.7 million less than this year in matching funds, with a total of $100 million in reductions when federal funds are included.

Reducing payments to help safety net hospitals cover their costs.

Savings: $89.3 million

Another way the state helps the safety net hospitals is to provide them with funding to cover the costs of Medicaid patients. The rate health care providers receive to treat Medicaid patients is much lower than patients on Medicare, the federally funded health care program for those over 65.

The rates are so low, most health care providers estimate Medicaid only covers between 60 and 70 percent of their costs. So the state provides additional funding to bring the rate for Medicaid in line with Medicare.

But under Medicaid expansion, the state will be eligible for the more favorable federal rate, reducing the need for more state funding to go toward the safety net hospitals. The savings is expected to generate almost $90 million.

Paying less for hospitalized prisoners.

Savings: $3.5 million

Because prisoners are in the custody of the state, they aren't eligible for Medicaid expansion when they're being treated routinely in a clinic setting. But when they're hospitalized more than 23 hours, the prisoners are eligible for the more favorable rate under Medicaid expansion.