'Tis the season to be making small talk with your relatives, and when matters turn to entertainment, things can get out of hand quick. In fact, chances are you've said one or more of these things in the past hour:

21) It's not Saving Mr. Hanks. It's Saving Mr. Banks, and Tom Hanks is in it. Who's Mr. Banks? Now that you mention it, I have no idea.

20) See, I actually think SNL IS as good as it used to be.

19) I agree that it's insane you need three remotes to turn the TV on, but where is the double-spaced, size-14 font HOW TO TURN ON THE TV printout I made you last month? You gave it to Wanda? It's specific to your TV; it does Wanda no good!

18) It's just pronounced Lord. Not Lordy.

17) Orange Is the New Black isn't "smut." It's full of sophisticated commentary on the state of—oh no, it's fine, Aunt Phyllis. You go ahead. I never tire of this definitely true story of that time a woman wrote you love letters from jail.

16) A Katniss and a Hobbit have nothing to do with each other. These are two different movies you're talking about.

15) What do you mean, you have four free iPads on the way? Oh, 'cause you clicked on four FREE IPAD pop-ups. Yeah, those aren't coming. And now you need a new computer too.

14) No, I don't think we should watch Don Jon as a family after dinner. Nope, it's not about a surf shop. That's Ron Jon. If you didn't like Orange Is the New Black, you're definitely not going to like Don Jon.

13) ... Yeah, I guess Grownups 2 is fine. I already suffered through it once on the plane coming here, but why not?

12) See, what you're describing isn't the Breaking Bad finale. It's just the last episode of Breaking Bad on Netflix.

11) There is no need to argue about Kevin Hart's height! We have the Internet; we can look these things up! I just googled it and he's 5'2". Whoever bet that Kevin Hart "is probably pretty tall in real life" owes Uncle Chaz 10 dollars.

10) I don't know why Hugh Jackman isn't in more movies.

9) I don't know why Taylor Swift rubs you the wrong way.

8) Yes, I'm sure they could be more respectful of Bruce Jenner. I know, he's accomplished more than the rest of them put together.

7) To be fair, kids did stick their tongues out before Miley Cyrus. No, I didn't hear it's a gang sign, but I'd imagine that's accurate. Let's keep repeating it.

6) And P.S. Keep the twerking jokes coming, I can't get enough. Each one is more cutting-edge than the last!

5) I haven't watched the Homeland finale yet, so please don't... GUYS I HAVEN'T WATCHED IT YET SO PLEASE DON'T SAY ANYTHING THAT WOULD RUIN... dammit.

4) I don't think I've seen that episode of Everybody Loves Raymond. Sure, I've got 22 minutes, take it from the top and don't leave anything out.

3) Harry Styles is not the royal baby. You're thinking of... actually, I have no idea what you're thinking of.

2) Yes, Bradley Cooper does seem like a nice young man. But I don't think he's even on "the Twitter," and even if he was, I wouldn't just introduce myself to him. Yes, I know I have a lot to offer and should put myself out there more. I know.