There's no need to ever feel left out again at the water cooler conversation. Here's a rundown of the stories currently trending in the world, the country and your backyard.

Here's what's trending

Taliban attacks Afghan parliament: The Taliban exploded a car bomb in front of the Afghanistan parliament Monday. Following the blast, gunmen attempted to storm the building, but were turned back by security forces. Reports say they are holed up in a nearby building.

Supreme decisions: The U.S. Supreme Court may issue several major decisions Monday morning. The rulings on two hot-button topics -- same-sex marriage and Obamacare -- are yet to be revealed as court-watchers note time is growing short since the court's term ends at the end of the month. Rulings on clean air, elections and racial discrimination, among others, are set to come within the next eight days.

Services held: The members of the Emanuel AME Church in Charleston, S.C., gathered Sunday in the first service held in the building after a 21-year-old man shot and killed nine people there Wednesday night. Interim pastor the Rev. Norvel Goff, told the congregation to resist the temptation to seek vengeance for the attack that took place during a prayer service.

Apple reversal: Seventeen hours after singer Taylor Swift complained that Apple was not paying artists for streams customers had access to during a free trial period, the company announced they would reverse the policy. Swift had posted a complaint on social media saying artists were not compensated when a person streamed music during a free trial period of the Apple Music service.

Billy Graham's grandson: The grandson of evangelist Billy Graham has stepped down from the pulpit of a church in Florida after he admitted to having an affair. Tullian Tchividjian, 42, who led the high-profile Coral Ridge Presbyterian, said in a statement to The Washington Post that both he and his wife had been unfaithful.

What are some of the best dad quotes you have heard?

Check out Today in Pictures

Follow Debbie Lord on Twitter at Follow @DebbieMLord