Bigoted, juvenile Donald Trump — with a tax plan that would increase the U.S. deficit by up to $12 trillion over 10 years — dominates national Republican presidential polls.

The billionaire boor’s competition with the rest of the field is but a proxy for a struggle of huge importance to the GOP, as well as to America.

Two Republican strains are slugging it out: Rejectionists, represented by Trump and Ted Cruz, are pitted against candidates who offer greater hope of responsibly governing an ideologically diverse country.

GOP SENATE CANDIDATE WANTS NOTHING TO DO WITH TRUMP, CRUZ

Voting in state primary contests, just over a month away, will start to clarify whether Republicans will march on the scorched-earth course set by Trump and Cruz.

Rejecting any path to legal status for undocumented immigrants, Trump would deport 11 million people — and, in theory, vet them on return. It’s an impossible and impossibly divisive idea.

The only policy proposal more offensive? To ban any and all Muslims who live outside the United States from stepping foot on American soil, either as visitors or immigrants.

And now, in Iowa, New Hampshire, South Carolina, Florida and elsewhere, Cruz is surging as a right-wing absolutist.

He led the government shutdown in 2013 over a pointless effort to defund Obamacare — and wanted to push the government over the cliff again this year due to the tiny fraction of taxpayer money that goes toward Planned Parenthood.

TRUMP, CRUZ, OTHERS FACE OFF AT TERRORISM-FOCUSED GOP DEBATE

The Cruz tax plan — boasting a 10% flat rate, and a complete elimination of all payroll taxes that fund Social Security and Medicare — is an irresponsible fantasy.

Cruz is also a culture warrior without peer. In June, he said states had “no obligation” to accept the Supreme Court’s landmark same-sex marriage ruling. In the immediate wake of the ISIS-driven San Bernardino attack, he held a Second Amendment rally .

The two men are riding high on a tide of anger fueled by economic dislocation, middle-class stagnation, a resurgent terror threat and two terms of President Obama. While Republican voters’ frustrations are understandable, their easy embrace of simplistic answers offered by charismatic messengers has cast candidates who should be far more credible onto the fringes.

Contenders from Chris Christie to Jeb Bush to Marco Rubio to John Kasich are hardly Republicans in name only. They each have credible conservative credentials of their own.

STASI: DONALD TRUMP IS BAD, BUT CRUZ WORSE FOR U.S.

Bush, Christie and Kasich — current or former governors who’ve proven the ability to actually run blue or purple states — have demonstrated more interest in crafting solutions than in making purist proclamations.

Rubio has also shown an occasional willingness to build bridges, rather than to throw bombs.

Cruz savages his fellow senator as a sellout for joining other Republicans and Democrats in 2013 to draft a comprehensive immigration reform bill that among other things would have given undocumented immigrants the eventual chance to earn legal status.

It should sadden those who care about the future of the Republican Party that a sizable contingent of the base disqualifies Rubio for attempting to resolve a pressing national issue.

TRUMP SLAMS CRUZ A DAY AFTER POLLS SHOW TEX. SENATOR IN LEAD

The Iowas caucuses and succeeding primaries will reveal whether Republican voters will follow Trump or Cruz. Doing so would result in a near-certain loss in November.

They will have only themselves to blame when a second President Clinton takes the oath of office.