Republican presidential candidate John Kasich, making his first major fundraising trip to Chicago, said Tuesday the rancorous tone of the campaign may justify the need for the party to rethink voters' perception of conservatism.

Appearing before the Chicago Tribune Editorial Board, the two-term Ohio governor said he believed that during his best days on the campaign trail, "my job is to raise the bar" in the overall GOP debate. But he added, "If I didn't think I could win, do you think I'd do this?"

Kasich also was critical of statements made by Reince Priebus, the Republican national chairman, who warned that Iowa and New Hampshire are not assured "first-in-the-nation" presidential caucus and primary status after 2016. "I just completely disagree with him," said Kasich, who is ramping up organizing in both states.

The candidate had a wide-ranging day of stops that included a visit at a River North Portillo's to meetings with top state GOP officials and a private fundraiser at the Union League Club.

At Portillo's for a "meet and greet" with about 150 prospective supporters, he made a point to stress he was having a Chicago-style hot dog with "mustard" to conform to the city's anti-ketchup tradition.

Kasich even touched on baseball. He said a one-game play-in for the National League playoffs next week, likely between his Pittsburgh Pirates and the Chicago Cubs, was an "outrage" after a 162-game season. Instead, he suggested a best two-out-of-three format.

John Kasich stops by Portillo's Ohio Gov. John Kasich stops by Portillo's Sept 29, 2015. (WGN-TV) Ohio Gov. John Kasich stops by Portillo's Sept 29, 2015. (WGN-TV) See more videos

It is the second time that Kasich has made a bid for the White House, giving up a short-lived campaign in 2000. But Kasich also is governor of a national presidential swing state that has voted for the winner in the last 13 elections for the White House.

Kasich's conservatism has been called into question by tea party activists and some on the GOP right, particularly over his decision to implement some aspects of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, in Ohio, including Medicaid expansion.

Citing a background that included 18 years in Congress, where he served on the House Armed Services Committee and as chairman of the House Budget Committee, Kasich told the Tribune editorial board he had a record of working to balance the federal budget and touted efforts to reform Pentagon spending, including curbing money devoted to the B-2 bomber.

John Kasich in Chicago Brian Nguyen / Chicago Tribune Republican presidential candidate and Ohio Gov. John Kasich enters Portillo's on Sept. 29, 2015, in Chicago. Republican presidential candidate and Ohio Gov. John Kasich enters Portillo's on Sept. 29, 2015, in Chicago. (Brian Nguyen / Chicago Tribune) (Brian Nguyen / Chicago Tribune)

"So why am I not (considered) one of the conservatives? You know why? Maybe because I have a different tone. Maybe because I think I care about poor people, I care about minorities," Kasich said. "If we get to the point where we define conservatism by the narrowness of your message or the pitch at which you describe it, we need to rethink conservatism."

He said voters were experiencing "a fling" by expressing support for political outsiders such as businessman and reality television star Donald Trump, neurosurgeon Ben Carson and former business executive Carly Fiorina.

"I think it's a moment in time. And if it isn't a moment in time, that's OK. My life is going to be fine," he said. Later, he added, "I think people are saying, in some cases, 'I don't matter. I don't count. The politicians lie. I'm frustrated. I'm upset.' And a lot of that is driven by the media."

Rather than embracing Trump's no-holds-barred attacks on the GOP field, Kasich said he has found voters believe in some of the messages they expressed during the recent U.S. visit by Pope Francis.

"We like to have hope again in America. We like to have a little positiveness going on. We'd like to believe in ourselves and believe that we can do better in ourselves," Kasich recounted. "I think it illustrates that we're hungry as a country to stop all this nonsense, this fighting and personal attacks and vindictiveness."

Earlier in the day, during the restaurant stop, Kasich sought to portray himself as having "always been kind of a rebel reformer even inside my own party" while criticizing his rivals.

"At the end of the day, when you have ideas of reform, you've got to know how to enact them. It's one thing to make a speech. We hear a lot of people, including candidates in my own party, who run around making a lot of speeches," he said. "But my question is, for those who serve in politics today, what have they accomplished in their lifetime? What did they do to bring about change? They'll have to answer that question at some point."

Kasich also said he disagrees with Republicans pushing for a government shutdown over the issue of defunding Planned Parenthood. He said he supports federal defunding of the women's health group but not at the cost of a shutdown.

"I was involved in a government shutdown in the '90s, but I knew that we would get Bill Clinton to change," Kasich said of the 1995 shutdown that involved a federal budget dispute.

"If you're going to shut the government down, you've got to be pretty certain you're going to get a result. And just to shut it down and open it up with no result, just so you can kind of make a statement, doesn't make a lot of sense to me," he said.

rap30@aol.com

Twitter @rap30