TRENTON — Most New Jerseyans say they pay too much for health care and would be interested in an alternative Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey is offering that would reduce premiums and out-of-pocket expenses, according to a survey released Saturday by the state's largest insurance company.

Horizon released the poll two days before a state Senate committee is expected to grill its executives about the new OMNIA Alliance plan that promises to cut premiums but charge more for hospitals and physicians that are outside its "Tier 1" network. Hospitals excluded from Tier 1, many of them in cities who serve a predominately poor population, fear they will lose substantial business and be unable to survive.

RELATED: Horizon partners with 22 hospitals to lower insurance rates

The hospitals in the OMNIA Alliance are among the largest systems in the state including Barnabas Health, Robert Wood Johnson University Health, Atlantic Health, Hackensack University Medical Center.

Lawmakers say the tiers limit access in cities like Trenton and counties like Burlington have no Tier 1 hospitals.

"We commissioned this survey after hearing the concerns raised by legislators and others following the announcement of the OMNIA Health Alliance," said Robert A. Marino, chairman and CEO of Horizon BCBSNJ. "As part of our ongoing efforts to respond to what consumers tell us they want, we felt it important to validate what we've heard from our customers – rising health care costs are unsustainable."

In an automated survey of 600 people Sept. 30-Oct. 1 by TargetSmart, a Washington D.C. political polling and strategy firm, 73 percent said the price of health care is too high.

The survey script said: "Horizon has recently announced new plans that would move New Jersey's health care system away from a system that rewards doctors and hospitals for the number of tests and treatments they provide to one that rewards them for improving patient health and satisfaction. The new health plans will have lower monthly premiums for customers. Additionally, consumers will have the ability to save additional out-of-pocket costs for seeking care at certain, but not all, doctors and hospitals in Horizon's networks across New Jersey."

When asked whether they supported or opposed Horizon's plans, 43 percent said they supported it, 40 percent said they were unsure and 16 percent said they opposed it, according to TargetSmart.

When asked whether they would be willing to go to a hospital within seven miles of their home to get the cheaper rates, 57 percent said yes, 23 percent said no and 20 percent was unsure.

The survey said an estimated 40,000 uninsured people will be expected to get coverage through this Horizon product. The question doesn't mention it, but these uninsured people would sign up through the health exchange created by the Affordable Care Act. When asked how important it was to them whether more people obtain health insurance, 74 percent it was somewhat or very important and 16 percent said it was not very important or not important at all.

The poll's margin or error is plus or minus 4 percentage points.

Susan K. Livio may be reached at slivio@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @SusanKLivio. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.