This Oct. 15, 2014 file photo, a screen shot shows the home page of HealthCare,gov, a federal government website managed by the U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Service. President Barack Obama's health insurance expansion faces the biggest test of its second year on Monday, the deadline to sign up for coverage that starts Jan. 1. Not only are Healthcare.gov and state websites preparing for heavy traffic, but the deadline also is a test of whether millions of current customers understood that they needed to come back and shop to keep their premiums in line. (AP Photo, File)

CHICOPEE, Mass. (WWLP) – Massachusetts health insurance companies are about to feel the impact of Obamacare.

Other states have to play “catch-up” with our state, but business expenses could grow for some companies here, as Massachusetts will be operating under the same rules as the rest of the country.

98% of Massachusetts citizens are insured under the state Health Connector. The Affordable Care Act, commonly referred to as “Obamacare,” has a goal of 100 percent coverage. Part of reaching that goal is a federal mandate that will force insurance companies to share the risk for the people who still have no health coverage. It’s called “risk adjustment.” It is assumed that the people who have no insurance aren’t as healthy, and will cost more to cover.

State Senator James Welch (D-West Springfield) chairs the Joint Committee on Health Care Financing. He told 22News “risk adjustment will have the state’s insurers pay into a pool to, in his words, “level the playing field.”

“There’s going to be new people coming into the insurance market. We want to make sure the insurance companies are not cherry-picking. Not trying to only cover those people who are healthier population that’s going to be a lower-cost population for them to cover,” Welch said.

Senator Welch told 22News that Governor Baker is working with our congressional delegation, led by Congressman Richard Neal to have the Obama Adminitration waive the “Risk Adjustment” because Massachusetts already has a high percentage covered through the state’s health reform

22News will continue to follow this story to let you know if this will end up costing you more for your coverage.