A laptop shows the HealthCare.com website during an Affordable Care Act enrollment event on Feb. 12, 2015, in Fort Worth, Texas. LM Otero) L.M. Otero/Associated Press

There are some eye-popping numbers in health plans’ proposals for 2016 insurance premiums in some states under the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

As today’s Wall Street Journal reports, the biggest insurers in some of the states that have made the plans’ requests public are seeking average increases such as 51.6% in New Mexico, 36.3% in Tennessee and 30.4% in Maryland — enough to make a 14.5% proposed raise here, or an 8.4% boost there, look almost tame.

But what does that actually mean for the amount that a person would pay each month if these rates are approved? And don’t insurance rates vary by state, as well as by health plan?

The Wall Street Journal scrubbed the biggest health plans’ proposals to see what they might mean for a 40-year-old nonsmoker living in their state capital who picked the lowest-cost, mid-range “silver” plan available.

Under the 2010 federal health law, insurers have to charge everyone the same, regardless of their medical history or gender. Older people can be charged up to three times more than younger people. In most parts of the country, smokers can also be charged more and rates vary by geographic area, too.

The rules apply to most plans sold to individuals or families — in other words, to folks who don’t get coverage through their job or a government program such as Medicare. The rules apply whether or not the consumers use the health law’s exchanges, where they can also apply for subsidies from the federal government to offset the price of their premium.

Premiums are, of course, just one way of calculating individual health insurance costs. Plans often keep premiums in check by imposing deductibles and limiting the network of providers available. (A silver plan typically has a deductible of between $1,000 and $3,000.) But premiums are, for better or worse, one of the ways supporters and opponents judge the health law.

Here are the average rate increases by state, included in the Journal story, as well as what the plans are proposing for a 40-year-old capital-living nonsmoker in 2016 and the comparable 2015 rate. In some cases, the across-the-board percentage increase for all the health plan’s products isn’t the same as the change specifically affecting mid-level “silver” plans that cover, on average, 70% of medical costs.

(The only one we couldn’t deduce from the publicly available records was the Health Care Service Corp. 2016 rate in New Mexico, and the health plan said it couldn’t provide it. In most of the other cases, health plans confirmed our calculations or supplemented them.)

You’ll see that some of the plans seeking the biggest increases had some of the lowest prices in the country in previous years. We’ll know in coming weeks whether that makes a difference as consumers and regulators debate the proposals. But we already know that it’s a factor that played a role in the insurers’ moves.

As we’ve explained before, health plans had to make some pretty big guesses going into 2014, and didn’t know much more as they headed into 2015, so they say that strategy played into their decisions as well as math.

“One of those rationales why they have a higher rate increase is maybe they were too low the first time,” said David Axene, a fellow of the Society of Actuaries, who also works with health plans to set premiums but didn’t work with the big ones cited in our story.

You’ll also see that there are some parts of the country where health insurance has just always been more expensive. We’ll find out soon how that affects the way people feel about a smaller percentage increase.

You can weigh in, in the comments section, or share your story.