'Our Caucus' participant Rebecca Aguilar says it's a political privilege to live and take part in the Iowa process.

Rebecca Aguilar (Photo: Courtesy of Rebecca Aguilar)

I will be a first-timer at the Iowa caucuses. In the past, I never knew enough about the process — almost a bit intimidated to even get involved. Not this year!

Back in June, I started learning about Bernie Sanders. I quickly realized that our thinking was aligned in many ways. I agree with many of the policies and plans he has for America.

There are many issues Senator Sanders confronts that other candidates won't even speak of. He exposes the wealth and inequality gap, proposing to reduce it by demanding that large and wealthy corporations pay their fair share in taxes. Breaking up big banks instead of bailing them out, guaranteeing healthcare to all citizens, and making public college tuition free are also plans he has for our future.

Coming from an area with a large Hispanic population, both citizens and residents, I recognize the importance and effect our next president will have on our immigration situation. Senator Sanders is pushing his Fair and Humane Immigration Policy. It is obvious he respects, is aware of the problems, and understands the needs of the Latino community.

During this time, I've also really come to understand the importance of my being there to support Sanders at the caucus. Senator Sanders needs me and other informed voters to stand in his corner. I never really understood the political privilege it is to live and take part in the Iowa process. I do now and constantly share with others about Sanders and the caucus.

My natural approachability and realness make it easy to connect. Many are just like me, wanting to take part but don't really know where to begin. I just encourage others to learn for themselves and direct them to information. I always end every exchange letting them know, wherever they choose to stand, a place awaits them on Feb. 1.

Although born in California, Rebecca Aguilar has lived most of her days in southeast Iowa, which she calls home. She's been living in Fremont for almost four years,with her two children, Alyse and Silas, her longtime boyfriend Keith Carroll, and her dog Max. Aguilar spends most of her days working and serving the people of Ottumwa at Country Kitchen. Serving allows her the flexibility and freedom to write for her blog (beccaswords.com). Plus, she can keep up with her kids' crazy schedules and have time for plenty of couch cuddles. She also fits in volunteering at events in the community, school functions, the Bernie Sanders campaign, and serves on the Iowa Latino Leadership Committee. She is a graduate of Ottumwa High School and Indian Hills Community College with an associate's degree in liberal arts.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1QDoSbs