How excited would you be if one of the most respected personalities in today’s world gives you thumbs up? I bet you will be thrilled that someone that is respected is keeping an eye on your activities. So, it was for the guys at Jobberman when Mark Zuckerberg mentioned them in a post to announce the launch of Free Basics in Nigeria.

Zuckerberg is simply a whizkid and no one can take that away from him. Today, he is one of the wealthiest personalities on the face of the earth. Beyond his wealth is the fact that his innovation is a tech powerhouse used by billions of people across the world today.

Part of his statement reads, “…There’s a lot of innovation across Africa right now and Nigeria in particular is home to a lot of talented developers. Free Basics offers Nigerians, including 90 million people who are currently offline, the opportunity to access news, health information and services like Jobberman that were built by Nigerians and other developers across West Africa all without having to pay for data.”

Ordinarily, this is a good development on the face value, but a closer look throws up a number of issues top of which is how would this affect Net Neutrality in Nigeria and other parts of Africa where the service has been launched?

Before I proceed, what really is Net Neutrality, also referred to as Net Equality, Network Neutrality or Internet Neutrality? It is basically a principle that Internet Service Providers and relevant authorities should treat all information on the World Wide Web the same way. It means not discriminating or billing differentially by users, website content, system, application, form of included equipment, or style of communication.

It implies that the ISPs should supply us with an open network and should not prevent or discriminate against any website content or application which rides over that network. In the same way, our service providers should not determine who we can call and what we talk about on that call or what website we visit. It is believed that if all the Internet traffic is not treated equally, it will destroy the openness and innovation of the Internet. Net Neutrality is really needed to preserve our right of communicating freely online.

Looking at the basic description of Net Neutrality above; can one really say that the Free Basics project would work in Nigeria without undermining Net Neutrality? Are there policies in place to ensure that the playing field remains level for all stakeholders? These are questions I will leave for the Federal Ministry of Communications and the Nigerian Communications Commission to answer.

What exactly is the Free Basics project? According to Facebook, the Free Basics project offers free access to crucial Internet services, such as education and learning, communication, medicine and health care, employment, farming and much more without the need for data.

Here is an example to buttress the positive side of this service: a rural community with no access to medical services can remotely use the services of a medical doctor in faraway Kaduna as long as that doctor’s website or platform is hooked onto Free Basics and then the service providers of the users must have also hooked up. What this means is that in reality, this service can actually bring Internet services to millions of people not yet online. This is a good thing if you ask me.

But if this project is so fantastic, why did India fight it? India is one country that we know does not joke with technology. As you are aware, Indians don’t stop at issuing beautiful statements only when technology is concerned, they back it up with the right investments. For instance, the Indian Prime Minister, Narendra Modi, recently announced that over a billion dollars will be set aside to support Indian start-ups. This is the kind of statement I’d like to hear, backed up with action, from the President and other officials in Nigeria too.

Anyway, back to the topic at hand. India has effectively pushed Free Basics out of their country through the Prohibition of Discriminatory Tariffs for Data Services Regulations Act 2016. I am not saying that we should push Free Basics out. I doubt if we even have the capacity to make that happen.

My point is that we should get the Free Basics team to answer these and many more questions: who approves websites listed on Free Basics? What is the approval process and is it fair enough? Can a day old start-up cope with the criteria? On the other hand, what happens to all subscribers on other networks? Does the local industry player have a say in what happens? These and many more questions will have to be answered for the programme to be fair to all.

So, accept this as a clarion call to Nigerian authorities, including lawmakers, the Ministry of Communications, Nigerian Communications Commission and all other relevant agencies to ensure that projects like this respect Net Neutrality, especially for an ecosystem like ours that is developing.

I will end this piece by quoting David Talbot, a senior writer for MIT Technology Review. Talbot, in a 2013 article titled Facebook’s Two Faces, stated as follows: “If Facebook really wants to connect more people, it should support cutting-edge wireless networks. If the company really wants to make access more affordable, it can make sure its data is in the countries where people are using the service. If it really wants to connect more people, it can fund and support cutting-edge wireless networks.”

So how free is Facebook’s Free Basics?

Copyright PUNCH.

All rights reserved. This material, and other digital content on this website, may not be reproduced, published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed in whole or in part without prior express written permission from PUNCH.

Contact: [email protected]