Colorado men’s basketball coach Tad Boyle and Kansas’ Bill Self are longtime pals, dating to their playing days as athletically challenged guards in the old Big Eight. Now they have something else to chat about.

But discussing the loss of a key performer to an injury won’t be much fun. Colorado had to retool, if not reinvent, itself after a season-ending knee injury suffered by point guard Spencer Dinwiddie on Jan. 12. Now it’s Kansas’ turn to deal with the unknown.

The Jayhawks will learn Sunday whether the back injury suffered by 7-foot freshman center Joel Embiid has impacted Kansas’ seeding for the NCAA Tournament.

Before the Embiid injury, Kansas was viewed as no worse than a No. 2 seed, possibly a No. 1. But the Jayhawks have lost three of their past five games, including 94-83 to Iowa State in the Big 12 Tournament semifinals.

Embiid, a potential overall No. 1 pick in the 2014 NBA draft, fell hard during a March 1 game at Oklahoma State. Last week, he was diagnosed with a stress fracture in the lower back by a specialist in Los Angeles. Embiid was ruled out of the conference tournament, but no further timetable was given.

Ron Wellman, chairman of the NCAA Tournament selection committee, said Wednesday that the Embiid issue is being monitored closely by the committee.

“The committee members are well aware of that injury,” said Wellman, the athletic director at Wake Forest. “We will be in as good a position as we possibly can be to place Kansas in the right seed line.”

Even without Embiid, Kansas has enough talent to make a run during March Madness. But where the Jayhawks are seeded is sure to be a hot-button topic during the Selection Sunday bracket announcement.

Shockers worthy of No. 1 seed? I get the feeling there won’t be much criticism among coaches if undefeated Wichita State is, as expected, granted a No. 1 seed.

Yes, the Missouri Valley is down in talent. But it’s a basketball league with passionate fans and established programs. Oregon’s Dana Altman coached against Wichita State for 16 years while at Creighton.

“(Shockers coach) Gregg Marshall has done a great job and Wichita State has always had a great tradition,” Altman said. “Going undefeated is tough to do. It’s a great accomplishment.”

Mountain West not peaking. The Mountain West figures to receive only two NCAA Tournament bids after getting a conference-record five in 2013.

The spotlight will be on San Diego State and New Mexico because both are purported to have enough talent to win multiple games.

Last year, no Mountain West team reached the Sweet 16 and the league took an oral beating from college basketball analysts, much of it deserved.

“That (lack of NCAA Tournament success) is the rap on our league,” Colorado State coach Larry Eustachy said. “We need to get a team to the Elite Eight. Then we need to get a team to the Final Four.”

Need a sleeper pick? I’d go with UCLA. Scoring the ball, to use coaches’ lingo, becomes especially difficult in the NCAA Tournament. But the Bruins feature a lot of scoring options.

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler

Planting the best seeds

Denver Post college basketball writer Tom Kensler projects the top four seeds in each regional:

EAST

1. Wichita State, 2. Wisconsin,

3. Duke, 4. Iowa State

MIDWEST

1. Michigan, 2. Villanova,

3. Syracuse, 4. Cincinnati

SOUTH

1. Florida, 2. Creighton,

3. Louisville, 4. Virginia

WEST

1. Arizona, 2. Michigan State,

3. Kansas, 4. San Diego State