Buy Photo Green Bay Packers quarterback Brett Favre celebrates after a touchdown during the Jan. 12, 2008, playoff game against the Seattle Seahawks. The Packers are scheduled to unveil Favre's name and No. 4 on the facade of Lambeau Field during the Thanksgiving Day game. (Photo: Evan Siegle/Press-Gazette Media)Buy Photo

Brett Favre’s career with the Green Bay Packers will come full circle on Thanksgiving Day when his name and No. 4 are unveiled on the facade of Lambeau Field.

He will join the ranks of legendary Packers players Don Hutson, Tony Canadeo, Bart Starr, Ray Nitschke and Reggie White, who have had their numbers retired. (Former general manager Ron Wolf, who brought Favre to Green Bay, was honored Nov. 15 when his name was unveiled on the Lambeau facade.)

Favre and Packers fans have come a long way since 2008 when the quarterback retired, then un-retired five months later and was traded to the New York Jets. A year after that he signed with the Minnesota Vikings.

The sting of the messy departure and eventual signing with a Packers’ rival have faded. Instead, fans focus on how he made Sunday afternoons relevant again in Wisconsin and made Packers games must-see TV. And how he helped bring home the Lombardi Trophy again after a 30-year absence.

That was evident in July when 67,000 fans packed Lambeau Field to watch Favre’s induction into the Packers Hall of Fame and then gave him a five-minute standing ovation as he exited the players’ tunnel and walked to midfield to address the crowd.

It’s also a reminder of how lucky Packers fans have been with Favre and now Aaron Rodgers leading the offense. Not many teams have had that caliber of consistency, excellence and success at the quarterback position for over 20 straight years.

We hope that another legendary Packers quarterback, Bart Starr, can make the Thanksgiving Day game against the Bears. Starr led the Packers to five NFL championships including victories in the first two Super Bowls. That's five championships. Count them. He excellence extended off the field, too, and he has been an excellent ambassador for the team after his playing and coaching days ended.

He’s scheduled to join Favre and Rodgers for the ceremony at halftime – a historic gathering of three great quarterbacks. Starr’s family has said he’s been working toward the goal, as he has had to overcome a heart attack, multiple strokes and a lung infection.

Favre will always be remembered for his passion and durability and his infectious enthusiasm that helped revive a proud organization.

Retiring Favre’s number is a fitting end to his career here and we say: Congratulations. Canton awaits.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1jdKkGL