A community for those trying to feel comfortable in their bodies

Rachael Quirke, left, and Kaitlin Mulligan, have started a new club at the University of Colorado that focuses on eating disorders. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

Feeding Fearlessness on Facebook facebook.com/feedingfearlessnessboulder To learn more: Email feedingfearlessness@gmail.com.

When she was 14, Kaitlin Mulligan made an effort to start eating healthier.

But soon, her good intentions "spiraled" into restrictive dieting and, eventually, bulimia and exercise addiction, she said.

When she got to the University of Colorado, she realized there was no one to hold her accountable — she was in charge of her own health. She suspected other students were also struggling with eating disorders and body-image issues and could benefit from having other people to talk to on a regular basis.

Last fall, she helped form Feeding Fearlessness, a student group that aims to create a sense of community among young people who are grappling with how to feel comfortable in their own skin.

"I know that it's often something people don't really want to discuss openly and it's hard to talk about, especially if you're a freshman and you don't really know that many people," said Mulligan, a junior studying art history. "We wanted to make it clear that this was some place that people could open up and everyone else would know what they were going through."

From her own struggles, Mulligan believes it can often be easier to talk to a peer — and one who has had a similar experience — than a medical professional. The members of the group can talk about strategies that worked for them and share advice with each other, she said.

Advertisement

According to data from the 2015 National Collegiate Health Assessment, 1.7 percent of CU students surveyed reported being diagnosed and/or treated for anorexia within the last 12 months. Some 1.6 percent reported being diagnosed and/or treated for bulimia.

Nationally, 1.3 percent of students who took the assessment at 108 colleges and universities reported being diagnosed and/or treated for anorexia and 1.1 percent reported being diagnosed and/or treated for bulimia.

Living in Boulder, often ranked among the healthiest cities in the world, can be stressful for people coping with body-image issues, said Allison Stanek, a member of the group and CU junior studying psychology.

"I hope we can start the conversation about these kinds of things because eating disorders and body image in Boulder specifically — it's a big problem and I don't know how many people are aware," Stanek said. "Some people don't realize there's a point where trying to be healthy can go too far."

For the most part, Stanek said she has overcome the body-image struggles she dealt with in high school. But she wants to talk with other young people about what she went through and perhaps give them tips for success.

"I'm still not perfect, but I'm definitely doing a lot better than I was back then," she said. "Food and body image don't dictate my entire life anymore. I definitely still have my days where I struggle with that, but for the most part I'm just in college and focused on school. It sounds weird, but I have a life now."

In addition to being a support group, Feeding Fearlessness is also trying to raise awareness about eating disorders and promote healthy living.

The group has held fundraising events for the National Eating Disorders Association and did a poster campaign for National Eating Disorders Awareness Week.

"We wanted to see what we could do to make (students) feel good about themselves and talk about what makes us feel good, what doesn't, how can we resist peoples' expectations for us," said Rachael Quirke, a junior studying psychology.

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta