The Hudson County Board of Freeholders has authorized a lawsuit against the state, seeking reimbursement retroactively for the cost of long-term hospital care for inmates.

Generally, no inmate in state prisons or county jails was eligible for Medicaid coverage for long-term hospital care until the Affordable Care Act established a “24-hour exemption,” said executive director of the New Jersey Association of Counties John Connadio.

The exemption provides coverage for Medicaid-eligible inmates who become inpatients of a hospital or nursing home upon the recommendation of a physician and then receive room, board, and professional services in the hospital or nursing home for a 24-hour period or longer.



The exemption became law on Jan. 1 in states that agreed to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, as New Jersey did. But Connadio said the state has not yet implemented the 24-hour exemption due to “technical issues.”

The lawsuit the county has authorized seeks reimbursement back to Jan. 1 for its cost for the medical care for inmates that should have been covered by Medicaid under the 24-hour exemption.

Hudson County Department of Corrections Director Oscar Aviles backs the lawsuit. He said the corrections department is asking for $1.9 million in the 2014 county budget for hospital care for inmates. He said implementation of the 24-hour exemption would shave more than $1 million from that amount.



“If it’s going to force the state to reimburse the county for something being funded by the federal government, why not?” Aviles said. “I think that makes economic sense for the county.”

Hudson County Freeholder Bill O’Dea said the counsel to the board of freeholders is preparing the lawsuit and expects to file it by the end of this week.

“I sponsored the resolution because on Jan. 1 we should have started to get this reimbursement from the state,” said O’Dea. “When we are dealing with a difficult budget, a million dollars is a lot of money and we can’t wait for the state to get its act together.”



There was no reply to an email seeking comment from the office of Gov. Chris Christie.