By James Burger, The Bakersfield Californian McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

June 05 --County officials are unveiling a new plan to help rescue Kern Medical Center : a merger with Kern Health Systems .

Under the carefully crafted proposal, the struggling county hospital and the successful public health insurance management firm would become one integrated service.

Details of the idea will get their first public airings before Kern County supervisors on Monday and the Kern Health Systems board on Thursday.

"This is the long-term vision," said county hospital CEO Russell Judd . "This is where KMC is a year from now."

MONEY GRAB?

Kern Health Systems is a county-created agency that manages health care for local residents on Medi-Cal . It's been in the news a lot in recent years, including for its controversial spending of $8 million on audit -- something uncovered by The Californian -- and for sitting on huge cash reserves.

Judd and two county supervisors moved quickly Thursday to dispel any notion that the county -- troubled by $30 million in annual losses at KMC -- is making a grab for the millions of dollars in reserves Kern Health Systems holds.

" Kern Health Systems must maintain its reserves to maintain its obligations. KMC cannot get the reserves of Kern Health Systems . It's not a money grab," Judd said.

Supervisor Leticia Perez said the KHS reserves would only disappear into the fiscal gulf at KMC.

"It's a temporary fix and it doesn't solve the structural problems at KMC and potentially creates two problems rather than one," she said. "We need to ensure that KMC is standing in 100 years."

Judd said the county will not force the 141,000 Kern Health Systems patients to go to Kern Medical Center . Both the county hospital and the health system would still contract with outside hospitals, doctors and health insurance plans.

"Some will say it's a money grab. It's not. Some will say it's about driving all KHS members to KMC. It's not that either," said Supervisor David Couch . "Other hospitals and doctors would still provide care to KHS patients and KMC would still provide care to patients with private insurance."

MOTIVATION

So why develop an authority?

"It is preparing KMC and Kern Health Systems to survive all the changes that are coming with health care reform," Judd said. "The future of KMC is much bleaker if we don't do that."

Part of the problem at Kern Medical Center , Judd said, is that the hospital continues to operate on a fee-for-service model.

The hospital only gets paid when it provides a service.

So the hospital wants to increase the number of people it sees. Kern Health Systems is trying to control costs so it doesn't want patients to get unnecessary medical care.

Putting the two together would create a system where the health plan and the hospital would be focused on helping the patient get healthy, Judd said.

"Part of the problem and challenge at KMC is that it is operating as if it is in a health care delivery system from 50 years ago," Perez said.

That has to change, Judd said.

"KMC is (largely) funded by state and federal programs. All indicators are that all those funds need to go to health systems that keep people well -- not just to treat them," Judd said.

The other advantage to the move would be to get Kern Medical Center out from under county processes -- including the civil service and hiring systems -- that limit how efficiently KMC can operate.

"County processes constrain KMC's ability to operate as a hospital," Judd said.

WORKERS

So what will happen to the employees at Kern Medical Center ?

The county has been working with the Service Employees International Union to negotiate the process forward and is participating directly with Assemblyman Rudy Salas , D- Bakersfield , who is drafting the legislation that will allow Kern County to write an ordinance that would create the authority.

"SEIU will represent all the people moving into the authority," Judd said.

Perez said the employees of KMC need to know that their jobs are there for them as this transition happens.

"The labor force is important. There has to be a sense of security in their work," she said.

Months of careful work have gone into the deal and there is still negotiation on the language of Salas' bill.

"There is disagreement. We are resolving it. Nobody's going to get everything they want," Perez said.

END RESULT

Next week's meetings are only the first public look at a process that Judd said will take a long time to finalize.

"The formation of this is enabled by state legislation. A county ordinance enacts it. We are months, if not a year, away from this happening," Judd said.

If Salas' legislation can get approved, it won't take effect until January 2015 , Judd said.

After that, he said, county supervisors will need to hammer together an ordinance that would enact that change.

How will the authority be formed? That would be answered by the ordinance.

What would happen to Kern Medical Center's fluctuating $100 million debt to the Kern County general fund?

The county would handle that question at ordinance time.

But county officials believe the effort to create an authority must be made.

"The formation of this authority would allow both Kern Medical Center and Kern Health Systems to succeed," Couch said.

___

(c)2014 The Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.)

Visit The Bakersfield Californian (Bakersfield, Calif.) at www.bakersfield.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 903

[jetpack-related-posts]