Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton addresses supporters at her Super Tuesday election night rally in Miami, Tuesday, March 1, 2016. (AP Photo/Gerald Herbert)

KINGSTON >> Whether Hillary Clinton or Bernie Sanders wins next month’s Democratic presidential primary, a number of local Democratic leaders feel they’re getting a good candidate.

Some of those who have picked a side, though, say Sanders is their choice to be the next president of the United States.

“I think we have two really great candidates,” Ulster County Legislator David Donaldson said Friday, adding that he had not yet decided who he would support in the April 19 primary. The Kingston Democrat said he could support either candidate, though he did say he happens to like Sanders and what the senator from Vermont talks about on the campaign trail.

Not every one of Sanders’ platform goals is attainable, though, Donaldson said. He also said Clinton, a former first lady and secretary of state under President Barack Obama, has a little more political experience.

Advertisement

Woodstock town Supervisor Jeremy Wilber said he also is undecided which Democratic candidate to support. He said he might not make a decision until he actually is in the process of marking his ballot.

“I think they both have great strengths,” Wilber said. He said Sanders has brought topics to the table that needed to be discussed and that Clinton has a lot of experience. Both would nominate good candidates to the Supreme Court, he said.

In primary contests last week, Clinton secured wins in Virginia, Tennessee, Alabama, Georgia, Arkansas, Texas and Massachusetts, while Sanders won in Vermont, Oklahoma, Minnesota and Colorado. Many polls show Clinton leading the race in terms of the delegate count.

Ulster County Legislature Minority Leader Hector Rodriguez, D-New Paltz, said he is a Sanders supporter, but that he thinks extraordinarily highly of Clinton.

“I think we have to make some changes in this country, and I think Sen. Sanders’ agenda best represents my values,” Rodriguez said. He said, for instance, he is a big believer in single-payer health care, which Sanders said he supports. Rodriguez said he feels Obama’s Affordable Care Act was a great first step, but it was a first step.

Rodriguez said Sanders has a robust agenda, and that, even if he only accomplishes half of his goals, it will be a marked improvement for the country.

Dutchess County Legislator Joel Tyner, D-Clinton, said he is a strong Sanders supporter, not just for moral and integrity reasons, but because he believes the senator can win the presidency. He said a recent poll shows Sanders beating all the Republican Party candidates, including front-runner Donald Trump. While the polls showed Clinton also beating the GOP candidates, Sanders did so by a higher margin in the poll, Tyner said.

“So, it’s not just about a fight for the soul of the Democratic Party,” Tyner said. “It’s about who are the Democrats going to put up whose actually going to win this thing.” He added that people are sick and tired of politics as usual and how the power structure of both major parties is being sold out to powerful, well-monied interests. Tyner said he has worked against that in his political career, while Sanders has worked against it his whole life.

In the town of Rhinebeck, Supervisor Elizabeth Spinzia said she did not want to comment on the primary beyond saying she remains undecided on a candidate.

Livingston town Councilman Will Yandik, who is seeking the Democratic nomination in the 19th Congressional District race, also declined to comment on the primary.

Zephyr Teachout, who is seeking the Democratic nomination in the 19th Congressional District, declined to talk about the candidates in the presidential primary, but did say she was pleased to see their debates focused on substantive issues. Last December, Teachout endorsed Sanders in the presidential contest, calling him a “fearless, experienced leader capable of seeing the truth and standing up to big private power, even when it is almost impossibly hard.”

“I think primaries make candidates stronger,” Teachout said, adding that the primaries give voters a choice and engages them in the process.