Just three days after she signed up for coverage, she went to the emergency room with severe stomach pain and underwent emergency abdominal surgery. “I called on the way to the hospital to make sure I was really covered,” she said. “When they said, ‘Yes, you’re covered,’ I actually cried.”

Amanda Shelley: A 37-year-old physician assistant from Gilbert, Shelley works as an independent contractor in the geriatric health field and, until implementation of the Affordable Care Act, was unable to buy insurance because of a pre-existing medical condition.

This month, the teenager started working as Intel’s youngest intern, a position that company CEO Brian Krzanich offered him after the two met at a fair at which inventors display their work.

Joey Hudy: A 16-year-old inventor from Anthem, Hudy was a big hit when he attended a White House science fair two years ago and demonstrated his “extreme marshmallow cannon” for the president. At President Barack Obama’s urging, Joey fired the cannon inside the East Room of the White House. Joey also gave the president a card that read, “Don’t be bored, make something.”

“I couldn’t believe it,” Avila said of the first lady’s invitation to attend the speech. “But I know this is not about me. It’s about the movement. It’s just getting stronger and bigger.”

Cristian Avila: Avila, a 23-year-old undocumented immigrant, fasted for 22 days to underscore the “moral urgency” for Congress to pass immigration reform that includes a pathway to citizenship for undocumented migrants. In November, he and other activists went without eating and drank only water for more than three weeks inside a tent on the National Mall in Washington, D.C. The Obamas, Vice President Joe Biden and other dignitaries visited during the fast.

Other Arizonans at the State of the Union

The Republic | azcentral.com Tue Jan 28, 2014 11:44 PM

Cory Remsburg, a decorated Army Ranger from Gilbert, has made a habit out of meeting President Barack Obama.

The first time, Remsburg was a paratrooper doing a ceremonial jump.

The second time, he was in a hospital with a massive head wound.

The third time, he was in a wheelchair, but stood to salute his commander in chief.

The fourth time came Tuesday after Obama delivered the State of the Union address at which Remsburg was seated as an honored guest in the audience.

Remsburg, 30, who was wounded by an explosive device in Afghanistan, and his father, Craig, were among 24 guests invited to sit in the Capitol gallery with first lady Michelle Obama. President Obama introduced and praised Remsburg and all those who serve in uniform at the end of his speech.

“It was a pretty awesome event,” the father said. “He (Cory) was humbled by the recognition, and he thanked the White House and Congress for letting him represent the wounded warriors.”

Craig Remsburg said the invitation came last week. His son has spent the past three years in hospitals and rehabilitation centers learning to walk and talk again. The father hopes that story will remind the country that soldiers are still being killed and wounded.

“If he sends that message by his presence alone, then he’s done something,” the elder Remsburg said by phone from Washington on Tuesday. “That was his take on it: If I can help others know that people are hurt and are continually going to get hurt in war, then I’ve done my job.”

Sgt. 1st Class Cory Remsburg, the recipient of the Bronze Star and Purple Heart, still has four to six hours of speech and physical therapy every day, his father said. He is blind in one eye and has a titanium plate in his skull.

On Tuesday, the Remsburgs met with Veterans Affairs Secretary Eric Shinseki to discuss Cory’s recovery.

Cory’s meeting with Obama capped a remarkable string of face-to-face encounters between one soldier and one president.

2 chance encounters

Cory Remsburg signed up for the Army on his 18th birthday. He wanted to follow in the footsteps of his father, who served in the military for 25 years. Remsburg was training to be a Ranger on Sept. 11, 2001.

In 2003, he began a string of months-long deployments to Iraq and Afghanistan.

Between two deployments came a trip to France in June 2009. Remsburg was among Army Rangers who re-enacted the 65th anniversary of the D-Day paratrooper jump into Normandy during World War II. There, he met the visiting President Obama.

Weeks later, Remsburg was sent to Afghanistan again. It was his 10th deployment.

On Oct. 1, 2009, Remsburg and his unit were preparing to clear a landing zone for helicopters. One soldier stepped on an improvised explosive device. The blast from the 500-pound bomb killed the soldier and critically wounded others, including Remsburg.

Remsburg was 5 feet from the blast. He suffered massive head trauma. He spent months in a coma. When he awakened, doctors moved him to the National Naval Medical Center in Bethesda, Md., to rebuild his skull.

Remsburg was still at Bethesda in April 2010 when Obama came to visit wounded vets.

During the tour, the president stepped into a room and saw a picture of himself on the wall. The photo showed the president meeting a soldier in France less than a year earlier. That soldier was Remsburg, now in the bed in front of him.

“And there at Bethesda, we were meeting again,” Obama said during a speech to the Disabled Veterans of America Conference in 2010. “And Cory still couldn’t speak. But he looked me in the eye. He lifted his arm, and he shook my hand firmly. And when I asked how he was feeling, he held up his hand, pulled his fingers together and gave a thumbs up.”

Leading the way

Remsburg spent the next three years in and out of hospitals and clinics. Last April, he was released to his family’s home in Gilbert.

That August, Obama was scheduled to visit Desert Vista High School for a speech on the housing market and the economy. White House staff arranged a private meeting between Remsburg and Obama in a classroom at the school, the third meeting between the two.

Obama did not mention Remsburg during his speech that afternoon in Ahwatukee Foothills. But he did update the Disabled Veterans conference a few days later.

In that speech, Obama said he saw Remsburg alert in a wheelchair, far from the soldier who had been in a hospital bed barely able to move.

“And then, he wanted to show me something,” Obama said in the speech. “And he leaned out of his chair. And he reached out and grabbed his walker. And with the help of his parents, he pulled himself forward and he stood up.

“And he looked at me, and he gave me a sharp salute.” Remsburg also recited his unit’s slogan: “Rangers lead the way.”

On Tuesday, Obama quoted something else Remsburg told him: “My recovery has not been easy. Nothing in life that’s worth anything is easy.”