Finally, some good news!

This is an awesome story of collaboration amongst a number of groups to return coastal land to the Kashia Band of Pomo Indians; 150 years ago they were forced to leave their land and move inland. The small reservation that became their home is now 18-times bigger and will again reach to the Pacific coast of Northern California where their ancestors once lived.

Not A Pretty History

Around 1817, hundreds of Pomos were forced to accept the Catholic faith at local Spanish missions. In 1822, California became part of the Mexican Republic; at this time, thousands of Pomos died of disease (mainly cholera and smallpox), while Mexican soldiers killed or sold into slavery thousands more.

Things got worse. After 1849, Anglos invaded the Pomos’ territory, stealing their land and murdering hundreds of them. In 1856, the Pomo were “rounded up” and forced to live on the Mendocino Indian Reserve, a tiny 40-acre reservation far from the coast.

When this happened, the Pomo Native American tribe left behind their coastal lands: 668 acres of redwood forest, dramatic ocean views and the ability to hunt and fish freely, especially for their beloved abalone.

Jump forward 69 years: in 1925, the Richardson family purchased the 688-acre property. Now, Bill Richardson has agreed on a price that will return the land to the Pomos.

Finally Going Home

A hundred and fifty years later, it’s time for the Pomos to finally come home. As Good News Network reports, the tribe may now expand its reservation to 18-times its previous size. And, for the first time in over a hundred years, the people will once again be able to enjoy the Pacific coast where they and their ancestors once hunted and fished.

It took five years of fundraising by the Sonoma County government, the Trust for Public Land and private foundations for the vision to become a reality. Sonoma County contributed two million dollars for the project, while another six million was raised by the coalition of groups seeking to buy the property for the Kashia Pomos.

Protected Open Space

In a win-win for the Pomos and local nature-lovers, the tribe will manage the land as protected open space. There will also be a demonstration forest for educating the public about the history of native peoples in the area.

The Pomo Indians will get to start using the land immediately, and Bill Richardson will stay on the property, with the promise of being buried on a hillside when he dies.

It should be noted that, while this is an awesome piece of good news, the Richardson family is still doing pretty well from this sale. They accepted a discounted price nearly $1 million below the appraised value of the property but still made $6 million on the deal.

Nevertheless, the agreement is being hailed as a healing occasion, as it restores coastal access to the Kashia people while providing for environmental conservation and public use.

The Pomo Indians haven’t had access to the coast for generations. Now, they have their land back.