On Tuesday, nurse practitioners rallied in Harrisburg in their fight to practice independently in Pennsylvania, a cause that has drawn support from The Hospital and Healthsystem Association of Pennsylvania.

Right now, for a nurse practitioner to practice in this state they must first have collaborative agreements with two physicians, which are basically contracts that allow them to practice alone.

Two bills are pending – one in the House of Representatives and one in the Senate – that would loosen nurse practitioner regulations so that Pennsylvania can become what is known as a full-authority practice state.

Advocates for the change argue that nurse practitioners receive adequate education and that it would reduce health care costs and expand services to rural areas that are currently experiencing a shortage of doctors.

“Pennsylvania faces a growing crisis in which residents, especially those in rural areas, are unable to find access to quality health care,” Lorraine Bock, president of the Pennsylvania Coalition of Nurse Practitioners, said. “Nurse practitioners have the skills and training to assist our most vulnerable populations. It’s time we join the growing number of states who recognize the benefits that NP’s provide to their communities.”

There are currently 21 states and the District of Columbia that allow nurse practitioners to practice independently, according to a news release from The Hospital and Healthsystem Association of Pennsylvania, or HAP.

HAP said it supports allowing nurse practitioners to practice without physician supervision or a collaborative agreement, as long as they work under a doctor’s supervision for at least three years and 3,600 hours, a news release said.

HAP also said it supports nurse practitioners who are licensed in another state and meet the three-year/3,600-hour requirement to practice in Pennsylvania without a collaborative agreement.

“The 2010 Affordable Care Act is the largest overhaul to our nation’s health care system since the creation of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965,” HAP President and CEO Andy Carter said. “It has required a comprehensive rethinking of the way care is provided. This rethinking also must include the role of health care professionals in new, team-based models of care.”

The Pennsylvania Medical Society continues to object to nurse practitioners practicing independently. It would prefer to see more collaboration between physicians and nurse practitioners.

“With the complexity of patients increasing, and the need to promote team-based care between health care professionals, now is not the time for hospitals to make things worse by further risking the safety of their patients by lobbying to eliminate physician-nurse practitioner collaboration,” Dr. Scott Shapiro, president of the Pennsylvania Medical Society and a practicing physician in Montgomery County, said. “Instead, HAP should be promoting team care that is best for patients and providers. Studies have consistently shown that when health care professionals work together in a coordinated, efficient manner, care improves.”