Hartford Democratic Mayor Pedro Segarra is ditching his campaign manager after a series of early errors that put the campaign on the defensive.

In an email to supporters, Segarra said he decided to let Patrick Romano and his firm, DNA Campaigns, go.

"The opening weeks of the campaign did not reflect the city's accomplishments, momentum and progress," Segarra said. "For numerous reasons, I believe it is best to move in a different direction."

It's been a rough start for Segarra's reelection campaign. First, he told potential donors in an email that the city's graduation rates have doubled since he was elected mayor, but they haven't. Then, he told potential donors that Democratic challenger Luke Bronin hadn't voted in the 2013 municipal elections, when he had.

Romano was charged last week in Guilford with a DUI and other misdemeanor charges following an argument with his wife, according to his attorney, Hugh Keefe. Keefe called it "a very minor dispute between two people who love each other." He said Romano's wife was also charged, but that the matter would soon be resolved in court.

Segarra also named a new campaign manager -- Michael Beckendorf.

"Michael is based in Washington D.C. and has directed several campaigns in various states," Segarra wrote. "Most recently, he served as the Coordinated Campaign Director for the Democratic Party of Oregon, helping to reelect U.S. Senator Jeff Merkley as well as other Democratic candidates. In 2012, he served as the Field Director for Pete Gallego's successful campaign for Congress in San Antonio, Texas, one of the most competitive Congressional races that year."

This is Segarra's second campaign for the office. He was first appointed mayor in 2010 after the resignation of then Mayor Eddie Perez -- who left office after being convicted of corruption-related charges. Segarra won his first mayoral election in 2011. Now, he's running for a second four-year term and facing several challengers from within the Democratic party.

Efforts to reach Romano Saturday were unsuccessful.