TRENTON — New Jersey offers one of the most expensive health benefits plans in the nation to its state workers, with average monthly premium costs running nearly 1-1/2 times more than that of the rest of the country, according to the first-ever analysis of how much state governments pay to insure their employees.



A study released this afternoon by Pew Charitable Trusts and the MacArthur Foundation, both nonpartisan research organizations, found premium costs were highest in Alaska, New Hampshire, New Jersey, Vermont and Wisconsin, and lowest in Arkansas, Mississippi, New Mexico, South Carolina and South Dakota.



The national average monthly premium — the cost borne by the state and its employees — was $963, compared to $1,334 in New Jersey, according to the report.

New Jersey covered 95 percent of the tab, employees 5 percent, compared to the 84 -to-16 percent state and employee split nationally. The leader of the largest state employee union disputed the finding, saying workers pay at least three times that amount. The study's project director Maria Schiff said upon consultation with Milliman Inc., the actuarial firm that built the database, the report will be amended to clarify employees pay more or less based on their income, family size and other factors.

Updated on Aug. 14: According to Kil Huh, Pew’s director of State and Local Fiscal Health, "The report will be revised to reflect an average employee premium contribution percentage of approximately 9 percent, based on an assumed (national) average annual salary of $50,000 in 2013."

"The report presented average premium contribution percentages for plan year 2013, which began in January 2013 and ended in December 2013," Huh said. "Unlike most other states, New Jersey was in the midst of implementing a major change to their premium contribution arrangements. As a result of additional analysis, researchers found that most employees contributed at the Year 2/Year 3 level for plan year 2013 because while premiums are based on the calendar year, Year 3 of the phase-in began for most employees on July 1, 2013. Some employees contributed at the Year 1/Year 2 level during plan year 2013 because they entered the phase-in schedule on July 1, 2012. Employees who reach Year 4 of the phase-in period, which would have only applied to new employees in 2013, are scheduled to contribute, on average, approximately 15 percent of their total premium."

The report's authors warned against comparing costs across state lines because there are many factors that drive up premiums. The number of employees enrolled and their ages, the variety of benefit plans, and the regional differences in doctors' practice styles complicate attempts to rank and compare states, Schiff said.



"Because of the range of variables that influence spending, higher spending is not necessarily an indication of waste and lower spending is not necessarily a sign of efficiency," according to the report.



But because the study is the first of its kind, it "offers a nationwide benchmark against which states can be compared," the report said.



The report's release is timely for New Jersey. Gov. Chris Christie has railed against the rising cost of health care benefits for public workers in town hall meetings this summer. Last week, the governor appointed a panel of economic experts to recommend ways the state can reduce pension and health benefit expenses.



The state pension system is facing nearly $40 billion in unfunded liabilities, while the health benefits program for current and retired employees is running a $47 billion hole, according to recent state Treasury estimates.



“Let’s talk about some things that are unsustainable going forward,” said Christie during a July 1st town hall in Caldwell. “Here’s one thing that Barack Obama and I agree on. (The president) looks at the New Jersey public health care plan for public workers and says it’s a ‘Cadillac plan.’”

If the state doesn’t make changes to public workers’ health care plans, New Jersey will be taxed “a fine” for its so-called “Cadillac plan” beginning in Fiscal Year 2018, Christie said, referring to changes under the Affordable Care Act.

“That’s not me making that decision, that’s the Democratic president of the United States making that decision. ... This is what I was dealt with and this is what I have to deal with."

Hetty Rosenstein, New Jersey director for the largest state worker union, Communications Workers of America, questioned the report's statement that workers contributed only 5 percent of premium costs. State workers contribute 19 percent to 35 percent to their premiums, and not the 5 percent cited in the study, she said.

"We have only had a moment to review the study which we didn't see until late this afternoon, but it greatly understates employee contributions to the plan and it seems it may combine costs for active and retirees which also distorts costs," Rosenstein said.

Rosenstein said state workers have "good healthcare coverage," but it's not "extraordinary."

"The issue is not the healthcare plan — it's the overall cost of healthcare in New Jersey. New Jersey doctors charge more, we don't engage in bulk purchasing of pharmaceuticals, we have private hospitals price gouging, and until the Affordable Care Act, we had one of the highest rates of uninsured in the country. All of these things drive our prices up," Rosenstein said.

"Health insurance costs have become a significant portion of states' overall health care spending, second only to Medicaid," according to the report. "Nevertheless, little has been known about how states' employee health plans and costs compare with one another and with those of large, private sector employers."



The study includes data from every state but Pennsylvania, which does not publicly release its public employee benefit costs.



In 2013, the 49 states spent $30.8 billion to insure 2.7 million employees and their families, according to the report.

EDITOR'S NOTE: This story has been corrected to say New Jersey's premiums are nearly 1-1/2 times more than the national average, not more than 1-1/2 times than the national average.





FOLLOW STAR-LEDGER POLITICS: TWITTER • FACEBOOK • GOOGLE+