IN FORMATION: A pigeon flew as aircraft performed during the National Day military parade last Saturday in Madrid. (Eduardo Parra/Getty Images)



HILL CLIMB: Ryan Staveley rode his dirt bike up dune 18 during the 2013 RHL Weston beach race in Weston-super-Mare, England, last Sunday. Riders compete on a course marked out on a beach, with man-made jumps and sand dunes being constructed to make the course tougher. (Adrian Dennis/AFP/Getty Images)



COLORFUL CELEBRATIONS: Devotees paraded through the streets in Phuket, Thailand, last Saturday during the annual vegetarian festival. The Phuket Vegetarian Festival is a colorful event that begins on the first evening of the ninth lunar month and lasts for nine days. (Alexander Widding/Zuma 24)



ILLUMINATED: People on horses lined up for the national anthem on the final day of the Albuquerque International Balloon Fiesta last Sunday in Albuquerque, N.M. (Jim Thompson/Albuquerque Journal/Zuma Press)



PRIMP AND PREEN: A woman groomed a poodle at the World Team Dog Grooming Championships in Barcelona last Sunday. (David Ramos/Getty Images)



DESTROYED: Residents surveyed damaged houses Monday after Cyclone Phailin hit Puri, India. Unlike past storms, only 25 deaths were reported thanks to a massive evacuation effort by police that effectively moved nearly 1 million residents out of the storm’s path and into shelters. (Ahmad Masood/Reuters)



NO ROOM TO MOVE: More than 1 million people crammed into Manila’s streets, stopping traffic and closing government offices and businesses, as they attended a charity and medical event held Monday by the powerful Iglesia ni Cristo, or Church of Christ, sect. (Bullit Marquez/Associated Press)



JUST CHECKING: Raymond Weyandt looked inside his refrigerator last Sunday after floodwaters from a nearby creek filled his home in Austin, Texas. Flash floods swept through the Austin area after up to a foot of rain fell in a 12-hour period. (Ralph Barrera/Austin American-Statesman/Associated Press)