Speaker John Boehner and his Republican colleagues in the U.S. House of Representatives are ready to sue President Barack Obama for doing his job despite them.

As former White House Counsel Kathy Ruemmler observed on Meet the Press, Speaker Boehner’s lawsuit is “all for show.”

President Obama has acted within his constitutional role. Just as the Bush administration extended deadlines and waived penalties during the 2006 rollout of Medicare Part D, the Obama administration has reprogrammed some funds and delayed some of the provisions of the Affordable Care Act.

Concerns about immigration enforcement are similarly overwrought. The executive branch makes enforcement priority decisions every time a federal prosecutor declines to charge a case supported by probable cause or deploys FBI agents with guidance to focus on a particular crime. Congress should maintain accountability for executive action, but congressional oversight, the power of the purse, and the ballot box are almost always the appropriate places to hash out such disputes, not the courts.

Lack of standing

Regardless, the courts will likely never get that far because the House does not have standing to bring this lawsuit. Standing requirements assure courts that the person bringing the lawsuit has a sufficiently concrete interest in the outcome to sustain a lawsuit under the power of courts to decide “cases” or “controversies” under Article III of the U.S. Constitution.

First, the speaker’s legal advisers misplace reliance on Raines v. Byrd, a 1997 Supreme Court case in which a number of legislators unsuccessfully challenged the constitutionality of the line-item veto. They quote Raines to argue that, as a result of the President’s actions, Congress’s “votes have been completely nullified” and therefore legislators have standing to sue. The legislators in Raines, however, lacked standing because they could still pass or reject appropriations bills, vote to repeal the act at issue, and their votes were therefore not nullified.

The same is true with respect to the Affordable Care Act. Speaker Boehner’s 54 attempts to repeal or amend it may have failed, but they failed because they don’t have the votes in the Senate, not because of executive action.

But what if the entire House passes a resolution to authorize a lawsuit as an institution rather than as individual representatives as in Raines? The Supreme Court has never conclusively resolved that question, but the House’s standing arguments would be especially weak when it seeks to require the president to enforce an enacted law.

For example, Georgetown University law professor Marty Lederman elsewhere has laid out the executive branch’s long-standing view, across administrations of both parties:

“…Congress as a whole does not have Article III standing to defend the constitutionality of statutes or to compel executive enforcement of the law, using two basic and related arguments. First, Congress has no more interest than do citizens in seeing that enacted laws are enforced — and since citizens cannot ask Article III courts to act based solely on the “abstract injury” suffered by all citizens in kind when a law or the Constitution is not enforced, neither can Congress. Second, litigation on behalf of the United States in order to secure enforcement of the Constitution and laws is an executive function — indeed, part of the President’s obligation to ‘take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed,’ Art. II, sec. 3 — and Congress cannot engage in executive functions of that sort.”

The ‘toxic’ wing

These two principles — one rooted in the general applicability of enacted laws and the other in separation of powers — preclude the speaker’s lawsuit. If there is a problem with the president’s actions, the courts will step in only for a party who sustained a real injury. In fact, the line-item veto that angered the legislators in Raines later got struck down once a plaintiff with standing — the City of New York — brought suit.

The Boehner lawsuit primarily is just political theater. The midterm elections are approaching and control of the Senate is very much in play with Democrats defending several seats in conservative states. Gerrymandered congressional districts have calcified Republican control of the House for the time being. And the voters who Democrats need — minority, young, and female voters — have been historically less reliable during midterms.

One tangible benefit for the speaker is that the lawsuit may save him from the politically toxic, impeachment wing of his conservative base.

But Speaker Boehner and his allies could snatch defeat from the jaws of victory by relentlessly reminding voters that they prefer to obstruct, investigate, and litigate rather than use the vast legislative powers of Article I of the U.S. Constitution to further the public interest.

As Ms. Ruemmler put it, “to say this lawsuit is frivolous is an understatement.” Speaker Boehner can sing from the Capitol dome that the White House seeks an imperial presidency, but it is his own lawsuit that is an emperor without clothes.

Andrew McCanse Wright is a professor at Savannah Law School and served as associate counsel to President Barack Obama.