A Fort Myers family is struggling to cope with the disappearance of their daughter.

Kaiyana Spence, 16, has not been seen since October 22. The family, with the help of the Lee County Sheriff's Office, is desperately trying to find her. They believe that she's in danger.

"Without her here, we are three wheels without our fourth. She should be right here. We shouldn't even be doing this," said Marcy Spence, Kaiyana's mother.

Spence said she dropped off Kaiyana, a junior at Cypress Lake High School, at her bus stop Thursday morning.

"The last text she got from me told her how much I love her," Spence said. Kaiyana never returned the text, and now her phone is dead.

"To think that she would be willing to abandon her family, I really have a hard time believing that."

Kaiyana was last seen at Rutenberg Park. Her parents said she left school and walked to a playground with a girl from class.

Her father, Corey Spence, said the fact his daughter hasn't reach out to them is not like her.

Like her phone, Kaiyana's social media accounts and her debit card are silent. The detectives questioned her parents, friends, and anyone she spoke with in person or online.

Would she run away?

"I think she did walk away, but not with the intention of staying away this long," her father said.

Kaiyana's photo is spreading while her family continues to hold on to hope.

Marcy, Kaiya's mother, wants a fresh start with her daughter.

"We haven't listened to each other as best as we should have, but I just want a second chance to make it right with her."

Corey Spence just had one message: "Come home now if you can, and if you can't, fight."

The sheriff's office has sent out a "Be on the Lookout" alert for Kaiya. This case doesn't fit the criteria for an Amber Alert because there's nothing to indicate she was taken by force.

"We made a web page for Kaiya called Find Kaiya Spence on Facebook," said Marcy.

Just hours after starting the social media page, the family received a tip that she might be on Fort Myers Beach, but it turned out not to be true.

If you have any information on Kaiyana Spence, call the Lee County Sheriff's Office at (239) 477-1000.