Topics: Books, Lev Grossman, magicians, The Magician's Land, Entertainment News

There is much to love about Lev Grossman’s Magicians trilogy. The books — which began with “The Magicians,” in 2009, and just wrapped up this month with “The Magician’s Land” — are massively absorbing, very funny, occasionally heartbreaking. They’re just pulpy and juvenile enough to make for a great weekend diversion, but just smart and literary enough that you don’t feel cheap afterward. The Magicians trilogy has wit, style, soul and — thanks in part to Lev Grossman’s position as the book critic for Time — an encyclopedic knowledge of the conventions and flaws of the fantasy genre, which this book frequently mocks, and subverts whenever possible.

Which is why, unfortunately, the reader’s attention is inevitably drawn to the one irritating fantasy cliché that the Magicians trilogy doesn’t avoid. It’s not just that it’s an epic Hero’s Quest narrative centered entirely around a white, straight guy. It’s the absence of a female lead who can make it through even one entire installment of the trilogy without being killed, raped or otherwise horrifically traumatized to fuel that guy’s arc.

The trilogy centers around young Quentin Coldwater — a social reject, a puzzle-solver, smarter than average; your usual ready-made avatar for the nerdy, socially disenfranchised white men presumed to be buying fantasy books — who discovers that magic is real when he is invited to an exclusive private college for magicians. (Harry Potter references are dropped every few pages, to let the reader know that it’s an intentional resemblance.) Soon enough, Quentin has learned that Fillory, the extremely Narnia-esque fantasyland of his favorite children’s books, is real too, and he’s off to save it from certain peril. In between all this, we get your usual coming-of-age parable. Which is actually the redeeming feature of the series: Rather than aiming for the 12-to-18 YA market, this series is about the ages between 18 and 30. And unlike Harry Potter, Quentin doesn’t learn that he’s inherently special and destined for greatness: He learns, slowly and painfully, that he’s not. He drinks too much, tanks relationships, takes unfulfilling jobs, gives up on his childhood dreams, and, Grossman is brave enough to suggest, becomes a better person by giving them up. In a culture obsessed with youth and wish-fulfillment, these are books about the heroism of acting your age.

Still: This subversive streak might resonate more, were it not channeled through a traditional white, straight, male lead. I’m not the first to point out that Grossman’s story seems conflicted about who its protagonist is — in Slate, Choire Sicha recently wrote about why Julia is the trilogy’s real heroine. But it’s frustrating that genre epics, especially the ones that tap the Joseph Campbell “hero’s quest” formula, have always belonged to these “Everyman” characters: Harry Potter, Luke Skywalker, Frodo and Bilbo Baggins, etc. We still see white, straight and male as the default setting for human experience; stories about them can be marketed as “universal,” whereas everything else is assumed to cater to an interest group. (Remember Joanne Rowling, not only bowing to the convention of the male hero, but degendering her name into “J.K.” so as not to scare off boys.) It doesn’t help that Quentin is far from the most likable of everymen; when Q.C. starts whining, he can give even the legendarily wimpy Luke Skywalker a run for his money. This has given Grossman’s books a bad case of what a friend calls “Hermione syndrome”: Quentin is frequently eclipsed by side characters who are vastly more interesting and sympathetic than he is. Most of them are women. And most of them are not long for this world.

I have fallen in love with each female lead Grossman introduced, only to see them invariably fed into a narrative meat-grinder to teach Quentin a lesson. Consider Quentin’s first girlfriend Alice, from “The Magicians”: She’s the most obvious Hermione analogue of the lot, a withdrawn and socially awkward girl who studies harder than anyone else in class, in part to live out the potential of her magician brother, who was killed in a tragic accident. She’s smart, hardworking, intensely ethical, in love with learning; she’s also dead by the end of the first book. In “The Magician King,” we get Julia, Quentin’s high-school crush, who is (if possible) even more wonderful than Alice: She was rejected from Brakebills, the magic academy, and had a nervous breakdown before resolving to teach herself magic by any means necessary. In non-mythical terms, while Quentin was attending the Ivy League schools and scoring internships, Julia was stripping to pay for night classes at a community college. Julia, like Alice, is brilliant; she’s also tough, worldly and intensely, vocally critical of Quentin’s immense privilege. Whenever Quentin gears up for another Skywalkerian whine — this time enriched by mentions of his dead girlfriend Alice — Julia is there to remind him there are people who’d kill for his life. For her service, Julia is granted a lengthy, exceptionally graphic rape scene at the hands of an anthropomorphic fox-god, then shunted off to another dimension.