Topics: 2016 Democratic primary, 2016 Hillary Clinton, Bernie Sanders, Big Pharma, daraprim, Health Care, prescription drugs, turing pharmaceuticals, Video, Elections News, Technology News, Business News, News, Politics News

As a new survey released this week revealed that American workers’ out-of-pocket medical costs are rising faster than wages or overall inflation, and amid controversy over a pharmaceutical company’s decision to raise the price of a 62-year old infection-treating drug over 5,000 percent overnight, Democratic presidential candidates have tailored their health care platforms around the rising cost of prescription drugs.

Hillary Clinton is out today with a proposal barring insurers from offering health plans that charge patients more than $250 a month in co-payments for drugs.

“We need to protect hard-working Americans here at home from excessive costs. Too often these drugs cost a fortune,” she said in Des Moines, Iowa today. Clinton chided drug companies who she said keep profits for themselves while “shifting the cost to families.”

“Frankly, it is finally time for us to deal with the skyrocketing out-of-pocket health costs, and particularly runaway prescription-drug prices,” Clinton said at a campaign stop in Louisiana on Monday.

“Because even though the uninsured rate is at its lowest point in decades, Americans with health insurance are paying more and more in out-of-pocket expenses,” Clinton noted during her defense of Obamacare.

When Clinton tweeted a New York Times article highlighting this week’s Big Pharma monster of the moment, smug Turing Pharameutical CEO Martin Shkreli, calling his company’s decision to inflate the cost of Daraprim “outrageous,” biotechnology stocks plummeted:

Price gouging like this in the specialty drug market is outrageous. Tomorrow I'll lay out a plan to take it on. -H https://t.co/9Z0Aw7aI6h — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) September 21, 2015

Clinton’s plan would encourage the development and use of generic drugs, redirecting funds to a U.S. Food and Drug Administration office with a backlog of generic drugs awaiting approval. Clinton’s plan also raises the rates pharmaceutical companies pay to Medicare in exchange for the federal program insuring prescriptions drugs.