Amendment 1 signs line the drive at Howard Office Building in Nashville on Oct. 18, 2014. A poll released Wednesday, Oct. 29, 2014, by Middle Tennessee State University said results were "too close to call," with 39% of 600 registered voters saying they were in favor of the measure, while 32% opposed it. Fifteen percent remain undecided. (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins, The Tennessean)

NASHVILLE — On Tuesday, Tennessee voters will have a final chance to weigh in on Amendment 1, a proposed measure that would give state lawmakers more power to regulate and restrict abortions.

In television commercials and radio ads, from church pulpits on Sundays and competing news conferences by physicians, faith leaders and celebrities, backers and opponents of the measure have tried to get their conflicting messages out — in some cases leaving voters confused about what the measure would and would not do.

Here are some facts about the amendment, abortion in Tennessee and those on both sides of the campaign.

What the amendment says:

Nothing in this Constitution secures or protects a right to abortion or requires the funding of an abortion. The people retain the right through their elected state representatives and state senators to enact, amend, or repeal statutes regarding abortion, including, but not limited to, circumstances of pregnancy resulting from rape or incest or when necessary to save the life of the mother.

What the amendment would do?

If passed, the amendment would have no immediate effect on abortion in Tennessee. However, lawmakers would have more ability in the future to pass restrictions that the state Supreme Court has previously ruled were unconstitutional. A "yes" vote would give lawmakers this ability. A "no" vote would leave the state constitution unchanged.

If enacted, Tennessee would become the fourth state in the nation that has an abortion amendment in its constitution. The other three states are Arkansas, Colorado and Rhode Island.

What measures could lawmakers enact if Amendment 1 succeeds?

Examples of measures that lawmakers and others have spoken publicly about include:

• A waiting period before a woman seeking an abortion can obtain one.

• A requirement that doctors give women specifically worded information about abortions and fetal development crafted by lawmakers.

• A ban on abortions past a certain stage of fetal development.

• A requirement that abortion clinics meet the stricter standards of ambulatory surgical centers where typically more complex medical procedures are performed.

• An end to exceptions to abortion restrictions for women who are victims of rape or incest, or in cases in which a woman's health is at risk.

Voters in Tennessee will consider a constitutional amendment on abortion rules. (Photo: Nichole Manna, The Jackson (Tenn.) Sun)

What do voters think about the amendment?

Thirty-nine percent are in favor of the amendment, 32% are against, 15% are undecided while 8% said they would not vote, according to a poll of 600 registered voters by Middle Tennessee State University. The poll had a margin of error of 4 percentage points.

Do abortion regulations and restrictions exist in Tennessee now?

Yes. The state's current abortion laws include:

• A requirement that physicians performing abortions obtain admitting privileges at local hospitals.

• A ban on telemedicine — or videoconferencing — between a doctor and patient taking an abortion-inducing drug.

• A requirement that the parent of a minor consent before an abortion is provided, with a judicial bypass procedure in place for minors.

• Health plans offered in the state's health exchange under the Affordable Care Act may not provide coverage of abortion.

• Public funding for abortions is only available in cases of rape, incest or when the life of the mother is endangered.

Abortions in Tennessee by the numbers:

In 2010 there were 16,373 abortions performed in Tennessee, down 6% from a decade ago, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

More recent data compiled by the Tennessee Department of Health provide a snapshot of Tennessee women who have sought abortions. The data are different from the CDC's because they track only Tennessee residents.

In 2012, 12,122 Tennessee residents sought abortions.

Are abortion clinics regulated?

There are seven abortion providers in Tennessee, down from 16 in 2000.

Five of the seven clinics operate as ambulatory surgical centers, which are inspected and regulated by the Tennessee Department of Health.

Two of the clinics operate as private physician practices. Physicians are regulated and licensed by the Board of Medical Examiners.

Is Tennessee really an "abortion destination"?

The percentage of abortions in Tennessee sought by women from other states has steadily climbed since 1992. By 2010, one in four abortions in Tennessee was sought by a woman from another state.

Backers of Amendment 1 say this proves Tennessee is a destination for those seeking an abortion. Opponents note that Tennessee, which is bordered by eight states, has long been a health care destination. Increasing restrictions on abortions and clinic closures in other states also have prompted women to travel to Tennessee for the procedure.

Who is behind the "Yes on 1" campaign?

Tennessee Right to Life has been the key organizer of the campaign. Gov. Bill Haslam, General Assembly Republican leadership and the state's Republican Party also back the measure. The campaign had raised more than $1.5 million by Oct. 25. Reality television family the Duggars, who are featured in the TLC network series 19 Kids and Counting, have twice made public appearances in support of the measure. Faith groups including the Southern Baptist Convention, all three of Tennessee's Catholic bishops and a number of denominations have come out in support of the amendment.

Who is behind the "Vote No on One" campaign?

The state's Planned Parenthood affiliates and the American Civil Liberties Union of Tennessee are the primary groups behind the "no" campaign, but abortion providers, clergy and physicians have all spoken out against the measure. The opposition on Saturday drew some star support, with Connie Britton, the star of the television show Nashville, and film actress Ashley Judd speaking against the measure. The campaign had raised more than $4 million by Oct. 25.

How are the votes for ballot measures counted?

To succeed, a constitutional amendment requires a majority vote that also exceeds 50% plus one of the number participating in the governor's vote.

Wadhwani also reports for The Tennessean.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1wXAETn