According to John Kerry, global warming means that building more African farms in a starving continent is a bad idea due to the potential increase in carbon output. But due to the way the U.S. Secretary of State phrased this claim some people say it’s a Mansanto conspiracy intended to help GMO companies.

In a related report by The Inquisitr, a climate change scientist who claimed that “disasters associated with hurricanes, tornadoes, floods, or droughts have increased on climate timescales either in the United States or globally” ended up being given the boot due to people criticizing him as a climate change denier. But the response to one MSNBC segment on climate change was generally just amusement since they said global warming could cause a sharknado in real life.

In parts of sub-Sahara Africa, one in four people suffers from chronic hunger. When speaking at the U.S.-Africa Summit earlier this week, John Kerry astonished African leaders by saying that they needed to face their starvation problem by not creating more farms or farmland:

“Certain agricultural processes can actually release carbon pollution and actually contribute to the problem in the first place. It’s a twisted circle. Always complicated. But we also know that there are certain ways to change that. For example, rather than convert natural areas to new farmland, a process that typically releases significant amounts of carbon pollution, we can, instead, concentrate our efforts on making existing farmlands more productive.”

Of course, when Kerry made these comments he might have been referencing a global warming study which claims higher temperatures could increase the number of starving people due to widespread famine in 2050:

“As a result of global warming, rates of malnourishment in the developing world could increase from the current 18 per cent to 27 per cent within the next four decades.”

Of course, even the EPA claims that global warming may benefit farming if handled correctly:

“Increases in temperature and carbon dioxide (CO2) can be beneficial for some crops in some places. But to realize these benefits, nutrient levels, soil moisture, water availability, and other conditions must also be met.”

When Kerry talks about “making existing farmlands more productive,” it’s presumed this would mean Africa needs to adopt American farming methods. Based upon that assumption, some critics believe Kerry is really pushing GMOs under the guise of global warming fears:

“Oh, I get it! Africans shouldn’t build more farms to attempt to feed themselves and become self-sustaining, they should just concentrate the power into GMO companies and industrial mega farms. Yeah. Makes sense he would say that, since Monsanto practically owns our government.”

What do you think about John Kerry’s comment on global warming and African farms?