A report from the U.S. Department of Energy showed Kansas has enough untapped hydropower to power the entire state, but that isn’t likely to happen due to physical and legal challenges.

A study from Oak Ridge National Laboratory showed Kansas has about 2.4 gigawatts of potential hydropower that isn’t being used. A gigawatt is equal to 1 million kilowatts, a more familiar metric for residential electricity users.

The study found about 65 gigawatts of potential hydropower nationwide, with about 12 gigawatts coming from adding turbines to existing dams that were created for something else, such as flood control or a drinking water reservoir. Much of the remainder came from small-scale facilities that depend on the flow of a river instead of storing a large amount of water, according to a news release from the Department of Energy.

Hydropower accounts for about 7 percent of the total U.S. electricity generation in 2012, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. That was about twice as much as wind energy provided that year, but significantly less than coal, natural gas and nuclear energy, which accounted for 37 percent, 30 percent and 19 percent of generation, respectively.

David Barfield, chief engineer with the Kansas Department of Agriculture’s Division of Water Resources, said the report doesn’t go into detail about the technology that might allow new hydropower development in Kansas, but adding turbines to existing dams might be the best bet.

“I think that’s realistic and something that’s being examined,” he said.

The Kansas River doesn’t have much potential for additional hydropower, Barfield said. The Missouri River is more promising. The report also showed high potential for hydropower growth in the Arkansas River, but that doesn’t seem likely because the area is flat and the river often doesn’t flow above ground, he said.

“I’m not trying to downplay the value of looking at hydropower, but I’m puzzling over the numbers,” he said.

Building new dams can be difficult from a permitting standpoint, Barfield said. They raise river levels in the immediate area, meaning the dam owner needs easements from all affected property owners. Along the Missouri River, owners also would need permits in two states, he said.

Dams also need water use rights, but those wouldn’t be as difficult to get for hydropower as for some other uses, because most of the water simply flows through the turbine, Barfield said.

“It doesn’t really affect downstream users,” he said.

Gina Penzig, spokeswoman for Westar Energy, said the utility has sought bids for renewable energy projects five times in the past decade, but no one has come forward with an idea to develop hydropower in the area.

“The cost is not competitive with other forms of renewable energy,” she said.

Katie Ingels, spokeswoman for the Kansas Water Office, said none of Kansas’ reservoirs were built with hydropower as their primary purpose. The state’s rivers don’t have the flow or elevation changes in most places to support large-scale hydropower, she said, but small “low-flow” projects could use minimum releases from reservoirs to supply a few homes or businesses.

“Since the reservoirs in Kansas were built to serve other purposes, namely flood control, water supply and recreation, low-flow projects could use existing operations of the projects without significant change that would jeopardize existing primary purposes,” she said.

Sarah Hill Nelson, owner and operator of Bowersock Dam on the Kansas River in Lawrence, said she thought adding hydropower to existing dams would be the best strategy because it doesn’t involve flooding much additional land and requires fewer permits.

“Building hydropower on an existing dam is much more attainable,” she said.

Bowersock boosted its capacity from 2.35 megawatts to 4.65 megawatts by adding a new powerhouse and turbine to an existing spillway, Hill Nelson said. It took more than two years to bring the project to fruition, but that was unusually quick, because projects often take six to seven years, she said.

The Kansas City Board of Public Utilities purchases all of the power, she said.

Hill Nelson said she was surprised at the amount of energy the report found could be generated by hydropower in Kansas, but she doesn’t think the state will run on hydropower alone any time soon.

“The purpose of that report was to say what’s possible, not what’s politically or fiscally attainable,” she said.

Kansas also isn’t likely to build new dams because of the difficulty of keeping existing ones from filling with silt, Hill Nelson said. Adding hydropower to those that are already here might be helpful in that regard because some of the money from selling the electricity could go toward paying for dredging, she said.

Hydropower has some variation depending on the flow in a river, but it can be predicted two or three days out based on flows and precipitation upstream, Hill Nelson said. It doesn’t vary much within a single day, making it more stable than wind and solar power, she said.

It also has fewer environmental impacts on the Plains than in areas where fish like salmon swim upriver to spawn, Hill Nelson said. In some parts of the Northeast and Northwest, communities have moved away from hydropower because of concern about fish, she said.

“Of all the places you could develop hydropower, I think the Midwest has the lowest impact,” she said.