Hillary Clinton

"Just I was just watching the news where Hillary Clinton kicked off her campaign today and was giving campaign speeches and you know, I really hope people will give serious thought to; we have lost the trust and respect of a lot of countries and most of these countries do not allow their women to participate in anything. They're not allowed to do anything. Do you really think if we had a female president they would sit down across the table and negotiate world dealings with a woman? Think about it. It really deserve some serious thought. I don't think these countries would deal with us any more if they had to negotiate with a woman."

"I see as of yesterday, Hillary's real campaign has begun. She is campaigning and attacking the rich. Does that mean she's attacking herself?"

Paving on 29th Street

"I'd like to correct the person that called in and thanked the city of Loveland for their excellent paving job on West 29th Street. It was done by Coulson Excavating, a private company, who gets the job done every time they do it, and they do an excellent job. The city of Loveland does a good job but nothing like Coulson Excavating, so let's get the facts straight."

"I just want to thank Coulson Excavating for doing such an awesome job paving 29th Street from Taft to Wilson. It's so smooth, it is like driving on butter."

Campground Legalities

Advertisement

I was just wondering how is it that the city of Loveland is allowing, there's a resident in the 1400 block of Arthur Avenue that opened a campground, basically. I'm just wondering how that can be possible since it's on a city easement. When you walk over the railroad track bridge you look down, it's constant partying down there, there's trash everywhere and it stinks to high heaven. I'm just wondering how this can be allowed."

Flag Missing

"I want to thank the 'patriots' that stole my flag and flag pole just before Flag Day. This will be the first Flag Day in decades that I'm not able to fly my flag. I live in the southeast part of Loveland and I would like my flag returned, please."

Weed Control

"To the person who so smugly called in their weed control complaint saying 'Leave these people alone because it's been raining for six months.' You're the ones that have been living in a cave. We mow our grass every week and so has virtually everyone on our block. You need to get out of the cave. There has been ample time to keep your weeds out. Those people are just lazy and they're going to be that way the whole summer whether it's rainy or not."