Buy Photo David Dixon, 52, who lived in Lakewood’s Tent City for three years, talks about life in his new apartment in Berkeley. (Photo: TANYA BREEN/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)Buy Photo

Last Christmas, David Dixon spent the holiday living in the woods.

This year, the Sayreville native planned to cook a ham and serve it to his mother inside his Berkeley apartment.

"Ahh, I ate too much," Dixon recalls his mother saying last month on Thanksgiving, after he served her turkey, mashed potatoes, collard greens, stuffing and other trimmings. "I told her, 'Ma, that's how you're supposed to feel during the holidays.' "

But by next Christmas, Dixon fears he will be living outside again.

"I don't know what's coming around the corner," said Dixon, 52, as one of his three cats stretched her legs after emerging from under his couch. "I'm just trying to appreciate what I have for the time being."

Dixon is one of dozens of people who were living until recent months in Lakewood's Tent City — a homeless camp in the woods that the township emptied out this summer.

Buy Photo David Dixon, 52, who lived in Lakewood’s Tent City for three years, now has an apartment in Berkeley. (Photo: TANYA BREEN/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)

Free housing for a year

As part of a court order, the 125 who were counted as part of an official "census" of the camp in 2013 were entitled to a year's worth of free housing, paid for primarily by Lakewood taxpayers.

But like Cinderella eying the clock as it approached midnight, people like Dixon know that their time inside a rent-free dwelling with heat and furnishings is temporary, a 12-month moment in time that will end sooner than they would like.

"For people who did not have a lot of skills or who had difficult obstacles to overcome, it was not enough to just afford them a place to live for a year," said Minister Steve Brigham, who organized and oversaw Tent City for several years. "The system is really broken."

Those who were relocated out of Tent City were not simply patted on the back and given the keys to an apartment, said Michael McNeil, executive director of the nonprofit Solutions to End Poverty Soon, or STEPS, which Lakewood tasked with the job of placement.

Rather, STEPS employees have tried to connect people with jobs, with mental health or substance abuse counseling, and with educational opportunities, McNeil said.

Buy Photo Dave Jones (right), who now lives in Jackson, was a resident of the Ten City homeless camp in Lakewood. He sits with Michael McNeil (left), executive director of STEPS, a nonprofit that is relocating the former residents of the camp. (Photo: BOB BIELK/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)

Getting their lives in order

Some have used the 12 months of guaranteed housing as an opportunity to get their lives in order, before they are back on their own, McNeil said.

"We have a commitment to those who can't help themselves and to those who only need some direction," said McNeil, who emphasized that STEPS could not compel Tent City's former residents to receive services they might benefit from.

As Christmas approached this week, former Tent City resident David Jones was working in Teaneck, using a truck to deliver household moldings.

Unlike other people at Tent City, Jones said he only lived there intermittently, depending on his success or failure to maintain jobs and pay the bills.

"I was back and forth, back and forth, back and forth," said Jones, 52, who is now living in Jackson. "This year has been full of changes for me, but thankfully, they have all been for the good."

Once his free housing expires in April, Jones said he plans to move to Georgia to stay with family.

"Some people have no plans whatsoever," Jones said. "I tell them, 'You need to hurry up and tighten up. You're running out of time.' "

Problems remain

While moving people out of Tent City's woods and into actual dwellings was a blessing, advocating for the rights and the needs of the homeless in Ocean County has been more challenging now that the camp is shuttered, said Paul Hulse, outreach director of nonprofit HAVEN Inc.

"There's a sense that now that Tent City is gone, the homeless are gone as well," Hulse said. "Believe me, nothing could be further from the truth."

Many homeless are now living in smaller camps in the woods of Ocean County, trying to minimize their numbers so as to not attract attention from the police, Hulse said. Others are living inside vehicles or are trying not to overextend their welcomes at the homes of friends or relatives, he said.

Brigham said he splits his time between a small camp near the border of Lakewood and Howell that existed before this summer and a mattress that he has set up inside a vehicle.

"I'm trying to minimize my overhead costs as I determine my next move," said Brigham, noting that his only fixed monthly costs are his car insurance and cellphone bills.

On Christmas, Brigham said he planned to hold a small dinner and perhaps a religious service at the camp, which he said has five or fewer people.

Brigham organized Tent City for over seven years. The camp drew homeless from throughout the country, attracted a filmmaker, and even had a website.

Lakewood's attempts to shutter Tent City ended up in court, costing taxpayers at least $400,000, Deputy Mayor Albert Akerman has said.

Akerman, who oversaw Lakewood's response to Tent City and has estimated that the final bill may add up to over $600,000, could not be reached for comment.

Jeffrey Wild, a Roseland lawyer who represents those who were relocated out of Tent City, said he, township officials, McNeil and other advocates involved with Tent City meet regularly to monitor the progress of those who were placed this year.

"Sixty to 70 people are currently in housing because of this unprecedented effort," Wild said. "The people who need help will get it."

Of the 125 who were counted in the census, some are currently unaccounted for and so have not been placed, while others died or accepted "buyout" checks of up to $4,000, McNeil said.

Variety of issues

Generally, those with fewer personal issues to overcome agreed to be placed first, while those battling more complicated hardships — combinations of mental illness, substance abuse issues and poor employment and education skills — waited until the last moment, McNeil said.

The camp was officially shuttered on June 26. Brigham was allowed to stay for an additional week, until sundown on July 3.

The general order of the placement means that those with the greater issues to overcome currently have the most time to look forward to a roof over their heads, McNeil said.

"For some people, we've had to do practically everything," McNeil said. "We've tried to avoid it, ... it doesn't give them much of an incentive to go out and do something."

Dixon said he has tried to find a job amongst the retail outlets along Route 9, but has not gotten callbacks. The jobs Dixon could do were limited several years ago, he said, after he suffered a back injury while in a car accident.

More recently, Dixon said he has been able to do even less because he broke his thumb while wrestling with a friend.

"I must've heard people tell me, 'I'll call you,' a thousand times," Dixon said.

Dixon does not miss Tent City. The challenges of living in the woods were nothing compared to living amongst a large group of people with mental health and substance abuse issues, he said.

"Me and a couple of other guys, we tried to band together, insulate ourselves from the crazies," Dixon said. "You never knew what was going to happen out there."

Currently, Dixon shares his apartment in the Bayville section of Berkeley with another former Tent City resident. Across the parking lot of the apartment complex lives a third person who also used to live at the camp, he said.

The strong scent of stale cigarette smoke hits the nose upon entering his apartment, which is furnished with used sofas and wood tables that have seen better days.

But there is no clutter to the place. It has a sparkling Christmas tree and a television hooked up with cable channels. Dixon, who loves to cook, proudly showed off his refrigerator, which was stuffed recently with food waiting to be prepared and eaten.

"If I got it, I'm going to give it to you," said Dixon, who sets his culinary boundaries around only one item. "Anything but liver. Absolutely no liver in this house."

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/16QTZxo