A look back: Mergers reduce number of health care systems in Michigan

Consolidations in the Michigan health care industry have reduced the number of the state’s total health care systems.

Driven by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010, shifts to outpatient care, changing reimbursement models that reward quality and punish over-utilization, readmissions and medical errors, hospitals have sought the safety of larger health care organizations to gain negotiating clout with payers and shore up bottom lines.

Since 2011, when Crain’s published its first statewide hospitals list, the total number of independent health systems has dipped to 18 from 20.

The result is a mixture of larger health systems and new owners for local hospitals in the search for higher quality and efficiency that can drive up profits.

In 2014, Beaumont Health System, Oakwood Healthcare and Botsford Health Care merged to form Beaumont Health. That nearly doubled Beaumont’s net revenue to $4 billion in 2014, from $2.2 billion in 2011.

While most deals increased revenue by adding hospitals in the mergers, some systems that didn’t grow through M&A experienced revenue declines for a variety of reasons, including lost market share, sale of affiliated businesses or companies, increase in bad debt and decline in government and private insurance payments.

For example, Midland-based MidMichigan Health saw revenue decline more than 5 percent to $544 million in 2014, from $570 million in 2011.

Other M&A deals:

Marquette General Hospita l in Michigan’s Upper Peninsula was acquired in 2012 by Duke LifePoint Healthcare , a joint venture of Brentwood, Tenn.-based LifePoint Hospitals and Duke University Health System , based in Durham, N.C.

l in Michigan’s Upper Peninsula was acquired in 2012 by , a joint venture of Brentwood, Tenn.-based LifePoint Hospitals and , based in Durham, N.C. In August, Crittenton Hospital Medical Center , a Rochester Hills-based nonprofit hospital, was acquired by Ascension Health Michigan . Ascension Health Michigan is part of St. Louis-based Ascension Health , the largest nonprofit health system in the nation with 131 hospitals in 24 states and Washington, D.C.

, a Rochester Hills-based nonprofit hospital, was acquired by . Ascension Health Michigan is part of St. Louis-based , the largest nonprofit health system in the nation with 131 hospitals in 24 states and Washington, D.C. Prime Healthcare Services of Ontario, Calif., last year acquired Garden City Hospital , a 323-bed osteopathic hospital.

of Ontario, Calif., last year acquired , a 323-bed osteopathic hospital. ProMedica , a not-for-profit, multihospital system based in Toledo, completed its acquisition of Mercy Memorial Hospital System in Monroe this year.

, a not-for-profit, multihospital system based in Toledo, completed its acquisition of in Monroe this year. In early November, Henry Ford Health System announced a letter-of-intent to acquire Allegiance Health in Jackson.

Related Links