Fans react as Germany wins a World Cup match against the USA at Zum Schneider in Manhattan on Thursday. Andrew Hinderaker for The Wall Street Journal

German expatriates gathered on Manhattan’s East Side on Thursday to root for their country in a World Cup match against the U.S.

Zum Schneider, an East Village Bavarian beer hall and restaurant, followed in the European tradition by setting up a big screen at an outdoor event space at E. 23rd St by the East River. They also served up German-only beers alongside bratwurst and a themed band, to complete the scene.

“We’re a German restaurant so we tried to bring all German stuff here,” said Micha Gerland, one of the restaurant’s managers and a Berlin native. “We thought to start open-air viewing here because it really should be done more.”

Fans react at Zum Schneider as Germany scores against the U.S. Andrew Hinderaker for The Wall Street Journal

Fellow organizer Angela Wendt added it took the company six months to find the Solar One outdoor venue and make arrangements to show soccer games there. They will also be showing all the quarter-final games and the World Cup final on July 13 at the outdoor space. “Outdoor viewing is all over Europe so we had to do it,” she said.

Philipp Huesgen, 33 years-old, a finance worker clad head to toe in German colors, took the day off to watch the game there. “This is a good place to be,” he added as he soaked up the sun and a slender 1-0 German victory over the U.S. “It’s very big to watch like this in Germany–you can do it in every town,” he added.

American Ray Williams, 45 years-old and married to a German, said he appreciated the scene. As a United Airlines pilot, he was due to watch the game in Dusseldorf until his schedule was changed.

Fans watch the World Cup match between USA and Germany at Zum Schneider. Andrew Hinderaker for The Wall Street Journal

“This is the way to watch there and something we have to do here in the U.S.,” he said. “It’s definitely more fun.”

The riverside venue attracted more than a thousand soccer fans for the game—and not all of them rooted for “Deutschland.”

“We’re all American today,” said Frank Fellone, 31, a part-German construction worker in a U.S. jersey. “I’m not conflicted at all,” he added of supporting America.

There were cheers all round at the end of the match. Despite the 1-0 German victory, both teams progressed to the next knockout phase of the competition.

Related Coverage: