WASHINGTON — If you believe the political discussion, from left and right, the American economy is in dreadful shape, beset by rampant joblessness and too much debt.

Actually, the economy has been steadily, if too slowly, improving.

Unemployment is down to 5.3 percent from 10 percent in President Obama’s first year in office. Gross domestic product is expanding at a clip of 2.5 percent, a modest pace but growth nonetheless. The federal deficit is estimated at $486 billion this year, or about a third of what it was in 2009. Despite all the complaints about the Affordable Care Act, 15 million more Americans are covered than two years ago.

Why all the negative rhetoric? Persistent systemic problems have kept wage growth stagnant for a long time. The recovery has been very top heavy.

The economy invariably becomes a political target when there is no White House incumbent running for re-election. The opposition party has to talk about how bad things are and its ideas for change. The incumbent party, in this case the Democrats, must be more nuanced, striving to avoid getting tarred as defenders of the status quo.

Yet, the United States is one of the bright spots in an unsettled global economy. Much of Europe remains prostrate.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

A few years ago, the BRIC nations — Brazil, Russia, India and China — were viewed as the world’s locomotives. Today, Brazil and Russia are economic basket cases. The picture is mixed in India, which changed its method for calculating gross domestic product, potentially overstating growth.

The shakiness of China, at least short term, was on display last week when it allowed its currency to plunge, underscoring fragility in what is the world’s second-largest economy. The move followed recent government restrictions on the stock markets that also reflected displeasure with poor results.

In an integrated global economy, European woes and worries about China affect the United States. Donald J. Trump’s China-bashing may have populist appeal; it would have no economic benefits.

Private investment remains sluggish as companies struggle to generate more revenue for the top line. It is those investments that drive productivity that then turns into wage growth. That is not happening.

So, despite the comparatively promising performance, many Americans do not experience any improvement. Not only are wages stagnant but the unemployment rate is deceptively low in part because it does not account for part-timers who want to work full time.

There’s little that politicians can do to change the situation in the 14 months before the presidential election.

Gridlock in Washington precludes most actions. The premium should be on not doing harm, such as shutting down the government or bringing the country to default by failing to raise the debt ceiling this autumn.

The Federal Reserve could make a difference by tightening monetary policy and raising interest rates. The chairwoman of the Fed, Janet L. Yellen, is very sensitive to weakness in the employment market and the best guess is that her steps will be cautious and modest.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Senator Bernie Sanders, the Vermont socialist who is challenging Hillary Rodham Clinton for the Democratic nomination, arouses crowds with denunciations of the economy and vows to soak the rich. But few mainstream liberal economists believe steeper taxes on investment and wealthier Americans would produce an economic boom.

Many of the more right-wing Republican presidential candidates advocate slashing federal spending, which is also not a prescription to goose the economy.

Jeb Bush, a former governor of Florida, though he has been short on specifics, has promised to produce an economy that grows 4 percent or more a year. His top economic advisers were leading decision-makers in the administration of his brother President George W. Bush when the rate of expansion never reached 4 percent. The only time over the past half-century that such fast growth was achieved for four consecutive years — the length of a presidential term — was under Bill Clinton.