A deal on a spending bill seems close; a deal on unemployment remains elusive.

House Appropriations Committee Chairman Hal Rogers, R-Ky. testifies on Capitol Hill in January 2013. (Photo: J. Scott Applewhite, AP) Story Highlights First step will be approving a 3-day spending bill to prevent a shutdown

Year-long spending bill is still in the works

Senate struggles to find deal on extending unemployment insurance

WASHINGTON — Congress confronts two critical budget issues next week as lawmakers scramble to finish negotiations on a massive bill that would fund the government through September and another that would reinstate expired jobless benefits for the long-term unemployed.

Senate Democrats failed to reinstate unemployment benefits affecting 1.3 million Americans after Republicans scoffed at their proposal to offset the $18 billion cost of the 10-month extension with budget cuts that won't occur until 2024.

Senators, including six Republicans who support reinstating the benefits if they are paid for, said they would work through the weekend in an effort to find a compromise. The benefits, which provide on average $300 weekly to recipients, expired Dec. 28.

Friday, the Labor Department said unemployment fell to 6.7%, but the economy added only 74,000 jobs in December. Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., said the sluggish job growth underscored the need to renew benefits for those who have been out of work for more than 26 weeks.

"The economy is improving for some, but thousands of Americans in Nevada and across the country still cannot find work, no matter how hard they try," he said, "These unemployed Americans deserve better than being left hanging by the leaders they sent to Washington to look out for them."

House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, countered that the latest jobs numbers suggest lawmakers should be focused on legislation to spark job growth. "There are more families living in poverty today than there were before the president took office, and instead of making it easier to find a good-paying job, Washington has been more focused on making it less difficult to live without one," he said.

Congress is also hustling to wrap the government's 12 annual spending bills into one $1.012 trillion "omnibus" package. That bill would implement the agreement secured by Senate Budget Committee Chairwoman Patty Murray, D-Wash., and House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan, R-Wis., in December that established top-line spending figures for the next two years.

House Appropriations Chairman Hal Rogers, R-Ky., introduced a three-day stopgap spending bill Friday that would keep the government running until Jan. 18. The funding expires Jan. 15. The House is scheduled to approve the short-term extension Monday. The extension would give the Senate more time to process the bill and get it to President Obama's desk.

Lawmakers were confident they could pass the spending bill, which would eliminate the threat of a shutdown through Sept. 30. The negotiators — the top Republicans and Democrats on the House and Senate Appropriations Committees — have been tightlipped on the details of the negotiations, but disagreements remained this week on perennial fights over funding for President Obama's signature Affordable Care Act, as well as policies that affect abortion rights and environmental regulations.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1hEkWr0