Budget fireworks already

With help from Elena Chiriboga

GETTING CHIPPY: Let’s be honest: The budget experience has never exactly been pleasant during the Obama era — and we’re not even talking about the government shutdown and almost default. But with President Barack Obama about to release his eighth and final budget, you can really feel the chill between him and congressional Republicans.

Story Continued Below

For starters: The White House plans to roll out a $10-a-barrel “fee” on oil as part of its budget on Tuesday, to pay for a “clean” transportation agenda that would include investments in high-speed rail, self-driving cars and a variety of other initiatives. (The Agenda’s Michael Grunwald was first on that: http://politi.co/1UOlNpc. And Pro Transportation’s Lauren Gardner has more: http://politico.pro/1L1K4CO)

This might be about as good a time as any for Obama to propose this sort of tax, given the tumble that oil prices have taken. But while the oil companies would be charged that tax, it would almost certainly lead to higher prices at the pump, as ExxonMobil and the rest pass at least some of the new costs on to consumers. And surprising virtually no one, top GOP lawmakers including House Speaker Paul Ryan and House Ways and Means Chairman Kevin Brady almost immediately lashed out at the plan, as Pro Energy’s Elana Schor reports. http://politico.pro/20v180c

But come on — partisan sniping over budget proposals that are unlikely to become law is a rite of passage in Washington.

This is new, however: Sen. Mike Enzi and Rep. Tom Price, the chairmen of the congressional budget committees, decided not to invite Obama’s budget director to the Hill to discuss the president’s plan. Both Enzi and Price said having Shaun Donovan testify would basically be a waste of time, as our Brian Faler reported. http://politico.pro/1R7QExO

White House budget chiefs appear to have testified about their administration’s frameworks for close to two decades running, leading the administration and its congressional allies, like Rep. Chris Van Hollen (D-Md.), to call out Republicans for breaking protocol. “This appalling decision to reject long-standing, bipartisan tradition is the latest evidence that the tea party controls this Congress,” said Van Hollen, the top Democrat at House Budget.

ANOTHER WEEK IS ALMOST IN THE BOOKS. Hope everyone’s getting their queso ready for Super Bowl Sunday. We’re hoping our friends who are Panthers or Broncos fans can avoid each other come Sunday. While you’re waiting for the commercials, let us know the scoop. Email:bbecker@politico.com, teckert@politico.com, bfaler@politico.com, kodonnell@politico.com. Twitter: @berniebecker3, @tobyeckert, @brian_faler, @katyodonnell_ , @POLITICOPro and @Morning_Tax.

DON’T WANT TO LET GO: As we noted Thursday, Republicans on the House Ways and Means Committee haven’t exactly been broadcasting that dealing with FAA taxes is on their to-do list. But your Morning Tax author also notes that senior GOP tax writers suggested Thursday that they’ll need plenty of convincing to go along with House Transportation Chairman Bill Shuster’s plan to shift oversight of air traffic control to a nonprofit board, and to largely trade out the taxes that pay for the system for user fees. Tax writers are unnerved both because they don’t think they understand Shuster’s ideas yet, and because they like having control over FAA taxes. "The last thing we want to do is to give up oversight and the ability to have input on how FAA operates," said Rep. Dave Reichert. He added that Shuster’s plan is "an idea. But it's not an idea that's the only idea." http://politico.pro/1PlAL2l

THE NEVER-ENDING ‘CADILLAC TAX’ BATTLE: The Obamacare tax on costly insurance plans isn’t scheduled to go into effect for another four years — and lots of folks around town believe it never will — but the lobbying remains fast and furious. Our Brian Faler reports that organized labor, Obama’s allies on lots of other issues, says it won’t be swayed by the White House’s proposal to tinker with the Cadillac tax. http://politico.pro/1Pa8zRX

On the Hill, Senate Finance Chairman Orrin Hatch and Rep. Erik Paulsen (R-Minn.), a Ways and Means member, want to blunt the Cadillac tax’s impact on Health Savings Accounts and other benefits key to the middle class, Brian and Katy O’Donnell report. http://politico.pro/23Mu9Ud

PROBLEM SOLVED?: It turns out any concerns about long-term systems outages at the IRS were unnecessary, and we can all go back to waiting by the mailbox for our tax refunds. The agency said Thursday that it started processing tax returns again at around 5 p.m., about a day after announcing a hardware failure had halted that process. IRS Commissioner John Koskinen said the agency worked nonstop since Wednesday to get everything up and running. “Our processing systems are back in business. Taxpayers should see little, if any, impact on their tax returns or refunds,” said Koskinen, who nonetheless apologized for any inconvenience.

— WHAT REALLY HAPPENED? In its statement, the IRS said it’s investigating what caused Wednesday’s outage, but added the situation appeared to be a hardware failure and the agency didn’t suggest that any outside sabotage had occurred. (For whatever it’s worth, the agency did admit when cyber thieves had breached a transcript program last year.) But House Oversight Chairman Jason Chaffetz, speaking Thursday before the IRS systems were fixed, told Fox Business that “my initial gut reaction is that may be a hack.” Chaffetz added that he didn’t think systems just conked out the way the IRS suggested. “It’s not like they run out of batteries or something,” he said.

BERNIE VS. HILLARY, CONT’D: We’re admittedly partial to taxes, so this opinion could be somewhat biased. But taxes always seem to be just below the surface in the Democratic contest between Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders, with Clinton’s plan of limiting tax increases to the rich showing off her pragmatism and Sanders’ idea of using broader tax hikes to pay for a single-payer health system underscoring his call to revolution.

That does not mean that taxes played a big role in Thursday’s debate between Clinton and Sanders. (They did not.) Clinton knocked Sanders’ tax plan, saying that a number of outside analysts have questioned the math underpinning it. Sanders talked up a financial transaction tax, and went after Boeing and General Electric for their offshore tax practices. Maybe more next time.

ZERO’S A LONG WAY DOWN: The NYT’s Josh Barro takes a deeper dive into Marco Rubio’s proposal to eliminate taxes on capital gains and dividends — which, let’s be honest, doesn’t mesh with the plan’s more family-friendly ideas, like increasing the child tax credit. Barro notes zeroing out capital gains was much too far for Mitt Romney, frequently pilloried as the prototypical GOP rich guy. But there are economic rationales for taxing investment income less than wages, and Barro casts Rubio’s proposal as a microcosm of his battle with Sen. Ted Cruz and Donald Trump.

“The fight over taxes mirrors the divide that has emerged between the Republican Party’s elite supporters and its voter base. Mr. Cruz’s and Donald Trump’s tax plans offer significantly lower tax rates than Mr. Rubio’s to the sorts of highly paid workers that form a key Republican voting constituency. But they are not as generous to people who live off investment income — a group that, not incidentally, includes many of the people who fund Republican super PACs.” http://nyti.ms/1SvL4ak

INTERNATIONAL NEWS —

DON’T CALL IT A COMEBACK: Nicolas Sarkozy, the former French president, is making tax cuts a central plank in his pitch to regain his old office, the Financial Times reports. “Sarkozy, who lost his bid to retain the presidency four years ago to socialist leader François Hollande, promised to cut taxes on households and businesses by €25bn in the first few months of a new term, including a 10 percent cut in income taxes and a €13bn reduction in employers’ social charges. He also said he would abolish the wealth tax, increase the pension age from 62 to 64 by 2025 and allow companies and their workers to scrap the 35-hour maximum working week.” http://on.ft.com/1nKHxrf

IT’S STILL SWITZERLAND: Federal officials on Thursday charged bank Julius Baer of Zurich with conspiring to help American clients evade their U.S. taxes. The Justice Department and the U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York also announced that they reached a deferred prosecution agreement with Julius Baer, in which the bank admits to wrongdoing and agrees to pay more than a half-billion in penalties. And two Julius Baer client advisers pleaded guilty in Manhattan, after being originally charged in 2011 and then going underground until Monday.

STATE UPDATE —

OREGON SECRETARY OF STATE WILL HELP INVESTIGATE ENERGY TAX CREDITS: Individuals who applied for the controversial Business Energy Tax Credit are being investigated by Oregon Secretary of State Jeanne Atkins for fraud and misconduct, The Oregonian reports. “She said the goal is to conduct a preliminary audit on a random sampling of the 12,000 tax credits the department issued after 2007 to determine if there are systemic issues or individual tax credits that warrant a forensic review or referral to the State Department of Justice.” Atkins indicated the review was authorized after discovering there were major gaps in the files documenting some $1 billion in state tax credits. “The agency was overwhelmed by a tsunami of tax-credit applicants in the years after the Legislature super-sized its energy incentives, making them the most generous state subsidy for renewable energy and conservation projects in the country.” http://bit.ly/1PVesQo

GET ACCESS TO PRO’S NEW BUDGET AND APPROPRIATIONS BRIEF : The fiscal 2017 budget and appropriations season kicks off in two business days. Are you prepared? On Tuesday, Feb. 9, POLITICO Pro, POLITICO’s premier solution for policy professionals, will launch its Budget and Appropriations Brief as the president reveals his budget proposal. This Brief will be the latest resource to be included in POLITICO Pro subscriptions and provide in-depth, actionable insights about budget and funding measures. The brief will also include a calendar of committee markups and key documents such as committee drafts, amendments, committee reports and CBO cost estimates. Sign up today to receive a complimentary issue of our inaugural Budget and Appropriations Brief.

QUICK LINKS

— TaxSlayer acknowledges data breach. http://on.wsj.com/1R89S6w

— Tax Court nominees look to be on the path to confirmation. http://politico.pro/1QJGem9

— Senate Dems introduce bill to incentivize retirement saving. http://1.usa.gov/1T1tQkN

DID YOU KNOW? Benjamin Franklin coined the term “battery.”