MANASQUAN

More than 700 people took the plunge on a borough beach on Valentine's Day, but it had nothing to do with popping the question. And plenty to do with the cold.

And outsized – or undersized - costumes.

There were men in wrestling singlets who had long ago outgrown them. There were women in tutus and there were vikings. There was a man shivering in an American flag Speedo and a man dressed as Bamm-Bamm – all for a cause.

The noon jump into the frigid water Saturday on Main Beach was a fundraising effort to raise money to battle Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS). Proceeds benefit the Joan Dancy and P.A.L.S. (People with ALS) Foundation, a Red Bank-based charity that provides support for ALS patients and their families, and the Staytough FightHard Inc. Foundation, a grassroots group formed to fight ALS.

Denis Eagan, 28 of Maplewood, braved the cold ocean water wearing a purple party hat and a red plastic mustache and glasses. He rode the waves for quite a while, trying to achieve the longest time in the water – and the best attempt to override common sense.

"I literally cannot feel anything," he said through chattering teeth. "Literally nothing."

The water temperature wavered between 37 and 38 degrees. The air was 32 degrees.

"I couldn't even feel my toes before we started because the sand was freezing," said the man dressed as Bamm-Bamm Rubble, GarretConger, 27, of Milltown, a math teacher at New Brunswick High School. "There's a lot of adrenaline pumping through right before you jump in. I was thinking, 'What am I doing, why am I doing this?' But I was just having a blast doing it. Raising money is always fun. It's good to get awareness out there.A lot of people don't know about ALS."

There were at least two records broken Saturday for the nine-year-old event.

More than 750 people jumped in the water, the most ever. Because of the wind and the lack of sunlight, it was possibly the coldest of the nine, said Sean Magovern, an organizer of the event and the executive director of the Dancy Foundation. The air temperature in Manasquan at noon was 32 degrees. And the plungers raised the most money, more than $300,000, Magovern said. That amount is growing, with more people donating through social media.

The Dancy Foundation spends the proceeds on services for ALS patients. It helps fund the two nurses and social worker the foundation uses as its staff to help ALS sufferers.

Sean Magovern's late father Terry founded the organization after his fiance, Joan Dancy, died of ALS in 2005.

Plungers had to raise a minimum of $100.

The supporters rooting on the plungers far exceeded the number of wet, cold people. Not only for charity, the annual social event sends hundreds into the borough's bars afterwards.

Ken Serrano: 732-643-4029; kserrano@njpressmedia.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1Ds9J67