Q: Is it OK to record what my doctor says during an exam, so I can review the information later?

A: The question of when or whether patients should record physician visits has become a highly contentious issue in medicine.

“Doctors are very angry about this,” says Glyn Elwyn, a physician and scientist at the Dartmouth Center for Health Care Delivery Science. “Their first reaction — and it’s ill-considered — is to be defensive or worried that it could be used against them in some way.”

Ali Seifi, a neuro-critical care physician at the University of Texas Health Science Center in San Antonio, wrote about secret patient recordings in the Journal of the American Medical Association. After his piece appeared, Seifi heard from doctors who said that they become more risk-averse and less frank when they see that a patient is taping a conversation.

“Physicians take it as ‘This patient might file a lawsuit later,’ so they try not to be open to any complaints,” Seifi says.

Recording raises issues of trust for doctors as well as patients, especially if it’s done surreptitiously. Seifi’s interest in this issue began when he noticed a patient secretly recording their conversation. The message was clear, he says: “The patient doesn’t trust me.”

Perhaps that’s true. On the other hand, Elwyn says, his research has shown that doctors who agree to go on the record with advice can boost their patients’ trust and strengthen their relationship. It takes confidence to grant permission, though. Even experienced, competent doctors may worry about subjecting their advice to scrutiny.

“Humans are fallible, and it’s very difficult for doctors to stay on top of everything,” Elwyn says. A doctor who misses the latest evidence or neglects to disclose a risk or side effect may be called out by a dissatisfied patient.

When patients record, doctors may feel an added pressure to stay up-to-date and to give extra care and attention to what they’re saying.

“That’s not argument for not doing it — it just means that doctors have to be on their game,” Elwyn says.

Despite doctors’ hesitation, Elwyn says that recording has important benefits for patients. Retaining all the information conveyed during a visit can be difficult — especially if the medical condition is complex — and patients and families value an audible record, Elwyn says, because it allows them to share and reflect on what has been said.

Given these benefits, it’s not surprising that some patients are covertly recording, as Elwyn describes in a study in the journal PLOS One.

Sometimes patients come away from a visit with different interpretations of what the doctor said, and reviewing the conversation would help them clarify what went on.

Seifi generally grants his patients and their families permission to record, but he says intent is important: “Are they doing it to help the family or to give them material for a lawsuit?”

Patients in most places have a right to record even without a doctor’s consent. Only 12 states — including Florida — require permission from all parties for audio recordings.

Doctors worry about a recording that gets shared with a wider audience or goes viral on the Internet.

“It’s a legitimate concern: What happens to the recording after the visit?” Elwyn says. “This is virgin territory.”

The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act grants privacy protection to patient records, but Seifi says that once a recording is made, it may be hard to ensure that it remains private.

“What’s lacking here is a policy that says we encourage you to record, but please take good care of this record — we don’t want it to appear on the Internet or social media,” Elwyn says.

Such policies may be coming, but for now there are few rules in place.

– Christie Aschwanden, The Washington Post