WASHINGTON -- Democrats have repeatedly mocked Republican promises to craft a replacement for Obamacare, and while the GOP is reportedly working on a plan, House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) had only another promise to offer on Wednesday.

When asked at a news conference whether Republicans would have to step up efforts to come up with their own plan now that President Barack Obama has announced more than 7 million people have signed up for Affordable Care Act insurance plans, Boehner responded, "Listen, Obamacare is continuing to wreck havoc on American families and small businesses."

"The president can go out there and tout about all the people he's signed up," he continued. "Our job is to show the American people we have better solutions, and we're working to build a consensus to do that. And when we have something to talk about, we'll show you."

The outline of a plan was supposed to be circulated among the GOP this month, but shortly after the plan to craft the plan started to make news, Politico reported that the eventual bill might not even get a vote from the leaders likely to craft it.

When pressed on why an Obamacare replacement was not in the GOP's new budget proposal, and on how important it is for Republicans to offer an alternative when Democrats finally have some positive news to point to, including potentially improving opinions about the health care law, Boehner stuck by his promise to propose a replacement.

"I think when we outline how we would repeal this bill and what we would replace it with, you'd see that our intent here is to take care of the American people, as opposed to harm them, as the president's bill has done," Boehner said.

Michael McAuliff covers Congress and politics for The Huffington Post. Talk to him on Facebook.



Also on HuffPost: Speakers Of The House (1920-Present) Speakers Of The House (1920-Present)

1 of 17 John Boehner Speaker Of The House , 112th Congress (2011-present) Share this slide:

(Photo by Allison Shelley/Getty Images)