NEW YORK — In 2009, the stock market was filled with panic.

The housing market had collapsed. Lehman Brothers had gone under, and General Motors was on the verge of bankruptcy reorganization. The U.S. was in a deep recession, and stocks had plunged 57 percent from their high in October 2007.

Fast forward six years, and investors are enjoying one of the longest bull markets since the 1940s. The Standard & Poor’s 500 index has more than tripled since bottoming out at 676.53 on March 9, 2009.

So has this bull run its course? Most market strategists haven’t seen the signs that typically accompany a market peak. Investors have yet to become rash or overconfident.

“Bull markets end not because they grow old. They end because some excesses build,” said Stephen Freedman, head of cross-asset strategy at UBS Wealth Management.

Here are some questions and answers about the run-up in stocks.

Why do stocks keep rising?

It’s a powerful combination of higher corporate profits and a growing economy.

The main driver is company earnings. Companies slashed costs in response to the recession that began in December 2007. That helped boost profit margins when demand began to recover. As a result, earnings per share have risen consistently since the end of the recession in 2009.

Hiring is picking up and costs are down. Most economists forecast growth of more than 3 percent this year.

As investors become more confident about growth, they’re willing to pay more for stocks. The average price-to-earnings ratio for an S&P 500 company stands at 17.2. Six years ago, it was 11.

What role has the Federal Reserve played?

The Federal Reserve has held its main lending rate close to zero since 2008. It has bought trillions of dollars in bonds to help hold down long-term interest rates. By cutting rates, policymakers have encouraged businesses and consumers to borrow and spend.

The historically low interest rates in the bond market have also made stocks look more attractive in comparison.

“Essentially, by investing in the S&P, you’re getting the same yield as you would on a Treasury,” said Marc Pinto, a portfolio manager at Janus. “But you have … the upside of stocks moving higher as companies grow their earnings.”

How long can this bull market continue?

All bull markets must end. But few analysts are calling the end of this one just yet.

The U.S. economy is continuing to strengthen and inflation remains tame. And while the Fed has ended its bond-buying program, other global central banks, such as the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan, are still providing stimulus to their economies.

Also, many of the excesses that accompany bull-market peaks haven’t surfaced, says UBS Wealth Management’s Freedman. Think of the housing boom that preceded the bust that began in 2007, or the dot-com mania of 1999 and early 2000.

What kills bull markets?

Typically, it’s a recession. Four of the five bull markets since 1970 ended as investors got spooked by a recession, or the anticipation of one.

Bank of America analysts say that the most likely threat to the bull market would be rising inflation. That could cause a sell-off in bonds, sending shock waves throughout financial markets.

Another threat is a slump in earnings. That could happen if the surging dollar, already at a 12-year high against the euro, grows even stronger, making U.S. goods more expensive to customers overseas and translating into fewer dollars to corporate bottom lines.

Steve Rothwell,

The Associated Press