WEST CHESTER, Ohio--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Evenflo® Feeding, Inc., the trusted brand that promises better care for baby by offering products with premium features at affordable prices, announced that it has teamed up with Better Living Now, Inc., a leading healthcare products supplier and breast pump insurance expert. The new partnership allows women access to high-quality Evenflo Feeding breast pumps with no premium out-of-pocket costs under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) -- the health insurance reform that requires most plans to cover the cost of a breast pump as part of women’s preventative health services. Through ACA and Better Living Now, women can now easily verify their insurance plan coverage, obtain a prescription from their physician, submit an insurance claim, and have an Evenflo Feeding breast pump delivered right to their home.

“We fully support all mothers’ breastfeeding goals and believe all parents should have access to high-quality, affordable equipment regardless of income level,” said Elaine Bobbey, President and Managing Director at Evenflo Feeding. “This relationship with Better Living Now will allow us to be every baby’s advocate and every parent’s ally by providing the best quality products available within a patient’s coverage.”

Better Living Now has a full range of breast pump options, including the Evenflo Advanced Double Electric Pump, a preferred item that is covered in full by many plans with no premium product out-of-pocket expense. The new Evenflo Advanced Double Electric Breast Pump includes high-grade features such as:

The ability to control speed and suction separately, allowing for 32 different settings

A closed-system to keep milk pure from bacteria while pumping

Multiple flange sizes included for best fit and comfort, and smartly-designed flanges for slouch-free pumping comfort

The pump also comes with world-class educational programs, which are designed in collaboration with International Board Certified Lactation Consultant Shari Criso to offer nursing moms the advice, support and tools they need.

Additional information about the joint venture can be found online at Evenflo Feeding’s new website: www.Evenflofeeding.com.

About Evenflo Feeding, Inc.

Evenflo has been a worldwide leader in the development of innovative infant equipment, and is now one of the nation’s leading manufacturers of high quality baby care products. Originally incorporated in 1920 as Pyramid Rubber Company in Ravenna, OH, the Evenflo Feeding division and its products have been trusted by parent for the comfort and care of their children for almost a century. Due to its ongoing commitment to better care for every baby by offering products with premium features at an affordable price, Evenflo Feeding has become one of the most highly recognized and trusted brand names in America.

In 2013 the Evenflo Feeding division was acquired by Kimberly-Clark de Mexico and incorporated as Evenflo Feeding, Inc. with headquarters in West Chester, Ohio. For more information on Evenflo Feeding, visit www.evenflofeeding.com.

About Better Living Now, Inc (BLN)

Founded in 1992 and located in Hauppauge, Long Island, New York, BLN is dedicated to providing high quality healthcare products at discounted prices and high quality customer service that works hard to assist you with managing and improving your health. BLN delivers the products you need efficiently and discreetly, directly to your home. BLN is a supplier of health care products, programs and services designed to meet the needs of healthcare benefit-eligible patients with chronic medical conditions. BLN provides a comprehensive approach to servicing your healthcare product needs by integrating our mail order medical supply program with our JCAHO Accredited Home Medical Equipment Delivery, Setup and Maintenance Program. Please contact us at 1-800-854-5729 or visit www.BetterLivingNow.com for more information.