Buy Photo Jeremy Greenwood (right) and Colleen Gannon, both of Indianapolis, were among opponents of Indiana’s Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) who attended a rally on March 28, 2015, outside the Statehouse. (Photo: Charlie Nye/The Star file photo)Buy Photo

Over the next year or so, Indiana courts will have to answer several important legal questions.

Should both names of same-sex couples be placed on their child's birth certificate? Is consuming weed a form of religion? Are the state's Right to Farm laws protecting giant corporations at the expense of farm families they were meant to protect?

Such questions are at the heart of many high-profile cases that are now before the courts. Here are some of them, in no particular order:

Syrian refugees

Gov. Mike Pence is facing a federal lawsuit that challenges his power to block Syrian refugees from resettling in Indiana. Pence and several other governors suspended resettlement of Syrian refugees in their states after terrorist attacks in Paris.

A lawsuit filed by the American Civil Liberties Union of Indiana and Exodus Refugee Immigration, an Indianapolis nonprofit that receives federal dollars to resettle refugees in Indiana, says Pence doesn't have the authority to interfere with refugee and immigration policies.

The Archdiocese of Indianapolis settled a Syrian refugee family in Indianapolis despite the governor's decision. Pence later said he would not block the family from receiving aid such as food stamps and health care.

Right to Farm

A lawsuit pending in Hendricks Superior Court contends that the state's Right to Farm laws, meant to help farm families, unfairly protect giant corporations by allowing industrial-scale livestock operations to be built close to residential areas despite possible health hazards.

The nonprofit Hoosier Environmental Council filed the lawsuit on behalf of a Danville farmer and four other residents who live close to a feedlot that warehouses up to 8,000 hogs.

Buy Photo This livestock operation is west and slightly south of Richard Himsel's property, on County Road 425 West in Hendricks County. Himsel lives on the farm his family has owned near Danville since 1940. Himsel has filed a lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of Indiana's Right to Farm laws. (Photo: Doug McSchooler/For The Star)

County clerk sued

A former clerk's office employee who was fired for refusing to process licenses for same-sex couples because of her "sincerely held" religious beliefs has filed a lawsuit against her employer.

Linda Summers accused her former employer of discriminating against her based on her religion. Harrison County Clerk Sally Whitis "acted appropriately" when she fired Summers, according to Whitis' attorney.

Birth certificate dispute

Should the state of Indiana recognize both same-sex parents of a child on a birth certificate? Such is one of the legal questions that courts must answer after a landmark decision by the U.S. Supreme Court to legalize same-sex marriage in the country.

Jackie Phillips-Stackman and her wife, Lisa, filed a lawsuit against state and local health departments to have both of their names on their child's birth certificate. The documents, they say, continue to treat marriage as being between a man and a woman.

Buy Photo Jackie and Lisa Phillips-Stackman hold their daughter, Lola, at their Indianapolis home, Friday, Dec. 4, 2015. The couple are filing a lawsuit against the state to try to get Indiana to recognize both same-sex parents on their children's birth certificates. (Photo: Michelle Pemberton/The Star)

RFRA "fix"

Conservative groups are asking the court to throw out the "fix" that legislators added to Indiana's Religious Freedom Restoration Act, or RFRA, after a public outcry over what the law would do.

The lawsuit, filed by the Indiana Family Institute and American Family Association of Indiana, also claims that local nondiscrimination ordinances that protect sexual orientation and gender identity intrude on people of faith's religious rights.

RFRA was signed into law in March. Legislators added the "fix" to prevent RFRA from being used to supersede local and state civil rights laws.

Church of Cannabis

Should the court recognize the First Church of Cannabis as a real religion? Is marijuana part of a deeply held religious belief?

Such are the questions that the court must answer after a lawsuit claiming state laws making marijuana illegal burden a religious practice and place the church's members in danger of criminal prosecution.

The case also raises questions about how Indiana's RFRA can and can't be used.

Buy Photo Grand Poobah Bill Levin gets down Mick Jagger style during the First Church of Cannabis' inaugural service. (Photo: Michelle Pemberton/The Star 2015 file photo)

Police shooting

Police say Donte Sowell was killed in a gunfight with officers, but his family says that wasn't the case. Sowell's death is now the subject of a federal lawsuit that accuses Indianapolis police officers of shooting and killing an unarmed man.

An attorney representing Sowell's family told reporters that several witnesses confirmed the father of three was unarmed and surrendering, but police kept shooting. An autopsy report showed Sowell was shot six times, at least four times from behind.

Buy Photo The family of Donte Sowell showed photos during a news conference on Sept. 10, 2015, to announce a lawsuit filed against IMPD in the death of Sowell, who was shot and killed in an incident with police on Jan. 15, 2015. This photo shows Sowell with three of his four children. His fourth child was born after he died. (Photo: Kelly Wilkinson/The Star 2015 file photo)

Purvi Patel

Attorneys for Purvi Patel are asking the Indiana Court of Appeals to throw out the woman's feticide conviction, saying there's nothing she could have done to save her child.

The case of the Northern Indiana woman stirred national conversation about how much control women should have during their pregnancies and whether they should be held accountable if something goes wrong.

Patel is the first Indiana woman to be convicted of feticide in connection with her own miscarriage.

Corn lawsuit

Thousands of Indiana corn farmers have joined those from several other Midwestern states in a complex and lengthy legal battle against Syngenta, one of the world's leading producers of seeds.

In November, a Muncie farmer filed a class-action lawsuit blaming the Swiss biotechnology company for the dramatic drop in the price of corn that resulted in millions of dollars in lost revenue for farmers nationwide. The lawsuit claims Syngenta sold genetically modified corn seeds to U.S. farmers despite knowing that China, a key importer of U.S. corn, would reject the GMO products.

BlueIndy

Marion County Auditor Julie Voorhies claims in a lawsuit that city officials illegally paid $6 million to BlueIndy for its electric car-sharing service.

The lawsuit asks for a temporary ban on future BlueIndy-related construction. BlueIndy officially launched in September.

Star reporters Stephanie Wang and Jill Disis and the Associated Press contributed to this story.

Call Star reporter Kristine Guerra at (317) 444-6209. Follow her on Twitter: @kristine_guerra.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1OwLuFK