NASHUA, N.H. — Sen. Ted Cruz is spending the day in New Hampshire, rubbing elbows with voters. At Nashua City Hall this morning. Cruz spoke with about 50 GOP activists at a New Hampshire Republican Party get out the vote rally.

Before and after his talk, a number of activists encouraged him to run for president.

“It’s certainly a state that I’m thrilled to have a chance to be back in and visit with the good people here,” he told reporters when asked whether that’s on his mind as he makes his second visit to New Hampshire as a senator. “We have a national debate right now about the direction this country is going in. and New Hampshire is going to be front and center as part of that national debate.”

Does he feel that New Hampshire would welcome him in 2016?

“This is a state that believes in the principle of live free or die. And I’ve got to got to say, that is a proposition that Texans understand.”

He also weighed in on the resignation of Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius. That, he said, does “not remotely” end the debate over Obamacare.

“Senate Democrats demanded her head to try to change the subject,” he said. “But firing Kathleen Sebelius does nothing to help the millions of people who’ve lost their jobs” or been forced into part-time work or who face “skyrocketing” insurance premiums.

He also took credit for the Obama administration’s decision Friday to refuse a visa to Iran’s pick for ambassador to the United Nations. Hamid Aboutalebi worked as a translator for the militant student group that stormed the U.S. Embassy in Tehran in 1979 and held Americans hostage for 444 days.

Cruz worked with Sen. Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., on a bill that sailed through the Senate earlier this week and then cleared the House, barring the envoy. Cruz called the outcome “a terrific demonstration of how the political process could work.”

Iran’s choice “was a deliberate slap in the face. That was an insult. That was meant to be a direct provocation.”

So, he said, “I was very, very pleased to see yesterday the White House announced that we’re going to deny the visa and not allow somebody who participated in taking Americans hostage to move to New York City, to live in Manhattan with diplomatic immunity. That was the right thing to do and I’m very pleased to see the president did the right thing.”

Cruz attended a similar rally in Manchester before heading to the New Hampshire Freedom Summit, a conservative gathering organized by Americans for Prosperity and Citizens United.

Sen. Rand Paul and Mike Huckabee are among the other potential 2016 contenders appearing at the event.

As for that baby in the photo, Clare Sanborn. Cruz spotted the 17-month-old after his talk to GOP activists at a park in Manchester and made a beeline, playfully chasing her around a tree. Her mom, Molly Sanborn of Concord, 34, chairs the New Hampshire Young Republicans and chatted with Cruz briefly. “He’s wonderful. He’s so personable and sincere,” she said.