Obamacare penalties could be greater than uninsured anticipate

Photo: Rodger Mallison, MBI Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius, left, was at Tarrant County College South on Thursday urging people to sign up for health care. U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius, left, was at Tarrant County College South on Thursday urging people to sign up for health care. Photo: Rodger Mallison, MBI Obamacare penalties could be greater than uninsured anticipate 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

At 35, Brandan Licatino is old enough to understand the risks of getting sick without health insurance and informed enough to know he faces a tax penalty a year from now if he fails to sign up for a federally mandated health plan by the end of the month.

But like hundreds of thousands or more Texans, he seems willing to take his chances.

"At this point in my life, I don't see the need to do it," Licatino said this week, knocking on a wooden bureau in the hair salon he owns on Washington Avenue. "It's definitely been on my mind. I'm 35, not 25, but I'm still young. It's not a matter of if something is going to happen. It's when. I get that."

Once the March 31 deadline to sign up for insurance required by the Affordable Care Act passes, he and others can circle another date on the calendar: April 15, 2015. That's when tax penalties come due and uninsured Americans are hit with a bill of potentially thousands of dollars. The rate of the penalty is set to increase annually the following two years.

Some who fail to sign up now may be lulled by the $95 figure that is often cited as a penalty. But that is the minimum an individual will be charged, and few will get off that lightly. For most earners, it will be 1 percent of annual income, and families will pay the greater of $285 or 1 percent of annual income. Penalties will be assessed when 2014 tax returns are filed next year.

More Information B

Weigh deductible

The penalty could be as high as $5,000 for an individual or $12,500 for a family, said certified public accountant Kevin Lovins of Briggs & Veselka in Houston.

"I think they need to calculate what their true penalty would be," Lovins said, adding the cost of insurance could be lower than people might have expected, especially for those who qualify for subsidies.

Licatino, who said he expects to gross more than $100,000 from the two salons he owns, figures that even with insurance he would have to pay thousands on top of a deductible if he were to suffer a serious injury or illness.

But what if he stays healthy and has to pay the penalty instead of monthly premiums? An online calculator devised by the Urban Institute and Brookings Institution sheds some light on that.

Licatino is single with no children. Someone in that category with a 2014 adjusted gross income of $100,000 would face a penalty of $1,899 on his or her 2015 tax bill, the calculator shows. That compares with an average annual premium for a bronze plan under the Affordable Care Act of $3,600.

But the calculator, which assumes a 3 percent growth in income, also shows how quickly the penalties grow by law over the following two years. On the 2016 tax bill, for example, the $103,000 earner would pay a penalty of $3,914, compared to an annual bronze plan premium of $3,816. The following year, the penalty would be $5,041, well above the $4,045 cost of premiums, according to the calculator.

Inevitable cost

Vivian Ho, James A. Baker III Institute health economics chair at Rice University, said it can be difficult for people to look that far ahead. But the bill comes due nonetheless.

"One thing to get people to reconsider if they don't buy insurance is the penalty," Ho said. "Maybe seeing the first penalty on tax returns will change their minds, but they're not going to see it until 2015. But that penalty will be rising in the following years."

To pay the minimum penalty, an uninsured single person would have to earn less than $19,650 this year, Lovins said. A family of four with two children younger than age 18 would have to have an income less than $48,800.

Qualify for subsidies

"That's pretty low," Lovins said. "You're between 139 and 400 percent of the poverty level and should be able to qualify for a subsidy."

People who are so poor they can't afford insurance but are not eligible for coverage through a government program such as Medicaid might qualify for exemptions from the tax penalty. So might people uninsured fewer than three consecutive months.

Aaron Potier of Spring hopes he qualifies for an exemption or, preferably, gets an offer soon for a job that includes insurance.

Potier, 48 and married with two young daughters, has been unemployed more than a year after getting laid off from an advertising firm. His wife earns about $35,000 as an assistant property manager; she and the kids are covered through her employer at a cost of about $350 per month. The family can't afford more.

"There's no room in our budget, whether it's through the Affordable Care Act or my wife's insurance," Potier said. "I picked out a plan. It's $220 a month.

Good idea, but …

"I'm a big advocate for the Affordable Care Act. It's long overdue. But a lot of people just can't find the pennies to squeeze to buy insurance."

Stacey Pogue, senior policy analyst at the nonpartisan Center for Public Policy Priorities, which advocates for low- and moderate-income Texans, said she thinks many people inadvertently will be hit with penalties because they believe they can buy marketplace plans all year long. But open enrollment closes March 31 and reopens in the fall for 2015 insurance signups. Those who get a plan after the deadline will pay a prorated penalty.

And Lovins also warned against betting the 2010 health care law will be repealed.

"Some people might think that this has been handled so poorly, that it's just going to go away," Lovins said. "I don't think that's going to happen."