EDITOR'S NOTE: The Times-Call's Take Two series revisits people and things we have written about in the past year. Take Two stories run on Mondays.

During the busy lunchtime hour Friday, hopeful Longmont Recreation Center patrons pull into the parking lot, circle for a few minutes and swoop in to a space as soon as another vehicle pulls out - the effect of a perfect parking storm.

The existing problem is that the rec center has never had ample parking spaces in the first place. Longmont Recreation Manager Jeff Friesner said that the city regularly receives calls complaining about the lack of space in the rec center lot.

Kristen Epstein plays with her daughter Marlo, 2, at the Longmont Recreation Center, 310 Quail Rd., Friday. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

Those complaints increase in the winter, when the building is more popular than ever. Cold weather and New Year's resolutions drive people inside the center, with its fitness machines, volleyball and basketball courts, swimming pool and track. Plus, the cold weather often means snowplows push parking lot snow into one of the precious spaces, preventing patrons from snagging the premium real estate.

When the center is especially busy, many people park in the Longmont Museum's parking lot, or on the street next to the Blue Vista neighborhood. The street parking prompted ire in neighbors in 2012 and resulted in "No Parking" signs on Quail Street.

This year, besides the usual winter surge in attendance and snow problems, rec center parkers are also finding they must circle longer because half of the museum's parking lot is currently occupied by construction equipment, as workers chip away at a new shiny auditorium.

"On Saturdays when they have the kids' basketball leagues, it's almost impossible to find a place to park here," said Jim Hassett, 63, who comes to the rec center five or six times a week.

For Kristen Epstein, however, the parking was not that big of an issue. As she attempted to teach her 2-year-old daughter Marlo to shoot a basketball at the one of the rec center courts, Kristen Epstein said "every time we come here we have to circle a couple of times but if you're coming to the gym to exercise, should you have a problem walking a little farther to get to the front door? No, you should not."

On his way to his noon pickup basketball game Friday, 18-year-old Kyle Kolakowski summed up the problem concisely.

"There aren't that many parking spots here and that's what it comes down to," he said. "It's a popular place."

Friesner said by this time next year, the city may have a solution to the parking spot supply issue.

The city plans to build a new tennis complex northeast of the pond near the rec center and it will come with between 50 and 60 nearby parking spaces.

"We think during this time of year with the weather being cold and not conducive to tennis, it could help offset our parking issues at the rec center," Friesner said.

In the meantime, recreation staff are meeting in the coming week to see if there are any short-term solutions until the tennis parking lot is completed sometime in 2015.

"We're bursting at the seams right now," Friesner said, admitting that too popular a rec center was a good problem to have.

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci