How crazy do your economic projections have to be that even Obama admin veterans roll their eyes? Bernie Sanders level crazy which assumes 5% growth because all the money trees will rise out of the ground once he does a magic hippie rain dance.

So even these guys have come out against that level of fantasy economics.

Four former White House economic advisers are taking issue with a rosy economic analysis of Sanders' proposal that found that Sanders' plan would spur the U.S. economy to grow by 5.3% per year,median income to soar by more than $22,000, and the unemployment rate to fall to 3.8%.

And the unicorns will come out of the clouds and they will dance. And we will all dance with them. And then hug each other. And no one will want money anymore. #FeeltheBern

Not so fast, wrote the economists, Alan Krueger, Austan Goolsbee, Christina Romer and Laura D'Andrea Tyson, who chaired the White House Council of Economic Advisers under Presidents Obama and Clinton in a letter addressed to Sanders and Friedman. "We are concerned to see the Sanders campaign citing extreme claims by Gerald Friedman about the effect of Senator Sanders's economic plan -- claims that cannot be supported by the economic evidence," the former chairs wrote. "As much as we wish it were so, no credible economic research supports economic impacts of these magnitudes."

But when you rig the numbers to make unrealistic claims (like the ones about ObamaCare) then someone will show up promising even more delicious pie in the sky.

Raise the rate of gross domestic product growth to 5.3 percent per year, more than double the Federal Reserve’s current long-run projection of 2 percent.

• Reduce unemployment to 3.8 percent, which is way below the Fed’s long-term estimates of 4.9 percent. • Restore the share of the population in the labor force back to what it was in 1999, even though the Baby Boom generation is much older today and so many more Americans have reached retirement age. If you don’t follow economic statistics closely, these numbers may not mean much to you. Here’s how I’d describe them in laymen’s terms: garbage. It’s not just that these figures assume delusionally large effects. Some show effects that don’t even point in the right direction. Consider the claims about labor force participation. If you actually think about Sanders’s proposals — such as completely delinking health insurance from employment, making college free and increasing Social Security benefits — you’ll realize they mostly would reduce workforce participation on the margin. That doesn’t mean they’re unworthy policy choices. Like any other choices, though, they bring tradeoffs — including making it easier or more attractive for Americans to not have a job. In no known universe would they have the effects Friedman predicts.

Who is Gerald Friedman, the wizard who promises us that doing more of the same terrible things while completely disregarding math will make candy rain from the sky? Exactly who you expect.

Ph.D., Economics, Harvard University, 1986. Dissertation: Politics and Unions: Government, Ideology, and the Labor Movement in the United States and France, 1880-1914. Professional Activities: Drafted financing plans for single-payer health care systems for Maryland, Massachusetts and the United States.

Associate Editor of Labor History 2003-present.

Member of the Editorial Board, The Journal of Economic History (September 1994 - 1998).

Member of the Editorial Board, The American Journal of Sociology (September 1995 - 1997). Selected Publications: Reigniting the Labor Movement: Restoring means to ends in a democratic Labor Movement (London and New York, Routledge, 2007). "Revolutionary Syndicalism and French Labor: The Rebels Behind the Cause" French Historical Studies (Spring 1997). "Worker Militancy and its Consequences: Political Responses to Labor Unrest in the United States, 1877-1914," International Labor and Working Class History (Fall 1991), 5-17.



"Capitalism, Socialism, Republicanism and the State: France 1877-1914" Social Science History 14:1 (Spring 1990), 151-74.

If you look really closely, you might be able to spot a subtle agenda.

But Bernie Sanders supporters are furious that these math guys with their filthy math are killing the beautiful dream of unlimited free stuff for everyone with infinite economic growth.

Killing the Future: Centrist Dems are Trying to Destroy the Optimism of Bernie Sanders' Followers Let’s, for a moment, take on board what these people are saying. They’re certainly right that Bernie Sanders’ plans are incredibly ambitious. Just imagine having to martial an entire nation in order to carry some of his proposals out, never mind getting any of them to pass through congress. And what’s the point in even attempting to break out of the destructive boom-and-bust economic cycle when Wall Street has such a grip on the political process? You know what? Let’s listen to these pessimists: let’s all just give up.

No, we must believe. We must clap our hands and say we believe in Socialism. Or Socialism will die. (I like the Freudian slip of "martial" for "marshal". As in martial law.)

Bernie Sanders is an idealist, yes, and his plans are ambitious. Nothing of this scale has been proposed since the days of Franklin Delano Roosevelt. But what harm would come to the naysayers if Sanders’ supporters voted to at least aim for his something better? What would be wrong with attempting to steer the country towards greater income equality, if there’s a chance even half of Gerald Friedman’s findings coming true? (An 11 grand salary increase still isn’t bad.) And hey, if the Sanders plan fails after four years, we can always just go back to this other system. You know, the one that isn’t working.

Like in Cuba or Venezuela. Or North Korea. All working. So let's ignore the math and march forward for the 101th repetition of the Great Socialist Experiment.

It reminds me of what Pavlov said, "If Communism is an experiment, I would not sacrifice a frog's leg for it." Bernie Sanders supporters want to sacrifice a nation.