Iowa (KWQC) – Within six months, two of Iowa’s four state run mental health institutions will close their doors.

The governor’s office said it believes the state can better deliver mental health care through smaller, community-based organizations. Not everyone agrees.

KWQC talked to two health professionals laid off from the Mt. Pleasant facility. They said the governor’s proposal will only worsen Iowa’s mental health crisis and land more mentally ill people in jail. The Lee County Sheriff agrees.

“Mental illness is not a crime and I’m certainly tried of seeing it treated as one,” said Lee County Sheriff Jim Sholl.

With the Mt. Pleasant facility winding down, Sheriff Sholl expects to see his inmate count bumping up.

“Person suffering mental illness that cannot receive the proper services in the community often times resort to self medication with alcohol or drugs,” he said. “Because of that they might commit misdemeanor crimes.”

“We see everything from depression, folks who are suicidal to people who have schizophrenia,” said Cindy Fedler.

Fedler was a nurse clinician at the Mt. Pleasant MHI before she was laid off last month.

She saw some of the same people Sheriff Sholl is worried he may soon see in his jail.

“These folks sometimes need longer term care and we’re taking the hospitals away from them,” she said.

Anna Short was a drug abuse counselor at the same MHI until she was laid off.

“My main fear is that folks will end up in prison that don’t belong there,” said Short.

Both worry that the governor’s decision to close Mt. Pleasant and Clarinda MHI’s will mean more people on the street and more people in jail.

“You’re going to see the prison population rise,” said Fedler.

She said they’re already seeing that now.

“Once you close down two and you lose those beds there’s just not the resources for them and so they get treatment in prisons,” said Fedler. “Anybody who works with the mentally ill will tell you this is the most absurd decision ever made.”

At one point, Mt. Pleasant had three mental health programs at it’s MHI. Now, it has one: the Iowa Residential Treatment Center for substance abuse. It will operate until funding runs out, likely sometime this year.

“We’re trying to serve more and more people in the community and have fewer people in institutions,” said Iowa Department of Human Services public information officer Amy McCoy.

McCoy said the agency wants to modernize mental health care in the state by serving more people in community-based treatment centers.

“This is really what the mental health and disability redesign was meant to do,” she said. “It’s to help those services come online all across the state instead of just having people served at these four rural institutions that are very difficult to keep running.”

McCoy said with this move, counties have become apart of regional systems that allows them to pool resources. This includes Affordable Care Act funding that’s available through expanding services to Iowans.

“It’s really making it possible for counties to use that $100 million in surpluses to invest in a very types of crisis services and programs that can serve people in their own community,” she said.

But, Sheriff Sholl said closing the MHI’s will especially hurt rural areas like in Lee County, where there aren’t many community-based treatment centers available.

“If they want to close the MHI’s I wish we would have had proper treatment facilities available locally before that happened,” he said.

Short said without IRTC more people will end up incarcerated.

“A referral to IRTC was a person’s chance one step before prison,” she said.

Short said in her last week at the MHI former patients called her. One was an elderly man who struggled with alcoholism and had ruined relationships with his family.

“He called me in my last week to tell me, he was dating his wife again,” she said teary eyed. “So, don’t tell me program’s not valuable.”

Funding for Mt. Pleasant and Clarinda will be reallocated to the remaining state run mental health institutes in Cherokee and Independence.

DHS said they’ll be adding a net total of six in-patient beds, state-wide.

State Senator Rich Taylor represents Lee and Henry counties, home to the Mt. Pleasant facility.

He said the governor’s proposal doesn’t make any sense.

“Hospitals are calling us all the time saying we don’t know where we’re going to put these people if you close these institutions down because we can’t help them,” said. St. Sen. Taylor.

He said the patients coming to Mt. Pleasant and Clarinda have already shown they need more help than they’d get at home.

“These people have already failed in the community and that’s why they’ve come to the state institutions,” he said. “It’s just ridiculous the way we treat people that need our help.”

The two remaining facilities in Independence and Cherokee are two and five hours away from Mt. Pleasant.

Fedler and Short, the health professionals said that’s just too far and simply not fair.

“To put mentally ill people in handcuffs, in chains, lock them in the back of a squad car when they’re already mentally ill drive all that distance to Independence or possibly Cherokee because those are the only two set to be left open… We wouldn’t do that do someone who was having a stroke,” said Fedler.

But unless legislation changes, Mt. Pleasant and Clarinda will be shut down.

“That’s the problem. Iowa is not taking care of their citizens who are mentally ill,” said Fedler.

Fedler, Short and Sheriff Sholl all worry patients will end up in jail instead of in treatment.

Currently, funding for Mt. Pleasant and Clarinda are set to run out June 30th. However, the governor is now supporting a proposed compromise to keep state funded services available at those two institutions through December 15th.

The state said it would work to find private vendors to fill space at Mt. Pleasant and Clarinda, once funding runs out.

KWQC did reach out to the governor’s office for an interview. We received written statements from the governor’s spokesperson.