Snow showers will develop in western North Carolina as the system approaches. Light accumulations are possible overnight.

Sleet will begin to mix in with the snow around 4 a.m. in western North Carolina with light sleet and freezing rain developing over parts of northeast Georgia and the Upstate.

A light glaze of ice will make to hazardous morning travel as pockets of sleet and freezing rain linger throughout the morning and into the early afternoon hours.

As temperatures increase, expect ice to transition into light to moderate rain bay the afternoon for much of the Upstate. Northern Greenville, Spartanburg and Cherokee county may hold on to a wintry mix a bit longer as cold temperatures stubbornly sit in place.

By Monday evening, light to moderate rainfall to take over with heavier rain pushing in overnight Monday into Tuesday. Tuesday may see a few lingering showers early in the day across the Upstate while mountains towns can see a few lingering snow showers.

A Freezing rain advisory will be in effect for all of northeast Georgia as well as Anderson, southern Oconee, southern Pickens, southern Greenville, Spartanburg and Cherokee counties from midnight until 1 p.m. Monday afternoon.

For northern Oconee, northern Pickens, northern Greenville counties and much of western North Carolina, look to see a Winter Weather Advisory last from 6 p.m. Sunday until 7 p.m. Monday evening.

Finally, a Winter Storm Warning will be in effect for McDowell, Mitchell and Yancey counties from 6 p.m. tonight until midnight Tuesday morning.

The Upstate and northeast Georgia will likely see a light icing of only about a tenth of an inch in some location.

Western North Carolina my see a bit more icing for the far eastern counties, accumulating up to a quarter inch of ice through Rutherford, McDowell, Mitchel and Yancey counties. This can cause a bit more concerns other than just travel.

Warmer temperatures will arrive Thursday with snow and rain likely tapering off. Sunny skies return by mid-week.

Copyright 2016 FOX Carolina (Meredith Corporation). All rights reserved.