A case of twisting campaign-finance law for partisan ends

Editor’s Note: The following article appeared in the Opinion Review & Outlook section of The Wall Street Journal on January 9, 2016.

Laws restricting political speech are easily abused for partisan gain, as we’ve seen with the IRS and Wisconsin’s John Doe investigation. The latest example is unfolding in Montana, where a state official is taking revenge against a political rival.

Arthur Wittich is a conservative state representative elected in 2010 who led Montana’s pushback against ObamaCare mandates as state Senate Majority Leader. In 2014, when he was running for the seat he now holds in the state house, he was sued by state Commissioner of Political Practices (COPP) Jonathan Motl, who accused Mr. Wittich of accepting illegal campaign contributions in the 2010 campaign.

Mr. Motl claimed Mr. Wittich had broken the law by taking an in-kind contribution in discounted direct mail services. But an expert witness showed the vendor made a profit on the work and Mr. Motl’s calculations overstated the cost of materials, inflating the presumed market cost. Mr. Motl also claimed Mr. Wittich’s campaign had improperly coordinated with Western Tradition Partnership, which ran advertising during his 2010 campaign. Mr. Motl has not produced any evidence that such coordination occurred.

Messrs. Motl and Wittich have some history. In 2013 Mr. Motl was appointed state Commissioner of Political Practices by Democratic Governor Steve Bullock. Conservative lawmakers objected to his work with liberal anti-speech groups like Common Cause and for urging Montana’s elected officials to support a constitutional amendment overturning the U. S. Supreme Court’s Citizens United ruling.

Mr. Wittich was among his most vocal critics, noting that with a “partisan” running the office, “the people of Montana aren’t sure if a Republican can get fair treatment.” That was prescient. According to Mr. Motl’s agency website, since taking office Mr. Motl has gone after conservative groups or parties, with suits against nine conservative groups in 2014. Mr. Wittich decided to fight.

Mr. Motl’s revenge against Mr. Wittich has been a one-man show; he filed as the plaintiff party and lawyer and designated himself an expert witness. He later hired two outside attorneys, Gene Jarussi and John Heenan, who are working on a pro-bono basis with a small stipend. Both have made political donations to Democrats.

Montana is known for its restrictive - and illegal - campaign-finance laws. After the Supreme Court’s 2010 decision in Citizens United, then Attorney General Scott Bullock tried to claim that Montana could continue to limit corporate expenditures. He was smacked down by the Justices in American Tradition Partnership v. Bullock; Mr. Wittich’s law firm brought that case.

Campaign-finance coordination allegations have become a favorite tool of the political left, which knows proving coordination often requires a fishing expedition into a target’s personal communications. Prosecutors hope they can unearth evidence that will be embarrassing even if not illegal.

Perhaps some evidence will emerge to justify this political dragnet. Until then it looks like Montana’s effort to silence conservative voices in the legislature is the left’s latest attack on political free speech.

Reprinted by permission of The Wall Street Journal, Copyright © 2016 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved Worldwide. License number 3791720320906.