The New Jersey office park isn't what it used to be, and the state's job market is suffering for it.

Thirty years ago, the state was on the cutting edge -- building sprawling office campuses that housed thousands of employees and attracted huge companies to the suburbs. Office workers quickly became New Jersey's largest employment sector, populating small cities that dotted the landscape.

Then, in the late 1980s, the electronic spreadsheet was born and use of the personal computer rose. The Internet came next. Mobile technology exploded with the dawn of the 21st century.

The office changed, and New Jersey wasn't positioned to change with it. Today, a N.J. Advance Media analysis shows the state's office sector is a job-sucking albatross, an anchor holding down what already has been a slow recovery from the Great Recession.

"Eighty percent of all the commercial office space that exists today was built in the 1980s. Much of that stuff is between 25-30 years of age now," said James Hughes, dean of the Bloustein School of Planning and Public Policy at Rutgers University. "Most of the jobs that were in these places are now done by artificial intelligence, and that has changed the internal structure of the office."

"Suburban, isolated campuses have fallen out of favor. Unfortunately, we have too many of them."

While most job sectors saw employment crash during the recession, nearly every one has shown signs of recovery in recent years. But not the state's largest -- office and administrative support -- which employs more than 650,000 in the Garden State.

Since 2003, more than 118,000 office and administrative support jobs have disappeared from New Jersey, analysis of labor data shows. It stands as the only job sector to not add a single job in any given year since 2007.

In fact, office sector job losses make up the vast majority of state employment that has not been replaced since the recession ended in 2009.

"What we're seeing is both cyclical and structural. The cyclical aspect ... that was the result of the recession," said Carl Van Horn, director of the Heldrich Center for Workforce Development at Rutgers University. "The structural change is that these jobs have been delayering for decades and much of that was fueled by information technology.

"When you think about walking into an office 20 or 30 years ago, you had all of these people you'd see working. I mean think about of many things used to have to be keyed in by hand. All of that went away."

The recession hastened the decline of office work, according Bureau of Labor statistics released last week, but it is appearing more likely that its effects may be permanent.

The typical office today is smaller and more nimble, Hughes said. Since jobs like administrative assistants and record-keepers are largely no longer necessary, the jobs that remain also require more skill than they would have decades ago.

"The work that takes place in offices today is really high-end creative work," he said. "That has changed the internal structure of the office."

New Jersey is also at a unique disadvantage when it comes to attracting new employers. The cost of living is among the highest in the country, requiring would-be employers to pay higher salaries to remain competitive. Much of the office space in New Jersey is now also woefully outdated, inefficient and often come with high tax bills, making neighboring states more attractive landing points for employers on the move.

"We are a very expensive place for doing business," Hughes said. "Someone today would likely get sticker shock if they were transferred to New Jersey."



It all leaves the state at an unenviable transition point. Some sectors of the state's economy, like education, healthcare and transportation, are doing well, adding tens of thousands of jobs since the end of the recession.

But experts say until the state's office landscape undergoes a vast reimagining, the bloodletting is likely to continue. Because as it stands, New Jersey's largest employment sector is chiefly built to accommodate a worker who has been fading into non-existence for decades.

Stephen Stirling may be reached at sstirling@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @sstirling. Find him on Facebook.