Update: Metro Health sale to national hospital chain falls through

WYOMING, MI – Who gets the check when the assets of non-profit Metro Health are sold to Community Health Systems, Inc., one of the nation’s largest and most profitable health care systems?

That question will be determined in the coming months by state Attorney General Bill Schuette, said Lody Zwarensteyn, the former president and CEO of the Alliance for Health.

“You could say that the assets are owned by the community,” Zwarensteyn said on Friday, Jan. 23, after CHS announced it will acquire 80 percent of Metro Health’s assets, including Metro Health’s 208-bed hospital in Wyoming, outpatient centers and related assets and businesses.

Zwarensteyn, who retired after spending 42 years monitoring the region’s health care system, said patients should expect little change in services. Doctors and other health care providers also should expect few changes.

“It will be business as normal whether a for-profit operates it or a non-profit,” he said.

CHS, which owns, leases or operates 206 affiliated hospitals in 29 states with 31,100 licensed beds, may be able to find internal cost savings when it takes over Metro Health, he said.

In a best-case scenario, a price war could result between CHS and the region’s two big health care systems, Mercy Health and Spectrum Health, Zwarensteyn said.



RELATED: Metro Health to sell 80 percent interest to Tennessee health care giant

The question of who will be paid and how much is an issue that will be governed by the Attorney General’s office, which must sign off on the agreement before it can go forward, Zwarensteyn said.

A certificate of need review by the Michigan Department of Community Health also will be required.

Zwarensteyn said the ownership and sale of a non-profit is a big question that could be resolved by the creation of a community foundation.

“If a non-profit sells, technically the community owns it,” he said. “The community is the one that built it and it’s the people of the community who used the place.”

“This is kind of virgin territory.”

While CHS can be expected to take over Metro Health’s debt and bond payments, Zwarensteyn said the non-profit’s equity and the value of its good will in the community should determine how much CHS will pay.

Sidney Allen, a spokesman for the Attorney General's office, issued the following statement to The Grand Rapids Press and MLive.com Friday afternoon:

"Our office reviews non-profit to for-profit transactions to ensure that the nonprofit’s charitable assets are preserved for the benefit of the public. Our review of the transaction you referenced is just beginning and we expect to complete it over the next 4-6 months," Allen said.

In its announcement, Metro Health said CHS has pledged $100 million to $125 million in capital for investments in facilities, services, medical technology and physician recruitment in the first five years. It also has pledged to continue Metro Health's services and partnerships with University of Michigan, Orthopaedic Associates of Michigan, Pennant Health and others.

Metro Health’s board chairman, Doyle Hayes, and its president and CEO, Mike Faas, were not available for comment after the announcement was made.

Jim Harger covers business for MLive/Grand Rapids Press. Email him at jharger@mlive.com or follow him on Twitter or Facebook or Google+.