Colorado leads on universal health care

Bernie Sanders has thrown down a challenge for Colorado progressives: “Colorado could lead the nation in moving toward a system to ensure better health care for more people at less cost,” Sanders said in a statement to The Colorado Independent. “In the richest nation on Earth, we should make health care a right for all citizens. No one should go bankrupt or skip getting the care they need because they cannot afford it.”

If Amendment 69, which would provide universal health care to Colorado residents, passes in November, a right to health care will be enshrined in the Colorado Constitution. History will note that Colorado led the movement to transform health care in America from a commodity for those who could afford it, to a right for those who need it.

Amendment 69 offers Coloradans the opportunity to lead the nation in the inevitable evolution of universal health care as a right for all American residents. It will be resisted by the same voters who warned Obama to keep his government hands off their health care — while condemning Obamacare, of course. These, mostly Republican, diehards are destined to see their worst fears materialize and they are bound to go down screaming.

In the recent past, conservatives only had to shout “socialized medicine” at any effort to provide some form of national health care to be sure of a wave of opposition. Ironically, many of those who have most to gain from universal access to medical care — those who have no medical insurance either through employment, or purchased on the market — will be passionate in their resistance to any state or federal requirement for health insurance.

It would seem that small-government advocates, who want to curtail federal power, would welcome the autonomy the Affordable Care Act allows for states to experiment with alternatives to Obamacare. Of course, that would require that Republicans agree universal health care is in the public interest, which they clearly do not.

Party chairman Steve House told The Independent that Republicans would oppose the initiative. He supports “free market solutions rather than having more government control over how Coloradans are covered.” Translated, that means continuing the present system without significant reforms.

Thanks to Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders, national health care has become a central issue in the Democratic primary. Sanders advocates for a Medicare-for-all model that would insure all Colorado residents, as well as those in all other states, with essentially the same coverage as Medicare offers to seniors.

ColoradoCare, the Colorado version of the Sanders plan, differs from Medicare-for-all in that it would be owned by the residents of Colorado, rather than the federal government. Premiums would be based on income to assure all Coloradans could afford coverage regardless of financial circumstances. “By eliminating layers of bureaucracy and reducing administrative and other nonmedical costs, ColoradoCares would cover all residents and cost less than the current system,” according to the ColoradoCare Yes website.

Western Slope progressives might find a personal reason to support ColoradoCare. Marjorie Haun, local activist with Heritage Action for America, told the Daily Signal — published online by the conservative Heritage Foundation — “If we were to heed this all, I would probably have to move. … The thought of having no choice at all, the thought of the unknowns as you get older, you start looking at potential health problems. It’s pretty frightening.”

With a blind eye to the financial windfall the state gained from legalized marijuana, Haun complained, “I just think legalizing pot was pretty crazy. This is that times 10. This would really devastate the state. Anything could happen in Colorado.”

What a potential double victory for progressives in Colorado: Not only to procure universal health care for Coloradans, but to send Marjorie Haun packing off to Kansas or some other places her views would be closer to the mainstream.

Indeed, anything could happen in Colorado.

Bill Grant lives in Grand Junction. He can be reached at .(JavaScript must be enabled to view this email address) .