Thomson Reuters has launched a new Checkpoint Learning Health Care Reform Certificate Program.

The program provides in-depth knowledge and helps practitioners develop expertise related to the legislative and tax implications of health care reform. This program arms practitioners with the knowledge and tools they need to increase client consulting and revenue opportunities related to ensuring client compliance with health care reform legislation.

The passage of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) has created new mandates for individuals and businesses. Tax practitioners face an obligation and an opportunity to provide their clients with information and advice on complying with the new mandates.

Employers with at least 100 full-time and full-time equivalent employees are now required to offer affordable health coverage that provides minimum value to their full-time employees and their dependents. They need to know how to calculate which employees are included in their employee count, the options for the state exchanges, and the penalties that are assessed if they do not comply. All of this information, including how to fill out the related tax forms, is fully covered by the Checkpoint Learning Health Care Reform Certificate Program.

“2015 is a key year for health care reform, with regulations taking effect for the first time and requiring strict attention from both businesses and individuals,” said Ken Koskay, CPA, CFP, and senior vice president of learning solutions with the Tax & Accounting business of Thomson Reuters. “Participants in this certificate program will be better suited to serve clients that need assistance with implementation of the Affordable Care Act.”

Program registrants will obtain practical guidance on the Affordable Care Act, including employer and individual mandates, and the net investment income tax. The completed certificate program will assist with development of competency in reporting requirements, understanding compliance, and completion of forms and calculations, and health insurance marketplaces. It prepares professionals to consult with clients on health care reform issues – both tax and non-tax. The program offers a blended-learning format including three live instructor-led webinars, six online self-study courses (some exclusively available through this program) and a final exam on the entire program.

This program provides an opportunity for participants to develop job competencies while earning up to 27 hours of continuing professional education credit. Candidates who successfully complete the course work and final exam will earn a Checkpoint Learning Health Care Reform Competency Certificate that can be marketed to potential employers and to clients. The certificate can be renewed annually by completing eight hours of specially identified CPE credit.

More information is available at cl.thomsonreuters.com/GetCertificate/HCCP.