Doug Diny is a candidate for Wausau City Council District 4. (March 2016) (Photo: Courtesy of Doug Diny)

The election is over. You’ve done your civic duty. Or have you? You may be one of the zealots for Bernie or Ted, but have you saved any energy for state and local issues? Should you? Does it really matter?

The Wausau City Council has four new members, but really only two newcomers to city politics. Can we get the fresh start so many campaigned on? I think so, but only with the involvement of concerned Wausau residents. You owe it to the guy or gal you voted for to show your support; you also owe it to yourself to ensure the guy who knocks on your door every two years and asks for your vote is governing in accordance with that conversation you had with him on your doorstep.



It is foolhardy scapegoating to think the departure of City Council member Keene Winters and Mayor Jim Tipple will end the conflict in Wausau city government. The council is a body of 11+1 and City Hall has a staff of dozens; as such they must work as a body, not individuals. They all bear some responsibility. We still need checks and balances and spirited debate. Toeing the line or blanket calls for expanded council handbooks or conduct policy is eyewash to the real necessity of leadership, candor and efficient staff work.

Both the left and right clamor for an extreme leader for president, but both fail to recognize that no man or woman in the Oval Office will have as great an impact on their day-to-day lives as state and local governments; both directly in their grasp and control. A strong state and local government provides the most direct response to citizen action. A strong local economy weathers the downturns of global economic factors as well as rebounds ahead of the pack in a good economy.

It starts from the top. I call on Mayor-elect Robert Mielke to set the tone early. Leaders who listen often have the easiest decisions. Empower your staff to do great work; hire the best and trust their expertise. The council needs to take a quick step back and envision the perception Wausau residents have had in the last two years. You’ve all gotten an earful from your constituents; let it sink in a moment. You are the change agents they entrusted. Don’t let us down.

I call on every citizen to take time this year to attend a council or committee meeting. Take a friend, take a child; learn a little about the process. Or simply tune in public access. The meetings are posted on the city website: http://www.ci.wausau.wi.us/Home/Calendar.aspx

If you really want to make a difference, get involved locally first. Get involved now.

Doug Diny was a candidate for Wausau City Council.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1Sn7ZlD