With Sunday marking the first full day of spring, homeowners are gearing up for a season of gardening, renovating and home improvement projects.

By no coincidence, the Denver Home Show made a guest appearance in Denver this weekend at the National Western Complex to the delight of metro-area homeowners.

For more than 30 years, the Denver Home Show has brought vendors from across the state to satisfy the needs shoppers may not have known they had.

For example, at the “Rent-A-Chicken” booth, just one of the more than 400 vendors at the weekend event, customers could opt to rent a chicken for a day or two each week to get fresh eggs.

Cristian Moore, manager of the Denver Home Show, said the event is the perfect “one-stop shop” for anything home-related, making it the ideal spot for vendors.

Last year’s show brought in 30,000 people over three days, but online tickets sales as of Saturday were up 20 percent from the year previous, Moore said.

On average, 40 percent of people who attend the event spent $5,000 or more at the show on items from appliances to hot tubs. About 20 percent planned to spend $10,000 to $20,000 on a long-term purchase, such as a kitchen remodel.

“Our exhibitors change every year, and we have about 120 vendors who are here for the first time,” Moore said. “But we also have a 70 percent renewal rate among vendors because it’s such a key event for them. The leads and purchases they get here can sometimes lead them through the coming year.”

A walk through the winding corral of vendors also gives shoppers a glimpse at the year’s most popular home improvement trends.

At the forefront? Tiny homes.

Randy Woodman had been in the cabin-building business for 20 years before discovering the “tiny home” phenomenon. Just two years ago, he joined Escape Traveler, a home manufacturer that designs hand-crafted homes the size of an RV equipped with plumbing and electricity. “These are generally for people interested in down-sizing and who want to be able to afford to live where they live,” Woodman said.

Celebrity guests also made appearances. The “Fabulous Beekman Boys” of Cooking Channel fame told crowds the “seven things we learned from our goats.”

Self-described as “two NYC guys who bought a farm,” Josh Kilmer-Purcell and his partner Brent Ridge told audiences about their experience working on a goat farm and launching a lifestyle brand.

Their brand, Beekman 1802, which sells home decor items, food and recipes, recently was named one of the fastest-growing lifestyle brands in the country.

“We’re two gay New York City goat farmers — we are the punchline,” Kilmer-Purcell said. “But we work together in a community that’s so different from us to make something really wonderful.”

The Denver Home Show runs from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Sunday.