With the launch of Obamacare enrollment today, October 1 in a landmark date that will have many Americans railroaded into health insurance plans that directly pay for abortions with their insurance premiums – sometimes without their knowledge and consent.

Enrollment in the exchanges is to begin on October 1, 2013, and the exchanges are to offer health insurance coverage to an estimated 7 million individuals starting on January 1, 2014 (increasing to about 24 million by 2022).

Under the ACA, health plans that provide abortion coverage are permitted to participate in the state exchanges, including the SHOPs, and those plans are permitted to obtain federal subsidies. While states are allowed to enact laws “opting out” of permitting insurance plans that cover abortions to participate in their exchanges, many states are unable or unwilling to do so.

“Buried in the pages of Obamacare is the ‘Covert Abortion Premium Mandate’ that forces people and their money into the business of abortion,” said Charmaine Yoest of Americans United for Life. “In light of the dangers of abortion to women and their unborn children, this policy is a disaster.”

Abortion is woven into the healthcare law at multiple levels, making repeal of the law a pro-life necessity, Yoest said, including a failure to prohibit the use of federal tax dollars for abortion, abortion coverage, and abortion-inducing drugs and devices; pretending that the Hyde Amendment protections were enough to prohibit direct payment for abortions; and permitting federally subsidized Qualified Health Plans (QHPs) to provide abortion coverage through the state insurance exchanges.

Yoest said Obamcare fails to prohibit all multi-state qualified health plans from providing coverage for abortion, includes a “preventive care” mandate that is being used to force coverage of drugs and devices known to end life, and fails to provide comprehensive First Amendment conscience protections for individuals, employers, and insurance companies that have religious or moral objections to abortion.

“Real healthcare respects life,” noted Yoest. “The impact of Obamacare will be new income streams for anti-life policies. In fact, you could call Obamacare the ‘Abortionist Full-Employment Act’ as it intertwines the finances of people, businesses, states and the federal government with the anti-life industry of abortion.”

Emily Buchanan of the Susan B. Anthony List says estimates show as many as 111,500 abortions will be covered annually with taxpayer dollars thanks to Obamacare.

“The Lozier Institute (our research arm) released a ground-breaking report showing that between 71,000 and 111,500 abortions each year could be subsidized by our hard-earned tax dollars under Obamacare. The report ended up on the influential Drudge Report, and Congress noticed,” she said. “That’s why the resolve to stop pro-abortion Obamacare is only growing. The pro-life House is refusing to give in to Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid and President Obama.”

Brad Mattes of Life Issues Institute exlpains many of the abortion funding problems: