Tonight, every aspect of the 2015 Miss America Competition will be under the spotlight with the show Countdown to Miss America on ABC. The program will come immediately before the 2015 Miss America Competition and it will be hosted by Amy Robach, of Good Morning America. It will give viewers a chance to look behind-the-scenes at the lives of some of the 53 contestants who are all trying to become the winner of the 2015 Miss America crown, which will be awarded by last year’s winner, Miss America 2014 is Nina Davuluri from New York.

The show will also highlight past winners of the Miss America crown, including Lee Meriwether, who will also be one of the 2015 Miss America judges. During Countdown to Miss America, former Miss New Jersey Dena Blizzard, who was the host of the preliminary nights earlier in the week leading up to the 2015 Miss America Competition, will provide live updates on all of the excitement going on at Boardwalk Hall in Atlantic City, New Jersey, where the pageant will take place live on ABC at 8:00 pm ET/ 7:00 pm CT. Also, mobile users can view the on-goings live streaming by using the WatchABC app.

The two returning co-hosts of tonight’s 2015 Miss America Competition will be Good Morning America‘s Lara Spencer and the host of The Bachelor, Chris Harrison. Besides Lee Meriwether, the other judges tonight will be author Gary Vaynerchuk; U.S. Olympic Gold Medalist Shawn Johnson; television producer and writer Marc Cherry; West Point graduate and senior Army aviator General Anne MacDonald; CEO and designer Kathy Ireland; and, Super Bowl Champion and former Green Bay Packer Donald Driver.

The Miss America Competition got its start in 1921. This year, the 2015 Miss America Competition, which is the 88th one thus far, will show viewers some visuals of Atlantic City and reasons why it is a big tourist destination, despite recent events like casino closings that have taken place. Scenes of the Steel Pier, Boardwalk and beach will be shown, among others, highlighting the beauty of the city.

The preliminary rounds of the 2015 Miss America Competition were held for Tuesday, September 9 through Thursday, September 11, at Boardwalk Hall, where tonight’s competition will be televised live by ABC. During the first night of the preliminary rounds, Tuesday, Miss Ohio Mackenzie Bart was the winner of the Talent competition for her ventriloquism performance of the song Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious from the Disney movie Mary Poppins. She will be the recipient of a $2,000 scholarship. Miss Florida Victoria Cowen was the preliminary Lifestyle and Fitness winner. She wore a pink Catalina swimsuit and she will be the recipient of a $1,000 scholarship.

Wednesday, September 10, the second night of the preliminary rounds, Miss Kentucky Ramsey Carpenter won the talent competition with her amazing fiddle performance of the songs Sally Goodwin and Orange Blossom Special. She won a $2,000 scholarship. The Fitness and Lifestyle part of the competition was won by Miss Oklahoma Alex Eppler. Her swimsuit was a 2-piece pink Catalina one. She will be the recipient of a $1,000 scholarship.

Another award given on Wednesday was the Academy of Honor Award. The Miss America Organization presented it to Manfield Bias, who is the President and State Executive Director of the Miss Georgia Organization. Bias has been a dedicated volunteer for 40 years. He will be the recipient of a $5,000 Scholarship Award.

Also, Children’s Miracle Maker Awards were presented on Wednesday to the Miss Carolina Organization and the Miss District of Columbia Organization. The awards were in recognition of their outstanding fundraising efforts.

The $6,000 Quality of Life Award was also presented on Wednesday night during the preliminary round. The winner was Miss Alabama Caitlin Brunell.

On the final night of the preliminary rounds, Thursday, September 11,the winner of the Talent part of the competition was Miss Pennsylvania Amanda Fallon Smith. She sang Wish You Were Somehow Here Again from the musical Phantom of the Opera. For her performance, she will be the recipient of a $2,000 scholarship. The Fitness and Lifestyle portion of the competition was won by Miss Maryland Jade Kenney who wore a 2-piece pink Catalina swimsuit. She will be the recipient of a $1,000 scholarship.

The preliminary rounds and the Countdown to Miss America on ABC later tonight are building up the anticipation in the air for the big event, the 2015 Miss America Competition which will be held in Atlantic City, New Jersey, and will be broadcast live on ABC at 8:00 pm ET/ 7:00 pm CT. Who will make the final cuts on tonight’s competition and be included in the top 15, the top ten, and then the top 5 contestants? Find out by tuning in to ABC to watch, then come back here to read a recap of the 2015 Miss America Competition!

Written By Douglas Cobb

Photo Credit: The Miss America Organization

Sources:

Miss America.org

Omaha.com

I4U News

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr