Rapid City, SD

Worshippers at Calvary Lutheran Church in Rapid City celebrated Christmas Eve services for the first time this year with music from their new pipe organ.



It's a monster of a musical instrument with a sound that seems to magnify religious songs and their meaning.

"You can hear it," Albin Spreizer, music director and organist at Calvary Lutheran Church in Rapid City said. "When they're singing those hymns, it's like, oh, yeah, it's beautiful."

The new pipe organ at Calvary Lutheran Church was a dream that took almost ten years to come true. It was cheap, at a cost of $1 million, but it was covered with a successful fundraising campaign. With the fundraising finished and the organ officially dedicated last fall, it made its first Christmas Eve appearance -- as usual, to rave reviews.

“There's certain hymns that are played, that has the hair standing up on the back of your neck and you've got goose bumps. And it's just amazing," Pastor David Piper said.

A piece of art on its own, the organ is a multiple-keyboard assortment of pedals and keys and buttons that has parts in two levels of the church. It was purchased used from a church in California and modified with extensive construction to fit in perfectly at Calvary Lutheran.

Musicians at the church says it’s complicated to operate.

“It is very hard to play," Spreizer said. “Well, you know, it looks like a piano but it's nothing like a piano."

Spreizer says the trick to playing the big pipe organ is to manage the four keyboards and

foot-pedal keyboard and mix the sounds in a pleasing way.

He says his previous accordion experience helped him learn the pipe organ.

The challenge is more than worth it, Spreizer said, “It’s a lot of work but I absolutely love playing it.”

If an organ is, as some have suggested, an instrument of God. This one bring a boom voice.

Piper loves that big sound, but even more he loves the big impact it has on his congregation.

“When you're singing Silent Night and the organ is just playing and you're going out to go Tell it on a Mountain and it's just booming," Spreizer said. "And you truly can see the impact it has on people as they walk out the door."

It's an impact with particular meaning today.