HOURS after issuing its second tie ruling of 2016, a 4-4 decision on March 29th that gives public-sector unions an unexpected break, the Supreme Court issued a plaintive cry for help. The justices are apparently evenly split again in Zubik v Burwell, the birth control case they heard last week, but are loth to issue a ruling that sets no precedent and leaves in place a legal hodgepodge whereby women working at religious non-profits in most of the country enjoy cost-free birth control under Obamacare while their counterparts in seven southern and midwestern states do not.

No one is less excited about another tie vote in another landmark case than John Roberts, the chief justice. Mr Roberts wants the public to regard the court as an impartial body administering justice with a steady hand. He emphasised in his confirmation hearings in 2005 that a justice should think of himself as an umpire calling balls and strikes, not as a player with skin in the game. And he consistently assails the "partisan rancour" in Congress that makes life harder for judges trying to administer justice and uphold the rule of law. Shortly before Antonin Scalia died, Mr Roberts criticised recent confirmation hearings and lamented that Senate votes for his “extremely well qualified” colleagues broke largely along party lines. The confirmation process “is being used for something other than ensuring the qualifications of the nominees”, he said. Judging by the GOP gamesmanship clouding Barack Obama’s nomination of Merrick Garland to replace Mr Scalia, it’s clear no one is heeding Mr Roberts’ admonition. So the conscientious, fair-minded steward of the nation’s highest court faces a circus in the Senate and a series of pending decisions that highlight the extent to which his tribunal has become the most highly politicised institution in the federal government.

Out of seeming desperation, then, the justices gave the religious non-profits and the Obama administration an assignment that will keep them busy during the court's two-week break. In supplemental briefs due on April 12th, “the parties are directed to...address whether and how contraceptive coverage may be obtained by petitioners’ employees through petitioners’ insurance companies, but in a way that does not require any involvement of petitioners beyond their own decision to provide health insurance without contraceptive coverage to their employees”. Hoping to find a way out of the impasse, the justices want women who work for Christian colleges, hospitals and social-service organisations to receive the Obamacare benefit of free contraceptives without asking nuns, bishops and devout deans to take any action that makes them feel complicit in distributing them. “The parties are directed to address whether contraceptive coverage could be provided to petitioners’ employees, through petitioners’ insurance companies, without any such notice from petitioners”, the order reads.

On its face, the terms of this assignment seem to favour the government, as it does not ask whether providing contraceptive coverage in such a novel way would satisfy the religious scruples of the plaintiffs. It poses a technical question of whether the Affordable Care Act is flexible enough to permit changes in the mechanics of how women receive their contraception via the organisation’s insurance company. The wording seems to presume that the plaintiffs would have no problem with an arrangement that gives free morning-after pills and IUDs to the women who work for them as long as they have no role in triggering their provision. But the Little Sisters of the Poor, the University of Notre Dame and three dozen more plaintiffs are not likely to bow down to the justices’ workaround. While the court gamely implies that these non-profits would be fine with an arrangement that requires no action on their part and no response from the federal government, the tenor of the oral argument suggests the nuns may not be satisfied with this enhanced accommodation. And they may be reluctant to adopt this proposal floated by the justices:

For example, the parties should consider a situation in which petitioners would contract to provide health insurance for their employees, and in the course of obtaining such insurance, inform their insurance company that they do not want their health plan to include contraceptive coverage of the type to which they object on religious grounds. Petitioners would have no legal obligation to provide such contraceptive coverage, would not pay for such coverage, and would not be required to submit any separate notice to their insurer, to the Federal Government, or to their employees. At the same time, petitioners’ insurance company—aware that petitioners are not providing certain contraceptive coverage on religious grounds—would separately notify petitioners’ employees that the insurance company will provide cost-free contraceptive coverage, and that such coverage is not paid for by petitioners and is not provided through petitioners’ health plan.

Under this permutation, it falls on the insurer to notice that he is bound to deliver the free birth control when the employer orders only non-contraceptive policies for his employees. But such a plan ignores the religious organisations’ central complaint that their insurance plans are being “hijacked” to provide contraceptives. If that is their main beef, the nuns and bishops probably won’t be assuaged by an offer to not have to fill out a form. Their behaviour—the act of informing the insurance company that they "do not want their health plan to include contraceptive coverage"—still serves as a trigger that prompts the insurer to provide free birth control.The parties are not bound to this solution; the justices invite both sides "to address other proposals along similar lines". But it is quite unclear how the religious non-profits' adamant opposition to having anything to do with birth control will be resolved by yet another set of briefs.