Q: I don’t think my dad should drive. How should I approach the subject?

A: This is a difficult topic since driving is very much connected to independence. The best time to discuss the issue of driving is always BEFORE problems are identified. If we all anticipate that there may be a time when we will have to stop driving, it allows us to participate in a plan, to seek out local resources, or relocate to a community that provides transportation.

If trouble has already started, sit down and discuss it calmly. Choose a time when you can talk privately. Be specific about what you have observed: “I noticed that you changed lanes without looking.” Or “You slowed down at the intersection even when the light was green.” Don’t get sidetracked with other care issues, and be prepared for resistance. Your dad may not notice what you see.

Find out what is important to your dad about driving. Where does he need to go? Are there alternatives to get him there? Your dad may already recognize changes, but just doesn’t know how he would manage if he gave up driving. Investigate options like iTNSunCoast, SCAT transportation or friends that might be going to the same event. Point out that Florida provides for official identification that can be used instead of a driver’s license.

The Florida Department of Transportation publishes “Florida’s Guide for Aging Drivers,” which includes a self-assessment as well as a section for family and caregivers. It is a great resource and is available at flhsmv.gov/FloridaGrandDriver.

From the caregivers:

My husband was diagnosed with prostate cancer in 2006, nine months after we were married. In September 2007 he was cancer-free. But in January 2008 the cancer had returned. In July 2012 his doctor told him he should no longer drive because he had been falling; he shuffled when he walked, and had a slow response to everything. I would try to do the driving without upsetting him. But I was grateful that the MD told my husband he couldn’t drive. It was a relief for me that he stopped. Doing all the driving put me at his beck and call. At times I felt I had no life, but I didn’t want to be any place else but with him. I wanted to make his life comfortable, meaningful, and for him to feel valued. I always felt that I was never doing enough.

— Former caregiver for spouse with cancer.

I think as caregiver for my wife, I may have been doomed to failure if I had attempted to make this decision independently. Let a third party, your health professional or the SMH Driver Assessment Program suggest it may be time to consider other transportation alternatives. This is a kinder, non-threatening approach and it took me out of the decision-making process. Furthermore, it allowed me to be in a much better position to discuss this with her after the evaluation process.

— Two-year caregiver for spouse with Alzheimer’s disease.

—Caregivers’ Q&A is compiled by Susan Barcomb, with responses from current and former caregivers, and professionals from Sarasota agencies that include SMH Memory Clinic, The Pines of Sarasota, Jewish Family and Children’s Services, Alzheimer’s Association, Parkinson Place and the Friendship Centers. If you have a question about caregiving, email CaregiversQandA@verizon.net.