Health care under reform: Uncertainty clouds 2014 as systems end 2013 on strong note

Southeast Michigan health system CFOs say projecting budgets has never been as difficult as it is for 2014 because of the unknown numbers of newly insured patients and Medicaid beneficiaries who will pass through their doors from the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.



Some 299,811, or 47 percent, of Michigan's 638,000 uninsured adults who will be eligible for Medicaid benefits starting April 1 are in Southeast Michigan, according to the Ann Arbor-based Center for Healthcare Research & Transformation.



Some 148,584, or 43 percent, of the state's estimated 347,356 insured adults eligible for tax credits in the health insurance exchange that begins coverage Jan. 1 also reside in the five-county metro Detroit area, the center said.



"There is uncertainty with the exchanges," said Mike Gusho, CFO with the six-hospital St. Joseph Mercy Health System in Ann Arbor. "We don't know how many patients insured will show up. ... Many will have higher co-pays and deductibles. How that will work out, good or bad, we don't know."



But Gusho said St. Joseph is optimistic that Medicaid expansion, which begins April 1, will lead to an increase in patient revenue and a decrease in charity care.



Paul Castillo, CFO of the University of Michigan Health System, said University of Michigan Hospitals and Health Centers, the delivery arm of the Ann Arbor-based health system, is projecting neutral to a $2 million gain on Medicaid expansion.



Like Gusho, Castillo said it is too early to know if there will be growth in revenue from an expected increase in private patients on the Michigan Health Insurance Marketplace, the state's new exchange, which begins coverage Jan. 1. Open enrollment started Oct. 1 for individuals and businesses with fewer than 50 employees.



"We anticipate volume will be positive," Castillo said. "We expect the overall short-term (first six months of the year) to be neutral. There won't be a big uptake (in patients) from the exchange. We know there will be some."



But another unknown for hospital budget planners next year is what decisions midsize employers will make on their employee health insurance, he said.



"If they opt out and (send their employees to) the exchange directly, we don't know if the value of insurance today will be something more or less" than they had with their previous group policies, Gusho said.



For example, hospital executives have told Crain's that the increased use of high-deductible health plans — which have lower premiums because there is more out-of-pocket cost sharing — have led to an increase in bad debt.



Strong finish to fiscal 2013



Buoyed by a strong stock market, St. Joseph and Detroit-based St. John Providence Health System posted strong bottom lines in fiscal 2013 that ended July 31 with net income of $102.6 million and $108.6 million, respectively.





"We got off to a negative start in first quarter (of 2013). ... We had brought live Epic's MiChart (outpatient electronic medical record system), and there was a little more cost than we expected and (productivity declines) on the ambulatory side," he said.



But as fiscal 2013 proceeded, Castillo said, expenses leveled off and revenue increased, with inpatient discharges growing by 1 percent and outpatient revenue increasing by 11 percent.



"We had a positive performance in the second half of the year," Castillo said.



Looking forward into 2014, Robert Hewlett III, UM's finance director, said the health system is projecting a 1 percent operating margin. The health system also projects 6.3 percent growth in revenue to $2.5 billion and a 4.5 percent increase in patients.



"We still have incremental costs for Epic, but we will have moderate volume growth," he said.



Dampening profitability over the past two years for the UM Health System has been its Epic billing and clinical information system and its two replacement hospitals. UM is spending more than $800 million on its Epic system and spent more than $750 million on the new C.S. Mott Children's Hospital and Von Voigtlander Women's Hospital.



Earlier this year, Crain's reported 2012 financial results for Southeast Michigan's other main health systems, including Royal Oak-based Beaumont Health System, Detroit-based Henry Ford Health System and Dearborn-based Oakwood Healthcare. Those systems' fiscal year ends Dec. 31.



In 2012, Beaumont and Oakwood reported higher net income than the previous year. Beaumont earned $108.5 million, a 208 percent increase, and Oakwood earned $39.6 million, a 138 percent increase.



Henry Ford earned $53.2 million, a 15 percent drop from $62.9 million in 2011. The decline was attributed to a $23 million increase in uncompensated care and $36.4 million spent to install an electronic medical records system.



Most systems in Southeast Michigan are planning additional cost-cutting in 2014 to make up for reimbursements that are not keeping up with expenses and required capital spending.



More cuts ahead?



Besides an expectation of rising uncompensated care, another round of Medicare reimbursement and sequestration cuts are expected to dampen profitability in 2014, system executives said.



"It is a tough market and we anticipate it to remain so," Gusho said. "Our bad debt and charity care is at higher levels than historically."