Amid a barrage of negative news about the government web site and people having their insurance dropped, the public's views of the Affordable Care Act dropped in November with about half reporting an unfavorable view of the law, according to a tracking poll by Kaiser Family Foundation.

The biggest drop was in the share of Democrats viewing the law favorably, which now stands at 55 percent.

"This negative shift in opinion comes amid heavy news coverage of the website problems plaguing the law's online health insurance exchanges and stories about individuals being dropped from their insurance coverage because their plans don't meet minimum requirements set by the ACA, stories that were followed closely by more than half the American public this month," according to a summary of the poll released Friday. "The partisan divide on the law continues, but support among Democrats dropped sharply this month after rallying in September and October."

In November, 49 percent said they have an unfavorable view of the law and a third have a favorable view. In October, 44 percent had an unfavorable view and 38 percent had a favorable view.

Kaiser has tracked views on the law for four years and the gap between negative and positive views -- at 16 percent -- has only been this wide in October of 2011 when the law was getting a lot of negative attention in the GOP presidential primaries.

The poll found that about half of the public found that news coverage has been mostly about politics and controversies -- and that fewer than one in 10 people think the coverage has been mostly about how the law will affect people.





Some 40 percent say the news coverage has been balanced, two times as many believe the coverage is biased against the law as those who believe its biased in favor -- 33 percent to 17 percent.

The Kaiser poll summary noted that when Medicare "Part D" prescription drug benefit was launched, 50 percent of seniors had an unfavorable view of the program, contrasted with 63 percent now viewing it favorably and just 14 percent unfavorably.

"Of course, it is far too early to tell what will happen to public opinion on the ACA as it moves through the next phase of implementation, but the Medicare Part D experience suggests that it is not unusual for a new law of this sort to be poorly perceived at the outset," Kaiser notes.

Read more about the poll and its methodology here.