Photo

To the Editor:

As one of Nebraska’s “lonely progressives” (Op-Ed, Dec. 27), I would like to expand on Mary Pipher’s observations.

Despite being a very red state, Nebraska has some pretty progressive traits. Nebraska is the only state that has a unicameral legislature. Nebraska is mainly a public power state, and although many of the public power districts act like private power companies, there is a growing movement to put the public back in public power, using our own natural resources (wind and sun).

Our Republican governor-elect, Pete Ricketts, is a member of the TD Ameritrade managerial family that constructed a LEED platinum-certified headquarters, indicating their commitment to renewable energy and conservation. Nebraska is also one of two states that allow our electoral votes to be split.

In November, a long-serving Republican congressman was defeated by a Democrat, and Nebraska voters handily voted to increase the minimum wage.

As a public health professional, I am pleased that Nebraska has the second-best child immunization coverage in the country. Nebraska was also a site that treated Ebola patients. Nebraska has many progressive tendencies, but miles to go before we sleep.

DAVID E. CORBIN

Omaha, Dec. 27, 2014

To the Editor:

Mary Pipher hits the nail on the head when she toasts her group’s members who are running for city council and the Nebraska State Legislature. That is where power is still accessible.

Tens of thousands of local and state elective offices are available to go after the power to change things, if progressives only knew how to use all three levels of the federal system.

DAVID WYLIE

Bolton, Mass., Dec. 27, 2014

The writer is a former city councilor in Cambridge, Mass.

To the Editor:

I read Mary Pipher’s article with considerable sympathy. Like her, I grew up in a small Nebraska town — in my case, Hooper, where my great-uncles built some of the ornate Victorian buildings on Main Street that helped put the town on the National Register of Historic Places.

Unlike her, I left the state in 1955, after graduating from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and working in its public relations department for a few years. I wanted to write for magazines, and that meant the East Coast.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

When I was growing up, in the 1930s and ’40s, I didn’t know many Democrats: Dad’s first cousin, the postmaster, was one. And Mother’s father had been a follower of William Jennings Bryan. Given Nebraska’s unicameral legislature, however, I wasn’t very conscious of political parties. By the time I reached voting age, Dwight D. Eisenhower and other middle-of-the-road Republicans seemed right to me.

Although I will always be a Cornhusker, I haven’t been home for many years. I find that I have little to say to many of my oldest friends, who seem to get most of their information from Fox News. Frankly, what has happened to Nebraska because of recent Republican politics sickens me.

EMILY HEINE

Princeton, N.J., Dec. 27, 2014

To the Editor:

Mary Pipher writes that “with the exception of Lyndon B. Johnson’s landslide in 1964, our state has not supported a Democrat for president since 1936.”

In 2008, Nebraska contributed one of its five electoral votes to Barack Obama, in District 2, which includes Omaha and its suburbs. It was hard fought and it was close, but Mr. Obama won, and because Nebraska allocates its electoral votes by district, it counted.

I recall that a day before the primaries, Mr. Obama swept into town for an afternoon and filled Omaha’s 10,000-seat Civic Auditorium on a few hours’ notice. It was a raucous rally. I was there.

An overflow crowd of several thousand flooded the Civic’s basement. Our Democratic mayor at that time, Mike Fahey, renamed the city “Obamaha.”

Ms. Pipher might also have pointed out that just last fall, District 2 retired its Republican member of Congress, Lee Terry, after a 16-year incumbency, in favor of Brad Ashford. Mr. Terry was one of only three Republicans to lose a seat in the House in 2014. Sometimes, progressives do win in Nebraska.

BRUCE E. JOHANSEN

Omaha, Dec. 27, 2014