Sovereignty: Few constitutional scholars thought it possible for a president to give away unilaterally American representative government to an international body. The United Nations’ Iran vote just did.

The United Nations is apparently the “UnCongress,” kind of like the “uncola,” a lighter, refreshing alternative to your usual soft drink.

Why bother dealing with the heavy aftertaste of the Republicans in Congress on the Iran deal when you can get instant, unanimous approval for world peace from the UN Security Council?

Obama defied prominent members of his own party in Congress in getting the early UN stamp of approval. They include Sen. Ben Cardin of Maryland, co-architect this year with Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Bob Corker, R-Tenn., of the Iran Nuclear Agreement Review Act, the title of which now seems just as preposterous as the Affordable Care Act.

As we have urged, Congress can and must dissect this awful deal before the eyes of the American public. Experts must expose its many fatal flaws in hearings before many committees, and there must be a long, serious debate on the Senate and House floors.

But let no one doubt that Obama will use the unanimous Security Council vote as heavy leverage against Congress, especially in persuading the more important members of his party to support this surrender to the world’s foremost terrorism financier state.

Obama national security aide Ben Rhodes — whose claims in April about “anyplace, anytime” inspections in Iran were just disavowed by Secretary of State John Kerry — announced the launch of @TheIranDeal, “a Twitter account that is dedicated to delivering the facts and answering your questions about the Iran deal and how it enhances American national security.”

So the propaganda offensive begins.

Eyes must be focused especially keenly on Chuck Schumer, the liberal New Yorker and longtime supporter of Israel who is set to realize his dream of becoming the Democrats’ leader in the U.S. Senate.

The Brooklynite is one of the shrewdest politicians in Washington, ran fundraising for Senate Democrats in the successful 2006 and 2008 elections, and adores receiving federal money for New York State.

Schumer has the ability over the 60 days before Congress votes to lead a large group of Democrats in revolt against the Iran deal; a bunch of incumbent senators owes him a lot. Preventing him from doing so will cost Obama a lot, but the smart money is on Schumer being able to be bought.

As Senate Minority Leader and a perennial shoe-in for re-election in a dependably blue state, he’ll have little to fear from AIPAC and the rest of the pro-Israel lobby.

Overriding an Obama veto would take two-thirds of both Houses, which is close to impossible. The best that the majority Republicans can hope for is better than 50%, which would blemish the appeasement pact by having it opposed by most of the American people’s representatives.

But what does the will of mere Americans matter when you’ve got the UN? Welcome to post-constitutional America.