Topics: Academy Awards, all is lost, Birdman, Boyhood, Oscars, robert redford, Entertainment News

The other night I watched “All Is Lost,” the 2013 film about an aging sailor whose solo voyage in the Indian Ocean goes horribly wrong. The aging sailor happens to be Robert Redford. He’s the only person on-screen for the entire film and, other than a brief opening voice-over, he’s virtually silent.

I’ve never been a huge Redford fan, but I was blown away by his performance: by the physical rigor of the role and by how he uses his body and his face and his hands to convey emotion. “All Is Lost” is about a lot of things—solitude, hope, invention—but at its heart, it’s a parable about the human compulsion to try. Cunning and effort not only keep the old man alive; they express his essential selfhood in the face of nature’s indifference.

As should be clear, I was deeply moved by “All Is Lost.” But when it was over, I gave in to another sort of compulsion, which is, I’m afraid, quintessentially American. I began to wonder if Robert Redford had won the Oscar.

For the record, he wasn’t even nominated.

But that’s not the point.

The point is that rather than continuing to let the film works its particular magic on me (by which I mean take me deeper into my personal fears and desires) I had ducked into this other narrative, which had to do with determining what sort of public acclaim the film, and its star, had earned.

In other words, I was no longer interested in the process of trying, which involves struggle and doubt. I was interested in the result, the box score.

There are, of course, plenty of reasons to praise the Academy Awards, which will be held this Sunday evening. It’s a celebration of our most popular cultural art form, a chance to recognize the thousands of mostly unsung artists who make the Hollywood dream machine hum. It’s also cracking good entertainment, an ego pageant of the highest order. There’s something deeply gratifying in seeing our outsize cinematic heroes reduced to nervous contestants. The actors, especially, turn in some of their finest performances in those tender split-screen shots after the winner is announced, when the losers have to pretend that they have not just been humiliated on live television before the rest of their peers and 50 million snacking viewers.

The Oscars are also, by any objective measure, a decadent and stupid ritual, an orgy of luxury branding and self-congratulation for an industry already bloated by both. But the reason I find the Academy Awards especially gross has to do with the way the ceremony turns artistic endeavor into a zero-sum game.

At this point, I can hear many of you saying to yourself, Hey, dude. It’s just the Oscars. Chill out.

But it’s not just the Oscars.

Beneath the pomp itself is what you might call the Oscars Impulse, our cultural tendency to turn every single form of creativity into a competition. It’s what capitalism does to our souls.

Little wonder, then, that our Athletic Industrial Complex has gone berserk over the past two decades. Or that a growing share of our television programs are dedicated to absurd contests over who can bake the best cupcake or pull the most profitable junk from a storage unit. Little wonder that the vast majority of our political coverage focuses on polls and fundraising (who’s winning) rather than policy (how they might govern).