Dallas-area tea party leader Katrina Pierson said Thursday that she’s challenging longtime Rep. Pete Sessions in the Republican primary.

Sessions of Dallas is chairman of the influential Rules Committee and one of the most powerful Republicans in the House.

But Pierson and other tea party activists have soured on him in recent months, saying that he’s not standing up for conservative principles or doing enough to stop the Affordable Care Act, President Barack Obama’s health care law.

“The people of my hometown deserve an elected leader who will fight for them — a leader who won’t play the go-along-to-get-along, business-as-usual politics that have been hurting this country for so long,” Pierson said in a written statement announcing her campaign.

Sessions said he looked forward to discussing his record and the issues facing the residents of his district.

“North Texans deserve a leader who stands behind principled solutions, not rhetoric,” Sessions said in a written statement. “I’m confident that my conservative record speaks for itself and that my constituents will continue to trust my leadership as their representative in Congress.”

Just how formidable Pierson will be against Sessions is unclear. She’s making her first run for public office, though she’s been instrumental in several high-profile campaigns, including Republican Ted Cruz’s Senate victory last year.

Pierson got involved in the tea party movement after hearing about meetings across the country on a conservative radio show. She showed up at a Dallas-area event and quickly got involved.

A single mother from Garland, Pierson said she would put the needs of everyday Americans ahead of special interests.

“Politicians who have been in Washington far too long — who once had the appearance of stellar voting records — have rapidly sacrificed their principles in the name of political expediency,” she said.

After Pierson announced her intention to run against Sessions, she was quickly endorsed by the political arm of the conservative group FreedomWorks. The group’s support was also crucial to Cruz’s campaign.

“Katrina Pierson has led the fight to elect principled conservatives across the state of Texas for years,” said Matt Kibbe, president of the FreedomWorks PAC. “While incumbent Rep. Pete Sessions seems more concerned with keeping his seat at the leadership table, Katrina understands the importance of connecting to the grassroots at home and sticking to your guns in Washington.”

Sessions represents the 32{+n}{+d} Congressional District. It includes parts of northern and eastern Dallas County. He has been in Congress since 1997.

Though he’s being attacked by some tea party groups, Sessions points out that he has a solid conservative record. He has a 97 percent rating from the American Conservative Union, an A+ ranking from the National Rifle Association and a 100 percent rating from the National Right to Life.

And during his stint as chairman of the National Republican Campaign Committee, he helped the party gain 63 seats in the House, retaking the majority in 2010.

Follow Gromer Jeffers Jr. on Twitter at @gromerjeffers.