Lafayette Elementary fifth-grade teacher Angela Hambleton and Ford's Theater teaching artist Stephen Schmidt (via Skype) watch as student Thor Christianson rehearses with classmates during after-school Oratory Club. ( Doug Pike / Colorado Hometown Weekly )

Some elementary school teachers spend half their time trying to get their students to stop talking.

Lafayette Elementary School fifth-grade teacher Angela Hambleton just wants her pupils to get better at it.

Hambleton recently formed the Lafayette Elementary School Oratory Club -- an after-school program during which she helps her students become better public speakers.

The seed that became the Oratory Club took root after Hambleton — and two years later fellow fifth-grade teacher Katherine Kross — attended the Civil War Washington Teacher Fellows summer institute through Ford's Theatre in Washington, D.C.

Last year, the teachers did an oratory program for 60 fifth-graders.

Lafayette Elementary fifth-grader Corinne Otterness rehearses a speech Monday, March 10, during Oratory Club. (Doug Pike / Colorado Hometown Weekly)

"This year, it evolved into an after-school program; we started in November," Hambleton said. "This has been a great way to bring public speaking into the classroom."

So far, Lafayette Elementary fifth-graders have performed Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.'s "I Have a Dream" speech, the Gettysburg Address, an historic speech of their choosing, and now they're working on a three-minute speech of their own creation, following the "This I Believe" format championed by National Public Radio.

In addition to Hambleton, the students are mentored, via Skype, by Ford's Theatre teaching artist Stephen Schmidt.

Schmidt provides critiques on podium presence, body positioning, delivery and group dynamics, and even conducts one-on-one sessions with students to help them work through their speeches.

The students have improved by leaps and bounds, though sometimes it's the little things they need the most help with.

"I've really learned how to not put my hair behind my ears so much during a speech. I'm doing better," said fifth-grader Emma Caile. "I also kind of learned that I was loud at first, but now I'm louder."

Now more than halfway through the 20-session club, Lafayette's young orators are brimming with confidence.

"I love doing it now," Caile said. "I'm pretty good at it, too."

Fellow fifth-grader Sydney Reed said the club is a good outlet for performance-minded students.

"I like having all the attention on me," Reed said. "We all do."

Hambleton said the students' newfound comfort level has yielded amazing results.

"When these kids realize what they can do it's magic in this room," Hambleton said. "I think people unfairly underestimate what fifth-graders can do."

The Oratory Club will perform its "This I Believe" speeches from 6:30 -8 p.m. Thursday, March 13, during a celebration and reception at the school.