PLANT CITY – At first Bishop Taurus Davis believed that he had left the ministry for good. After leading churches in Fort Myers and Naples with telecast services, Davis resigned from the pulpit disillusioned and burned out from disappointing experiences, determined never to pastor a church again. What followed was a life completely opposite from the one he had lived before.

“I didn’t want to be associated with being a preacher,” he said. “I tried to run from this. I ran for two and a half years but when it’s in you nothing else will work for you.”

Two and a half years later he was living in Tampa when he found himself attending a service at Triumphant Fellowship Church. The pastor of the church recognized him from his previous days in the ministry and invited him to preach, but Davis said that he recalled being full of doubts.

“I didn’t want to tell him that I had gotten out of church,” he said. “As dirty and nasty as I had become I thought that God had lifted his anointing from me.”

But after the first service, his confidence grew until eventually other evangelistic opportunities opened for him in the area.

On Oct. 20, Davis, 42, of Riverview, was welcomed as the new bishop of Greater Love Christian Center in Plant City. The church is part of Faith Cathedral, a network of churches that Davis founded on the principles of love and acceptance for all.

“I try to make sure that every church I’m associated with is a no condemnation zone,” he said. “It’s not our job to change you but to preach and minister to you.”

Davis explained that he was presiding over Greater Love Christian Center as bishop of Faith Cathedral when B. Franklin Echols, founder and bishop over the church, died. Davis served in the interim until he was called to be the church bishop.

“I am still in awe because I never expected to be here. I knew I was loved but I didn’t know I was loved that much and that I would be taking the people of this church to the next level,” Davis said.

Born in Miami, Davis holds degrees from Moody Bible Institute and the AME Catechism with the African Methodist Episcopal Church and has been a consecrated bishop since 1992 with the Joint College of Bishops. He ministers at Greater Love Christian Center with his wife Sharon Davis, who is also a church overseer. They have two children: Ta’Shara Davis, 2, and Taurus Jr., 8 months.