Rep. Brady's challengers hope to set stage for runoff GOP candidates team up to siphon votes

Photo: Gary Coronado, Staff Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 U.S. Rep. Kevin Brady, pictured ﻿at a ribbon cutting ceremony for the Veterans Affairs Outpatient Clinic in December, could face a runoff election for his seat in the 8th Congressional District. ﻿ U.S. Rep. Kevin Brady, pictured ﻿at a ribbon cutting ceremony for the Veterans Affairs Outpatient Clinic in December, could face a runoff election for his seat in the 8th Congressional District. ﻿ Photo: Gary Coronado, Staff Rep. Brady's challengers hope to set stage for runoff 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Craig McMichael leaned toward a microphone in a roomful of Republicans in Montgomery County. He was clearly annoyed by the empty seat beside him, the one reserved for U.S. Rep. Kevin Brady.

"He will talk about holding 50 town halls a year, but he won't show up to debate when it matters," said McMichael, one of three candidates trying to defeat Brady in the March 1 GOP primary.

"As you listen to the questions tonight, if you don't like what I'm saying, that's fine. You have two other choices," McMichael told the Eagle Forum last month. "But the motto of this campaign should be, 'Anybody but Kevin Brady.'"

His comments reflect an odd dynamic in the 8th Congressional District race: the challengers are working as a loose team with the shared goal of beating one of the most powerful Republicans in Washington, D.C., a man they say is insufficiently conservative.

Together, former state Rep. Steve Toth, retired Army Lt. Col Andre Dean and McMichael believe they can siphon away enough votes to force Brady into a runoff, which, with a smaller turnout and tea-party enthusiasm, would seem to put the top challenger in a stronger position to win.

To that end, they haven't criticized each other on the campaign trail while directing their attacks at the incumbent, who gets high marks himself from conservative groups. Dean has called the challengers "good friends," while Toth has said he hasn't been a part of a race with "this kind of camaraderie."

More Information By the numbers 36 percentage points: Margin by which Brady beat McMichael in the 2014 primary $1.5 million: Brady's campaign war chest heading into 2016 More than $700,000: Brady's campaign spending between Jan. 1 and Feb. 10

McMichael said the challengers are running their own campaigns, "but I think we all understand that Kevin Brady needs to be replaced."

The four-way primary comes as Brady appears to be at the pinnacle of his political career. Three months ago, he became chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, the panel that writes legislation on taxes, trade, Medicare and Social Security.

Brady is still expected to receive the most votes in the primary. In making his case for another term, he is reminding voters that his chairmanship puts him in a strong position to fight the Obama administration and to help implement the agenda of a Republican president after the 2016 election.

"A Texas Republican working closely with a new Republican president would be a key asset for Texas and our region," he said.

Brady represents a district that pokes north from the fast-growing suburbs of The Woodlands and Kingwood to the declining farm towns of Leon and Houston counties. Since winning the seat 20 years ago, he hasn't had a close election.

The congressman defeated McMichael by 36 percentage points in the 2014 primary. But the challenger had narrowed the margin of victory from previous elections despite a shoestring budget.

McMichael, a Marine Corps veteran who lives in Spring, said his showing encouraged others to get into this race.

In broad strokes, it's hard to differentiate Brady and his opponents. They want to shrink the size of government and end the Affordable Care Act, the health care overhaul known as Obamacare. They oppose abortion and tougher gun restrictions.

But the challengers say Brady has compromised too often - most recently by voting for a year-end spending measure that conservative activists say lacked limits on Planned Parenthood or on refugees from Syria and Iraq.

"It's to his shame that everything the president wanted was in that bill," said Dean, a Madisonville resident who lost to Brady in the 1998 primary.

'Grievous handicap'

At a recent candidates forum in The Woodlands, Brady defended the vote, saying that he would "vote yes every time" to fully fund the military and add federal agents along the border with Mexico.

Despite criticism in his district, Brady has picked up endorsements from the National Rifle Association, National Right to Life and former Gov. Rick Perry. The Kingwood Tea Party said replacing him would be a "grievous handicap" to a Republican president and would "undermine our shared conservative objectives."

"The endorsements are important because in any campaign where claims are flying around, it can come down to who do you believe," Brady said in an interview.

He also has support from the oil and gas and banking industries, which helped him to build a $1.5 million campaign war chest entering 2016 - an amount that dwarfed his opponents' fundraising. The money has allowed his campaign to send glossy mailers on a nearly daily basis and buy advertising spots on television weeks ahead of the primary. It spent more than $700,000 between Jan. 1 and Feb. 10 alone, including about $360,000 for services from the Dallas-based media consulting firm Scott Howell & Company, finance reports show.

Brady, meanwhile, has attended only one forum - and called into four - of the more than 20 forums and debates held so far. When the challengers complain about Brady's absence, his campaign points out that he was busy working for conservative causes in Washington, D.C.

Missing forums is a front-runner's game, but it comes with some risk in a crowded race.

In Brady's absence, Dean, McMichael and Toth take aim at an empty chair, bolstering the idea that there is a deep well of frustration within the district because it isn't just one person venting.

"When he isn't there, they only talk about how bad Congressman Brady is," said Wally Wilkerson, the longtime chairman of the Montgomery County Republican Party. "They don't talk about what they're going to do."

'He changed'

Wilkerson said Brady has done a good job in the House, but it might not be enough in the face of a hard-right conservative revolt. Toth, in particular, has the support of many tea party activists. "Under normal circumstances, I don't think that's enough to win," Wilkerson said. "But I think there are even more people (beyond tea party conservatives) angry about the way things are going."

The presence of three challengers means the race is headed to a runoff, Toth predicted. So he has told supporters not to speak poorly about McMichael or Dean.

"I'm not running against Craig or Andre," Toth said. "I'm running against Kevin Brady. If we get into a runoff, I want their supporters to come on board."

Toth appears to be the challenger most likely to advance because of his name recognition as a one-term state lawmaker and the support he has gained from national conservative advocacy groups and some small businessmen.

Houston retail furniture magnate Jim "Mattress Mack" McIngvale said he was troubled by Brady's vote, among others, to resuscitate the Export-Import Bank. It offers loans and guarantees to finance the export of U.S. products but has been criticized as corporate welfare by some conservatives.

"He is more interested in free enterprise than Kevin is," McIngvale said of Toth, adding that "no one is subsidizing me."

McIngvale and his wife contributed the maximum $5,400 to the campaign, which had raised more than $130,000 though Feb. 10, records show. He pledged his support after an hour-long meeting, in which Toth promised not to change if elected.

"That's the problem with Brady," Toth said. "He changed."

Brady said he is making the same tough votes as before and isn't taking his House seat for granted.

"In this unpredictable political climate, anyone who is not working as hard as they can is not connected," Brady said. "I'm connected to my district."