Another questionable incident has bubbled up from Dora B. Schriro's five-year tenure as New York City's correction commissioner. It's not looking good for her.

While there, according to The New York Times, Ms. Schriro — now Connecticut's public safety commissioner — had an internal investigation report doctored to omit negative comments about two of her subordinates as well as a recommendation that they be demoted. This is troubling.

She said she ordered the editing because no disciplinary proceeding had been started against the two men and it would be unfair to criticize them in a report that would be widely shared. But her editing changed the meaning of the report.

It's disturbing that she didn't disclose, before her appointment to the Department of Emergency Services and Public Protection in April, either the internal investigation report (done by the city) or the other investigation, by the Justice Department, of possible civil rights violations at Rikers. The Justice Department's scathing report was issued in August.

That investigation and the Times concluded that she bore some of the blame for the increase in violence visited upon inmates by guards at the infamous Rikers Island prison complex — New York City's jail — when she was correction chief.

"During her five-year tenure, violence by officers increased almost every year, and the number of serious injuries suffered by inmates in altercations with guards jumped," The Times reported in mid-August. During those years, three inmates were beaten to death by guards. No one has been criminally charged.

None of this apparently came up during Gov. Dannel P. Malloy's pre-hiring interviews with Ms. Schriro, who, Mr. Malloy has said, was his only candidate for the public safety job. In hindsight, of course, more scrutiny might have prompted him to look further.

She has strong defenders, however: New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg has praised Ms. Schriro for reforms at Rikers, and the Connecticut State Police Union is thrilled with her: "No commissioner has made as much effort to engage state troopers in the field," the union said in a recent letter to the editor.

Mr. Malloy has had better luck with other appointments, including Kevin Counihan, the architect of the state's health insurance exchange, who is now heading the federal marketplace created by the Affordable Care Act. Also, James E. Dzurenda, Connecticut's correction commissioner, was recruited away last month to (paradoxically) oversee Rikers and other jails in New York City's five boroughs.

But the revelation that Ms. Schriro altered an investigative report to protect two subordinates shakes confidence in her trustworthiness.