Computer storage maker Seagate Technology said it laid off about 70 workers at its Longmont operation Wednesday, or about 5 percent of its Colorado workforce.

The Cupertino, Calif., firm also confirmed that it cut 1,000 jobs companywide.

“Seagate can confirm that, as a part of continual optimization of workforce resources, it has initiated an action to reduce the company’s workforce by approximately 1,000 employees globally (less than 2 percent),” according to a statement from Cindy Martini, Seagate’s senior communication manager at its Longmont operation.

As of mid-August, Seagate employed 1,400 people in Longmont who worked on the company’s core storage technology. The Longmont employees affected in the layoffs work in the design center, which is one of two nationwide. The other is in Minnesota.

Seagate might be most familiar to consumers for its computer hard drives. This month, the company announced an 8-terabyte hard drive geared toward business users.

Last month, Seagate announced it would acquire Dot Hill Systems Corp. in Longmont for $694 million. The storage software firm employs 260. The deal is expected to close by the end of the year.

CEO Steve Luczo said in July that the market was challenging and hard to predict. The company’s fourth-quarter net income dropped to $138 million, compared with the prior year’s $320 million. Revenues fell 11 percent to $2.9 billion.

“We downgraded them just last week,” said Mark Miller, an analyst with Menlo Park, Calif.-based The Benchmark Company. “We’re definitely concerned about them.”

Miller said Seagate’s earnings have dropped significantly over the past three years — down more than 35 percent, compared with 7.5 percent at peer Western Digital.

Miller also said the company’s cash position appeared weak, especially in light of its recent $694 million purchase of Longmont-based competitor Dot Hill Systems.

“That’s why I think they’re taking these measures,” Miller said. “It’s not the best scenario when you’ve got to cut people and reduce costs just to make your earnings look good.”

The Longmont employees were notified of the layoffs Wednesday and will receive severance packages, the company said.

“Given the complexities of Seagate’s markets and business, along with the investments that need to be made, it is necessary that the company continually review its operations and spending, making adjustments as needed,” Martini said. “Unfortunately, at times, the workforce is affected by these decisions.”

Daily Camera staff writer Shay Castle contributed to this report.

Tamara Chuang: 303-954-1209, tchuang@denverpost.com or twitter.com/Gadgetress