Clinica Del Valle Del Pajaro, on the Watsonville Community Hospital campus, is part of Salud Para La Gente, which has been named a national leader for its performance compared to other clinics. (Dan Coyro -- Santa Cruz Sentinel)

Safety net clinics Safety net clinics in Santa Cruz County provide affordable care accepting insurance, Medi-Cal, Medicare, Healthy Kids and Covered California, with sliding fee scales for those without insurance. Locations are: Santa Cruz Salud Para La Gente Beach Flats Clinic, 302 Riverside Ave. Planned Parenthood, 1119 Pacific Ave. Suite 200.Santa Cruz Women’s Health Center, 250 Locust St. (women and children)Santa Cruz County clinic, 1080 Emeline Ave. Homeless Persons Health Project, 115-A Coral St. (Homeless clients only) Live Oak East Cliff Family Health Center, 21507 E. Cliff Drive.RotaCare Clinic, 1777 Capitola Road. Dientes Community Dental Care, 1830 Commercial Way (dental only.) Aptos Cabrillo College Student Health Center, 6500 Soquel Drive. (Cabrillo students only.) Freedom Salud Para La Gente, 208 Green Valley Road Bldg 1. Watsonville Salud Para La Gente, 204 E. Beach St. Bldg A. Salud Para La Gente Clinica Del Valle Del Pajaro, 45 Nielson St. Santa Cruz County clinic, 9 Crestview Drive. Planned Parenthood, 398 S. Green Valley Road. Diabetes Health Center, 85 Nielson St. Suite 201. Cabrillo College Student Health Center, 318 Union St. (Cabrillo students only.) Mental health and substance abuse services Anywhere in Santa Cruz County, call 800-952-2335.

By Jondi Gumz

jgumz@santacruzsentinel.com @jondigumz on Twitter

WATSONVILLE >> Salud Para La Gente is one of only 10 health centers in California to receive recognition as a national quality leader from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Along with that recognition comes $92,793 in Affordable Care Act funding to reward quality improvement.

Dr. Amy McEntee, chief medical officer of Salud Para La Gente, cited the emphasis on preventative and chronic disease care and electronic health records that provide alerts when patients are due for a mammogram or a medication refill.

“This award acknowledges the exceptional work our staff has done,” she said. “All staff are committed to tracking our patients to ensure that they get screened for cancer regularly, that patients with diabetes get their blood sugar tested regularly and eye exams annually. Having the systems in place that support clinical staff to provide this care is critical in being effective.”

Salud was recognized in three categories: improving clinical quality, resulting in a grant of $22,598; having the highest performance compared to peers, accompanied by $32,598; and being one of the highest performers compared to national standards, for a grant of $37,598.

Salud serves nearly 26,000 people annually, providing medical, dental, vision, and behavioral health services to all patients regardless of ability to pay. Evening hours are available, with the East Beach Clinic, 204 E. Beach St., and Clinica Del Valle Del Pajaro, 45 Nielson St. open until 7:30 p.m. Monday through Friday. The East Beach Clinic is also open Saturday from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.

Salud’s clinics are among the “safety net clinics” in Santa Cruz County that offer quality affordable care with sliding scale fees for those without insurance.

Two other safety net clinics in the county were awarded federal funds for improving clinical quality. Santa Cruz Women’s Health Center at 250 Locust St., Santa Cruz, was awarded $12,613. Santa Cruz County, which operates clinics at 1080 Emeline Ave., Santa Cruz, and 9 Crestview Ave., Watsonville, was awarded $13,187.

All of the county’s safety clinics, including Planned Parenthood, offer same-day appointments for medical services.

In California, a total of 118 quality awards were made totaling $5 million but only 27 awards were for reporting “on the full universe of patients using electronic health records.”

Advertisement

The Affordable Care Act provided incentives to switch from paper records to electronic health records but that technology has proven challenging.

The Petaluma Health Center was the only location in California to win recognition in all four categories, including the electronic health record.