Topics: Bernie Sanders, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, mike gravel, Innovation News, Elections News, Politics News

It is my belief that Sen. Bernie Sanders will be the next president of the United States — a belief I’ve held since he first announced. Bernie is one of the most gifted politicians I have ever observed. He’s a person of great integrity and very clever. Many thought that calling himself a democratic socialist doomed his presidential candidacy, initially causing “the powers that be” to dismiss him. It turned out to have been an asset because this lack of national attention from opinion-makers permitted Bernie to grow his movement below the radar.

Having tied with Hillary Clinton in the Iowa caucuses, and winning overwhelmingly in New Hampshire, Bernie is now going to face an incredible assault by the Wall Street clique, which controls the American and global economies; by the Democratic Party establishment, beholden to Wall Street money; by mainstream media, largely owned by six Wall Street corporations and defenders of the status quo; and by Hillary and Bill Clinton, who cater to Wall Street’s interests.

These attacks on Bernie will attempt to marginalize him as a naive idealist, with an agenda he will be unable to get enacted in the next Congress. The possibility of a Sanders presidential administration will motivate Wall Street and its acolytes to pour record-breaking campaign contributions into congressional races to guarantee Republican control of the Congress, or at least to extend their control of the House of Representatives. Democrats should not count on Sanders’ coattails.

This anti-Sanders theme was addressed by a recent Op-Ed piece by Sen. Elizabeth Warren in the New York Times, stressing the importance of the president’s executive powers to effect some changes. She concluded, by alluding to Bernie’s broader agenda, that the people would simply demand its enactment.

Bernie knows the problem and clearly stated it in his baseline speech on Jan. 5, 2016: “No president, not Bernie Sanders or anyone else, can effectively address the economic crises facing the working families of this country alone. No president can do it alone. … What this campaign is about is building a political movement, which revitalizes American democracy, which brings millions of people together. … [W]hen millions of working families stand together, demanding fundamental changes in our financial system, we have the power to bring about that change.” Bernie has said repeatedly that the people will storm the Congress and demand change under a Sanders administration.

I have observed similar themes over the years, where large numbers of people make demands on their political leadership, yet fundamental and structural change in our system of governance fails to occur. Progressive activists particularly fall prey to this hope that the people can demand change. The nuclear freeze movement — a citizen effort to outlaw nuclear weapons held by the U.S. and the Soviet Union — was the largest movement I have ever observed, greater than any presidential campaign. The movement presented their signed petitions to President Ronald Reagan, who acknowledged receipt of the movement’s demands and proceeded to ignore them, after which the movement fell into political irrelevance. The nuclear proliferation issue is still with us and looms ever larger as the greatest threat to the planet’s survival.

More recently, during the public debate over how to expand health coverage to more Americans, polling indicated that more than 70 percent of the people wanted a single-payer system. Instead, the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) was enacted — actually a subsidy to insurance and pharmaceutical industries. Still, more than 20 million Americans remain without healthcare.

Demands from the electorate are usually insufficient to overcome the special interests and power of paid lobbyists. Nor is there any official acknowledgment that campaign contributions are a nuanced form of bribery that has corrupted our electoral system from the very beginning.

The truth of the matter is this: All people can do is to vote each Election Day, giving their “power” away to political representatives. If the people are subsequently unhappy with the conduct of the stewards of their power, all they can do is protest — proof democracy is not working — and wait two, four or six years to exercise their sovereign power on a future Election Day. Mark Twain understood the essence of the problem when he observed at the high point of the robber baron era that if voting were able to change anything, they wouldn’t let us do it.

Bernie is correct in sensing the frustration and fears of average Americans. Despite hard work, the economic and political structures of American life are benefiting the top 1 percent rather than creating opportunities for the majority. That’s why he calls for a political revolution.

There are other instances in U.S. history where the people suffered economic oppression, resulting is a revolution. The greed of the robber barons from the Civil War to the turn of the 20th century set the stage for a movement that elected a majority of progressive legislators in various western state legislatures. Unfortunately, World War I closed this progressive window of opportunity.

Nevertheless, progressives enacted worthwhile laws improving health and labor conditions. Their most important accomplishment, however, was the revolutionary structural changes they made in representative government at the state and local levels of government by enacting Initiative, Referendum and Recall (IRR) laws. These IRR laws empowered the people to participate in the central power of government: making state laws and amending state constitutions. Citizens with this new legislative tool could finally address issues that state legislatures and local legislative bodies refused to even acknowledge.