Fans of CBS' "Criminal Minds" will finally get a taste of the new spinoff series in the next all-new episode.

Earlier this year, CBS gave "Criminal Minds" executive producer Erica Messer the green light to launch another series based on the veteran crime drama procedural. The spinoff, however, will focus on an international division of the FBI and will feature FBI agents who help American citizens in danger in other countries.

The April 8 episode of "Criminal Minds" will serve as the backdoor pilot for the spinoff as Rossi's unit teams up with the new BAU crew to track down a killer in Barbados after a family of four is abducted on a shuttle on the Caribbean island.

Former "CSI: NY" star Gary Sinise will play Jack Garrett, the head of the international BAU unit. "Breaking Bad's" Anna Gunn will also be introduced as a member of the spinoff crew. According to Buddy TV, other members of the International Unit include Daniel Henney as Special Ops Agent Matthew Simmons and Tyler James Williams as International Unit tech guru Russ "Monty" Montgomery.

"We find out that this unsub eluded Jack's team two years ago. He killed a family in Aruba and it [haunts] Jack that they weren't able to catch him," executive producer Erica Messer told TVGuide.com. "Last year, he got away from the BAU when he killed a family in Florida and now this year, he's striking in Barbados, and we're gonna get these two teams together to finally catch this guy."

Messer also teased that the two different BAU teams "are very aware of one another. There's no, 'Who's that?' 'Can we really work together?' or 'Why are we doing this with you?'" she said. "They're all the best at their jobs. We go all over the country. These guys go all over the world. There's a familiarity between all of them, but they never get a chance to work together until now."

The titled of the episode, "Beyond Borders," is also the titled of the spinoff series.

According to Carter Matt, the synopsis is stated below:

"When a family of four is abducted while on vacation in Barbados, the BAU is called to assist Unit Chief Jack Garrett (Sinise) and his International Unit on their investigation. Garrett and his unit, the FBI's top division for handling cases involving Americans abroad, work jointly with Hotch and his team when they discover that this case matches one the BAU investigated last year in Florida."

Season 10, Episode 19 of "Criminal Minds," "Beyond Borders" will air on Wednesday, April 8, at 9 p.m. EST on CBS.