<p>STAR FILE PHOTO Pacific View Mall</p>

By Stephanie Hoops

At a time when many brick-and-mortar centers are struggling to compete with online retailers, sales figures show two local malls are healthy.

The Oaks in Thousand Oaks and Pacific View mall in Ventura are owned by the Macerich Co., which is being targeted for takeover by the Simon Property Group.

Simon released a statement Monday confirming reports that it seeks to acquire all of Macerich’s outstanding stock in a deal that would be valued at approximately $22.4 billion.

Indianapolis-based Simon owns the Camarillo Premium Outlets and is the number one mall owner in the nation in terms of market value. Santa Monica-based Macerich is the nation’s third largest mall owner.

* Source: Macerich Co.

Simon CEO David Simon said in a news release Monday that Macerich has refused to discuss his company’s acquisition proposal despite “enthusiastic support” for the combination voiced by overlapping shareholders. He also stated that Simon has outperformed Macerich in key operating and financial categories, including sales per square foot, which is a barometer of a retailer’s efficiency in creating revenue. Sales per square foot is the average revenue generated for every square foot of sales space.

Simon has not included a breakdown of its properties’ sales per square foot in its filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, so it’s not known what the sales per square foot have been at the Camarillo Premium Outlets.

Robust sales per square foot have been reported in Macerich’s annual public filings with respect to The Oaks and Pacific View mall.

The Oaks reported $512 sales per square foot last year, and Pacific View reported $405 sales per square foot.

Using a mall quality assessment chart developed by the real estate research and advisory firm Green Street Advisors, The Oaks’ sales figures qualify for between an “A-” and “A” grade, meaning it should perform at a high level for the foreseeable future.

Pacific View mall would get between a “B” and “B+” grade under Green Street Advisors’ assessment. “B” grade properties are considered “stable and adequately serve their target shopper in a given area,” according to Green Street.

Malls that are at a competitive disadvantage with their long-term viability in question are given “C” grades by Green Street Advisors and have sales per square foot are under $310.

The success of The Oaks and Pacific View mall likely has to do with the area’s wealth, said Dan Hamilton, director of economics at California Lutheran University.

“The people who tend to live in the coastal California zone are more wealthy because they have to be to be here,” he said. “When you have more wealth, that’s going to boost your sales per square foot. A second factor is that it’s likely that coastal California gets more tourism than certain areas in the middle of the country.”

More tourism also translates into more dollars per square foot, he said.

Representatives for The Oaks and Pacific View mall did not respond to requests for comment.

The Pacific View mall’s anchor tenants are JCPenney, Sears, Target and Macy’s. Target opened at the mall in 2008 with the hope that it would revitalize the mall’s north end, filling space formerly occupied by Robinsons-May, which closed in 2006.

The Oaks mall underwent a $250 million renovation and expansion beginning in early 2007. The interior spaces and the exterior façade were remodeled and a 138,000-square-foot Nordstrom was constructed. Anchor tenants at The Oaks are JCPenney, Macy’s, Macy’s Men’s & Home and Nordstrom.

Bruce Stenslie, president and CEO of the Economic Development Collaborative of Ventura County was impressed that Macerich bankrolled The Oaks’ significant remodeling project during the recession.

“They really invested when nobody else was,” he said. “That may be a payoff for them. Macerich has always seemed to be pretty successful.”