Sayreville superintendent of schools Richard Labbe talking to the press after the parents meetin Monday October 6, 2014 at Sayreville high school photo by Ed PagliariniEST 1007 Sayreville Parents Meeting

Emboldened by the scathing comments of a lawyer who represented a defendant in the Sayreville High School football scandal, a group calling itself “concerned Sayreville residents” resumed an attack of Schools Superintendent Rick Labbe and the Board of Education.

Labbe and the board were much maligned following their decision to cancel the Sayreville football season last October amid allegations that seven players hazed and sexually assaulted four teammates inside the locker room.

Unable to comment on the specifics of the four separate locker room attacks as authorities investigated the charges, Labbe and the board sat in stoic silence last October while parents of football players spewed venom, delivering one verbal right hook and left jab after another during several contentious school board meetings.

After announcing last month that his client was found not guilty of the more serious charges in the case, Richard Klein, an attorney from East Brunswick, called Middlesex County Prosecutor Andrew C. Carey “overzealous” and accused his office of acting “reprehensibly.”

Those remarks prompted the “concerned Sayreville residents” to start an online petition at moveon.org that implores the State Department of Education’s School Ethics Commission to investigate Labbe and the board.

“It is believed by many in the community that (Labbe) … acted not in the best interest of children but for personal political notoriety” and that he “tainted the image of our athletes and community as a whole with inaccurate statements to the media prior to … conducting a thorough investigation on the matter,” the group’s petition, which has gained little traction, with just over 200 signatures, reads in part.

“We are still at a loss as to why he felt it necessary to go to the media using what has now proven by a court of law to be inaccurate statements.”

On Monday, three days before Sayreville’s first day of school and 11 days before the high school football team’s season opener, Carey issued a press release outlining the sentences a Family Court Judge imposed upon six of the seven defendants (one case is still pending).

“The community of Sayreville needs to know that these serious crimes occurred, “Carey said, “and now must work together to heal.”

As part of a plea deal in which Carey’s office agreed not to pursue mandatory sex offender registration as required under Megan’s Law, the six players were placed on probation and ordered to serve 50 hours of community service after some of them admitted using their fingers to anally penetrate younger players.

In one attack, according to Carey, a victim was forcibly knocked to the floor before one defendant held him while at least two others grabbed his penis and attempted to digitally penetrate his anus.

“The facts that were alleged by the Middlesex County Prosecutor’s Office at the beginning of the case have clearly been proven in a court of law,” Carey said before making an apparent reference to Klein, stating, “while the Code of Juvenile Justice provides confidentiality for the protection of juveniles, that confidentiality, unfortunately, allows for certain individuals to unscrupulously mislead the public as to what occurred at the school and during the juvenile proceedings.”

Pamela Brause, an attorney from Metuchen representing another defendant, previously told MyCentralJersey.com, after allegations of race playing a role in Carey’s filing of criminal charges surfaced in an NBCnews.com report, that she has “been practicing law in this county for a long time” and that it is not her “experience that this Prosecutor’s Office would … be unethical.”

Carey and Labbe clearly have no credibility issues, yet the scathing attacks on the latter continue on the “concerned Sayreville residents” petition.

“I am a former school board member,” one comment, posted two weeks ago, reads. “I sincerely feel that this whole situation was created and followed through by people that had a vested interest in putting in their own choice of football coaching staff. This was a vendetta and I feel the more that you look into this, the more you will see that this was all premeditated.”

Another signee called Labbe and the board “a disgrace to our great community,” while one more wrote: “It's mind boggling the way these board members ruined these kids’ lives. The victims and the accusers. Disgusting display of using power to get what Labbe wanted.”

Labbe and former Sayreville Board of Education President Kevin Ciak, who should be lauded for their handling of the football team’s scandal and for demonstrating remarkable leadership under intense national scrutiny, held two press conferences, one prior to and another after shutting down the gridiron program.

The two made one national television appearance on TODAY, which their critics perceived as grandstanding, and for a short time thereafter responded to interview requests until, at the behest of a crisis management firm the district hired, Labbe and Ciak began declining comment.

In less than a month after Labbe shut down Sayreville’s football program and courageously asked others to join him nationwide in taking a stand against bullying (his critics perceived that maneuver as bringing undue attention to the district, even after the story had already garnered national attention on its own), three high school football teams in bordering states canceled the remainder of their seasons amid bullying allegations.

Dr. Claudio V. Cerullo, who previously served as a White House panelist on school violence prevention and is the founder and executive director of a national anti-bullying prevention organization, said he believes Labbe's stance emboldened others to speak up.

"I think the mere fact that he took a stand certainly had a domino effect across the nation," Cerullo previously told MyCentralJersey.com, "and what it says is that we are not going to tolerate bullying or hazing, and at the same time protect our children.”

Labbe has remained publicly silent on the topic, but is scheduled to deliver the keynote address later this month at a New Jersey Principals and Supervisors Association symposium on high school hazing in Monroe.

Unfortunately, some of those “concerned Sayreville residents,” who could benefit from attending the symposium, aren’t invited. School districts, however, are encouraged to send up to four staff members including a superintendent, principal, athletics director and coach.

In Labbe, the NJPSA could not have found a better ambassador, something the “concerned Sayreville” residents should recognize.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1FfRTlj