Happy familes: Black Caviar with her new addition. Photo: Georgina Lomax Photography

Black Caviar, Australia's fastest racehorse in a generation, might have been a little slower at giving birth, but has taken to motherhood quickly after foaling a filly in the Hunter Valley on Friday night.

The bay filly, with a small white marking on her forehead and a couple of white socks, is the first foal out of the champion racemare, which was undefeated in 25 starts in Australia and Royal Ascot in Britain.

"Black Caviar was the people's horse and we are looking forward to sharing this filly's journey with the people of Australia," said Black Caviar's managing part-owner Neil Werrett said after rushing from Sydney on Friday night to make it five minutes before the birth started.

Proud godparents: Black Caviar's managing part-owner Neil Werrett and partner Lena Attebo with her new foal. Photo: Georgina Lomax Photography.

"It will be a long and patient road from birth to racetrack, so at this time we are revelling in the excitement of being proud parents. We're incredibly proud that she's given birth to a filly and equally delighted that both Black Caviar and her foal are healthy and doing well."

Advertisement

Black Caviar's followers had been expecting the royal birth for weeks, but it was only on Friday night that the eight-year-old showed signs she was ready to deliver off the track.

Her owners have dismissed the idea of putting the Exceed And Excel filly through a sales ring, once famously comparing it to like "selling your children".

The filly is the first foal out of the champion mare. Photo: Georgina Lomax Photography

Werrett said Black Caviar had quickly recovered from the birth and was back into her tucker.

"She's great and she's loving it," Werrett said. "She just stands still in the corner as still as she's ever been. The first thing she wanted to do after she had the baby was she wanted to eat. She sat up and started eating. It was amazing. She hasn't lost her [zest for] tucker".

Black Caviar won 15 group 1s, including the Diamond Jubilee Stakes at Royal Ascot in 2012.

She won three Lightning Stakes, a race that carries her name, two VRC Classics, two William Reid Stakes and two T.J. Smiths, which was her farewell to the racetrack last year.

Her brother All Too Hard also proved a top-class galloper and his first foals are hitting the ground this season.

A decision on a sire for Black Caviar this season is yet to be made.