MaxServices Group Announces New Product That Simplifies Affordable Care Act Reporting

The ACA MAX Prodigy Solution provides employers 1094-C and 1095-C form generation plus electronic filing to the IRS by importing two straightforward data files. This method simplifies the reporting process for businesses who are looking for an effective solution with ACA deadlines quickly approaching.





“Businesses are looking for a fast, efficient way to accurately file with the IRS. That’s why Max has developed a solution that accepts two straightforward human resource and benefits files from employers with all their year-end data to create 1095-C forms,” said Kendra Strickland, Vice President of Strategic Planning at Max.



Midwest Professional Staffing, a recruiting and staffing firm specializing in accounting, banking, and financial services has benefited from Max’s products and services.



Jim Bruno, Partner at Midwest states, “I’ve worked with the Max team to be sure that we are prepared for ACA at each step of way this year. Their team is incredibly helpful in providing resources and assistance that address our toughest ACA challenges to help us run our business.”



The ACA MAX Prodigy solution is now available to process tax year 2015 ACA returns.



Employers who need help with 1094-C and 1095-C reporting and electronic filing can contact MaxServices Group at



About MaxServices Group:



MaxServices Group helps our clients achieve maximum results through innovative workforce solutions that establish more profitable and successful business operations, including Affordable Care Act Tracking and Compliance, Applicant Tracking Systems, E-Onboarding, Tax Credit Processing, and Unemployment Cost Management.



For more information on ACA MAX Prodigy:

www.maxservicesgroup.com/affordable-care-act-aca/

Email Boston, MA, December 17, 2015 --( PR.com )-- MaxServices Group (Max), a provider of ACA solutions, announces its ACA MAX Prodigy product which assists employers with 1094-C and 1095-C form generation and electronic filing. Max is an approved transmitter of ACA returns to the IRS via the AIR system.“Businesses are looking for a fast, efficient way to accurately file with the IRS. That’s why Max has developed a solution that accepts two straightforward human resource and benefits files from employers with all their year-end data to create 1095-C forms,” said Kendra Strickland, Vice President of Strategic Planning at Max.Midwest Professional Staffing, a recruiting and staffing firm specializing in accounting, banking, and financial services has benefited from Max’s products and services.Jim Bruno, Partner at Midwest states, “I’ve worked with the Max team to be sure that we are prepared for ACA at each step of way this year. Their team is incredibly helpful in providing resources and assistance that address our toughest ACA challenges to help us run our business.”The ACA MAX Prodigy solution is now available to process tax year 2015 ACA returns.Employers who need help with 1094-C and 1095-C reporting and electronic filing can contact MaxServices Group at info@maxservicesgroup.com About MaxServices Group:MaxServices Group helps our clients achieve maximum results through innovative workforce solutions that establish more profitable and successful business operations, including Affordable Care Act Tracking and Compliance, Applicant Tracking Systems, E-Onboarding, Tax Credit Processing, and Unemployment Cost Management.For more information on ACA MAX Prodigy:Email info@maxservicesgroup.com , or call 855-866-4629.