The leading professional athletes in Australia are at risk of being blackmailed into match-fixing, according to an organised crime detective.

The NSW Police Organised Crime Squad is addressing match-fixing, in particular the use of 'honey trapping', where players are set up to cheat on their spouse then blackmailed with the evidence.

Detective Superintendent Scott Cook has claimed that most sports have already been infiltrated by match fixing, with players sabotaging their events to benefit criminals, reports News.com.au.

A senior detective in the department has claimed that most sports have already been infiltrated by match fixing

Detective Superintendent Scott Cook claims the operations involve criminals from overseas, which makes it difficult for police to gather evidence on who is responsible

Mr Cook said the match fixing is being organised by a select number of individuals.

'The intelligence we are getting suggests that most sports have been infiltrated to some degree, but it's just a few people, not thousands.'

'A lot of the information we're getting is that players and sports people are being influenced or approached in social settings in order to manipulate them ... that is one example,' he said.

'It's early days for us, but we're looking to develop the intelligence to proceed into prosecutions.'

Mr Cook believes underworld figures could be making billions of dollars from the match-fixing operations.

'In offshore locations the amount of money that's bet on games, like cricket, is billions of dollars,' he said.

Mr Cook believes underworld figures could be making billions of dollars from the match-fixing operations

Professor Jack Anderson of Queen's University in Belfast estimates that 25 per cent of world sport now is controlled by organised crime

He claims that the operations involve criminals from overseas, which makes it difficult to gather evidence on who is responsible.

He also claimed that many acts go unpunished due to a lack of evidence.

Four Australian soccer players and a coach from the Southern Stars premier league team were arrested in 2013 for match fixing.

Police claimed the syndicate had earned more than $2 million from betting.

At an international sports law conference in Adelaide in October, Professor Jack Anderson of Queen's University in Belfast said match fixing had become the number one threat to sports integrity.