The Friendship Centers -- that venerable local do-it-all-for-elders organization, which still answers to the name Senior Friendship Centers if you prefer -- has built an international reputation for efficiency and heart in the way it funnels government funds and charitable donations to those who need it, in the form of meals and adult care and enrichment.

But these days, as CEO Erin McLeod points out, a nonprofit needs to cultivate multiple funding sources in order to weather fickle political and economic cycles while still pouring out a steady stream of service. The Friendship Centers board, she says, spent a full year trying to ascertain what sort of outreach program could generate new income while fulfilling the centers' core mission.

The result of this head-scratching is the Friendship Center for Aging Studies. After years of hosting delegations from all parts of the world that came to study Sarasota's pioneering methods of meeting elders' needs for sustenance and companionship, the Friendship Centers will use its expertise to educate service professionals about the special characteristics of an aging population.

McLeod says the idea of offering continuing education credits for licensed social workers, therapists and counselors felt like a natural fit.

"We said, Hold on a minute: There are people who have never had any professional training in and around the aging world, who really need some," she says. "They’re very capable trained professionals. They’re starting to see more and more of their clientele aging, and this will bring unique issues, unique challenges and unique solutions."

The budding Center for Aging Studies will host its first official session on Tuesday, April 5, as a sort of soft opening for local professionals -- and anyone else in the community with an interest in cognitive health. Nationally regarded geriatrician Kevin O'Neill, who serves as chief medical officer for Brookdale Senior Living, will present a talk called "Cross-Train Your Brain." The course fee is $15, for one continuing education credit, and will start with a light breakfast at 7:30 a.m. To register, visit the website or call (941) 556-3263.

What's nice about the new center's focus is how well it complements the outreach-plus-income effort of another respected aging nonprofit: Pines of Sarasota's Education Institute. This program, which harnesses the practices and philosophies of the Pines to train professional and family caregivers, has grown steadily and is now attracting an international audience.

McLeod says a global profile is also part of the new center's three-year plan.

"First we're putting our toe in the water locally," she says, "and ultimately our courses will be promoted regionally and nationally. We are selling the idea of a vacation/education, with up to 15 hours of continuing education credits."

The vision also has in common an element that was behind the generation of Sarasota's Institute for the Ages, which flamed out after trying to turn a profit quickly -- the idea that this region is savvy enough about what it takes to age well, that folks should be traveling here from all over to watch us do it.

Follow Barbara Peters Smith on Twitter @BarbaraPSmith.