Topics: ABC, Alfonso Cuarón, believe, jj abrams, NBC, resurrection, TV, walking dead, Entertainment News

“The Walking Dead’s” baby-faced gunslinger Carl is still, hands down, the most disturbing kid on Sunday night primetime television. But now he’s got competition. Last week, he was joined by Jacob (Landon Gimenez) of ABC’s “Resurrection,” a presumed deceased eight-year-old with some ‘splainin’ to do. And this weekend, NBC’s “Believe,” which also premiered last week, moves to its permanent slot on Sunday nights. “Believe’s” ten-year-old Bo (Johnny Sequoyah) eradicates all existing definitions of the word wunderkind, having already exhibited telepathy, telekinesis, and acute, superhuman adorableness. Jacob, an underachiever by comparison, is actually a pretty normal boy except for the fact that he has stayed out thirty-two years past his curfew and hasn’t aged a bit since the day he died.

As “Walking Dead” fans know all too well, Carl came up hard. His family was more broken then most even before circumstance forced him to kill his own mother. Since then, he has matured rapidly, becoming an aggressor in an aggressive world. These two noobs, on the other hand, are more traditionally childlike. Bo, despite being a cherubic Jean Gray in training, is too sweet, trusting, and hopeful to survive on her own without protection. Unfortunately, her protectors don’t seem to fair too well either. In the pilot, her parents get brutally Steven Seagal-ed by the most unlikely of action stars – no, not Steven Seagal. Sienna Guillory is thoroughly unconvincing as Kyle Maclachlan’s high-kicking henchwoman. Watching her fight it out with co-star Jake McLaughlin is like watching fully-clothed underwear models do capoeira.

“Believe,” created by Alfonso Cuaron and executive produced by J.J. Abrams, comes across as a mostly heartwarming story of good versus evil. Very bad guys are after Bo for her abilities. But under the right guardianship and nurturing she will use her powers – unwittingly, at first – only to help those struggling individuals she comes across as she tries to evade capture. Already, the little girl’s most advanced talent seems to be identifying the good in people – and that includes her long-lost father with whom she is reunited in the very first episode. (She doesn’t know it yet.)