Former Medicare chief Marilyn Tavenner had been hired as AHIP’s new CEO. A lobbying vacuum in D.C.?

History has names for its different eras. In the lobbying world of Washington, it seems, there’s Before Obamacare and After Obamacare. And now, with all the suspense gone from the fight over the Affordable Care Act, K Street is about to get a whole new power elite in the deep-pocketed world of Big Pharma and health care.

So much top talent has fled that, according to my POLITICO colleague Erin Mershon, the executive search firm Korn Ferry found itself in the very strange — and uncomfortable — position of doing simultaneous searches for CEOs of two bitterly battling lobbies: America’s Health Insurance Plans and the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America.

Story Continued Below

Korn Ferry vice chairman Nels Olson told The KGB File that there was no conflict of interest involved because the firm was careful to keep the two searches cordoned off from each other. “We’ve had two completely separate teams executing these assignments,” he says. Still, AHIP and PhARMA have taken opposite positions on drug pricing and coverage, and delivering better executive talent to one lobby or the other could give it the edge in future debates. Korn Ferry tries to stay out of such policy issues, Olson says.

Some of the pressure was relieved Wednesday when it was announced that former Medicare chief Marilyn Tavenner had been hired as AHIP’s new CEO, replacing Karen Ignagni, who left to take over a big New York-based insurer. Even so the vacuum continues: Along with Ignagni’s departure have come a slew of others, Mershon says, including top pharmaceutical lobbyist John Castellani; American Hospital Association CEO Rich Umbdenstock; and Ralph Neas, head of the Generic Pharmaceutical Association.

That doesn’t mean the fight over Obamacare is done necessarily. But it does seem like the industry is hitting pause before a new generation of lobbyists deals with the 2016 election.