A deluge of phone calls greeted the Massachusetts Health Connector on the one-month anniversary of its new website Monday, mostly from people misinformed about the deadline to buy insurance, state officials said.

Consumers have until Dec. 23 to select and pay for a plan obtained through the Connector.

Advertisement

But news reports about a Monday deadline in many states and on the federal health insurance website, healthcare.gov, led many people to contact the Connector’s call centers.

As a result, morning wait times stretched as long as 30 to 40 minutes, said Maydad Cohen, the top official overseeing the website’s rebuilding after its failure last year.

“While the confusion is unfortunate, the benefit is — it is driving people to the website and the phone,” Cohen said, predicting heavy call volume the rest of the week.

Cohen said that 525 people were answering the phones Monday. “We are staffed to the maximum,” he said.

Massachusetts is one of six states with later deadlines for people buying health insurance through Affordable Care Act marketplaces. A seventh, Connecticut, extended the deadline until Friday for those who started the process by Monday.

Advertisement

Adding to call volume in Massachusetts: Monday was the first day consumers could make changes to applications. They needed to call customer service to ask that their accounts be unlocked. Before Monday, only those with a major life change affecting their ability to qualify for assistance — a job loss, for instance — could make alterations.

Meanwhile, by Sunday, 180,844 people had used the Connector website to determine the coverage for which they were eligible. Of them, 84,019 were enrolled in MassHealth, the state’s Medicaid program. The rest needed to select private insurance on the Connector, and 41,757 — 43 percent — had taken that crucial step by Sunday night.

The Connector did not have up-to-date numbers on how many people had taken the final step necessary to enroll and pay the first month’s premiums. By the middle of last week, 6,989 had paid, representing 8.7 percent of those deemed eligible for coverage.

“We’re seeing enrollments start to increase the way we envisioned,” Cohen said. “I would imagine we’re going to see many more payments this week.”

Susan Feinberg, a self-employed consultant in West Dennis, said she has paid for her health insurance but still can’t determine with certainty whether she will be covered.

A cancer survivor who recently started her own business, she said she is grateful that state and federal laws ensure that she can buy insurance despite her health history. But she’s also anxious to make sure there is no gap in her coverage.

The 55-year-old said she chose a plan Nov. 18 but never received a bill, despite requesting one and calling to follow up when it didn’t arrive. When she realized she could pay online, she did. But, unnervingly, the website did not confirm receipt.

On Dec. 10, the premium was withdrawn from her checking account. But when she called the insurance company, it had no information about her. “They way they’re set up, no one can reassure me that, yes, I will be covered on Jan. 1,” Feinberg said. “It’s so frustrating. I did everything right. I did it early. . . . Right now, it’s causing me so much stress.”

Richard Pask of North Truro is another anxious customer. He was among the 10 percent of applicants who needed to submit additional information to verify their identity and citizenship. When that process was completed, he said, he had to mail in his property tax bill — twice — to verify his residency. Finally, he selected a plan. But Pask said he never received an invoice and cannot find out his account number.

Pask said that a call center representative advised him to mail in the check, even though he doesn’t have an account number. He plans to do so, but he’s worried it won’t be credited to the right account in time.

“Come Dec. 24, if they say, ‘You didn’t get your check in time,’ I’m going to have no recourse,” Pask said. “They say everything’s going swell. It’s not going swimmingly for me.”

The Connector’s Cohen said that, despite a smattering of such complaints on social media, there were no widespread billing delays. But completing the process takes time, he said.

Dell, the company handling the billing, needs to verify consumers’ information, withdraw money from their bank accounts, and communicate with the insurance company — meaning it can take seven to 10 days between placing a payment and receiving an insurance card.

Consumers paying online need to go to Dell’s website to process the payment. Some found this frustrating because Dell then asks for account numbers available only on the Connector website. Cohen urged consumers to keep the Connector page up in one tab and open Dell in a separate tab.