Ben Carson, who has yet to win a nominating contest in the Republican primary race, told supporters Wednesday that he sees no "path forward" for his campaign and that he would not be participating in Thursday's Republican debate.

"I do not see a political path forward in light of last evening's Super Tuesday primary results," Carson said in a statement Wednesday. "I appreciate the support, financial and otherwise, from all corners of America. Gratefully, my campaign decisions are not constrained by finances; rather by what is in the best interests of the American people."

Instead of formally suspending his campaign, Carson said he would "discuss more about the future of this movement" during Friday's Conservative Political Action Conference in Maryland.

"Even though I will not be in my hometown of Detroit on Thursday, I remain deeply committed to my home nation, America," Carson added. "Along with millions of patriots who have supported my campaign for President, I remain committed to Saving America for Future Generations. We must not depart from our goals to restore what God and our Founders intended for this exceptional nation."

The statement comes after a disappointing finish in Super Tuesday states, where Carson claimed no delegates. GOP front-runner Donald Trump swept up 11 victories, with Ted Cruz notching two states and Marco Rubio winning the caucuses in Minnesota.

The announcement from Carson, who once led the GOP field with Trump, follows several months of his campaign struggling to break double digits in national and early-voting state polls.

Armstrong Williams, Carson's longtime business manager, tells the Associated Press it's "just the reality" that "there's only one candidate in this 2016 election on the GOP side, and his name is (Donald) Trump."



Williams adds that Sens. Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz also "have no path" and should drop out.



It was not immediately clear whether Carson will officially suspend his campaign, but Williams says he no longer will actively seek votes.



Another Carson aide, Larry Ross, said Carson will offer "more details" when he speaks Friday at the CPAC gathering, an annual conservative confab.