ATLANTA (AP) - The confetti fell on another Alabama championship, just not the one the Crimson Tide really wants.

Next up: the College Football Playoffs.

With a Heisman-worthy performance from Derrick Henry and another dose of dominating defense, No. 2 Alabama cruised into the four-team playoff with a 29-15 victory over No. 18 Florida in the Southeastern Conference championship game Saturday.

The Tide became the first team since Tennessee in 1998 to win two straight SEC titles - an impressive achievement indeed.

But the only way this season will be considered a true success is Alabama claiming another national title.

That’s the standard Nick Saban has set in Tuscaloosa.

“As tight as this group is and how hard we play together and how we have each other’s backs, I’m real confident in this team,” quarterback Jake Coker said. “I think we can do whatever we want to do, based on how we practice and prepare. It’s going to be an exciting playoff.”

Alabama’s title hopes were on the ropes in mid-September when five turnovers allowed Mississippi to pull off a 43-37 upset at Bryant-Denny Stadium. The Tide (12-1, No. 2 CFP) bounced back to win 10 straight games, earning a spot in the national semifinals at either the Cotton or Orange Bowl on New Year’s Eve.

The pairings will be announced Sunday. Unbeaten Clemson, rated No. 1 and atop the playoff rankings, beat No. 8 North Carolina 45-37 Saturday night in the ACC championship game.

A year ago, the Tide played in the inaugural playoff but was upset by eventual national champion Ohio State in the Sugar Bowl.

Saban, who said he even had questions about his team after the Ole Miss loss, gushed over how the Crimson Tide rebounded.

“I’m very proud of this team,” said Saban, who already has three national titles as the Tide’s coach and needs two more wins for his fourth. “They wanted to do something special. And probably more than any other time I’ve ever coached, I wanted to see these guys succeed.”

Henry capped his Heisman campaign with a flourish, rushing for 189 bruising yards on a staggering 44 carries against one of the nation’s top defenses. Jake Coker turned in just the sort of performance that the Tide needed out of its quarterback - 18 of 26 completions for 204 yards, including a pair of touchdowns. The defense was too much for Florida’s maligned offense, which managed only 3 yards of offense in the second and third quarters.

Florida, an 18-point underdog, briefly grabbed a 7-2 lead on Antonio Callaway’s 85-yard punt return for a touchdown early in the second quarter.

Alabama dominated from there.

Story Continues →