Buy Photo The Baxter Community Center in Beecher Terrace is one of many assets in the Russell neighborhood. (Photo: By Michael Clevenger, The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

Despite widespread poverty and a high crime rate, the Russell neighborhood is considered to have numerous assets.

Russell stretches south to Broadway, west in a rectangular shape from Ninth to I-264/Georgia Davis Powers Expressway at 32nd Street and north to Market Street/Portland.

In a report based on a neighborhood survey for a "Vision Russell ... Roadmap to the Future" plan being developed by the city, the top five "neighborhood strengths" listed are housing affordability, access to public transportation, location near downtown, near family or friends and access to neighborhood services. Almost half of the housing in Russell was built before 1939, and about 82 percent of household are renters.

The top five drawbacks/most needed improvements pertain to crime/violence on the streets (including two spikes in drug-related offenses between 2013 and 2015), lack of neighborhood amenities, poor street lighting and layout, lack of social services and location (distance form school, jobs, groceries, transportation and services).

According to one chart, 71 percent of those surveyed in Beecher Terrace said crime occurs frequently, one to two times per week, most commonly at night and in parking lots and along walking routes to bus stops.

The neighborhood also has a significant number of vacant lots and run-down buildings that are said to detract from the neighborhood's appearance, and almost 20 percent of the housing units are vacant. "People would like to see something done with all the abandoned properties, first and foremost," Julia Robinson, a plan outreach worker, said.

But the area is bolstered by an "extensive network" of nearly 40 faith-based institutions owning about 40 acres of land in all, the first report says.

Among the neighborhood assets listed are: Russell National Register of Historic Place District in the heart of the west Louisville neighborhood, other assets include Kentucky Center for African American Heritage, Western Cemetery, Byck Elementary School, Central High School, Coleridge Taylor Montessori School, Roosevelt-Perry Elementary School, Baxter Community Center, Louisville Central Community Center, Plymouth Renewal Community Center, Healing Place Addiction Recovery agency, City View Apartments, St. Peter United Church of Christ, Greater Salem Baptist Church, Joshua Tabernacle Baptist Church, Ouerbacker-Clement Mansion (being converted to apartments), planned West Louisville Food Port and the Chestnut Street YMCA.

Other data gathered for the plan includes this information:

Population is 10,753

90 percent African American, vs. 21 percent citywide

62 percent of residents live in poverty

Rate of home ownership is 23 percent, versus 63 percent city-wide

Violent crime rate is more than five times the citywide rate.

Beecher Terrace public housing development, which was built in Russell in 1939, has about 1.331 residents and 768 apartments. The median household income is $5,885, compared to $14,209 in Russell, $21,699 in west Louisville and $44,159 in Louisville as a whole, according to plan data.

More than half of Beecher Terrace's labor force participants are unemployed, compared to 23.3 percent in west Louisville and 10 percent in Louisville.

Reporter Martha Elson can be reached at (502) 582-7061 and melson@courier-journal.com. Follow her on Twitter at @MarthaElson_cj.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1MtILm4