The Denver Broncos Defeated the Carolina Panthers on Sunday 24-10 to win Super Bowl 50, making 39-year-old Peyton Manning the oldest quarterback ever to win the big game. Manning going into the game was already the oldest quarterback to start a Super Bowl and will now decide whether he will end his career at a highpoint.

“I’ll take some time to reflect,” Manning said when asked if Super Bowl 50 is the end. “I got a couple priorities first. I’m going to go kiss my wife and my kids. … I’m going to drink a lot of Budweiser tonight. Take care of those things first.”

Broncos linebacker Von Miller was named the MVP after finishing with six tackles, 2.5 sacks totaling a combined 27 yards, two quarterback hits, a pass defensed and the two forced fumbles. Denver’s defense, left by Miller, plagued Panthers quarterback Cam Newton all night, despite him wearing golden shoes before the game.

Newton finished off the season in which he was the league’s MVP with the loss. Miller twice stripped him, once for a touchdown, the second time setting up a clinching TD. Denver’s top-ranked defense, the same defense that ran over Tom Brady in the AFC championship, hammered away at Newton and wore him down.

“In all honesty, we came into the game wanting to play our defense,” Miller said. “We knew if we were to be consistent and play [our] style of defense that we’d be able to come out on top.”

Still, despite many commentators calling it his night, Miller credited his teammates.

“If I could cut this award,” he said, “I would give it to DeMarcus [Ware] and [Derek] Wolfe and all the other guys. That’s what I would do. This is all great and stuff, but for me, I want to be with my guys.

“I would take the ring. The MVP is great, but I’ll take the ring. I want to go in there with my teammates.”

Manning opened the game with an 18-yard completion to Owen Daniels, later hit Andre Caldwell for 22, and C.J. Anderson had a 13-yard run. When the Panthers held, Brandon McManus kicked a 34-yard field goal.