MANCHESTER — The Viscogliosi Brothers hope they've made the right bet again.

Anthony, John and Marc Viscogliosi have put together the money to commercialize the inventions of doctors again and again over the past 15 years. The most recent sale of one of the companies they launched was for $375 million, in 2014, according to a trade publication.

Anthony, a Manchester resident, moved Woven Orthopedic Technologies to a secondary Viscogliosi Brothers office in his hometown, and the startup company is aiming to be part of a bioscience cluster developing in the state.

Ilana Odess, CEO of Woven Orthopedic, used to evaluate investment opportunities for the brothers and was tapped to lead this company in 2013.

The idea this time — a plastic woven tube that would sit between a screw and the hole in a bone — is designed to improve outcomes of surgeries that use screws. Odess said $6 billion in screws are sold annually, for 279 types of procedures, and while it's not well known how often at least one of the screws becomes loose, some estimates are between 15 percent and 30 percent, depending on the joint.

Ilana Odess Brad Horrigan, Hartford Courant Woven Orthopedic Technologies CEO Ilana Odess holds up a screw retention sleeve made by the company. The fine mesh sleeve helps keep orthopedic screws from slipping out of bone. Woven Orthopedic Technologies CEO Ilana Odess holds up a screw retention sleeve made by the company. The fine mesh sleeve helps keep orthopedic screws from slipping out of bone. (Brad Horrigan, Hartford Courant)

"Everyone has tried to solve it with a hardware solution," Odess said, designing screws with different threads or different pitches of those threads.

When screws loosen after surgeries, 15 percent of the time there has to be a second surgery. Not only is that costly and painful for the patient, with health care cost controls introduced by Obamacare, repeat surgeries for Medicare patients may not be covered.

In some cases, the complications could create a "cascade of events that lead to pneumonia, because they weren't mobile and basically they were too long in bed," Odess said. Pneumonia is a leading cause of death for the elderly.

A Woven Orthopedic Technologies' screw retention sleeve Brad Horrigan, Hartford Courant A Woven Orthopedic Technologies' screw retention sleeve holds a screw in place in this cross section demo. The fine mesh sleeve helps keep orthopedic screws from slipping out of bone. A Woven Orthopedic Technologies' screw retention sleeve holds a screw in place in this cross section demo. The fine mesh sleeve helps keep orthopedic screws from slipping out of bone. (Brad Horrigan, Hartford Courant)

Woven Orthopedic, which is developing the invention of Dr. Alex Jones of Denver, has three patents and 16 patents pending for the design of the braided polymer sleeves.

Starting in early 2014, the company set a goal of raising $6.5 million in its first round of funding. It has raised almost $5 million. The money came partly from the Viscogliosi Brothers and partly from angel investors who are in the medical device industry or are surgeons.

John Moran, a former employee in a medical device company, is one of the angel investors in Woven. Moran, who lives in the Philadelphia area, said he has invested in 15 businesses, and 12 were medical device startups.

"I'm not always hugely successful," he said, but he has invested with the Viscogliosi Brothers three times before, and their backing is a big reason why he chose to put money in Woven.

Also, the company received a $100,000 grant and a $300,000 loan through the State's Small Business Express program.

So far, the only testing of the sleeve has been in foam blocks and cadavers, but Odess said they hope to begin testing the invention in sheep in the next three months, through a contract with the University of Colorado veterinarian school.

Odess said while there is a lot of biomedical engineering and mechanical engineering talent coming out of UConn and Yale, neither has animal testing on sheep.

Francis Magee, Woven's chief technical officer, works out of Manchester, but there is no lab on site. Almost everything is done outside, Odess said. "The CTO, he's basically the conductor," she said.

The animal testing could take up to six months, and the company hopes to submit the device to the FDA by the end of the year. The Food and Drug Administration takes 400 days on average to make a decision.

So Woven will have no revenues for the next several years. It will need to do another fundraising round, because the current cash will only cover the rest of 2015. There are six people on payroll in Manchester, Odess said, including one part-time administrative assistant.

The company has requested $500,000 from the state Bioscience Fund, but the law establishing the program says companies must be less than 3 years old. Although operations didn't begin until 2013, technically, Woven began at the end of 2007, under the name Screw Sock.

"Listen, it was a shell," Odess said she explained, to no avail. "Which is sad," she said, "$500,000 would be very, very good for us."

Connecticut Innovations is asking the legislature to change the terms of the program to allow companies to receive funding if they were funded up to seven years ago. Even though Woven is still too old by that standard, Odess said in a follow-up email that she is still in discussions with Connecticut Innovations and "there may be an opening."

Department of Economic and Community Development Commissioner Catherine Smith, who heads the CI Board, said in her view, "We'd like the flexibility to assess the idea, no matter how long they've been around."

If Woven gains regulatory approval to sell its product, what will happen then? Will the sleeves be manufactured in Connecticut? Will the marketers and sales people and logistics professionals be hired here?

That depends on how quickly the company is sold to a large conglomerate.

"I have a strong, strong belief this company will end with an exit," or sale, Odess said. "It could be an early one, with a smaller amount. It could be we really need to scale up," and then the sale will be based on how much revenue the company is generating.

"My gut is it will be sooner rather than later," she said.

"At the end of the day what matters to me is the safety and effectiveness and it really benefits the patient," she said. Shareholders and management, of course, would like a financial windfall. "Making money is a nice outcome," she said. "That will help me go and raise money for my next company."

She said it's a home run if the product both improves health outcomes and enriches investors.