The Russian novelist Fyodor Dostoevsky, who knew a thing or two about pain and frustration, observed that we can never really know how much somebody else's toothache hurts. But most of us can muster some amount of sympathy for older adults who need dental care they cannot afford.

When I wrote this week about the Senior Friendship Centers' low-cost dental clinic being ready to enroll new patients, with their volunteer retired dentists beginning to trickle back to Sarasota from points north, the clinic got an immediate response.

Erin Mcleod reported more than 50 calls the day the piece ran — not all meeting the guidelines, but all of them interested in keeping their teeth.

"Now we need dentists and assistants," she added. "But we'll work on that."

Knowing that one small clinic staffed with volunteers cannot meet the entire need, I looked around for other options for older adults without dental insurance — about 30 percent of U.S. seniors. And that's when I might have added to some Southwest Floridians' pain and frustration.

I couldn't find much in the way of help, but the state's Department of Health website listed local numbers to call for Florida's Public Dental Health Program. I added the numbers to a box that went with the story, calling each one to ask if the number was correct — standard newspaper procedure, since it's so easy to mistype a phone number.

And sure enough, people called those county numbers. I heard back first from Sarasota County's Dianne Shipley, health educator and media liaison. They were fielding demands they could not meet. With limited funds for adult oral health, the county can only offer emergency dental care — diagnosis and extractions — she said.

Then Marne Cothran, public information specialist for the Charlotte County health department, let me know that its primary care and dental clinic closed on July 28, and its former shuttle bus from Englewood to the Port Charlotte clinic is no longer available.

"We provide dental sealants and education for gradeschool children — at local schools — but that is the extent of DOH-Charlotte's dental service s," she said. "We do not provide any dental services to adults and no longer have a dental clinic."

I asked Cothran where Charlotte County elders can turn for low-cost dental care, and she said, "Oh, my gosh, that's such a tough question." Their main referrals, she added, are to the Family Health Centers of Southwest Florida, and to Sarasota County's federally qualified center in North Port.

Cothran and I discussed the wisdom of concentrating sparse resources on preventive dental health for children, helping to make sure their teeth can last a lifetime. And that's also the reasoning behind the Affordable Care Act's limitation on dental coverage — for now, it's minors only. Medicare, as well, has no dental benefits for elders.

Other states have Medicaid or other programs that specifically help seniors keep their teeth healthy. But in small-government Florida, the generation that came of age before most kids had access to dental care is also out of luck at the other end of life. This is why a new report from Oral Health America ranks our state No. 48 in the nation in meeting this important need.