Rain resumes as South Carolina recovers from massive flood

hello

Firefighters evacuate Eliza Linen by boat from her home in the Dunbar Community of Georgetown, S.C., Friday, Oct. 9, 2015. A week after the heavy rains first began, some South Carolina residents are still evacuating and others are stacking up sandbags for more possible flooding even as the nation's top security official prepares to inspect the damage firsthand. (Jason Lee/The Sun News via AP) Associated Press

Bertha Linen gets help getting up from a cot used to lower her from the back of a National Guard truck after being evacuated from the Dunbar community of Georgetown, S.C., Friday, Oct. 9, 2015. A week after the heavy rains first began, some South Carolina residents are still evacuating and others are stacking up sandbags for more possible flooding even as the nation's top security official prepares to inspect the damage firsthand. /The Sun News via AP) Associated Press

Nasir Linen, 10, holds Tristan Richards, 5, as they ride in the back of a National Guard truck as his family areis evacuated from rising flood waters in the Dunbar Community near Georgetown, S.C., Friday, Oct. 9, 2015. A week after the heavy rains first began, some South Carolina residents are still evacuating and others are stacking up sandbags for more possible flooding even as the nation's top security official prepares to inspect the damage firsthand. (Jason Lee/The Sun News via AP) Associated Press

Will Giles watches the flood waters from the back of a National Guard truck as he and 22 other residents are evacuated from the Dunbar community of Georgetown, S.C., Friday, Oct. 9, 2015. A week after the heavy rains first began, some South Carolina residents are still evacuating and others are stacking up sandbags for more possible flooding even as the nation's top security official prepares to inspect the damage firsthand. (Jason Lee/The Sun News via AP) Associated Press

Residents of the Dunbar community hand their belongings down from a National Guard truck after evacuating their homes under threat of flooding from the Black River, Friday, Oct. 9, 2015, in Georgetown, S.C. A week after the heavy rains first began, some South Carolina residents are still evacuating and others are stacking up sandbags for more possible flooding even as the nation's top security official prepares to inspect the damage firsthand. /The Sun News via AP) Associated Press

Sgt. William Buffkin, of the South Carolina National Guard , helps a family load onto a National Guard truck for evacuation from the Dunbar community of Georgetown, S.C., Friday, Oct. 9, 2015. A week after the heavy rains first began, some South Carolina residents are still evacuating and others are stacking up sandbags for more possible flooding even as the nation's top security official prepares to inspect the damage firsthand. (Jason Lee/The Sun News via AP) Associated Press

Tara Saracina rows down her street in the Ashborough subdivision of Summerville, S.C., Thursday, Oct. 8, 2015. Saracina said the floodwaters seem to be going down. "Now it's just the cleanup." Associated Press

Arthur Holmes and Carnell Linen row a boat to get items from a flooded home in the Dunbar community of Georgetown, S.C., Friday, Oct. 9, 2015. A week after the heavy rains first began, some South Carolina residents are still evacuating and others are stacking up sandbags for more possible flooding even as the nation's top security official prepares to inspect the damage firsthand. (Jason Lee/The Sun News via AP) LOCAL PRINT OUT (MYRTLE BEACH HERALD OUT, HORRY INDEPENDENT OUT, CAROLINA FOREST CHRONICLE, GEORGETOWN TIMES OUT); MANDATORY CREDIT Associated Press

CORRECTS YEAR TO 2015 - Guardsman Michael Sanders drives a South Carolina National Guard truck down a water-covered road in Georgetown County, S.C., on Thursday, Oct. 8, 2015. The Guard was using the truck to evacuate residents as rain-swollen rivers were expected to cause more flooding in the area. Associated Press

Harris Carter, owner of Castaways & Grill in the historic section of Georgetown, moves a road barrier to block traffic as high tide approaches historic downtown Georgetown, S.C., Thursday, Oct. 8, 2015. Gov. Nikki Haley held a press conference Thursday, telling Georgetown residents to prepare for floodwaters. Many store owners in the historic district have prepared for repeated flooding over the course of a week. Associated Press

A Georgetown County firefighter helps a child into a South Carolina National Guard truck in Georgetown County, S.C., on Thursday, Oct. 8, 2015. The family was being evacuated as rain-swollen rivers are expected to cause more flooding in the area. Associated Press

Preston Hester, left, and Johnna Godomski help unload water at Grace Episcopal Church to help flood victims in Anderson, S.C., on Thursday, Oct. 8, 2015. A number of South Carolina residents near the coast are evacuating and others are piling up sandbags anew outside homes and businesses, bracing for more possible flooding even as the nation's Homeland Security chief is set later Friday to tour areas hit hard by recent heavy rains. (Ken Ruinard/The Independent-Mail via AP) THE GREENVILLE NEWS OUT, SENECA NEWS OUT; MANDATORY CREDIT Associated Press

Father Jack Hardaway of Grace Episcopal Church blesses water delivered from The Holy Innocents' Episcopal School in Atlanta to help flood victims in Anderson, S.C., on Thursday, Oct. 8, 2015. A number of South Carolina residents near the coast are evacuating and others are piling up sandbags anew outside homes and businesses, bracing for more possible flooding even as the nation's Homeland Security chief is set later Friday to tour areas hit hard by recent heavy rains. (Ken Ruinard/The Independent-Mail via AP) THE GREENVILLE NEWS OUT, SENECA NEWS OUT; MANDATORY CREDIT Associated Press

Thad Wimberly, left, and Jonathan Berry inspect the damage to a field of peanuts following record rainfall and flooding in Branchville, SC., Friday, Oct. 9, 2015. Wimberly, co-owner of Wimco Farms in Branchville, said he expects to lose 75 percent of his crop. Associated Press

COLUMBIA, S.C. -- After four dry days, rain has returned to South Carolina - but not in the record-breaking amounts seen last week that caused devastating floods.

Thunderstorms in the capital of Columbia made it difficult if not impossible Saturday for residents who were evacuated to get back home to salvage belongings or check on their properties. However, by midmorning, there were no reports of major problems caused by the additional precipitation.

A storm system near the coast this weekend will bring as much as an additional inch of rain to some areas, according to the National Weather Service. The heaviest rain is expected Saturday, although forecasters said it shouldn't be enough to flood any additional areas.

"I didn't want to hear the word rain. But we hope the quantities aren't going to be great," said Georgetown County Administrator Sel Hemingway, where floodwaters from four rivers are converging on the coast.

After the weekend, forecasters predict several more dry days.

There is still flooding in South Carolina. All that water from Columbia continues to move toward the sea, although authorities don't expect the devastating damage that happened when up to 20 inches of rain fell over South Carolina's capital over two days.

Gov. Nikki Haley continued to urge people in Georgetown County and other coastal areas to be vigilant as flood waters rise. No one has had to be evacuated yet, but the water was isolating some homes, and the governor warned emergency officials could start knocking on doors any time.

But the worst may be over even along the coast. The Waccamaw River has crested and the Black River is near crest, Hemingway said Friday afternoon. It will take days or maybe more than a week for the rivers to go below flood stage, but the water should start dropping.

"Crested - I've been waiting for that word to be expressed here for a week," Hemingway said.

In Columbia, officials continued to be heartened by acts of generosity, but warned that tempers were flaring in some places.

Haley started to ask people to be more judicious with donations even as Richland County Sheriff Leon Lott said he was infuriated because his deputies had to investigate a state guardsman directing traffic at a food bank intentionally struck by an impatient driver. The guardsman broke his wrist and rib but was expected to survive.

Columbia Police Chief Skip Holbrook asked people to stay out heavily damaged neighborhoods unless they are coming to help because residents are tired of rubberneckers.

"The residents are physically and mentally tired. We're seeing some tempers flare up. Patience is thin," Holbrook said.

Haley suggested instead of donating bottled water or clothes, anyone who wants to help put on an old outfit and gloves and find somewhere to start helping with the recovery.

"If you want to help, go to those neighborhoods you know have seen trouble - have seen damage - and you can help with clean up," Haley said.

Also on Saturday, a contractor will begin working on shoring up the washed out foundations under some of the 18 small bridges that crisscross two rivers and swamps on a 13-mile closed stretch of Interstate 95 in Clarendon County.

South Carolina Department of Transportation Secretary Christy Hall said Friday she had no estimate when the road which carries 30,000 vehicles a day could reopen. In the meantime, travelers who would normally drive 74 miles between Interstate 26 to Interstate 20 must take a 168-mile detour through Columbia.

___

Beam reported from Summerville, South Carolina. Associated Press writers Susanne M. Schafer and Jack Jones in Columbia, South Carolina, and Bruce Smith in Charleston, South Carolina, contributed to this report.