The proverbial Aunt Flo we all speak of with reserved whispers and forced health class discussions is probably the thought that comes to mind when we think of a woman's period. But why has a woman’s menstrual cycle and the gateway into puberty become a taboo topic that makes teens blush and their parents struggle to explain the biology?

Girls experience their first period as early as 8 years old, but the typical age is usually 12, according to the Mayo Clinic. At such a young age, girls handle their first encounters with their periods differently, but a new project directed by Director Mary Harron for women’s performance underwear brand Dear Kate, which interviewed 20 women to discuss their story, hopes to clear some of the mystery for young girls.

From cheerleading practices to Latin class, the women talk about the embarrassment and the excitement of getting their periods. One says she thought she was dying, while another says because she was the first in her group of friends, she felt she won the competition. Many remember the exact date, but all of them describe the situation in vivid detail with smiles and giggles as they recall the cringe-worthy moment in their life.

“People, I think, thought I was nervous because my fake crush was there. They were like ‘Oh, you don’t want to get into your swimsuit around Tommy.’ And I was like, ‘No, actually I’m gay and I think I’m bleeding out of my vagina.’”

Another candidly retells her misconceptions about tampons, because her mom forbid her from using them. She told her she would lose her virginity from it. When she eventually did use her first tampon, she inserted it halfway and waddled the rest of the day. A different woman high fives the air while she talks about how her dad congratulated her on becoming a woman.

Whether their first period stories were told with laughter or horror, they can be used to entertain young women still nervous about their approaching first time. Parents.com encourages an ongoing conversation instead of building it up to be a big topic of discussion to make young girls and teens comfortable with their changing bodies.