A former Manhattan mayor filed to run as a Democrat against U.S. Rep. Tim Huelskamp on Wednesday, saying the conservative Republican has let his district down by failing to compromise even with leaders of his own party.

Jim Sherow said, regardless of party, voters in the state's sprawling 1st District want a strong voice on national agriculture issues and that voice was quieted when House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, stripped Huelskamp of his position on the House Agriculture Committee.

"Tim Huelskamp's ineffectiveness has deprived Kansans in having a say in the future of the state," Sherow said. "(Former Sen.) Bob Dole, (Sen.) Jerry Moran and other past 1st District representatives worked hard for the district and were respected nationally for their efforts. It's time to get the district back on track."

In citing the leadership of Republicans like Dole and Moran and promising to work for "cooperation" in Washington, D.C., Sherow's comments reflected the middle-ground strategy he will need to be competitive as a Democrat running in one of the country's most solidly Republican Congressional districts.

Huelskamp's campaign highlighted Sherow's party affiliation in a statement provided Wednesday.

“I look forward to seeing how Democrat Sherow will defend President (Barack) Obama’s and (House Minority Leader) Nancy Pelosi's failed ObamaCare; their regulatory attacks on Kansas farmers, ranchers and energy producers; and their failed economic policies that have harmed middle class Kansans," Huelskamp's campaign spokesman, Josh Bell, said.

The 1st District extends west from Lyon, Wabaunsee and Pottawatomie counties to the Colorado border, encompassing most of the state outside of metro areas and southeast Kansas.

Huelskamp also is facing primary opponents. Kent Roth, a lawyer from Ellinwood, formed an exploratory committee and is raising money but has yet to formally file.

Alan LaPolice, a Gulf War veteran and former California school administrator who grew up on a dairy farm in Kansas and now lives in Clyde, filed to run against Huelskamp earlier this month.

LaPolice said he also is running on a platform of restoring "functionality and civility to Congress." He said Huelskamp has exhibited a pattern of off-putting obstructiveness that goes back to 2003, when Kansas Senate leaders stripped him of his spot on the Ways and Means Committee.

LaPolice said Huelskamp's desire to separate food assistance programs from the subsidies in Congress' annual farm bill would be disastrous in a chamber in which only 35 of 435 members represent largely agricultural districts.

“Should this happen there won’t be a farm bill, at least not one that can get through the House and Senate,” LaPolice said. LaPolice said Bell and Huelskamp have agreed to debates after the candidate filing deadline June 2.

Sherow, a history professor at Kansas State University who has authored five books, is vying to face the winner of the Aug. 5 Republican primary. In addition to serving as Manhattan's mayor, he also served as one of its city commissioners; non-partisan positions he said show he can build consensus on policies that spur growth.

"I know how to work with other people regardless of party alignments," Sherow said. "If you know anything about Manhattan, you know it's prospering."

Sherow said his campaign strategy would be to encourage turnout among Democrats, appeal to independents and then try to bring moderate Republicans into the fold.

Sherow said the people he has spoken to in the 1st District want to talk about agriculture issues more than social "wedge" issues that have increased Huelskamp's political profile.

"We know there's a lot of dissatisfaction in the 1st District," Sherow said. "They're wanting to see change."

Bell said any such dissatisfaction would reach the ear of the congressman, who returns to Kansas every week because "his family, his home, his farm and his heart are in Kansas, not Washington, D.C."

"Huelskamp remains a strong advocate for his constituents in the Big First and has emerged as a top conservative leader in Washington, fighting for Kansas values even if it means challenging party insiders and special interests inside the Beltway," Bell said. "His principled stands against wasteful government spending, out-of-control debt, and runaway over-regulation — and for traditional marriage, protection of the unborn and our rural way of life has earned him strong continued support at home, where it matters.”