Celebrity Hot News

Zac Efron Rehab After Dating Vanessa Hudgens: ‘Parkland’/‘Neighbors’ Star Speaks Up About Drug Usage, Thanks Fans for Support

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Instagram/@zacefron) Zac Efron thanks his fans for the support during his recovery from drug abuse.

Zac Efron finished rehab not once, but twice about five months ago for his alleged cocaine addiction after overdosing on the drug. Now that the "Parkland" star has decided to clean up his act and get his career back on track, he posted a picture on Instagram looking healthy, thanking his fans for the support.



“Hey guys! Just returned from a incredible trip to Peru with my dad and wanted to thank you all for your support these past few weeks...means the world to me,” said Efron on his Instagram picture on Friday. “Love you guys!”



E! News reported that the “High School Musical” star, who previously dated his co-star Vanessa Hudgens, was spotted posing for pictures with fans as he went on his relaxing trip.



“He’s healthy, happy and not drinking,” said a source. “He’s taking time to focus on working.”



Sources explained that the “Neighbors” actor would party for days as his serious drug problem grew after being introduced to cocaine and Molly.



“The partying got out of hand. He cared so much about his career,” said a source. “He went through a lot of pills even though it was clear he was entering a danger zone.”



The actor reportedly missed multiple days of shooting Seth Rogen’s film, “Neighbors,” in April due to his struggle with cocaine.



Efron finally decided to clean up his act after doing cocaine for more than two years and completed his second stint in a treatment facility about five months ago.



Efron appeared at the Toronto International Film Festival to promote his new drama, “Parkland,” about John F. Kennedy’s assassination and said he feel like his career is moving in a new direction.



“It’s really a surreal experience for me. It feels very mature and really interesting. It’s a different kind of filmmaking and I feel blessed to have been a part of it,” said Efron to USA Today.



Efron has never been an actor who creates too much attention or speaks extensively about his personal life and lets his work do the talking. Hopefully his fans will get to see Efron continue to live his sober and drug free life as he continues to focus on exciting new projects.



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.