Dr. Roberts is a professor at the University of Wisconsin and a healthcare consultant.

First thing Monday morning, Bonnie Carter served fresh melon slices to the press, fellow members of the FMEMC, and a firehouse Dalmatian.

Family Medicine Education for Mendocino County is a brand-new 501(c) 3 organization that is working to bring a Family Medicine Residency program to Ukiah Valley Medical Center by 2018. And the spotted guest? That would be Dr. Rich Roberts, who calls himself a firehouse Dalmatian, chasing after family medicine.

Dr. Roberts is a professor at the University of Wisconsin and former president of both the American Academy of Family Physicians and the World Organization of Family Doctors. He has traveled to over 100 countries, advising communities on how to organize their healthcare most effectively.

The FMEMC paid for his travel to Ukiah (out of non-donated funds) to help launch the Family Medicine Residency Program last weekend. He continues to practice medicine in the small town of Belleville, near Madison, Wisconsin.

In fact, he prefers to be introduced simply as a family doctor, a profession which he believes can correct some of the imbalances in the modern American health care system.

According to Dan Munro of Forbes, the U.S. is expected to spend $3.207 trillion on healthcare this year, or about $10,000 per person. Munro addresses high deductibles that may lead patients to delay care, but Roberts cites additional reasons that many patients may wait until they can no longer endure a health problem: they do not have a relationship with a trusted family doctor. And a high density of specialists can lead to procedures that may not be appropriate or cost-effective.

It’s a familiar argument. But what’s the solution? According to Charlie Evans, CEO of Pacific Redwood Medical Group, Mendocino County needs 42 family doctors to serve its widely spread-out population. There are 28 in the county, nine of them over the age of 65. Recruitment costs are about $100,000 per doctor, and four out of seven new recruits have recently left the area. What is the solution to that problem?

According to Gwen Matthews, CEO of UVMC, we need to “grow our own” family doctors. Dr. Roberts asserts that 60- to 80 percent of doctors stay in the communities that trained them, while the recruitment process, in addition to being costly, can sometimes take as many years as the training.

The Residency Program is a long-term project, one that is not expected to start training doctors for another three years. Six new residents per year would study in the program, which would be taught by a combination of faculty from UC Davis, a full partner in the project, and a few experienced doctors at UVMC. It would operate under the direction of local doctor Noemi Mimi Doohan.

Residents must fulfill a wide range of requirements, including house calls, hospice care, a structured mental health curriculum, and hundreds of hours each working with patients in Pediatrics, Gynecology, ICU, Musculoskeletal, and many other disciplines.

Advertisement

Dr. Marshall Kubota, the regional medical director with Partnership HealthPlan of California, emphasizes that this program, should it come to Ukiah, will “not be an experiment.”

It will take “heavy lifting, continuous effort and commitment.” That commitment, he acknowledges, involves funding.

According to the budget consultant hired by UVMC, costs should run to $1.5 million over the next four years. Health Partnership has provided $50,000, and Adventist Health Corporate has provided an additional $100,000 in matching funds. FMEMC hopes to match that every year, and is already planning annual concerts and golf tournaments.

Dr. Evans stated that various grants will be available to the program after it becomes accredited, and implied that Health and Human Services and the county government would also contribute

So whom will this program serve? Dr. Noemi Mimi Doohan, founding director of the budding Residency Program, pledges to serve the neediest. If this program succeeds, it will be the fourth time she has worked to build a family medicine residency program.

Dr. Doohan is also the founder of Doctors Without Walls, a non-profit medical program providing free urgent care to thousands of homeless people in Santa Barbara, her hometown. Dr. Roberts hopes that alert residents providing care to children in schools will be able to address the healthcare needs of impoverished children.

Both are optimistic that larger numbers of family doctors in the area will result in more rural clinics, where it is often difficult for people to get to a doctor. End-of-life and palliative care are also high priorities.

One of the people who may be able to advise founders on crafting an educational program is Viki Chaudrue, director of nursing at Mendocino College. With the Affordable Care Act, many new patients have begun using a healthcare system that does not have enough doctors or nurses to serve them.

Chaudrue spoke frankly about the difficulty of attracting faculty to a position where the salary is not always competitive and the educational requirements are very high. She pointed out that holidays and summer vacations are a bonus that many in her field do not often enjoy, and Dr. Roberts and Dr. Evans spoke about the dwindling lack of interest on the part of new doctors to put in 80-hour work weeks.

Citizens had the chance to voice their concerns at a recent town hall meeting at SPACE in Ukiah. These ranged from financial questions to the impersonal quality of care they had received from specialists. Doctors and prospective patients alike mentioned frantic 15-minute appointments which they felt were unproductive.

There are systemic features which cannot be addressed with an infusion of new family doctors. It will be expensive. But, as Dr. Roberts asked of the Affordable Care Act, will it be as expensive as doing nothing? If all goes as the FMEMC and its partners plan, we will find out in three years.