Fireworks display is scheduled for the Riverfest 2015 finale tonight.

The CapFed Fantastic Fireworks Finale is scheduled for 10:30 p.m., overlooking the Arkansas River.

Radio station, 97.1 FM, will have a live simulcast of the fireworks soundtrack.

The final day of Riverfest will begin with the Kansas Health Foundation River Run, from 7 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. Several street closures are expected in downtown Wichita, near the WaterWalk.

The street closures will begin at 2 a.m. and last until noon at the following locations:

1. Lewis Street, McLean Boulevard to Waterman Street

2. Waterman Street, Lewis Street to Washington Avenue

3. Wichita Street, Dewey Street to Lewis Street

4. Water Street, Waterman Street to Main Street

5. Main Street, Lewis Street to English Street

6. Market Street, Lewis Street to Douglas Avenue

7. Broadway Avenue, Lewis Street to First Street

8. Topeka Street, Lewis Street to First Street

9. Emporia Street, Lewis Street to Douglas Avenue

10. St. Francis Street, Waterman Street to Mead Street

11. Commerce Street, Waterman Street to Mead Street

12. Mead Street, Waterman Street to Douglas Avenue

13. Douglas Avenue, Washington Street to Sycamore Street

14. Main Street, First Street to Williams Street

15. Waco Street, Douglas Avenue to Ninth Street

16. First Street/Second Street, McLean Boulevard to Wichita Street

17. Second Street, Wichita Street to Riverview Street

18. Third Street, Wichita Street to Waco Street

19. Central Avenue, Main Street to Greenway Boulevard

20. Murdock Street, Water Street to West Stackman Drive

21. Eight Street, Waco Street to Backbay Boulevard

22. Backbay Boulevard, Eight Street to Ninth Street

23. Ninth Street, Backbay Boulevard to Bitting Street

24. Jefferson Street, Eighth Street to Oak Park Drive

25. Oak Park Drive, Bitting Street to Eleventh Street

26. Bitting Street, Tenth Street to West River Boulevard

27. Forest Street, Oak Park Drive to Eleventh Street

28. Eleventh Street, Oak Park Drive to West River Boulevard

29. Briggs Street, West River Boulevard to Litchfield Street

30. Litchfield Street, West River Boulevard to Faulkner Street

31. Faulkner Street, West River Boulevard to Buffum Street

32. Buffum Street, West River Boulevard to Carter Street

33. Carter Street, West River Boulevard to Riverside Avenue

34. Riverside Avenue, West River Boulevard to Nims Street

35. Nims Street, Franklin Street to West River Boulevard

36. Wiley Street, West River Boulevard to Murdock Street

37. West River Boulevard, Eleventh Street to Murdock Street

38. Stackman Drive, Murdock Avenue to Central Avenue

39. Nims Street, Riverside Park Drive to Central Avenue

40. Spaulding Street, Murdock Avenue to Stackman Drive

41. Gilman Street, Murdock Street to Buffum Street

42. Buffum Street, Stackman Drive to Faulkner Street

43. Faulkner Street, Stackman Drive to Pine Street

44. Pine Street, Stackman Drive to Sim Park Drive

45. Sim Park Drive, Stackman Drive to Central Avenue

46. Central Avenue, Nims Street to Seneca Street

47. Seneca Street, Central Avenue to McLean Boulevard

48. McLean Boulevard, Seneca Street to Taft Street

49. Sycamore Street, McLean Boulevard to Maple Street

50. Maple Street, McLean Boulevard to Lewis Street

For a full list of Saturday events, click here.