Buy Photo Gretchen Rell is arraigned in Monmouth County Superior Court in Freehold on animal cruelty charges stemming from the hundreds of dead birds found in her home. (Photo: Tom Spader/Staff Photographer )Buy Photo

A volunteer for the Monmouth County Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals disputed there were hundreds of dead birds in her Little Silver home, after her attorney on Monday pleaded not guilty on her behalf to animal cruelty charges.

Gretchen Rell, 56, waved and said "hello" to a news photographer as she was leaving her arraignment in the courtroom of Superior Court Judge John R. Tassini, where defense attorney Dennis J. Melofchik entered a not-guilty plea.

Then, brushing past a handful of women wearing stickers that said, "I'm here for the birds," Rell threatened to sue the Asbury Park Press and Victor "Buddy" Amato, chief law enforcement officer for the Monmouth County SPCA. She told a reporter, "Check your figures," apparently referring to reports of the number of dead animals, at more than 300, which authorities said were found in her home on Mitchell Place in Little Silver on March 9.

Most of the dead animals were birds that were in cages stacked from floor to ceiling in the basement and garage of her home, authorities have said. There also were some dead rabbits, turtles, mice, opposums and other mammals that could not be identified because of the extent of decomposition, they said.

When asked for her accounting of how many dead animals were in her house, Rell responded, "Ask my attorney. I wasn't there."

Rell's attorney, Dennis J. Melofchik, said outside the courthouse, "I have no idea what that comment was about."

He added that he had advised Rell not to speak to the media.

"She had no intent of doing any harm to any of these animals or birds," Melofchik said. "I can assure you, this will not happen again."

SPCA was warned about Monmouth County dead bird hoarder but didn't visit home

Standing by his number

Amato, reached by telephone, stood by the number of dead animals he reported to the press.

"Our case has been handed over to the Monmouth County Prosecutor's Office for prosecution, and everything has been accurately documented, photographed and processed by a certified veterinarian," Amato said.

Rell, who also has an address on Unami Avenue in the Wanamassa section of Ocean Township, is charged with two counts of animal cruelty – one for the dead birds found in her home, and the other for the other dead animals, said Assistant Ocean County Prosecutor Melanie Falco.

Falco told the judge that Rell applied to the court system's pretrial intervention program, but was rejected. The program affords first-time offenders the opportunity to avoid a criminal record upon successful completion.

Falco said the state has extended a plea offer to Rell in which she would receive a probationary term with conditions that she perform community service, receive mental health treatment, have no contact with the SPCA, and be banned from owning or having contact with animals upon pleading guilty to the charges.

Melofchik said he will consider appealing Rell's rejection from the pretrial intervention program and will also review the plea offer with his client.

Each of the two counts of animal cruelty Rell is charged with carries potential prison terms up to five years, but there is a presumption of no incarceration for people, such as Rell, who have no prior criminal records.

Three pit bulls abandoned in Eatontown park

Prison term sought

The handful of animal activists attending the arraignment said they were dismayed at the possibility that someone responsible for the death of so many animals would escape incarceration. Suzanne Dragan of Aberdeen, speaking on their behalf, said more than 750 people have signed an online petition calling for a five-year prison term for Rell.

"They're going to give her a slap on the hand for killing all these animals," said Suzanne Dragan of Aberdeen. "That's disgusting. … It's more heinous because she was portraying herself as a rescuer."

Authorities said Rell was a volunteer for the SPCA who took in birds and other animals for temporary rehabilitation, but apparently became overwhelmed and started hoarding them.

Rell's attorney acknowledged his client was in over her head.

"This is truly a tragic situation involving Gretchen," Melofchik said. "She unfortunately was and is a good-hearted woman who really got overwhelmed by the birds and animals given to her care and rehabilitation."

Tassini scheduled a conference in the case for July 14. Rell has been free on her own recognizance with conditions that she cannot return to the SPCA or keep or care for animals.

Kathleen Hopkins: 732-643-4202; Khopkins@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/T3hfR8