Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro (Photo: AP)

America’s foreign policy reached a new low recently as President Barack Obama invoked emergency powers to declare “a national emergency with respect to the unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States posed by the situation in Venezuela.”

U.S. interference in Venezuela’s affairs has further strained an already troubled diplomatic relationship harking back to the Bush era. Washington has spent political capital it earned by improving relations with Cuba by supporting right-wing protesters behind the anti-government riots in Venezuela in 2013, a tragedy that took the lives of 43 Venezuelan citizens, mostly police and government supporters.

While Venezuela has historically struggled with corruption, it has taken swift steps in prosecuting security personnel for human rights abuses, acknowledging the need to reform police training and combat corruption within the force. Washington’s altruistic pretenses towards Venezuela are suspicious given U.S. aid to the regimes of Honduras and Mexico, which have engaged in systematic human rights violations. While all human rights abuses merit attention, the Obama administration’s selective indignation aimed at Caracas, and lack of criticism of violent anti-government demonstrations, raises questions about the motives of the U.S. towards Venezuela.

How would police forces in Iowa react if protesters burned government buildings, hospitals, buses and schools? Would there be sympathy for protesters blocking transit with trash and burning tires? It is unlikely police would show the leniency afforded violent protesters in Venezuela.

Does Venezuela threaten U.S. national security? Venezuela isn’t at war and hasn’t been since gaining independence from Spain. Venezuela was chosen by Latin American and Caribbean nations to represent the region as a non-permanent member of the U.N. Security Council and has been helping mediate talks between Bogota and the FARC rebels in Colombia to bring the longest-running civil war in the hemisphere to a negotiated solution.

Venezuela has provided discounted heating fuel to low-income Americans in the northeast and to 26 states in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina in 2005, and since, Citgo and Venezuela donated a half-billion dollars in oil. In 2013, Secretary of State John Kerry boasted, at the Organization of American States in Washington, that the time when the U.S. imposed its will on Latin American countries, as in the 19th century, had ended and he celebrated a new “inter-American partnership.” Two years later, we are treated to a cruel spectacle of hostile language towards Venezuela, a Catholic developing nation of 30 million, whose passion and love for baseball matches the enthusiasm Americans show for this sport.

Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro’s support comes not from violent terrorists, but from the largely excluded poor who now have access to housing, nutrition, health care and education. Times are hard for them, too, but they prefer the ballot box as the means of settling political differences. The Venezuelan Electoral Commission and its fully automated electoral system have a solid record and are second to none, with even former President Jimmy Carter praising it as “the best in the world.”

All political parties are using the commission to run their primaries, establishing both its credibility and transparency. Polls in Venezuela show that most oppose extra-constitutional regime change and prefer the democratic process to deal with differences. It is critical to note that campaigns for legislative seats in Venezuela’s National Assembly are beginning, and these elections, which include opposition candidates, do not pose a threat to America. As established in the constitution, the opposition can trigger a referendum in 2016 to try recalling the president.

America can benefit from a new partnership with Latin America, but it must be based on mutual respect for sovereignty, not “arm twisting” to impose disadvantageous trade practices. Obama’s announcement creates economic uncertainty and alienates American business interests in the region. Iowans can help put a stop to this by contacting legislators about this ill-advised policy, which will cost American taxpayers and drown economic development in the region.

VANESSA MARCANO-KELLY is a native of Venezuela who has lived in Iowa for three years. Contact: vanessacarolinamarcano@gmail.com.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1Co3Sh6