Last week, Rupert Murdoch, the king of all media, bid 80 billion big ones to buy Time Warner, which includes the whole TV behemoth — Warner Brothers, HBO, CNN and you name it. (Even he doesn’t want CNN, but that’s another matter altogether.)

While Murdoch, for sure, will swear not to make any changes in line with his political agenda, here are a couple suggestions he might consider:

VEEP episode 9 (season 2, episode 1): Julia Louis-Dreyfus. photo: Lacey Terrell/ HBO (Lacey Terrell/ HBO) Jenny McCarthy at The Women in Film 2009 Crystal + Lucy Awards held at The Hyatt Regency Century Plaza in Century City, California on June 12,2009 Copyright 2009 Debbie VanStory / RockinExposures (DVS/Debbie VanStory/RockinExposures) Julia Louis-Dreyfus ('Veep') and Jenny McCarthy.

VEEP

The Old: Julia Louis-Dreyfus as a hapless VP who can’t get anything done in a bogged-down system. The New: Jenny McCarthy as a right-wing VP and former stripper who gets everything done by flashing her knock-out knockers.

GAME OF THRONES episode 23 (season 3, episode 3): Peter Dinklage as Tyrion Lannister. photo: Helen Sloan (Helen Sloan) LONDON, ENGLAND - MARCH 30: Arnold Schwarzenegger attends the Jameson Empire Film Awards at Grosvenor House, on March 30, 2014 in London, England. (Photo by Mike Marsland/WireImage) RK (Mike Marsland/WireImage) Peter Dinklage ('Game of Thrones') and Arnold Schwarzenegger.

GAME OF THRONES

The Old: Emmy winner Peter Dinklage as Tyrion Lannister, a royal dwarf who crushes everyone that gets in his way with brilliant political maneuvering and military cunning. The New: Former Calif. Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger as Terminator Lannister, a royal giant who crushes everyone that gets in his way by beating the crap out of them.

NEW YORK, NY - OCTOBER 08: Candy Crowley attends Women in the Workplace: Reducing Stress With Meditation at Paley Center For Media on October 8, 2013 in New York City. (Photo by Robin Marchant/Getty Images) RK (Robin Marchant/Getty Images) NEW YORK, NY - SEPTEMBER 13: Kim Kardashian sighted on September 13, 2012 in New York City. (Photo by NYMSB/Star Max/FilmMagic) RK (NYMSB/Star Max/FilmMagic) CNN's Candy Crowley and Kim Kardashian.

CNN

The Old: Candy Crowley in a sensible suit discussing political affairs and the importance of new media. The New: Kim Kardashian in a shirtless suit discussing sexual affairs and the importance of the selfie.

BEVERLY HILLS, CA - JANUARY 13: Actor Sam Waterson attends HBO's Post 2013 Golden Globe Awards Party held at Circa 55 Restaurant at the Beverly Hilton Hotel on January 13, 2013 in Beverly Hills, California. (Photo by Frederick M. Brown/Getty Images) (Frederick M. Brown/Getty Images) LONDON, ENGLAND - JUNE 23: Former News International chief executive Rebekah Brooks and her husband Charlie Brooks arrive at the Old Bailey on June 23, 2014 in London, England. Downing Street's former director of communications and News Of The World editor Andy Coulson and the former News International chief executive Rebekah Brooks, along with six others, face a series of charges linked to the phone hacking of celebrities and others at the now-defunct newspaper. RK (Rob Stothard/Getty Images) Sam Waterston ('The Newsroom') and former News International chief executive Rebekah Brooks.

THE NEWSROOM

The Old: Charlie Skinner, the news director with a conscience. The New: Rebekah Brooks, the news director without a soul.

TRUE BLOOD, Rutina Wesley, 'Whatever I Am, You Made Me', (Season 5, ep. 503, airing June 24, 2012), 2008-. photo: John P. Johnson / © HBO / Courtesy: Everett Collection RK (©HBO/Courtesy Everett Collection/©HBO/Courtesy Everett Collection) WASHINGTON, DC - JULY 18: President Barack Obama smiles at the audience before speaking about the Affordable Healthcare Act in the East Room of the White House, July 18, 2013 in Washington DC. President Obama said that the affordable care act is holding insurance companies accountable and putting money back into the pockets of over 8.5 million Americans. (Photo by Mark Wilson/Getty Images) RK (Mark Wilson/Getty Images) Rutina Wesley ('True Blood') and President Obama.

TRUE BLOOD

The Old: Vampires suck the blood out of everyone in Bon Temps. The New: Liberals suck the blood out of everything in Washington.

Along with Time Warner comes HBO, CNN, Warner Bros. and more.

Russian President Vladimir Putin (right) denied a role in the attack on a commerical airliner Thursday. (Evan Vucci/AP)

TIME TO WAKE UP ON VLAD

Why do we put up with Putin?

My family used to own a business in Ukraine. Now they own a business in Russia. No, they didn’t move, but the political mood did when Crimea became part of Russia.

In February, Vladimir Putin put unmarked, masked forces on the ground in Ukraine, turning the rest of the world into helpless fools. No one could definitively say if they were Russian soldiers or not. Right.

On Thursday, a Buk missile system was smuggled from Russia into Ukraine. Later that day, pro-Russian dissidents committed an unthinkable act of terrorism and shot down a commercial airliner using a Buk, which they bragged about.

Putin can’t put black masks on the perpetrators this time because he’s one of them. Time for us to take our masks off, too. He’s no longer just a thug — he’s now a war criminal.

Sean Bergin, TV reporter for News 12 New Jersey, made ignorant, racially charged comments. (© Fox News )

RAGING MORON ON TV

If ever a guy should wear a disguise to cover his ignorance, it’s News 12 New Jersey reporter Sean Bergin.

The reporter, who is neither black nor a single mother, said, “The underlying cause of all of (anti-cop hatred), of course: young black men growing up without fathers. Unfortunately, no one in the news media has the courage to touch that subject.”

Maybe that’s because it’s completely without basis.

Then, in his own defense, Bergin said he’d gone “off the reservation” — another slur of an ethnic group with which he has no affiliation.

Unless this yutz grows a pair — of breasts, I mean — or changes the color of his skin, he hasn’t a clue. As a single mother, his remarks disgust me.

Sorry, Sean, you’re no Bill O’Reilly, and the plump, fiery white guy role is already occupied by Rush Limbaugh.

Mayor de Blasio promised a full investigation into the circumstances surrounding the death of Eric Garner in Staten Island. (Spencer Platt/Getty Images)

NOT DERAILED, JUST DE BLASIOED

Mayor de Blasio correctly postponed his family trip to Italy after the horrific choking death of Eric Garner, and he probably should stay through the funeral. However, earlier, the media was all over him for not canceling the family trip to Italy because of the looming LIRR strike. No. The mayor doesn’t control the MTA, and only recommends four of 22 appointments on the board. One reporter noted that Rudy Giuliani, critical of de Blasio’s decision, had himself been so busy as mayor that he didn’t even have time for his family. Right. Only for his mistress.

10,000-year-old rock paintings supposedly depicting aliens and UFOs were found in Chhattisgarh, India.

ALIENS FROM INDIA

The Times of India reported that archeologists in Chhattisgarh have confirmed that cave paintings of UFOs and aliens (of the outer space kind) decked out in space suits are about 10,000 years old. Since, shockingly, Chhattisgarh doesn’t have any UFOlogists on er, board there, they are bringing in NASA. What? Why don’t they call on Giorgio Tsoukalos and Erich von Daniken? Not only would “Ancient Aliens” pay for the research, we loyal viewers could discover once and for all whether Giorgio’s hair is alien or human. Better: If that shirt that “Aliens” contributor David Childress never takes off is also 10,000 years old.

LUBETUBE

Oh, those nutty Calis. A new female lubricant, Foria, made with cannabis oil, is now on the market — but only in California. The pot lube is supposed to relax women and lead to multiple orgasms. And remember, if you bring it to New York, do not smoke it — not even for medicinal purposes.