Scott Walker said Thursday he knows and likes John Kasich and Chris Christie, but the Wisconsin governor said that unlike the chief executives of Ohio and New Jersey, he didn’t accept Affordable Care Act Medicaid expansion dollars.

Drawing distinctions between himself and the other two sitting governors in an interview, he noted that his state and South Dakota are the only two states in the nation to have fully funded public employee pension systems.

Walker spoke with WMUR.com about the state of the campaign. He has been declining in recent polling in New Hampshire and Iowa, as businessman Donald Trump has risen to the top.

“What you are seeing right now is the expression of a lot of frustration that voters have, particularly Republicans. They are like, ‘We elected Republicans in the Senate. They are not getting it done,’ and I think that’s the big frustration out there.

“It’s August,” he said. “I know there is a whole lot of hysteria about things early on. I’ve found watching over the years and having been now a bunch of times in New Hampshire that people in New Hampshire are smart. They pay attention to the details. They are in for the long haul. They’re not just into the media hype nationally.”

Walker and his campaign disclosed to WMUR.com that he will make his sixth visit to New Hampshire of 2015 next week. The three-day trip will begin at a Republican Education Summit at Londonderry High School on Wednesday. Later Wednesday, he will participate in a town hall at Turbocam in Barrington and attend a house party in Derry hosted by longtime activist Chris Wolfe.

Walker on Thursday will make campaign stops in Sullivan and Grafton counties, including a town hall in Ashland. He will wrap up the trip with an appearance at a Politics and Eggs event Friday morning, Aug. 21.

Walker also told WMUR.com that he will return on Labor Day weekend and “will be traveling on a Harley through all 10 counties of the state.”

With the renewed focus on New Hampshire, he said he is confident that he will regain the strong standing he enjoyed in the state earlier this year.

“We’re going to keep doing things that allow voters in New Hampshire to see us for who we are, to ask questions, to put us on the spot,” he said.

While Trump leads in New Hampshire and Iowa polling, Kasich has made a surge in the Granite State after a strong showing in last week’s Fox News debate and an attention-grabbing visit to the state this week.

Christie has been to the state more often than either Walker or Kasich and is also returning next week.

Walker said Kasich is “a good guy” and has “a solid record in Ohio.”

“There’s a couple of differences between me and any of the other governors on the (debate) stage the other night, meaning Gov. Christie and Gov. Kasich,” he said.

“I didn’t take the Medicaid expansion under Obamacare,” as Kasich and Christie did. “I think that’s important to a lot of Republicans -- that I didn’t further Obamacare."

And, he said, “My state has a fully funded pension system. Wisconsin and South Dakota are the only ones in the country, so that makes me unique from the other governors.”

Walker also said he “took on the big government union bosses and actually won those battles. Ohio went through a similar battle. God bless him for trying, but in the end they weren’t able to sustain those reforms. We sustained them in Wisconsin and our state is much better because of it.”

Trump’s lead in the GOP polling is not a surprise, Walker said.

But he said that he is the best remedy for the voters’ frustration “because I don’t just fight about it. I fight. I win. I don’t just win elections. I actually get results and I’ve done it without compromising my conservative principles.

“The voters are upset, and what they really want is for someone to do what they say they are going to do,” he said.

Walker noted that in addition to Trump, voters also appear to be attracted to neurosurgeon Ben Carson and former business executive Carly Fiorina – “folks who have never been elected to office.”

“I think that is a common thread of frustration,” he said. “I get it. I hear it. People say, ‘Hey why haven’t they put a bill on the president’s desk to repeal Obamacare? Why have they allowed this Iran deal to go through? Why have they done nothing on Dodd-Frank?

“For me at least, I think the more times I can come back to New Hampshire and have town hall meetings and listen to people and respond to their concerns -- I came in in 2010. I came in because of this wave of concern. And I, quicker than any governor in America, took on the status quo. And not just in the other party.”

“We got it done and we did it right off the bat in a blue state.”

Walker was asked to weigh into the decades-long debate between Wisconsin and New Hampshire Republicans over the birthplace of the Republican Party.

“Ripon, Wisconsin, of course,” he said, naming a city in his home state which, like Exeter, claims the distinction.