High winds in south-central and southwest Colorado are carrying the hazy remnants of burning forests from out-of-state wildfires across the Southwest, creating air quality concerns and inciting a flurry of calls to emergency dispatch centers.

Smoke from wildfires burning in Arizona and New Mexico has floated into several counties in the southern part of Colorado, reducing visibility and inciting fear among residents that nearby forests are burning.

The Douglas County Regional Dispatch Center said it is receiving many calls related to smoke and is asking that people only call in to report actual fires, plumes of smoke or flames.

“Lots of concern regarding all the smoke which is coming from fires in (Arizona) and (New Mexico),” said a tweet from the U.S. Forest Service account for the Pike and San Isabel National Forests. “There are no fires locally!”

The Assayi fire burning in Gallup, N.M. is the wildfire closest to the state, roughly 150 miles south of Durango.

A blowing dust advisory has been issued for nearly all of southwest Colorado from midday Monday to 8 p.m., causing officials from the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment to warn those susceptible to respiratory problems in affected areas to avoid heavy exertion and stay indoors.

Visibility could be reduced to 10 miles in and around Pagosa Springs Monday afternoon, according to a news release from the department.

Red flag warnings have been issued for several counties across the state, including El Paso, Eagle and Gunnison. Much of the high country and western slope, including the White River National Forest and Grand Junction area, are also under red flag warnings, according to the National Weather Service in Boulder.

Monday’s forecast for Denver calls for highs in the upper 80s with southwest winds blowing between 5 and 15 miles per hour, the weather service said. Gusts up to 30 miles per hour are possible Monday afternoon.

Jesse Paul: 303-954-1733, jpaul@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jesseapaul.