There’s no such thing as a free check-up.

It doesn’t matter whether you run the numbers on a spreadsheet, a calculator, a 13th-century abacus or the back of an envelope, the Affordable Care Act does not add up. There is no way to give everybody everything at everybody else’s expense.

News of this has come as an embarrassment to congressional supporters of the health care reform law. “We’ve got some 17 million more people covered ... but they can’t access the care they seem to be entitled to,” said Rep. Jim McDermott, D-Washington. “It costs too much to use the care. That’s the deceptive part about it.”

McDermott was talking about the problem of high deductibles and co-pays, the out-of-pocket costs that skyrocketed for millions of people as the Affordable Care Act was implemented.

More bad news could be ahead for the math-challenged lawmakers. A pending U.S. Supreme Court decision could send the Affordable Care Act into a death spiral. The law says federal subsidies are available only for policies purchased through state-run exchanges, but more than 30 states declined to participate, so the administration went around the law with an IRS rule that allowed subsidies in all states through the federal exchange, HealthCare.gov.

If the Court upholds the literal wording of the law, more than 7 million people will be forced to choose between paying the full cost of their policy premiums or dropping their insurance. The sick are most likely to keep paying and the healthy to drop out, meaning costs will go up, revenues will go down, and premiums will vault higher, a cycle that repeats until collapse.

Even if the Supreme Court leaves the subsidies in place, math will kill the Affordable Care Act eventually. The source of the problem is the flawed belief that businesses are evil and governments are benevolent.

In reality, businesses are self-interested and good at math. Governments are self-interested and good at pleasing key blocs of voters.

So while the government was cheerfully mandating popular benefits like free check-ups, prescription drug coverage and maternity care, insurance companies were doing the math on how much it would cost to provide these and other “essential benefits” that every health policy was now required to cover, even if customers didn’t want or need them.

Nothing is free. More benefits meant higher premiums, higher deductibles and higher co-pays.

Advertisement

It’s easy for politicians to thunder that health care is a right, but there can’t be a right to anything that must be provided by other people. What about their rights?

Health care is not a right but an expense. It’s sometimes an entitlement, and then the expense is borne mostly by taxpayers.

Unfairly, the expense is also borne by doctors. Government officials maintain an illusion of lower costs by underpaying medical providers who treat Medicare, Medi-Cal and Medicaid patients. That’s why more and more doctors limit the number of these patients that they will see or refuse to see them at all. In California, the Medi-Cal program has added millions of new enrollees under Obamacare, and it’s harder than ever to get an appointment with a doctor. High deductibles aren’t the only reason people “can’t access the care they seem to be entitled to.”

To maintain the vital safety net and high-quality medical care, we need a free market: millions of people deciding for themselves what services they wish to buy or sell and at what price. That creates growth and abundance, with a surplus that society can tax to subsidize people who need help.

That’s the formula that built America, health care included.