Buy Photo Supporters of Syrian refugee programs participate in a candlelight vigil Monday, Nov. 23, 2015, on Legislative Plaza in Nashville. (Photo: George Walker IV / The Tennessean)Buy Photo Story Highlights It defies American values to reject people fleeing their nations based on racist attitudes.

Many of our leaders are shutting the gate and cowering in fear.

The authors both served in the armed forces and swore an oath to defend freedom.

We have come to expect extreme acts of barbarism from our enemies in 14 years of war.

The Paris assaults, the bombings in Lebanon and other recent attacks in dozens of places against unarmed men, women and children were tragic but not unexpected from a group driven by hatred and intolerance.

But we are sorely disappointed when, in response to these actions targeted against our way of life, some of our own leaders are ready to set aside the American ideals of courage, honor and inclusiveness to promote their own brand of intolerance and injustice.

In recent days, presidential candidates, governors, mayors and state legislators have begun demanding that places of worship be closed and that refugees face religious tests for entry and, if they are already here, face being rounded up by the military, interned and deported.

Have we forgotten that we fought a revolution to create a nation free of such violations of basic human rights? We hoped that such racist, fear-driven policies had been relegated to the past or banished to the darkest corners of the world occupied only by those barbarians.

The two of us, both Tennesseans, also share the warrior bond of having raised our right hands and sworn to “support and defend the Constitution of the United States.”

James Mackler (Photo: Submitted)

By our service in the military, we declared our willingness to lay down our lives in its defense. We have deployed to fight for the values that we hold dear and have seen firsthand what happens to a society that allows itself to be torn apart by sectarian fighting.

Other than our military service, we have little else in common. We grew up in different times and circumstances with different religious traditions.

Our differences are a source of strength and pride, not weakness and shame. This is how it should be for a nation of refugees.

Yesterday’s refugees are today’s gatekeepers. The gatekeepers should be manning their post, alert for the enemy but welcoming the innocent stranger, just as they were welcomed in the past. Instead, many are shutting the gate and cowering in fear. Worse still, as they hide behind the barricades, these “leaders” call for others to send their sons and daughters to distant frontiers to fight and die.

John Castellaw (Photo: Submitted)

We understand, perhaps better than most, the need for security and intelligent immigration policies. Those who come to our shore must be screened and vetted. Those that pose a danger to our citizens should be denied entry.

We cannot be silent, however, when politicians maliciously use security as an excuse for intolerance.

Remembering Oklahoma City among others, history has shown that refugees pose no more of a threat to our national security than native-born Americans. On the contrary, the contribution of refugees and immigrants to our nation’s prosperity is undeniable. Some of the worst times in our history were times that we let our darkest emotions hold sway, whether forcing Irish Catholics into ghettos, denying entry to European Jews during World War II or interning Japanese-Americans because they looked different.

Ronald Reagan famously described America as a shining city upon a hill whose beacon light guides freedom-loving people everywhere. As Americans, Tennesseans and military veterans, we urge leaders on every level to keep that light burning and rethink the xenophobic policies they are promoting.

These policies divide us and make us weaker. They ignore our shared history. They disgrace and embarrass those of us who have fought and bled to preserve American values.

James Mackler is an Army combat veteran living in Nashville and serving in the Tennessee Air National Guard. He is Jewish and grew up in the Northeast. John Castellaw is a retired lieutenant general who led Marines around the world. He comes from the evangelical Christian tradition and is the third generation on his family farm in West Tennessee.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Tennessee Immigrant and Refugee Rights Coalition holds a candlelight vigil to show support for Syrian refugees. George Walker IV / The Tennessean

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1jluGZP