Gov. Steve Beshear says that the state’s health care exchange, which is named kynect, is “transformative” and “life-changing” for Kentuckians. Courier-Journal file (Photo: Courier-Journal file ) Story Highlights Kentucky Gov. Steve Beshear accuses critics of federal health care law of being "disingenuous," attempting to be for a state program that is no different from Obamacare

The governor calls the state health care exchange known as kynect "highly successful"

The governor acknowledges that Kentucky's program was called kynect to distance it from Obamacare

Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell and other critics of the federal health care law are being "disingenuous" by attempting to be for a state program that is no different from Obamacare, Kentucky Gov. Steve Beshear charged Tuesday.

Beshear said the state health care exchange, called kynect, has been "highly successful," enrolling 421,000 Kentuckians — with 75 percent of them receiving coverage for the first time.

"That's life-changing for them, and it's transformative for our state," the Democrat governor told a Washington conference sponsored by Enroll America, a nonprofit, nonpartisan group whose mission is to expand health care coverage across the nation.

He acknowledged that Kentucky's program was named kynect to distance it from Obamacare, a name initially used only by critics to associate the Affordable Care Act with President Barack Obama. Obama was and remains unpopular in Kentucky.

RELATED: ERs seeing increase in patients under Obamacare

EDITORIAL: Romneycare and Obamacare

ALSO: Obamacare enrollment tops 413,000 in Kentucky

Beshear said he wanted to "carefully separate the politics of the Affordable Care Act from the health care impact of kynect."

"This was a very fine line to walk, and I'm still walking it," he said. "Nationally, I've become the face of Obamacare to many, calling out Senator Mitch McConnell and others who continue to try to dismantle the Affordable Care Act for being disingenuous now when they talk about it."

McConnell spokesman Robert Steurer responded that the Kentucky Republican still wants a full repeal of Obamacare.

"Despite the cancellation letters that were sent to tens of thousands of Kentuckians happy with their insurance, Kentucky did not need a mandate from Washington to start an insurance market exchange (kynect), and it doesn't need one to continue operating it," Steurer said in an email. "Public and private exchanges existed before Obamacare and there's no reason they couldn't exist after."

"The fact of the matter is that the federal funding for administering kynect ends this year anyway," Steurer added. "At that point, states must determine how to fund the operations without federal grant monies."

But Beshear said he sensed a change in tone from critics now that kynect has been used by 1 in 10 Kentuckians, who are "potential voters."

MORE: Read more coverage on Sen. Mitch McConnell

SPECIAL REPORT: Obamacare's Appalachian impact hotly debated

"Our senators and others seem to be looking at it a little differently and trying to talk about it a little differently," he said.

"You're seeing some of the worst critics — all at once they're trying to still be against Obamacare but be for kynect," he said.

Beshear appeared to making reference to a Louisville news conference on May 23, when McConnell called the ACA "the single worst piece of legislation to pass in the last 50 years" but was then asked if state exchanges like kynect should be dismantled. McConnell replied: "I think that's unconnected to my comments about the overall question."

His campaign later said the state should decide whether to keep kynect or some other system were Obamacare repealed.

Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., another Obamacare critic, was asked a similar question about the future of kynect, and he responded, "It's not an easy answer."

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share U.S. Sen. Rand Paul fielded questions Friday on the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare. Asked whether Kentucky's exchange should be dismantled, his answer wasn't too clear. Mike Wynn, The Courier-Journal

Former Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius, who became a lightning rod for the rocky roll-out of Obamacare, praised Beshear at the Enroll America conference, saying a "far healthier Kentucky and more financially secure" state would be his legacy.

In his remarks, Beshear recalled that, during this year's State of the Union address, Obama referred to him as "a man possessed" with finding health care coverage for Kentuckians.

"Now that was both humbling and quite honestly thrilling," Beshear said. "But let me tell you, Kentucky's success isn't because of Steve Beshear. It was a team effort and it's because of people like you sitting right down here in Kentucky."

Before the health care law was implemented, almost one in seven Kentuckians was uninsured, he said.

"Helping them is morally the right thing to do," Beshear said.

Reporter James R. Carroll can be reached at (703) 854-8945. Follow him on Twitter @JRCarrollCJ.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1q8PXVV