Topics: Father's Day, Gilles Rousseau, Gun Control, Gun Violence, Guns, Lauren Rousseau, Newtown shooting, Sandy Hook Elementary Shooting, school shootings, News, Politics News

This Sunday will be the second Father’s Day that I will spend without my daughter, Lauren. Lauren was a teacher at Sandy Hook Elementary School and she was shot and killed in the massacre there. So when Richard Martinez stood up and said, “Not one more,” days after his 20-year-old son was shot and killed by a man with a history of serious mental illness, I knew all too well the horror that he was feeling in that moment. When he said that he’d rather have people channel their anger and frustration into calling on their legislators to act in lieu of sending their condolences, I shared his sentiment.

Lauren loved working with children and was the kindest person I’ve ever known. She was 30 years old and with so much to look forward to in life. It’s been 18 months since Lauren and 25 other children and educators were gunned down, and time has barely begun to heal the wounds of her death.

They say you can never take life for granted and this saying has taken on such tragic significance after Lauren was killed.

I wish that the death of my daughter wasn’t what roused me to action on this issue. But it wasn’t until after Lauren was killed that I came to fully understand how incredibly weak our gun laws are and that gun violence occurs so much more often in America than in any other civilized nation on the face of the earth.

Responsible gun owners have the right to own and use guns, and American also have the right to live in a country with common-sense safety measures that will prevent guns from falling into the wrong hands. I, like Richard Martinez and too many other parents in this country, should be able to expect that our children can go to school or work without fearing that they might be gunned down. Our plans to attend our children’s graduations, dance at their weddings, meet their first child, and celebrate Father’s Day as a family should not be robbed from us because our elected leaders are too afraid to act.