Art by Mike Lucas

After seeing success with two portfolio companies that join with drugmakers to advance specific therapies, Abingworth has raised a $105 million fund that gives it more firepower to put behind this strategy, Brian Gormley reports for Dow Jones VentureWire. Abingworth companies SFJ Pharmaceuticals Group and Avillion LLP formed to provide pharmaceutical companies with another way to finance late-stage clinical studies of individual drugs. Even though many large drug developers are cash rich, they still face profit-and-loss pressures and aren’t able to fund late-stage clinical studies for all of the products in their pipelines. SFJ and Avillion aim to help them get more products to market by financing studies of specific drugs.

ALSO IN TODAY’S VENTUREWIRE (subscription required):

FiveStars Inc. has raised $50 million in Series C funding for its loyalty rewards business tailored for mobile usage. HarbourVest Partners led FiveStars’ Series C round and was joined by earlier backers Lightspeed Venture Partners, Menlo Ventures and DCM Ventures.

Malwarebytes Corp. has grabbed $50 million in Series B funding to help users disinfect their devices after malicious threats penetrate traditional antivirus software. The funding, led by Fidelity Management & Research Co., brings Malwarebytes’ total funding to date to $80 million.

WeLab Holdings, which operates online-lending operatios in Hong Kong and China, has raised $160 million in Series B funding

Shareable Ink Corp., a health-care technology provider, has been acquired by Digital Reasoning Systems Inc., a cognitive-computing company.

(VentureWire is a daily newsletter with comprehensive analysis of all the investments, deals and personnel moves involving startups and their venture backers. For a two-week trial, visit http://on.wsj.com/DJPEVCNews, scroll to the bottom and click “try for free.”)

ELSEWHERE AROUND THE WEB:

Startup Pays Cash to Buy Homes, Flip Them. Startup OpenDoor Labs Inc. has raised $80 million in a funding round that values the company at $580 million, The Wall Street Journal’s Rolfe Winkler reports. The company purchases houses and flips them.

Hyperloop Race Picks Up Speed. Two companies racing to build the hyperloop say they have held early-stage talks with governments in more than 10 countries, including China, India and the U.K., toward building a hyperloop by 2020, suggesting others also see prospects in the once-fanciful idea, the WSJ’s Jack Nicas reports. Venture-backed Hyperloop Technologies and rival Hyperloop Transportation Technologies Inc. are working to build the technology, which was proposed by Elon Musk in 2013. Mr. Musk’s idea was a low-pressure tube in which levitating capsules carry passengers at about 760 miles an hour. San Francisco to Los Angeles—nearly 400 miles apart—would take 35 minutes.

Human Driver, Taking Over From Computer, Crashes Autonomous Car. A human driver testing equipment for the startup Cruise Automation crashed an autonomous car in San Francisco while taking over control from the computer driving the car, the WSJ’s Mike Ramsey. The company confirmed that the car crashed while under the control of the human driver. A report filed with the California Department of Motor Vehicles said the Nissan Leaf test car crashed into a Toyota Prius.

IBM Bets on Video Streaming With $130 Million Ustream Buy. Startup Ustream Inc., which sells video-streaming services, has been acquired by International Business Machines Corp. in a deal valued at $130 million, the WSJ’s Robert McMillan reports.

Write to Mike Billings at mike.billings@wsj.com. Follow him on Twitter at @mbillings