ALTON — Mayor Brant Walker last week reportedly terminated his City Council liaison and chief of staff, who also served as the mayor’s campaign manager during his two runs for office.

The firing — or required resignation of Dan Herkert — happened Aug. 12, sources said. That same night, though, Walker said Herkert still was working for the city.

“It’s a personnel issue, we are working through some things,” Walker told the Telegraph at about 8 p.m., after the Aug. 12 City Council meeting. “He is still employed with the city as of this moment.”

Herkert later answered a reporter’s text message saying, “I have parted ways with the city as of August 12th.” He did not answer a question as to whether Walker fired him in that text or after a second, subsequent message from the reporter.

“(I) am very much looking forward to, and excited about, pursuing other opportunities as the ‘16 election cycle continues to heat up,” Herkert continued in his response to the Telegraph. “I remain on good terms with the mayor and will continue to advise him politically.”

Herkert did not attend that Aug. 12 council meeting, as he usually does. Friday, Herkert still had not cleared out his second-floor office, one of three in the mayoral space.

Walker has declined to discuss personnel issues publicly since taking office. He did not return a reporter’s telephone call on the matter Friday; the reporter subsequently filed a Freedom of Information request with the city with questions about Herkert’s employment.

State statute allows a public body five business days to respond to an FOI request.

The Telegraph had not received a response as of late Monday afternoon.

Multiple sources connected with the city, though, have told the Telegraph that Walker and Herkert have been arguing recently and disagreeing on the handling of some issues. Sources said the mayor fired Herkert after he returned from a trip to Las Vegas, with only the two men present at the firing. One source said Walker made Herkert “resign.”

Several sources also said Walker plans to hire Herkert’s replacement in October, an unidentified woman. Herkert reportedly will be compensated for unused sick days and vacation pay.

Herkert, a Hardin native, was in charge of Walker’s unsuccessful run for mayor in 2009 and his write-in race in 2013.

Reach Linda N. Weller at 618-208-6450 or on Twitter @Linda_Weller.

By Linda N. Weller [email protected]

Herkert http://thetelegraph.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/web1_HERKERT1.jpg Herkert For The Telegraph

Reach Linda N. Weller at 618-208-6450 or on Twitter @Linda_Weller.

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus