ARLINGTON, Va., June 4, 2015 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- Bloomberg BNA today announced the winners of its inaugural Bloomberg Law Write-On Competition for which 75 students from the nation's top law schools submitted original articles on current legal trends, which were published in Bloomberg BNA legal publications. Five articles were chosen by the company's senior editorial executives to be published and $5,000 prizes were awarded to the authors of the articles. Winners worked directly with editors at Bloomberg BNA to edit and prepare their submissions for publication.

"We are extremely pleased to recognize the winners of the first Bloomberg Law Write-On Competition," said David Perla, President of Bloomberg Law and Bloomberg BNA's Legal Division. "These students represent the best and brightest future attorneys from our nation's top law schools and we are excited to provide them with a platform to showcase their original scholarly work. We look forward to continuing our relationship with them as they embark upon their legal careers and supporting them with our flagship Bloomberg Law solution, which provides attorneys a platform for their wide-ranging legal research and business intelligence needs."

The winners of the competition are:

Bloomberg Law is an all-in-one technology platform that helps law firms grow their top line revenue, provide world-class counsel by getting the right answer fast and efficiently, and maintain and increase their profitability. This is done through a combination of proprietary market data, trusted content and legal analysis, and innovative technology - together enabling and accelerating client growth, client excellence and client profitability.

For more information on Bloomberg Law, visit here.

About Bloomberg BNA

Bloomberg BNA, a wholly owned subsidiary of Bloomberg, is a leading source of legal, regulatory, and business information for professionals. Its network of more than 2,500 reporters, correspondents, and leading practitioners delivers expert analysis, news, practice tools, and guidance — the information that matters most to professionals. Bloomberg BNA's authoritative coverage spans a full range of legal practice areas, including tax & accounting, labor & employment, intellectual property, banking & securities, employee benefits, health care, privacy & data security, human resources, and environment, health & safety.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20120110/DC33627LOGO

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/winners-of-inaugural-bloomberg-law-write-on-competition-for-law-students-announced-300094212.html

SOURCE Bloomberg BNA

Related Links

http://www.bna.com