Pottstown needs to be applauded for the great job that they all are doing to make the town better. West Pottsgrove, when are you going to start cleaning up your town from the top to the bottom?

I get a lot of mail addressed to “homeowner.” They ought to change that term to “home leaser.” If you stop paying your taxes, then you will really know who owns your home.

Tebow

I’d like to leave a nice shout out to Sanatoga Thriftway. Good luck to both the Joes. I worked there myself. The store is going to be sadly missed. Hope you guys do well. Take care of yourselves and hope to see you around. Good luck and goodbye.

Most of the Republicans who are running for president want to appeal Obamacare. What’s that leave the person without health care? Nothing. Just remember that when it comes to voting.

Advertisement

I need information about who to contact about mold in a public building.

It seems like all these Democrat women are really showing their stuff. We have Kathleen Kane, Hillary Clinton, Nancy Pelosi, all under arrest or either close to it you might say, for all the underhanded things they’ve been doing. I can’t believe it and then they holler about the Republicans how terrible they are.

To John from Mont Clare, regarding your remark saying these conservative presidents were bad, they were good presidents. Ronald Reagan helped this country; he didn’t put it into recession. And Dwight Eisenhower was a good man; I lived during his presidency.

This is to JTD. You say Ronald Reagan’s administration created 16 million jobs. I don’t know where you get those figures from because I’ve looked up a lot of stuff and I don’t find anything close to that. I think it’s a bunch of hooey.

I just want to put a shout out to Spring-Ford School Board for raising our taxes and making them one of the highest tax increases in the area yet again for the 15th straight year. When are you going to do something for the taxpayers instead of giving everything to the teachers and administrators? What does the school need that it doesn’t already have, another assistant to the superintendent? When is it the taxpayers’ turn for a favor from the board? Vote them all out.

Spring-Ford Taxpayer

It amazes me that somebody’s calling about the church using the parking lot at Edgewood School when the Hill School is using it.

To my critic, over 58 million babies were slaughtered in the womb not because of rape or imperfection but for convenience. There are always minuscule exceptions to any rule so that excuse won’t fly because those few are not part of the 58 million I’m referring to. That’s your typical Democrat answer when there is none.

Info Depot

Please stop investigating Hillary’s emails. It’s a waste of time and money. She has already deleted anything that would incriminate her. Don’t you know that she is above the law?

The president is not the only one making history. Our Republican members of Congress had also made history for being the most dysfunctional Congress in the history of this nation. Forty-seven members of Republican Congress will also be remembered for their letter to the radical right wing extremists in Iran to stop a nuclear deal. No shame.

I have an old refrigerator in the celler that has been closed for some time and when I went to move it, I found that there is a little bit of black mold inside. Before I ask somebody to come and take it away what’s the best way to clean black mold off the inside of appliances and anywhere else for that matter, walls or woodwork or anything? It’s only in the refrigerator right now that I’m concerned about. I would appreciate any information on how to get rid of it.

I’ve been watching the ball games that they have on, the Phils, the Dodgers, the Yankees. It doesn’t matter which one. If they would play as good as they spit constantly, I kind of think that the games would be a lot better. They get paid an awful lot to learn how to spit as much as they do. That’s not teaching our young children to grow up to be more conscious of what they do. Spitting is not one of the things you do.

“Always remember, the mind is your best muscle. Big arms can move rocks but big words can move mountains.” — Sylvester Stallone.

John from Mont Clare

If the grocery stores would stick to selling groceries, the drug stores would stick to selling drugs and the liquor stores would sell beer, maybe everybody would have a chance in life. It’s nothing but greed, sheer greed.

Sound Off is a forum to spur dialogue from residents of the communities we serve on topics of interest in those communities. Fair game are comments that raise issues of note or amplify ongoing debates.

We will not publish comments that are potentially libelous, slanderous, mean-spirited, vulgar or inappropriate. Publications of Sound Off comments are at the sole discretion of the publisher.