Peter Cownie (Photo: Special to the Register)

Too often the Iowa Legislature leaves unfinished business behind when it adjourns for the year. Sadly, I am sure this is not a surprise to most of our state’s citizenry.

I hear from Iowans every day with regard to their ideas, wants and needs. And while I’d like to make everyone happy, it is simply not plausible. In fact, it is the job of a legislator to make tough decisions while discerning what is best for his or her constituents, and to remain true to the principles he or she was elected on. It is often a tall order, and it brings me to an item that the Legislature did not come to agreement on last year.

Uber has become prevalent in Iowa. Uber operates in several communities, including my own. Uber is a unique and fairly new company that has revolutionized the transportation network industry. Iowans are now able to access a car ride from their cellphone in a matter of minutes. Uber provides a great service to Iowans, jobs for Iowans, and tax revenues to our state. We need to be accommodating for such an innovative company that wants to set up shop within our borders.

One problem: Uber is not regulated by our state code. I am not for frivolous regulation for regulations sake, of course. However, our citizenry need to be protected while allowing this industry the opportunity to thrive in Iowa. It will be a great disappointment to me personally, and a blemish on the Legislature, if we cannot come to an agreement on how to properly regulate Uber, as well as similar companies, this session.

The Iowa House passed a bill last year that would do just that. Uber supported it. But like a person without Uber, we could not get from here to there.

This session the Iowa House passed House File 2414 which would regulate this new-fangled industry, while working with our insurance and banking industries in our state. I hope the Senate will act on what the House has done, and I hope Uber will be part of the process.

This is important not only for the safety of Iowans, but as a symbol that the Iowa Legislature wants to welcome new industry to our state. The future of Iowa’s economy depends on the Legislature being accommodating and forward thinking while protecting its citizenry.

STATE REP. PETER COWNIE, R-West Des Moines, represents District 42. The district includes Cumming and portions of West Des Moines and northern Warren County. He can be reached at 281-3221 or peter.cownie@legis.iowa.gov.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1pbvxAg