President Barack Obama’s plan to combat greenhouse gases is entering its final lap, and now, with White House climate change hawk John Podesta gone, the baton has been handed to Gina McCarthy.

As the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, she’s become the face of Obama’s plan that will, for the first time in U.S. history, regulate the amount of carbon dioxide released by the nation’s fleet of power plants as part of the strategy to shrink the pollution that scientists blame for global warming.

Story Continued Below

This summer, the EPA will issue its rule forcing each state to design plans to cut their utilities’ carbon emissions — requirements that officials in many coal-dependent states say could threaten their power grids and Republicans warn will destroy the economy, but that advocates say are crucial to begin to slow global warming.

The plan has ignited controversy for bypassing Congress and made her agency a target for Hill Republicans, who contend the Obama administration is pursuing a radical green agenda. They have vowed to strip the funding for the EPA’s efforts.

Climate change may be just one of many issues, from immigration to government spending, where the administration will hit resistance from Congress, and Podesta acknowledged McCarthy may run into some bumps.

“We face a challenge in Congress, but I think that is the result of other factors [than the climate change initiative]. But we’re going to just have to deal with that,” Podesta told POLITICO shortly before he departed the White House.

On top of the fight with Congress, McCarthy has drawn a backlash from more than a dozen states and resistance from the entrenched power sector — challenges not unlike the ones that former Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius faced when rolling out Obamacare, another White House policy that threatened to upend a major slice of the U.S. economy.

Nevertheless, even many of her opponents agree that McCarthy is particularly well-suited for the job. She’s no wallflower and often pulls laughs from even the most antagonistic crowds. Her history working for Republican governors like Mitt Romney and her straight-talking demeanor create an easy rapport with some of EPA’s detractors, and her affinity for the details of regulatory policy can keep her grounded in the practical rather than the political issues.

Unlike Sebelius, the former governor of Kansas who was chased out of her HHS position after the disastrous early rollout of the Affordable Care Act, McCarthy earned her policy wonk credentials at state environmental agencies in Connecticut and her home state of Massachusetts before she came to Washington.

“I’m not somebody who wasn’t in the field before they took a position like this,” she said. “So I think I’m challenging to work for, because I make sure that everybody knows it as well as I know it, and I try to know it as well as the level below me knows it.”

Obama unveiled his Climate Action Plan in 2013 after telling Congress in his State of the Union address that if lawmakers wouldn’t address climate change, the administration would act on its own.

That main component of Obama’s push is the EPA’s Clean Power Plan, a set of regulations built off the Clean Air Act that will drive the biggest change in the nation’s power supply since Washington moved to end the utility industry’s dependence on oil in the 1970s.

The EPA’s regulatory efforts also provide leverage for the administration in its diplomatic efforts to reach an international pact at the Paris climate change summit late this year, showing that the U.S. is willing to take the same type of action at home that it’s seeking from other nations.

Opponents have ripped into EPA’s plans, warning the power plant regulations would kill the coal industry, drive electricity prices up and put the power grid at risk of failing as the rules forced power plants offline. They warn that the agency is trying to do too much too fast and that the unintended consequences could be costly and long-lasting.

Still, critics refrain from criticizing McCarthy. She wins praise from even EPA’s staunchest opponents, including lawmakers from coal-heavy states, such as Kentucky Rep. Ed Whitfield, who said he has great respect for McCarthy.

“However, I completely disagree with her and this administration on their climate agenda and will continue to do everything I can to overturn these policies,” the House Energy and Power Subcommittee chairman said.

Other powerful agency opponents include Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, who made support of coal and attacking EPA a centerpiece of his reelection campaign in Kentucky last year, as well as Louisiana Sen. David Vitter, who has regularly targeted the agency and has accused it of collaborating with green groups to create overreaching policies.

And Sen. Jim Inhofe (R-Okla.), who now heads the Environment and Public Works committee, has long butted heads with the EPA. He’s accused the agency’s “unelected bureaucrats” of making “unreasonable assumptions” about the state of climate change science. He’s decried the Clean Power Plan, saying recently it would “cost billions; it will increase our energy bills … [and] it still is not going to reduce the CO 2 emissions worldwide.”

The Senate leaders have made it clear that they intend to go after EPA in appropriations later in the year. They’ll hold votes trying to repeal the regulations once they are final, and there will be a barrage of bill amendments that aim for the proposals to suffer a death by a thousand cuts.

In the House, Rep. Lamar Smith (R-Texas), the Science Committee chairman, has led much of the opposition to EPA, contending the agency hasn’t been open with its scientific data.

The final power plant regulations that EPA will release this summer will generally leave it up to states to decide how to meet individual CO 2 reduction targets set by the agency. The plans are varied, and some of the proposed targets are likely to change in the final rule. Just last week, McCarthy hinted to utility commissioners that the agency is seriously reconsidering what cuts it will require by 2020. Many states have said EPA is asking for too much, too soon.

It’s a complex undertaking, one that requires the agency McCarthy leads to get the technical details just right and avoid any legal mishaps, all while conducting a difficult, behind-the-scenes effort to apply political pressure to reluctant state governments.

It’s a tall order for the hard-charging McCarthy, whose accent is a quick tip-off that she hails from South Boston. Her husband and three grown children still reside there, as does her dog, Emma, and she often breaks out of the Beltway for weekends at home, where she loves bike rides around her Jamaica Plain neighborhood.

McCarthy came to EPA during Obama’s first term to head the air office under previous EPA chief Lisa Jackson before undergoing a grueling confirmation fight to join the Cabinet. Prior to that, she worked under then-Gov. Mitt Romney in her native Massachusetts before heading up Connecticut’s environmental agency.

“There’s really only one place to get any kind of real experience for running EPA,” and that’s by directing a state environmental agency, said Carol Browner, a Clinton administration EPA administrator and former Obama climate adviser.

McCarthy agrees her background is a major asset in running the agency that’s not only responsible for the carbon rules but is developing proposals to cut ozone pollution, reduce methane leaks from oil and gas wells and expand EPA’s reach over new waterways and wetlands.

She’s steeped in the technical details and legal mechanisms of the carbon-cutting plan that would require states to lower the emissions from their existing power plants and force any new coal-fired power plants to use costly and still largely unproven carbon capture technology.

But she sees her role as turning the goals of the Obama administration into a workable policy more than directing her team on how to navigate the precedents of existing law.

“I tend not to read the rule language because I rely on the lawyers to make sure where commas go, but I really like reading the preamble because I think it’s important for us to speak to everyday people about what it means, what the law tells us to do, what the science is, that we understand it, and how to apply it, and what that means to them,” McCarthy said. “I think it’s enormously important.”

She may be more policy wonk than politician, but McCarthy’s begun playing a more visible public role to try to help sell Obama’s environmental initiatives.

In the past month, she’s talked climate change with X Games snowboarders in Aspen, delivered a speech about the threats posed by pollution at a World Health Organization meeting in Geneva and met with Pope Francis’ top advisers at the Vatican.

Complicating her task is the departure of Podesta, who exited the White House this month to join Hillary Clinton’s nascent presidential campaign.

Podesta was widely viewed as a key strategist at the White House, keeping the issue at the forefront of Obama’s agenda and steering the release of the proposed rules last year. But it’s McCarthy and EPA who must draft the regulations to fulfill the policies and implement the rules that will require each state to submit a plan to meet their carbon goals.

“And that’s a tremendous amount of work, and she’s a great leader and she’s got a great team working for her,” Podesta said.

“I think what has made this effort successful to date, and obviously there’s a ways to go, is that she’s a great listener and [has] been all over the country talking to stakeholders, from governors to utilities to environmentalists to state regulators, and she incorporates that ability to listen into kind of practical solutions,” he said.

White House officials say they are in regular contact with the EPA administrator, although turnover in the West Wing has increased. In addition to Podesta’s departure, acting head of the White House’s Council on Environmental Quality Michael Boots is leaving after holding the position for the year since Nancy Sutley left the job.

“We’ve got EPA’s back here at the White House,” said Dan Utech, a White House energy and climate adviser. Still, while it was Obama who directed EPA to cut carbon emissions from power plants, EPA is “driving the program in terms of the details,” he added.

So far, 13 states have joined in a lawsuit filed by Ohio coal producer Murray Energy to challenge EPA’s carbon rule-making in a state-federal battle that’s not unlike the disputes around Obamacare.

But there are some crucial differences between the health care law and the climate change initiative, which could benefit EPA in the end.

For one, “the Affordable Care Act was a new law,” said Browner, and the Clean Air Act is not.

EPA has been implementing the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments for 25 years, and there’s a long list of court decisions that has come to guide the agency, Browner said.

In fact, the Supreme Court has already issued several rulings in recent years that support EPA’s power to regulate greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide, and specifically to do so for power plants.

But it won’t be easy to force some states to do what they don’t want to do. EPA has taken over in the past when states balked at its pollution efforts, but never a program so complicated, and individually tailored to states’ widely varied situations.

For Obama, who sees addressing the threats of climate change as a legacy issue, McCarthy is his closer. She’s tasked with bringing the federal government’s efforts to curb climate-changing pollution over the finish line and making sure they last into the future.

“I think we are now in a plan that’s very mature, and that we are months away from delivering some of the major pieces,” McCarthy said. EPA is due to release a trio of final greenhouse gas regulations — for existing, modified and future power plants — midsummer. “So I’m incredibly confident.”

But with Republicans in Congress preparing to put EPA and its regulations under the microscope in the coming months — and potentially using their control over funding for the agency to fight the rules — the political battle over the climate change policy is only beginning. And that’s certain to put an even brighter spotlight on McCarthy.

“You know, I learned a long time ago not to take these things personally,” she said, asserting that she wasn’t surprised by partisan battles. “I’ve been on the Hill a lot, and as long as I get treated with respect, I don’t mind differing opinions, and I will always treat everybody else with respect.”

And while criticism on the Hill about Obama administration officials can veer into personality complaints, that’s not the case with McCarthy.

“I was on a plane recently with half a dozen or so House representatives,” some in leadership, Browner remarked. “And they all without solicitation commented on how much they liked her. I think being liked is important” for dealing with Congress, Browner said.

“She’s so down to earth. She’s just very reasonable.”