See who's been arrested, accused, convicted or released in Southern Arizona this month. An arrest is not a presumption of guilt.

See who's been arrested, accused, convicted or released in Southern Arizona this month. An arrest is not a presumption of guilt.

See who's been arrested, accused, convicted or released in Southern Arizona this month. An arrest is not a presumption of guilt.

See who's been arrested, accused, convicted or released in Southern Arizona this month. An arrest is not a presumption of guilt.

The search for a missing Tucson woman has resumed on Mt. Graham and her family is asking for help to find their missing loved one.

Officials in Graham County are looking for 53-year-old Mary Sloan, who was last seen on Sept. 3 on Mt. Graham, according to Lt. Jerry Nelson of Graham County Sheriff's Office.

Sloan is 5'3" tall, and weighs 110 pounds.

She was last seen in the Columbine area of Mount Graham wearing a green shirt and blue jeans.

Search efforts were suspended because of limited resources on Labor Day, but Nelson said they would resume Tuesday, Sept. 8. Sloan’s sister, Sherrie Brown said they are not concerned about the suspended search.

“We are very appreciative of all the work they’ve done up to this point,” Brown said.

Brown and her fiancé, Leroy Wood, are sharing the information in the Tucson area while their third sister does the same in Phoenix.

Sloan went camping with a group of people, Nelson said.

He said she knew one person in the group, who had joined her on a previous hike in the Flagstaff area. Family members later learned that Brown knew several people on the camping trip.

“Today we found a little more information, which is not any more fulfilling as far as bringing her home,” Wood said. “But it does give the sisters a piece of mind.”

Several people in the group, which meets a couple times a year, according to Nelson, went to bed at about 8:30 p.m. He said they were camping off of a Forest Service access road, not at an establish campground.

Sloan was not in her tent the following morning. Her cell phone, purse and bag were left at the campsite.

Though she has not been told that foul play is suspected, Brown said it is difficult not to worry that something went wrong on Mount Graham.

A ground search began on Sept. 4 and continued throughout the weekend.

Arizona Department of Public Safety helicopter crews were dispatched on Sept. 6.Search and rescue personnel from Maricopa, Cochise and Pima counties were to continue the search along the mountains and cliffs on Sept. 8.

The family is also requesting that trained search and rescue people and high-angle rescue crew members interested in assisting should contact the Graham County Sheriff's Office.

Sloan’s been missing for days, but her family and friends are still hopeful that she will be rescued.

“We’ve seen other stories like this,” Wood said. “It’s really nice to see the helicopter go up there and bring someone back and that’s what the family would really love to happen.”

Brown added that this situation should serve as a remind to anyone planning long hikes or camping trips to share the specifics with loved ones.

Brown said all she knew before her sister’s trip was that she was going to Mount Graham.

Anyone with information about Sloan's whereabouts is urged to call the Graham County Sheriff's Office at (928) 428-3141 or (928) 428-0808.

Copyright 2015 Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.