Democrat Mark Harris, left and Republican Glenn Grothman right, squared off in a debate Thursday in Oshkosh, during which they disagreed on global warming and other issues.

SHARE Election 2014

Visit our election section for complete coverage of the 2014 spring and fall elections.

By of the

Oshkosh — Republican Glenn Grothman and Democrat Mark Harris sparred over social programs, taxes, global warming and other issues in a debate in Oshkosh Thursday, as the two compete to replace longtime GOP Congressman Tom Petri.

Grothman called for cutting income and corporate tax rates and said current welfare programs give able-bodied poor people too many benefits without requiring them to work.

"It is killing America," Grothman said of the welfare system. "It is destroying both our work ethic and destroying our families."

Harris accused Grothman of exaggerating what the poor actually receive in benefits and said the cuts that Grothman supports would mainly hurt the working poor.

"What is it you want to take away from them? Do you want to take the food off the table from those kids? Or the roof over their head? Or deny them access to health care?" said Harris, who criticized Grothman for wanting to cut income taxes on high-income Americans while reducing benefits for low-income Americans.

"How is that fair?" said Harris.

Grothman is a state senator, Harris the Winnebago County executive. Because Petri's 6th Congressional District in eastern Wisconsin leans Republican, Grothman is favored to win the race.

This was the second of three joint appearances for the two candidates. The debate, at the EAA AirVenture Museum, was sponsored by the Oshkosh Chamber of Commerce, and most of the questions dealt with the business climate and the economy.

On environmental regulation, both men said they support the Keystone XL Pipeline, but they differed broadly over the significance of climate change.

Asked about efforts to cut carbon emissions from coal plants, Grothman said: "You are going to harm Wisconsin's economy ... I think some of this is based on global warming concerns, and we really haven't had any global warming in this country for I believe about 15 years now. So as a result, I think part of it is addressing a problem we may find out is not a problem at all."

Harris said: "I believe that global warming is probably settled science. But to the extent that it's man-made or natural, there is probably some room for debate. But the fact there is global warming occurring is really hard to deny if you look at pictures of the polar ice caps or even snow coverage in Greenland.... So I don't think we can completely ignore carbon emissions ... I think even Wisconsin's economy can be better off if the government invests in or promotes alternative forms of energy."

The two also differed over the Affordable Care Act, entitlement reform, the Dodd-Frank financial regulations and the causes of the 2008 financial crisis.

Harris portrayed himself as a pragmatic problem solver.

"You need to seek common ground and compromise so that we can end this terrible gridlock," he said.

Grothman said he has a history "of getting along with people on both sides of the aisle," but noted on taxes, debt, regulation and welfare, "we need somebody with my fervor" in Congress.

Petri is retiring after serving in Congress since 1979.

Petri was sharply criticized by Grothman during the GOP primary for not being conservative enough. Citing those remarks, Petri now says he won't endorse Grothman, even though the two are in the same party. Petri did make a contribution earlier this fall to Grothman's campaign.