SAN ANTONIO - Firefighters union officials are once again taking aim at a new pilot program being conducted by the San Antonio Fire Department.

The six-month Mobile Integrated Health pilot program will use five paramedics to coordinate the health care of 286 individuals the fire department considers high-volume 911 callers. The department said the small group of callers was responsible for nearly 4,000 calls in 2013, costing the city nearly $2 million.

Dr. Emily Kidd, interim medical director of the SAFD, said the program is mutually beneficial to the department and area hospitals.

"We will not only reduce unnecessary 911 calls, but also unnecessary emergency department visits," Kidd said.

Fewer calls means more EMS units will be available. Fewer recurring trips to the emergency rooms helps hospitals avoid fines under the Affordable Care Act.

The program will cost $500,000, an amount being paid solely by the fire department. Union President Chris Steele said that is one of the main reasons the union has opposed the program.

"The greatest benefit is going to be to the hospitals, money-wise," said Steele. "They should fund it."

Fire Department Chief Charles Hood said the department considered asking hospitals for funding, but decided against it.

"There's no way that we would go and ask for any type of funding before we can sit down and show them metrics that make sense for them," said Hood.

Union officials said the program's use of paramedics from peak-hour units could leave the department shorthanded. They also believe the department should have looked to peer cities like Fort Worth and Dallas to help design the San Antonio program.

Hood said the program would actually improve response times and that the department did study other mobile health systems.

"We sent our paramedics to ride with Fort Worth. Dallas has a program. Our folks went to ride with Dallas (crews)," he said. "We've had an opportunity to study and see what other people's shortcomings were with this program and this pilot."

Steele said the department's goal to reduce the amount of calls from the high-volume customers by 75 percent is unrealistic. While fire union representatives played a role in crafting the program, Hood said it's unfortunate they are now attacking it.

"If we can create great numbers in the next six months, and it makes sense, then that's when we hope to get the funding and to create the sustainability to where this program works long term," Hood said.

Copyright 2014 by KSAT - All rights reserved.