For 37 years, the Open Door Clinic was up on the sixth floor of the old Professional Building in downtown Elgin, giving the people who came to it for help with syphilis, gonorrhea, chlamydia and HIV/AIDS a low-profile place to seek treatment.

But as Open Door celebrated the grand opening of a much bigger, more public headquarters on Larkin Avenue Thursday — between two banks and across the street from the West Side Jewel-Osco store — Open Door CEO David Roesler said that symbolized a kind of coming out of the closet.

"We're getting rid of the stigma" in an era when having the HIV/AIDS virus has become less of a death sentence than a chronic disease that needs careful management and top-flight medical care and counseling, Rosier said.

He said the new building will provide both testing and treatment for people who suspect they may have a sexually transmitted disease, as Open Door has done since it was founded in an era before AIDS was even known to exist. But its staff of 25 people, including one full-time and one part-time M.D., also will become the primary-care physicians for patients with HIV who may find regular doctors and dentists unaware of special precautions they need, or may even be afraid of catching the virus themselves.

Another nine staffers work in an Open Door satellite clinic in Aurora.

"HIV people are coming to us and saying, 'You will be our everything,'" for medical care, Roesler said.

James Burns Jr., a longtime Open Door board member who Roesler said was "a driving force behind the purchase of this building," recalled that the waiting room for patients at the Professional Building "was adequate but it was gloomy. Our clients were stressed."

"Part of high-quality health care includes providing a place where clients can gather without fear of stigma or discrimination, while being valued and respected for their differences," Burns said.

After the Larkin Avenue site started seeing patients in March, Burns said, he visited its waiting room and saw four clients, who had not previously known each other, watching TV and chatting with each other.

Roesler said the Larkin Avenue facility is designed to treat HIV patients with a level of service defined by the U.S. Affordable Care Act as a "patient-centered medical home model." This allows it to use Medicare, Medicaid and private insurance to help cover the costs of managing 700 HIV-positive clients a year. The center also will provide behavioral health and substance-abuse care to clients who need it, some of whom may have caught the HIV virus by sharing hypodermic needles.

Formerly housing a foot care clinic, the 8,900-square-foot building at 1665 Larkin was remodeled to include eight exam rooms. The building also has six offices for case managers who work with and give advice to clients, and rooms for behavioral health therapy and group meetings. About 50 to 100 people attended Thursday's open house and grand opening.

"We have clients who have been living with this virus now for 30 years," said Marcos Bostho, the outreach, education and prevention officer.

Bostho said that thanks to research advances, it's a new world for someone who has been exposed to the virus that causes AIDS. Where HIV-positive used to need 20 pills a day, some of which caused terrible side effects, patients now often get by with one to three pills. And side effects have been greatly reduced.

Bostho said he goes out into the community to places such as homeless shelters and colleges, searches out people who are at high risk for having caught HIV and tries to persuade them to let him test them for the virus. That used to be done by just swabbing the inside of the client's cheek with a swab, he said, but a stricter testing standard now requires him to get a drop of the blood for testing, similar to how a nurse tests a patient's red blood cell level.

"A lot of people think that by touching and kissing, they can infect people. But it would take an awful lot of saliva to spread the virus," Bostho said. "It is spread only by sharing one of four body fluids."

He challenged a group of the visitors to name those four fluids. They came up quickly with two — semen and blood. "Vaginal secretions," someone else added. But no one could think of what the fourth could be.

"In breast milk," Bostho finally said. The group fell silent as they thought about the implications of that. But Bostho said a law now requires all pregnant women to be tested for HIV. If they are found to be HIV positive, various "pre-exposure prophylaxis" treatments now can almost always prevent the disease from spreading to the unborn baby.

"It is rare now for a child to be born with HIV," he said.

Bostho said counselors also show clients how to keep from spreading the virus through sexual activity, and advise them never to share needles.

Tiffany Steif, one of the case managers who finds out about a new client's life and health situations and draws up a care plan for each, said Open Door also has several support groups for people in various life conditions. It also has a "peer mentor" who has been HIV-positive for 15 years and can share his experiences with newer patients.

Roesler said the organization's next big project probably will be to upgrade Open Door's facility in Aurora to a level similar to that of the new Elgin building.

Asked what other needs he would like to see met for the clients he sees, Bostho said, "better mental health for the LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender) community."

DGathman@tribpub.com