Buy Photo Sen. Wendell Ford sits under a tree in front of the Capitol building in Washington on a September 1998 afternoon. (AP Photo/Messenger Inquirer, Bryan Leazenby) (Photo: Copyright 2004 The Courier-Journal )Buy Photo Story Highlights Wendell Ford was a Kentucky public servant who has been a fierce partisan when necessary but never disagreeable about it. For that, he has many friends in both political parties.

Ford himself still would insist he has been lucky and more, but the 89-year-old former lawmaker is having a fight with bad luck right now: lung cancer.

If ever there was a person in the nation's capital who did not intimidate with power and a title, it was Wendell Ford.

The former four-term Democratic senator from Kentucky, who served from December 1974 until January 1999, was and is as approachable and down to earth as they come. Warm, funny, folksy, Ford has a way about him that can turn heads and light up a room.

His Washington entrances were legendary.

"How are all you lucky people doing?" Ford would often bellow as he came through the door and started shaking hands. Sometimes, the senator would just shorten his greeting to "Hey, Lucky!"

Ford himself still would insist he has been lucky and more, but the 89-year-old former lawmaker is having a fight with bad luck right now: lung cancer that is spreading, according to a news release on Friday from his former press secretary, Mike Ruehling. Ford is being treated with chemotherapy in his beloved hometown of Owensboro, Ky.

This seems a good moment to offer an appreciation for a Kentucky public servant who has been a fierce partisan when necessary but never disagreeable about it. For that, he has many friends in both parties.

Ford's closest friend in the Senate, the late Sen. Daniel Inouye, D-Hawaii, met the Kentuckian in 1974.

"I could see that he was 'truth in packaging' personified," Inouye said in 1998. "There were no fancy frills, or bells, or ribbons around him. He was down to earth."

There are a lot of Ford stories that testify to his unassuming good nature, but one told by Sen. Carl Levin, D-Mich., is representative.

"A member of my staff had brought his 5-year old son to work for the day," Levin said in his 1998 tribute to Ford. "The staff member, needing to attend an important meeting, left his son to play with paper, crayons and stapler, under the supervision of several co-workers. He returned to find his son no longer at the desk where he had been left.

"A quick search followed. The young boy was found just outside the office in the Senate hallway, where he had stopped Senator Wendell Ford and attempted to sell him a book (artful pages of crayon scribbles, stapled togther) for a nickel. Senator Ford was in the act of earnestly requesting two and trying to convince the young man to accept a dime as superior to the requested nickel."

Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., who in 2009 eclipsed Ford's record as the longest-serving Kentucky senator, said at that time that Ford stood with the other great figures who have served the commonwealth in the Senate: Henry Clay, John Breckinridge, A.B. "Happy" Chandler, Alben Barkley and John Sherman Cooper.

Ford was successful as a politician, McConnell said, "because even while he attained high office, he never forgot the lessons he learned working alongside his parents on the farm."

"Countless times he reminded voters he was 'just a country boy from Yellow Creek,' " McConnell said. "And Kentuckians respected him for proving that a country boy could walk the corridors of power, dine with kings and presidents, and still come back to Yellow Creek and be right at home."

During his time in Washington, Ford was instrumental in passing many important laws, including the Family and Medical Leave Act, changes that made voting easier (the so-called "motor voter" law) and funding for energy research including clean coal technology.

On a personal note, I first encountered Ford well before I started covering Washington for The Courier-Journal in late 1997.

As a reporter for what was then Knight-Ridder Newspapers, I covered aviation safety regularly almost from the day I arrived in the nation's capital in 1983. Reporters couldn't cover aviation safety without paying attention to the senior senator from Kentucky. The mid-1980s were plagued by multiple deadly airliner crashes, and Ford was outspoken in his disappointment with federal safety regulators and his determination to identify the problems and make fixes.

The senator could be tough on committee witnesses who he thought were being less than open about the state of the nation's aviation system.

A landmark aviation safety bill signed into law by President Bill Clinton in 2000 was named the Wendell H. Ford Aviation Investment and Reform Act for the 21st Century.

Ford's loyalty to Kentucky's cash crop, tobacco, was unquestioned. Often with a cigarette in hand or nearby, he battled hard to protect the industry and farmers, even as the tide of public opinion continued to turn strongly against smoking. (Ford quit smoking about a decade ago.)

Ford fought Clinton over a plan to give the Food and Drug Administration the power to regulate tobacco, but the agency eventually got the authority after Ford left Congress.

Even so, their differences did not stop Clinton from raising money years later for the Wendell Ford Government Education Center in Owensboro.

Ford's friendships run deep and so does the affection of people who know him.

Most telling, perhaps, is how the senator's own staff felt about him as a boss.

Near the end of Ford's Senate service, then-Senate Minority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., read a letter to the Kentuckian composed by the people who worked for the Kentuckian.

"These weeks have given us the opportunity to hear others tell you what we've also known all along: your legacy of serving our state, your labor of love on behalf of all Americans, and the unfailing kindness you've shown during your time in the U.S. Senate will never be forgotten," the aides wrote.

"On top of just being a plain 'ole good boss, you've also been a mentor, a teacher, and someone we could always look up to for guidance and support, no matter the situation. But most importantly, you've been a friend to all of us."

Get well, senator.

Follow politics and government news on The Courier-Journal's politics blog and Facebook page at

www.facebook.com/ cjpolitics

. Follow James R. Carroll on Twitter @JRCarrollCJ. He can be reached at (703) 854-8945

.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1rqzG1G