Shepherd's Hope, one of Central Florida's main free clinics, served 16,000 people last year, officials said at its annual fundraiser breakfast.

"Our patients are people you'd never imagine," said Marni Stahlman, the clinic's president and CEO.

In 2015, 16,000 people sought care at one of Shepherd's Hope five clinics because they had little or no health insurance and needed medical care. That's compared with 21,000 visits in 2014.

Stahlman said the drop is partly because the clinics' implementation of electronic medical records, which reduced duplications, and switching from a fiscal to calendar year.

"But we're seeing a drop and that's what we want to see, because we can't sustain the impact at this pace," said Stahlman. "Five years ago, we had 12,000 to 15,000 visits. We shouldn't be having these numbers," she said.

The clinics turned away 1,700 people in 2015 because they were at capacity.

"We need all kinds of volunteer providers," Stahlman said. "We're being stretched beyond our current capacity and our patients' medical needs."

Stahlman said it concerns her that nearly 22 percent of the patients said they were there because they had lost their health insurance within in the past six to 12 months. That's a jump from 17 percent in 2013 and less than 10 percent just a few years ago.

Stahlman attributed the increase to employers who have stopped providing health insurance following Affordable Care Act's employer mandate, and people who didn't renew their ACA coverage.

"One person put it to me this way: it's like a having a Lamborghini with no gas," she said. Not all physicians accept Marketplace insurance; people are finding out that they've signed up for plans with high deductibles -- in amounts they can't afford to pay; and there's a shortage of primary care providers in the area, she said.

"Here in Central Florida, the beautiful place we call home, the population has two-and-a-half times the national average of the uninsured," said Michael Griffin, vice president of public affairs at Adventist Health System and a Shepherd's Hope board member. "We see them by the thousands in our emergency rooms in Florida Hospital."

In 2015, Shepherd's Hope operated with 28 employees and 2,200 volunteers with $15.6 million in donated services.

nmiller@orlandosentinel.com or 407-420-5158