Topics: 1980, 2016 Elections, conservative movement, Editor's Picks, GOP, Republicans, Ronald Reagan, Ted Cruz, Texas, The Right, Politics News

Ted Cruz gave a rip-roaring speech at the Texas Republican convention last week, pretty much confirming the speculation that he’s running hard for president (not that there had been much doubt). All accounts are that he was very well received by the ultra-right conservatives of the Texas GOP. They like their Angus steaks bloody and rare and he delivered.

First he laid out his agenda, which is actually quite clever:

… from repealing “every blessed word” of Obamacare and the Common Core educational standards, to auditing the Federal Reserve and standing with Israel and dissidents around the world. He even struck a populist note, saying, “the rich keep getting richer and richer, and everyone else gets left behind,” while those in the “corrupt, bipartisan cabal in Washington” succeed.

Mix together a dash of Rand Paul, a soupçon of Tea Party, a smidgen of standard Washington loathing and even a tiny skosh of Occupy Wall Street and you’ve got the basis for an unusual GOP amuse bouche. Ladle on some Ronald Reagan secret sauce and you’ve got a Republican recipe that actually sounds like it might work:

“There was a time when we had another president, like President Obama, we had Jimmy Carter,” he said to boos. “And all of us remember how quickly things can change.”

The senator, who at times has been a pariah within his own party in Washington and faced tough headlines over his role in the government shutdown last fall, said of Reagan, as he praised him for ending the Cold War: “All of the intelligentsia, all of the cognoscenti, they tittered at such uneducated, Philistine views. He didn’t have the sophistication, he didn’t have the nuance, he didn’t understand detente — which I’m pretty sure is French for surrender.”

He said “cognoscenti.” And his little dig at the French is a very Reaganesque kind of joke.

But he’s right about the bigger picture there as well. The intelligentsia did dismiss Reagan as a clown, to the extent that many of them literally couldn’t believe he could win. It simply wasn’t possible for someone with such a far-right hawkish worldview to become president. Surely someone with these simplistic ideas could never become president. He was nothing but an actor, for goodness’ sake. We know what happened. And one cannot help hearing the echoes of that point of view today when it’s taken as an article of faith that the American people must reject the GOP because of its extremism.

Cruz also made a case for himself as the new Reagan based upon a couple of structural factors that have not been commonly articulated by others:

“In 1980, we saw the Reagan Revolution, we saw in the face of stagnation, in the face of feckless, naive foreign policy, in the face of America getting weaker and weaker, we saw a grassroots movement that turned the country around … that same thing is happening today.”

That shows a conscious pivot from the domestic affairs that have dominated politics since the financial crisis back to foreign policy and national security, which have been traditional Republican strengths. (It’s likely this will become an even greater focus if a Democratic woman gets the nomination, playing into their usual “feminization” strategy in a literal way. Benghazi!™ is just the opener.)