Republicans are desperate to avoid fiscal fights in the first half of 2015. Senate flips, GOP ready to rule

The Senate flipped, John Boehner expanded his majority in the House and now Republicans want to show they can govern.

Before the election, top-level Republican aides and lawmakers described the strategy they hoped would let them notch some early victories before the presidential election season is in full swing in the second half of 2015 — a play by Boehner and other leaders to quickly shift away from crisis governing and toward a positive agenda.

Story Continued Below

At the top of the list is to get a funding bill passed to keep the government open through most of next year, freeing up the calendar to take on other issues like a GOP budget and a long-term highway bill.

( Senate results by state)

Legislating won’t begin until after Thanksgiving. Both parties intend to spend the weeks immediately after election organizing for the new partisan makeup of Washington. Capitol Hill will burst back into action by Dec. 1, and that’s when serious lawmaking could break out.

Republicans are desperate to avoid fiscal fights in the first half of 2015, which is why they will try to use the first few weeks in December to pass a long-term spending bill to keep the government open through most of the next year. Funding runs dry Dec. 11, as does the authority for President Barack Obama’s administration to train and equip moderate Syrian rebels in their fight against the Islamic State. That provision could complicate the calculus for lawmakers’ hopes for a drama-free spending bill.

Congress will also try to clear a host of lapsed tailored business tax provisions and renew a government-backed program that helps insurance companies protect against terrorist attacks. And depending on the result of the Senate, Democrats may push to confirm a new attorney general in the waning months of 2014 with Eric Holder’s impending retirement.

( POLITICO's 2014 race ratings)

The hope is that this spate of legislating will clear the calendar for the first half of 2015, so Congress can pass a long-term highway and infrastructure bill, lift the debt limit and pass a budget. With two chambers of Congress under GOP control, the budget process could give the party its best chance to alter Obamacare, particularly if Senate Republicans try to use budget reconciliation, which requires just 51 votes. Congress will also try to fix the Sustainable Growth Rate, a pricey formula by which the government reimburses doctors who treat Medicare patients.

One wild card is GOP Sens. Ted Cruz of Texas and Mike Lee of Utah, who have together vowed to stymie any legislation considered non-essential during the lame duck period.

Senior aides caution that anything – or everything – can change. But it’s certain that this lame-duck session will not include action on big items like immigration reform, tax reform or a large-scale fiscal deal.

( PLAYBACK: Best of 2014)

Just as important as the year-end legislating is the internal meetings that both parties will hold. A Republican majority in the Senate would need to devise the structure of their committees and the ratio of Democrats to Republicans. Perhaps the most drastic change will be a new slate of GOP committee chairmen that will attack the administration’s agenda.

No fan of the Obama’s energy regulatory agenda, Sen. Jim Inhofe of Oklahoma is expected to ascend to be chairman of the Environment and Public Works Committee. Sen. John McCain of Arizona is likely to end up the chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee — a prime perch for his continued broadsides on Obama’s foreign policy. And Sen. Jeff Sessions of Alabama, one of the most conservative senators, is in line to chair the Senate Budget Committee.

An expanded majority in the House means there will be a lot of housekeeping on Capitol Hill. New members will arrive in Washington Nov. 12 for their orientation and leadership elections for both the House and the Senate, including new Democratic and Republican chairmen for the Senate’s campaign arms.

The House, meanwhile, will also need to elect new chairmen for key committees.

( Driving the Day: Top House races to watch)

The Ways and Means Committee, which is gearing up to rewrite the tax code, will get a new leader in Wisconsin Rep. Paul Ryan. Texas Rep. Mac Thornberry, a 20-year veteran of Congress, will now lead the Armed Services Committee. The Oversight and Government Reform Committee, Congress’s top investigatory panel, will get new leadership, as Rep. Darrell Issa (R-Calif.) will reach his term limit. Reps. Jason Chaffetz of Utah and Mike Turner of Ohio are seen as front-runners for that slot.

There’s one race that won’t be competitive: the chairmanship of the National Republican Congressional Committee. Some House Republicans spent the fall grumbling about Walden’s leadership. But Tuesday night will quiet those concerns.