My young friend Katie Kieffer is one of two beautiful and conservative Katies with books out this summer. Katie Pavlich is the author of Assault and Flattery:The Truth About the Left and Their War on Women, seeking to corral women to the conservative cause. Katie Kieffer is out with Let Me Be Clear: Barack Obama’s War on Millennials, and One Woman’s Case for Hope, seeking to corral millennials to the conservative casuse.

Katie Kieffer’s book has garnered the endorsement of conservatives including Karl Rove, Sean Hannity, Laura Ingraham, and Mary Kissel, among others. Katie sends along a few notes on why her book would be of interest to Power Line readers and on her appearance tomorrow at the Young America’s Foundation conference in Washington, D.C.:

My book promotes an understanding of the Millennials and how conservatives and independents can reach out to them and win their votes in the 2014 midterms and 2016 presidential elections. The Millennial generation is 95 million strong and has the power to determine the direction of future elections. I interviewed close to 300 doctors and surgeons and included their concrete, free market solutions for both opting out of and overturning Obamacare. I discuss how the federal government’s involvement in education (think Common Core and the derailment of higher education) and the economy has affected your sons, daughters and grandchildren. Readers can learn what real solutions look like for the future. Read Let Me Be Clear for your own education, entertainment and empowerment and also to share the book’s message with the young people in your life. I spent over two years researching this book and incorporated a good deal of humor along with my research so that it would be an important and fun read for all ages. I’ve already had both Baby Boomers and Millennials tell me that the book has empowered them to become more conservative and get more involved. The book has been featured on many FOX News shows and other national TV and radio shows. On Tuesday, July 29th at 2:30 p.m., I will be speaking at the Young America’s Foundation’s National Student Conference in Washington, D.C. I will continue to speak at colleges and conferences throughout the fall and winter to educate young people, promote entrepreneurship and empower Americans of all ages to take back their dreams.

I got to know and admire Katie when she was an undergraduate student attending the University of St. Thomas in St. Paul, Minnesota. She adds this note to her message on the book:

Power Line readers may remember me from my days as a college student at the University of St. Thomas. With the help of Power Line, I was able to successfully fight against the liberal administration and promote free speech on campus with my student newspaper. Today, I write a weekly column for Townhall and I’m also a contributor to The BLAZE.

Below is Katie’s nine-minute interview with Dana Loesch on The Blaze.