Experts: Dump gift card, create wellness culture

Forget the gift card. If you want to make wellness work well at your company, Jamie Mills suggests that you aim higher.



Make taking good care of yourself a way of life and a part of the company's culture, then you won't have to spend time and money trying to get employees to participate in your wellness program, and you just may see better results, Mills said.



"Incentives and penalties — I think they've run their course," said Mills, executive vice president of the Grand Rapids-based Mills Benefit Group, which offers wellness services to employers.



As wellness takes further hold in the American workplace, and as the Affordable Care Act alters how employers can craft incentives, Mills is one of a growing number of voices in the field that expect more participation.



Rather than focus on providing financial rewards that drive employee participation in workplace wellness programs, or for achieving specific health outcomes, and penalizing those who don't, employers should focus on creating a culture that emphasizes overall well-being, she and others say.



Ultimately, what affects medical claims and rising health care costs over the long term comes down to people wanting to maintain good health or become healthier, she said.



Workers may participate in wellness "because they get some money or they don't have to pay some money, but in time it has to become a lifestyle change," Mills said.



Affordable Care Act changes



Those sentiments come amid changes in federal rules over the kind of incentives that employers may incorporate in their wellness program under the Affordable Care Act beginning Jan. 1, 2014.



One of the biggest changes is an increase in the maximum financial reward for wellness from 20 percent to 30 percent of the cost of the premium for a health policy. The incentive can go to 50 percent if it's designed to help someone quit smoking or is tobacco-related.



Employers must still offer a reasonable alternative for employees who are unable to meet a specific health outcome — losing weight, lowering their cholesterol or blood pressure, for example — to receive a reward.



Mills doubts the changes in the wellness rules under the ACA will make much of a difference in the number of small-business clients her firm serves or any effect on employee participation rates at those that already have a program.

Clients in the last year have focused more on whether to even maintain health benefits under the ACA, she said.





"Wellness, as we're defining it today, doesn't get you healthier," said Brand, who used to run an employer-owned health program. "It misses the mark more than it hits."



Mills even sees workplace wellness programs in the next few years incorporating on-site care with physicians, physician assistants or care managers spending a few hours a week at a company to coach employees who need to change their lifestyle and improve their health.



"Just giving them a penalty or a reward just because they had their biometric testing doesn't do a darn thing," Mills said. "What are we going to do about it? We have to provide somebody to help them."



Finding the return



McGraw Wentworth's managing director, Becky McLaughlan, sees the change toward outcomes-based programs as a natural evolution of wellness as employers seek to drive participation rates higher and generate actual results.



"Just inviting people to participate and show up for a (health) screening or do the health assessment isn't enough to move the needle," McLaughlan said.



The change in how employers view wellness is being driven, in part, by the difficulty in gauging the financial return on investment for company wellness programs. Although a dollar figure is hard to gauge, the presumption for many employers is that reducing health risks will pay off eventually through lower medical claims if employees can be persuaded to stick with wellness and lead a healthier lifestyle.



"You have to assume if people start losing weight and BMIs start going down, people stop smoking, and glucose levels go down, that should reduce their costs over the long term," McLaughlan said.



The difficulty in determining financial return on investment remains one of the main reasons employers don't have a wellness program.



Mills, however, believes employers need to look at more than just the straight financial considerations and how the money spent on wellness equates to lower employee medical claims and health care costs. The effects on employee morale, productivity and absenteeism should go into the equation, she said.



"Somebody who is sick and missing work is not the same as somebody who is taking care of themselves and physically at work and performing their job to the highest capacity," Mills said. "We try to tell employers that although you're not going to get a financial insurance reward, you're going to get a financial employee reward. You're going to have a healthy employee that is a bigger and better participant in your workplace."



And, as McGraw Wentworth's O'Brien says, the cost of perhaps avoiding a major health problem creates a return for a company as well, even if you can't put a dollar figure on it.



"How do you tell your CFO, 'Ken didn't have a heart attack because we put in this wellness program'?" she said.