Lynchburg, VA - Emergency Room visits continue to climb under the Affordable Care Act -- undercutting a major selling point.

Whether it starts with a 911 call,or they simply walk in. Each year, thousands of people enter the doors of the Lynchburg General Emergency room.

"About 90,000 Emergency room visits we'll hit this year" said Executive Vice President Centra David Adams.

Out of those patients around 10 thousand visited the E-R more than five times. But not every case is an emergency and Adams says not every patient is insured.

"If you look at the Emergency Room, it often is the place where individuals who can't afford, or don't have insurance, or even have Medicaid coverage end up having to go because of lack of access" said Adams.

As a non-profit Centra must provide charitable care to uninsured low-income patients. Last year, that care amounted to 47-million-dollars.

10 years ago, the number was just 14-million, and that doesn't account for all unpaid care, "If you have a high enough income level but have no insurance and decide not to pay your bill, we would eventually write that off as bad debt" said Adams.

Last year in bad debt, Centra wrote off 46 million dollars. To make up for those who don't qualify for Charity Care but can't pay their bills, Centra raises its prices on those who can --- meaning you and I will pay more.

"If you have a portion of your patients who can't pay their bills or don't pay their bills, then we have to raise our prices" said Adams.

"Exactly, there is no free Lunch" said Washington and Lee professor Ge Bai. Bai began looking into medical billing costs after receiving a bill of her own when she gave birth to her son six years ago.

"Then I asked myself, If I as a CPA could not understand the hospital bill how can the average American understand it?" questioned Bai. During Bai's research, she discovered the average hospital markup is 3.4 times what Medicare agrees to pay, meaning if Medicare pays $100 then you would walk out with a $340 bill for the same service.

She also found 50 hospitals marked up their prices as high as 10x the Medicare rate. "If hospitals have a high charge we end up paying a higher premium" said Bai.

Centra marksup its rate 2.6 times the Medicare rate, which is below the national average.. So while many in-network insurance providers negotiate lower costs, she says out-of-network patients are subject to that full rate. "It's not fair for any group of patients to subsidize the other" said Bai.

Bai believes it's time for policy makers to step in. "Just like they regulate the utility industry. They need to regulate, to some extent, hospital charges Nobody is immune from the negative financial impact from high hospital charges" said Bai.

Centra Executive Vice President David Adams says a major problem in this area is access to primary care.

So they are working on a few solutions. For example, they've come up with a program that works with frequent E-R visitors to help them find a suitable solution for their medical needs -- like referring them to the Johnson Healthcare Center.

They also have a MobileMed unit -- which is a traveling free clinic that serves areas with the most uninsured or underinsured patients.

On top of that the recent acquisition of the Bedford Memorial Hospital and the new Gretna Hospital, they believe will also take some pressure off the Lynchburg ER.