New Poll Shows Dead Heat In Maine Govs Race As Cutler and Michaud Face Off In Debate

Two of the three gubernatorial candidates faced off Friday morning in their third debate. Governor LePage was not at the event hosted by the Androscoggin county Chamber of Commerce and held the Ramada in Lewiston. LePage’s absence left Independent Eliot Cutler and Democrat Mike Michaud to go head-to-head for the first time.

The pair do share some common ground on issues like raising the minimum wage and expanding Medicaid in Maine under the Affordable Care Act. The most glaring point the two agree on is the notion that there needs to be a new tenant in the Blaine House on November 5. Michaud, who rarely acknowledged Cutler was in the same room with him during the debate, made that point clear at one point.

“I just asked Eliot whether or not, can we agree that the best thing for this state is to replace the dysfunction that we’ve seen over the past 3 1/2 years and vote someone new in for governor and that’s one thing we actually both agree on.”

Cutler was quick to chime in, saying, “What we don’t agree on though is who would be a better successor.” That line drew laughs and applauds from the crowd of more than 300 onlookers, many of them wearing the shirts and campaign buttons from both candidates.

Cutler spent much of the debate hammering Michaud, on a variety of issues. For most of the morning, Michaud refused to fight back, responding by ignoring the attacks and going on the offensive against Governor LePage, who wasn’t in the room. For the third straight day, Michaud continued to attack what he calls “the failed policies” of the LePage Administration. LePage skipped this debate to attend a groundbreaking event in Washington County, leaving his two opponents with a little one-on-one time.

After the debate, Michaud was asked if he was hesitant to engage Cutler, one day after the Democratic Congressman publicly dismissed the Independent as a serious contender by saying he “has no pathway to victory.” Once again, Michaud ignored Cutler and went after the governor.

“I’m running for governor and it’s this governor’s failed policies that are so startling when you look at Maine. He’s held Maine back in a lot of different areas. The fact more children are living in poverty today, more homelessness. Forbes has us 50th once again, 47th on economic growth,” Michaud said without once mentioning Eliot Cutler.

The silent treatment doesn’t seem to bother Cutler all that much. When asked about it after the debate he smiled and shrugged it off.

“No, it doesn’t bother me and I think as I say, I don’t really care what Mike thinks. I care what the voters see and think and I can’t imagine that they came away…believing that the next leader of this state should be Michael Michaud.”

Cutler says he’s more confident he’ll win in November than he was at this point in 2010, when he came within a whisker of pulling the upset, even saying he, not Michaud, is the only candidate who can beat LePage.

“You know there’s this big ‘anybody but LePage’ cohort of voters. There’s a big ‘anybody but Michaud’ cohort of voters. I can’t find an ‘anybody but Cutler’ vote anywhere in the state of Maine.”

To date, there is no polling data that corroborates the statement that there is an “anybody but Michaud” faction of voters out there.

A new poll out Friday shows the race to be a dead heat. The Rasmussen Reports Poll shows:

(R) Paul LePage – 41%

(D) Mike Michaud – 40%

(I) Eliot Cutler – 16%

Undecided: – 3%

(Margin of Error 3%)

To read complete poll: http://www.rasmussenreports.com/public_content/politics/elections/election_2014/maine/election_2014_maine_governor