Jack Antonoff of Bleachers performs at This Tent during Day 3 of the 2015 Bonnaroo Music And Arts Festival on June 13, 2015 in Manchester, Tennessee.

The eclectic set list included "This Is How We Do It," "Dancing in the Dark," "Eye of the Tiger, "Juicy," and many more.

Where else but the Bonnaroo Superjam! would you be able to find superstars, rising up-and-comers, and A-list actors coming together to make music that will never be replicated? 2015's Superjam! took things back with a collection of (mostly) '80s dance-ready tunes curated by electronic artist Pretty Lights.

Like last year when Skrillex reigned over the sprawling affair, the 2015 party featured the guiding presence of an electronic artist - manning the boards, offering remixes and thunderous bass as needed, and playing the backbone of the just-formed group -- as well as a "house band" and a stream of guests playing the lead.

Bonnaroo 2015: Watch the Live Stream Here!

Before a single musician could take the stage, the surprises were already beginning. After performing an unannounced set together in the Comedy Tent earlier in the day, Zach Galifianakis and Jon Hamm teamed up once again to start off the late night party with a duet of "We Are the World."

zach galifianakis and Jon Hamm (Don Draper) singing we are the world last night at #SuperJam A video posted by ᕼIᑭ ᕼOᑭ ᗰIKE / ᕼOT 97 NYᑕ (@hiphop_mike) on Jun 14, 2015 at 8:04am PDT

From then on the announced and unannounced guests popped in for a song or two (or four), promptly caused the crowd to lose its collective mind, and then slipped away back behind the stage. Jurassic 5's Chali 2na held down MC duties as the artists reveled in inciting the audience into a nonstop dance party.

Kacey Musgraves Disses Radio, Plays New Music in Heartwarming Bonnaroo Set

Chance the Rapper -- no stranger at all to guest appearances at this 'Roo -- summoned the spirit of Christopher Wallace for a rendition of "Juicy," while Bleachers frontman Jack Antonoff seemed to more closely mirror The Boss. With a confident smile and a repertoire of stage gestures to direct the crowd, Antonoff blasted through Bruce Springsteen's "Dancing in the Dark" and Talking Heads' "Psycho Killer" as the sole lead vocalist.

#superjam #bonnaroo #reggiewatts @reggiewatts A video posted by STV~WH~C9B (@pr_stv) on Jun 14, 2015 at 7:06am PDT

Later, electronic-soul singer SZA popped in for Michael Jackson's "The Way You Make Me Feel" and then a duet with Antonoff, "Under Pressure," a star-studded collab effort in its own right with throwback heroes Queen and David Bowie.

Bonnaroo 2015: All Our Coverage

"Are you ready to take a trip down memory lane?" asked Darryl "D.M.C." McDaniels when he appeared onstage about two hours after the start of the show. He and Chali 2na performed a double block off Run-D.M.C.'s classic Raising Hell: "Peter Piper" and "It's Tricky." With Chali 2na to the sidelines, Cherub's Jordan Kelley tagged in for Aerosmith's "Walk This Way" and even pulled off a passable Steven Tyler impression. Kelley added a few colorful scarves to his mic stand -- a la Tyler -- and made (what sounded like) sandpaper tearing in his throat during his screechy rendition of the chorus.

#rundmc #bonnaroo. #superjam yaaaaaassssssss A video posted by whartonn29@gmail.com (@nnekab00) on Jun 14, 2015 at 2:34am PDT

Undoubtedly the weirdest moment of the Superjam! also happened to involve Kelley. As the indie-electronic artist sang the incredibly goofy Rocky III song, "Eye of the Tiger," Corey Feldman suddenly appeared onstage in a glitter-adorned jacket and with his eyes glued to the screen of his smartphone.

Bonnaroo Day 2 Highlights: Kendrick Lamar Rocks Old Hits

By 3:30 a.m., the event's scheduled end-time had come and gone and no one was in any mood to step back into the present. "Well, my friends. The time has come," offered Jamie Lidell as he launched into the first encore, a more than eight-minute version of Lionel Richie's "All Night Long." Chance returned to the stage to finish the night, running through Bell Biv DeVoe's "Poison" and then perhaps the quintessential throwback party song, Montell Jordan's "This Is How We Do It." As the house music came up and the chants of "One more song" faded into the night, the weary 'Rooers who witnessed the entire two and a half hour hour experience knew they had witnessed something special.