Cleveland law firm Squire Patton Boggs has a prominent new client: the Palestinian Authority.



OdwyerPR.com reports that the Palestinian Authority has signed a $55,000 monthly retainer representation contract with Squire Patton Boggs — the firm formed by the merger of Cleveland law firm Squire Sanders and Washington, D.C., lobbying powerhouse Patton Boggs.



Squire Patton Boggs was required to make a public filing about the engagement under the Foreign Agents Registration Act of 1938. You can find the disclosure documents here.



The firm will assist the Palestinian Authority “in assessing U.S. funding promises to date and help ensure that further commitments of financial assistance are … received by the Palestinians,” according to the story.



TruthRevolt.org notes that U.S. aid to the Palestinians “is approximately $500 million annually.”



Squire Patton Boggs also will help manage the Palestinian Authority/United States diplomatic and political relationship, and it will review the 1994 Paris Protocol that established the economic relationship between the Palestinian Authority and Israel.



OdwyerPR.com reports that the one-year contract went into effect Nov. 15. It will automatically renew for an additional year unless the Palestinian Authority notifies Squire Patton Boggs of its intent to cancel by Oct. 15, 2015.



Squire Patton Boggs partner Gassan Baloul in Washington, D.C., writes in the disclosure documents that he “will be primarily responsible” for the firm’s work. He reports to H.E. Shukry Bishara, minister of finance and planning at the Palestinian Authority.



Baloul “has significant trial experience, participating in the defense of federal lawsuits involving mass tort claims, complex banking issues, international law and issues involving the Anti-Terrorism Act and the Alien Tort Statute,” according to the firm’s website.





Not a fan

After this piece from Politico Magazine, it’s fair to say that Matt A. Mayer — the CEO of Opportunity Ohio and chief operating officer of The Liberty Foundation of America, both free market think tanks — should not expect a Christmas card from Ohio’s governor.



“Much is being made nationally about Ohio Gov. John Kasich’s big win on election night and what it means for 2016, yet much of that premature Beltway pontificating lacks a true understanding of what happened here in Ohio: His “big win” actually shows a much less popular figure than a first glance would appear,” Mayer writes.



He notes Kasich beat an extraordinarily weak Democrat, Ed FitzGerald, and benefited from the general incompetence of the Democratic Party, which once again could not win any statewide elections.



And there’s this:



The turnout in Ohio was historically low, with just under 40% of Ohioans casting a vote. Kasich raised over $20 million, with another $4 million in television ads from the Republican Governors Association, compared to FitzGerald’s measly $2.5 million. Kasich’s 2014 vote total only added 26,764 votes to what he got when he barely won in 2010. In contrast, FitzGerald received 825,389 votes less than Kasich’s 2010 opponent, incumbent Democratic Governor Ted Strickland.



To put Kasich’s win in Ohio electoral perspective, his “huge” win only provided him with 50,943 more votes than Republican Bob Taft received in his reelection effort in 2002. Kasich’s 2014 vote total was 15,667 less than Republican George Voinovich’s 1990 win and 479,136 fewer votes than Voinovich’s 1994 reelection victory—and this is during a time when the state’s overall population has grown from 10.8 million in 1990 to 11.5 million in 2012. (Even Strickland’s 2006 win snared 512,948 more votes than Kasich did in 2014.)



Mayer makes it clear that he’s no fan of Kasich, noting, “In four years, Kasich increased state spending by 20%, expanded Medicaid under Obamacare, shifted taxes from income to sales and commercial business taxes, tried to hike taxes on Ohio’s nascent energy renaissance, failed to sustain public sector collective bargaining reform, tripled the number of legal gambling sites from four to eleven, and monitored Ohio’s middling 27th ranked private sector job growth from 2011 to today.”



He says the election numbers “point to problems Kasich will have in getting past his Obamacare expansion of Medicaid, higher state spending, and tax shifting approach with Republican base voters. Kasich’s minimal improvement over his 2010 vote total indicates an underlying weakness.”





Beyond the sea

The New York Times runs a letter to the editor from a Case Western Reserve University professor regarding media mogul Barry Diller’s plan for an offshore park off Manhattan’s West Side.



Diller’s vision plan “may well be a daring plan, but it is hardly an original one,” writes Ted Steinberg, a history and law professor at Case Western Reserve. He should know; Steinberg is the author of “Gotham Unbound: The Ecological History of Greater New York.”



Steinberg writes that “expansion at the expense of the sea is one of the defining features of New York’s environmental history. For the better part of the last 300 years, plans have gone forward to build into the surrounding waters, filling in wetlands and open water to produce solid ground and creating more real estate but at the expense of putting more people and property at risk of coastal flooding.”



He concludes, “These schemes to encroach on the sea are premised on the flawed idea of New York as an infinite proposition. They are made all the more problematic by the fact that by the 2050s, sea level around New York will likely have risen by 11 to 24 inches. One can reasonably ask why there should be more building and development in the riskiest coastal areas, especially when the goal is simply an amenity.”





You also can follow me on Twitter for more news about business and Northeast Ohio.