Fans are still reeling from the shocker of Aly Forrester’s death last week. The Bold and the Beautiful spoilers tease that Aly’s death will shake things up on many fronts this week, and there are some additional shockers on the way. What can viewers expect from the episodes airing during the week of July 27?

She Knows Soaps indicates that during Monday’s episode, viewers will see Thorne try to wrap his head around Aly’s death while Ivy and Steffy are weighed down by the way things played out on the dark road as Aly died.

Viewers have seen that Ivy thinks she knows what happened between Steffy and Aly as she has a video of that deadly moment. While Ivy doesn’t have the full story, Steffy hasn’t been entirely honest about Aly’s final moments either. The Bold and the Beautiful spoilers via We Love Soaps detail that Ivy will see Liam and Steffy growing closer in the wake of this tragedy, and many suspect it will propel her to use the video to try to get Steffy out of the way.

Thomas Forrester pops back into town on Monday’s episode. Bold and Beautiful spoilers tease that he will tell Caroline that he’s planning to stick around for a while. His reappearance in town seems to shake up Ridge on both the work and personal fronts, but it seems that Caroline will try to make it clear to Thomas that she’s sticking by Ridge.

The Bold and the Beautiful spoilers reveal that Liam makes his decision between Ivy and Steffy during Tuesday’s episode, and it seems that he’ll likely be sticking with his decision to choose Steffy. Wyatt will be by Ivy’s side as she sorts through her emotions, and the two become even closer as this all plays out.

Steffy will continue to hide some of the details of what happened with Aly, even from Liam. Will Ivy or Wyatt reveal what they know about Aly’s death? It sounds as if this will continue to play out throughout the rest of the summer as Aly’s family vows to figure out what truly happened to her on that tragic night.

Also ahead this week, Deacon and Brooke will spend some time together, and naturally Quinn gets a bit frantic about this. This trio hasn’t had all that much air time lately, but this tease makes fans wonder if there’s about to be some fresh drama to embrace.

When will the full truth about Aly’s death come out? Will it impact any of the romances currently developing among the Forresters and Spencers? How will Thomas’ return shake things up? Fans are anxious to see what comes next as the drama unfolds on The Bold and the Beautiful.

[Photo by Michael Buckner/Getty Images]