Topics: OnEarth.org, Orcas, sochi, sochi olympics, Life News, Entertainment News

This article originally appeared on OnEarth.org.

In my 25 years studying wild orcas in Alaska’s Prince William Sound, I have seen them leap 10 feet out of the water to chase down a Dall’s porpoise. I’ve watched them dive to depths of 700 feet hunting for king salmon. I’ve observed them holding their breath for more than 10 minutes at a time. And I’ve seen families leave sheltered waters during massive storms to surf down 15-foot swells.

Unlike most humans, physicality is not extracurricular to an orca’s life. It is the curriculum. To be an orca is to be a body moving constantly through boundless space, from birth until death. It is to travel the distance of an ultra-marathon every day. These incredible, social marine mammals are also some of nature’s most amazing athletes.

So it’s all the more distressing to hear reports that two wild-caught orcas might be put on display in an aquarium in Sochi during the Olympic games, which open this week on Russia’s Black Sea coast. After learning the news last week, I joined 400,000 others in signing an online petition in protest. Then I started digging for more facts. They are hard to come by.

News reports have stated that a Russian company called White Sphere captured eight orcas last year in the Sea of Okhotsk, which lies between Russia and Japan. But details about the round-up, transport, and current location of these animals remains cloaked in secrecy. According to the Vancouver Sun, White Sphere initially admitted in a written statement to legally capturing a single orca for the purpose of exhibiting the mammal in Sochi. But amidst growing public outcry, the company has denied it.

So I contacted my colleague Erich Hoyt, a longtime orca researcher and co-director of the Russia Far East Orca Project. Hoyt’s book Orca: The Whale Called Killerchanged the course of my life when I read it in my early twenties. Working at a fish hatchery in Prince William Sound, I became entranced by small groups of orcas that occasionally appeared in the bay. The book told me that those animals possess one of the most complex social systems on Earth, with populations developing their own culture and languages. Hoyt also wrote about the lives of field biologists who were wedded to long-term scientific research as well as conservation. I imagined—then wormed, then worked—my own way into that life, committing myself to one place, to one species, for the long haul.

For the last decade, Hoyt and a team of Russian and Japanese scientists have been documenting orca populations off Russia’s Kamchatka Peninsula. In an interviewwith Tim Zimmerman, co-producer of the documentary Blackfish, Hoyt describes numerous, and often botched, attempts by Russian hunters to capture orcas off Kamchatka and the Commander Islands over the last 15 years. (Although the Marine Mammal Protection Act, passed in 1972, prohibits catching wild orcas in American waters, as well as importing them, international laws are not so strict.) The eight reported captures by White Sphere, Zimmerman writes, may presage “a new orca gold rush” for the growing industry of marine parks in Asia.