UPDATED: This weekend in local public-affairs programs:

Kendrick Walker, a homeless high-school graduate who is headed to FAMU this fall, is a guest on "Central Florida Spotlight" at 12:30 p.m. Sunday on WFTV-Channel 9. Greg Warmoth talks to Kendrick and his mother, Samantha Walker, in a show that looks at the lingering homeless problems in the region. The Walkers attribute his success to the Boys & Girls Clubs of Central Florida. He was named the 2015 Kiwanis Club of Orlando Foundation Youth of the Year. Other guests are Tasha Robinson-Banks, senior service director, Boys & Girls Clubs of Central Florida, Downtown and Parramore Branches, and Mack Reid, chief operating officer of Boys & Girls Clubs of Central Florida.

Erik von Ancken serves as guest host on "Flashpoint" at 8 a.m. Sunday on WKMG-Channel 6. His guest is Andrae Bailey, CEO of the Central Florida Commission on Homelessness. "Flashpoint" examines the commission's progress in putting the homeless in homes of their own and looks at the group's quest to put every local homeless veteran in housing by year's end.

Pamela Goodman of the Florida League of Women Voters talks about the Florida Supreme Court ruling on redistricting on "Political Connections." The program airs at 11 a.m. and 8 p.m. Sunday on News 13. Analysts Michelle Ertel and Jeremiah Jaspon also comment on the ruling. Analysts Lou Frey and Dick Batchelor discuss the politics of the Supreme Court decisions on the Affordable Care Act and same-sex marriage. The program uses PolitiFact's Truth-O-Meter to rate a claim by Gov. Rick Scott about the amount of environmental funding in Florida.

"Orlando Matters" explores "The Year of the Hack" at 7 a.m. Saturday on WRBW-Channel 65. Host John Brown welcomes Internet security experts Tom Jelneck of On Target Web Solutions and Josh Murdock of Valencia College. They offer tips to make sure private information stays private. Bill Sublette, chairman of the Orange County School Board, discusses teacher pay.

"Global Perspectives" welcomes Aakif Ahmad, chief operating officer and co-founder of Convergence Center for Policy Resolution. John Bersia hosts the program at 9:30 a.m. Sunday on WUCF-Channel 24.

"Metro Center Outlook" presents a repeat at 9 a.m. Sunday on WUCF. The program looks at Osceola County's growth from technology, tourism and transportation. Host Diane Trees interviews Brandon Arrington, chairman of the Osceola County Commission.