Buy Photo William Reeves sits in common area Tuesday at La Gloria Senior Apartments in Salinas that was built by the Community Housing Improvement Systems and Planning Association, or CHISPA. (Photo: The Salinas Californian )Buy Photo

It’s the greatest challenge for the greatest generation.

Housing costs in Monterey County are notoriously out of synch with income levels, but for the most vulnerable populations, the problem is reaching crisis proportions, say those working to keep people in their homes.

And among the most vulnerable, seniors are some of the most at-risk, said Leila Emadin, executive director of the Housing Resource Center of Monterey County. Emadin pointed to data collected on Monterey County that paints a stark image of the local housing crisis.

A single elderly renter in Monterey County would need to earn $26,580 a year to survive with just the basics of housing, health care and food, according to the National Elder Economic Security Standard, a database maintained by the nonprofit Wider Opportunities for Women.

Yet the per-capita income between 2008 and 2012 averaged $18,003, placing one in five Salinas residents below the federal poverty level, according to the U.S. Census Bureau – a huge disparity between income and living costs, and right about what many, if not most, seniors receive in Social Security.

“Since 2007, a phenomenal number of seniors have lost their homes to foreclosure,” Emadin said. “There’s very little housing for these seniors who have lost their homes.”

Senior women are particularly vulnerable since they often outlive their spouses and find themselves widowed on a fixed income.

“What are you going to do when you need $27,000 [per year] and only receive $15,000 to $16,000 in Social Security?” Emadin said. “United Way’s 211 service is logging five to six times more calls for housing assistance than all other calls combined.”

How bad is Salinas? Consider that WalletHub, an online financial database, ranked Salinas No. 298 out of 300 cities nationwide for housing affordability and No. 274 for median household income. It’s what’s driving low-income residents to live two or three families in a single residence. And with a dearth of affordable housing available, landlords are able to set the monthly rents as high as the market will bear.

And what the market will bear are more bodies under a single roof. Asking grandma to go live with a half-dozen frat brothers might not be a practical solution. A quick glance at apartments for rent on Craigslist is tell-tale. A 571-square-foot, one-bedroom apartment at Boranda Manor in north Salinas goes for $1,024. It is not an exception; in fact, it’s on the lower end of the price spectrum. Most are asking between $1,200 and $1,500 and a number of listings topped $2,000 per month.

In California, the fair market rent for a two-bedroom apartment is $1,354. In order to afford this level of rent and utilities without paying more than 30 percent of income on housing, a household must earn $4,514 a month, according to the National Low Income Housing Coalition’s report “Out of Reach 2014.” In Salinas, the average renter would need to work 1.7 full-time jobs in order to afford the average rent. Imagine what it is like for a senior on a meager fixed income.

Forced into sad decisions

So what happens to these seniors when they lose a spouse and can no longer afford a mortgage, or they outlive their savings or a host of other cataclysmic events strike them? It’s not pretty.

Teresa Sullivan, executive director of the Alliance on Aging in Salinas, said many seniors are forced into nursing homes because that’s all they can afford. They may be physically active, mentally sharp and independent-minded. But they no longer can afford housing prices.

“Nursing homes and residential care facilities are a housing option for many,” Sullivan said. “Hopefully, they won’t have to go in these facilities until they have to, but unfortunately many have to go in prematurely.”

Even those options are limited. Of the 70-some nursing homes and residential facilities in Monterey County, there are fewer than 10 priced at the level of Social Security.

“And no way is that enough,” Sullivan said.

She noted that during the past five or so years, many more decisions on senior care are being made solely for financial reasons. If seniors can stay in their homes, there are services available that can support them. The Alliance on Aging provides numerous “wrap-around” services, those needs such as referrals, Medicare counseling, peer counseling for emotional support, and even tax services so seniors don’t have to fret about filing their taxes.

“We as a society need to look at this issue,” Sullivan said. “There will be challenges finding solutions.”

Government loses tools

With the free market working mostly for landlords, the task then falls on government to provide affordable housing. But over the past decade, what teeth government had have been removed one by one.

A key blow came in February 2012 when redevelopment agencies in California were dissolved. By state law, 20 percent of RDA funds were spent on affordable housing. That generated billions of dollars in the state for low-income and senior housing projects. Since then, there have been attempts to legislate fixes in what’s become a gaping hole in progressive housing policies.

Federal dollars through the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development have shifted away from renters assistance, transitional housing and emergency shelter and toward more permanant housing solutions.

“HUD’s goal is admirable, but it’s not working for everyone,” said Jane Royer Barr, the program manager for the county’s Redevelopment & Housing Office.

Fewer families receive assistance per dollar of federal funding and new HUD policies have shifted funds away from housing agencies, according to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a nonpartisan think tank in Washington, D.C., that analyzes effects of policy decisions.

“The problem has been we couldn’t find the housing to go along with HUD funding,” Royer Barr said earlier this year during a faith-based housing forum in Monterey. “Then if we did, we couldn’t find landlords to go along.”

Bills spark hope

There have been forays by the state Legislature to replace the RDA funding with bills that would include similar funding mechanisms but with safeguards to prevent abuses, the root cause of RDA dismantling. One of the most notable is a bill authored by Salinas Democrat Luis Alejo called the Community Revitalization and Investment Act. AB 2280 would earmark 25 percent of its funding to be used for affordable housing projects, a figure that sparks hope among local housing advocates.

AB 2289 has passed out of all committees in both the state Assembly and Senate and is due shortly for a full Senate floor vote. An exact date has not been set. From there it would go to Gov. Jerry Brown for his signature.

It would not mean new taxes. Like the old RDAs, a slice of existing annual property tax increases – increments of the maximum 2 percent annual cap in California – would stay with local authorities instead of being shipped to Sacramento.

The new authorities can be set up by a city, by a county, or as a joint-power authority, and interestingly for Monterey County, they can be set up in former military bases, such as Fort Ord. Among the criteria these authorities would include are high unemployment rates and the lack of affordable housing.

“This is for the areas struggling the most,” Alejo said.

Another bill that would generate funding for affordable housing is AB 32, the Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006. State Senate President pro Tem Darrell Steinberg is advocating taking revenue from California’s cap-and-trade program and using portions of it to include locating affordable housing near transit hubs to reduce carbon emissions on to-and-from commutes to work.

And SB 391, called the California Homes and Jobs Act of 2013, would create permanent, ongoing sources of funding for affordable housing development. The bill would impose a $75 fee on real-estate transactions other than home sales, such a refinancings. The bill was held up in the Assembly this year but state Sen. Mark DeSaulnier said this week he is vowing to keep pushing it through.

Burden on nonprofits

So with low housing inventories stoking unbridled jumps in rent, and state assistance still subject to Sacramento politics, the burden of rescuing seniors from homelessness is falling on the shoulders of area nonprofit organizations.

Emadin, executive director of the Housing Resource Center, said that in order to provide stable housing, her nonprofit must provide support across the spectrum of services – “from homelessness to home ownership.” Two of what she calls the six key factors to move families out of poverty is housing stability and financial literacy.

She, like other nonprofit leaders interviewed for this story, said that without increased inventories of homes and rentals, the county will never get an upper hand on affordable units. Royer Barr – from the county’s housing office – said the county’s General Plan requires 20 percent of new housing projects be dedicated to affordable housing. But the 2008 real estate crash left many developers on the sidelines, with scant new projects in the offing.

One bright spot is that Royer Barr said building activity is beginning to pick up. Her office is tracking more than a half-dozen projects underway countywide, a portion of which would be deemed affordable. But the price-points of eligibility beg the question of what is the definition of “affordable?”

Definitions and formulas vary from county to county and city to city. In Monterey County, affordability is tiered and income-based. “Very-low-income” buyers would qualify at 50 percent of median income for the county, which is $68,700, Royer Barr explained. “Low income” is set at 80 percent of the median income.

Another angle of attacking the affordability problem is the way the Community Housing Improvement Systems and Planning Association, or CHISPA, approaches it. Alfred Diaz-Infante, president and chief executive of CHISPA, acknowledged that because of relatively low-paying retail sales, hospitality and agricultural jobs, a large portion of the population does not have the financial resources to secure safe, clean housing.

CHISPA has been successful in building affordable homes and apartments in Salinas through a complex and byzantine financial process. Essentially, the nonprofit receives tax credits from the government that it then sells to financial institutions for less than the face value of the credit in exchange for construction loans to build the projects. For example, CHISPA can sell a $1 tax credit to a bank for, say, 90 cents.

It’s a win-win for CHISPA and the banks. Banks earn a return on the difference between the face value of the credit and what they paid for it. Additionally, the investment meets the requirements for the Community Reinvestment Act, which is designed to encourage commercial banks and savings associations to help meet the needs of borrowers in all segments of their communities, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods.

But as each CHISPA project is completed, the demand remains. Diaz-Infante noted that when CHISPA completed the conversion of a Travel Lodge on Sherwood Drive in Salinas to senior housing units, there were 124 units for a waiting list of over 300.

“We’ll never have enough affordable housing; this is a too desirable place to live,” Diaz-Infante said.

Though the problem in Salinas is far greater than on the Monterey Peninsula because of the income disparity between the two sides of the “lettuce curtain,” Monterey is not immune to the challenges of keeping seniors and families in their homes.

At the same faith-based and activist forum that Royer Barr spoke at earlier this year, the Rev. John Buehrens, interim minister at the Unitarian Universalist Church of the Monterey Peninsula, said the first wave of homeless is “washing up on our beaches as well.”

“Where’s the government?” he asked. “Sometimes it’s not about giving a person a fish, or teaching a person to fish, but giving them the right to get to the river.”

Senior Writer Dennis L. Taylor covers economics for The Californian. Follow him on Twitter @taylor_salnews.

Read or Share this story: http://bit.ly/1tuK0Ee