Ron Johnson was in Oshkosh on Monday to officially launch his campaign for re-election. Video by USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin.

By

Oshkosh — The race has been underway for a year, but on Monday U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson returned to the plastics manufacturing firm he started in 1979 to make it all official.

"The special announcement? I'm running for re-election. I figured you all knew that," Johnson told family, friends, supporters and workers gathered on the factory floor at Pacur.

Johnson said the country needs leaders who can tell the public the truth about the national debt, the threat of international terrorism and the costs of regulations on the economy.

"Why would I do this again?" Johnson said. "Why don't I just come home to Oshkosh and say 'it's such a mess, it's so frustrating, I'm angry too. I'm going to just give up.' Because I can't quit on America."

Johnson, a Republican, faces Democrat Russ Feingold in the fall. It's a rematch of their 2010 race, when Johnson came out of the private sector and rode a tea party wave to knock off Feingold, a three-term senator.

In the current race, Johnson has been trailing in the Marquette University Law School Poll — in the March survey Feingold led Johnson by 47% to 42% among registered voters. Johnson was confident that by November voters will have a clear choice.

With his wife, Jane, standing by his side, Johnson spoke of his roots, recalling the "deep faith" and value of "hard work" instilled in him by his late parents, Dale and Jean Johnson. He recalled childhood jobs of shoveling snow, caddying and working for minimum wage at a drugstore. And he talked of building Pacur.

Johnson sought to portray himself as a citizen-legislator "who helped to build a business," up against Feingold, "who most recently was a California professor, a career politician."

"My opponent, Senator Feingold, has no clue about the private sector," Johnson said. "He knows how to grow government."

Johnson said Feingold worked in Washington for 18 years and asked, "What did he ever accomplish?"

"Can anybody answer, think of a thing other than campaign finance reform, which was a miserable failure," Johnson said. "Trust me, I'm living in the environment after his solution."

Johnson also chided Feingold for voting four times against a balanced budget amendment.

"And of course, he was one of those deciding votes for Obamacare," Johnson said, a reference to the Affordable Care Act.

Johnson launched his political career in reaction to President Barack Obama's health care plan.

In an interview with USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin, Johnson said it was "laughable" that Feingold would paint Johnson as "anything but the outsider in this race."

"Listen, he has had 30 years in elected politics," Johnson said. "Thirty years out of a working career of about 40 years, that would be a career politician."

Asked if he felt he was behind in the race, Johnson said "I've always believed it will be right down to the wire. I think it's going to be a dead-even race."

He sounded sanguine about the possibility of having New York businessman Donald Trump at the top of the ticket as the GOP presidential nominee.

"I'm not a political pundit," Johnson said. "This is what I am. I'm a manufacturer. This is my place. This is where I feel most comfortable. I think that's a good thing. Hopefully Wisconsinites will value somebody who is not a career politician, who actually does know how to solve problems. If that's the case, I have a really good shot at it."

The event at Pacur kicked off Johnson's most intense campaign swing yet. Over five days, Johnson is scheduled to make 20 stops in 14 counties.

Feingold campaign spokesman Michael Tyler said in a statement that Feingold is the only Senate candidate listening to the people of Wisconsin.

"Senator Johnson has spent the last six years as a partisan shill who thinks our economy should only work for billionaires and CEOs like himself. Russ is fighting for an economy that works for middle class and working Wisconsin families," Tyler said. "We're excited about this campaign, because it's an opportunity for the people of Wisconsin to make a real change, throwing out a DC Republican insider like Senator Johnson and replacing him with someone like Russ that fights for them."

Also Monday, a group launched a $2 million ad campaign featuring a Department of Veterans Affairs whistleblower criticizing Feingold over problems at the Tomah medical center.

"Russ Feingold ignored veterans' concerns, while veterans were dying at the facility," Ryan Honl says in the ad.

The ad centers on a 2009 memo about problems at the facility. Feingold and the author of the memo contend Feingold didn't receive that memo at the time.

In an interview, Honl said he didn't believe that. Congress should fix problems with the Department of Veterans Affairs by allowing patients to access their benefits at private hospitals and "dismantling" unions for federal workers, he said.

The ad is being run by the Freedom Partners Action Fund, a group backed by the conservative industrialist brothers Charles and David Koch.

Patrick Marley of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.