The Seicento Baroque Ensemble is in a celebratory mood as it enters its fifth season. ( Richard C. Saxon / Courtesy photo )

If you go What: Seicento Baroque Ensemble presents Monteverdi's "Vespers of 1610" When: 7:30 p.m. Saturday, Oct. 24 (Boulder); 2:30 p.m. Sunday, Oct. 25 (Denver) Where: First United Methodist Church, 1421 Spruce St., Boulder; St. Paul Lutheran Church, 1600 Grant St., Denver Etc.: Soloist recital: "Music of 17th Century Venice," 7:30 p.m. Friday, Oct. 23, St. Paul Lutheran Church, Denver Tickets: Individual concerts, $25-$35 general admission, $20 seniors, $10 students; "Vespers"/soloist recital package, $40 Info: 720-301-7747 or seicentobaroque.org

While it might be the Boulder area's youngest and most specialized choral group, the 5-year-old Seicento Baroque Ensemble has experienced significant growth.

Partly to illustrate that, founder and artistic director Evanne Browne believes it is time to return to the monumental work that inspired the ensemble's birth.

Claudio Monteverdi's "Vespers of 1610" (also known as "Vespro della Beata Vergine") is a 90-minute composition that exemplifies the early baroque style that is the speciality of Seicento, whose name is the Italian term for the 17th century. The "Vespers" also is regarded as the largest-scale significant work of religious music before Johann Sebastian Bach.

Seicento presents the piece in its entirety on Oct. 24 at Boulder's First United Methodist Church and repeats the concert the following day at Denver's St. Paul Lutheran Church.

"When we performed it in 2010 for the 400th anniversary, it was the first ever Colorado performance," Browne said. "That performance was done under the auspices of FUMC, and it was a community choir with professional soloists and instrumentalists."

Seicento itself was not formally organized until 2011.

That the "Vespers" had not previously been presented in the state spoke to the need for specialization in 17th century music, which presents challenges not seen in the music that preceded or followed it.

"I thought the 2010 chorus was really good," Browne said, "but now we have this semi-professional choir, and I thought it was time to revisit it after five years. It's a good measure for how much we have absorbed about this style."

She said that people now are coming from Denver and Fort Collins to sing with Seicento because they love the music.

"People really do have a passion for this expressive, complex repertoire," she said.

And it is not easy. Monteverdi was a bridge between Renaissance polyphony, with its euphonious a cappella lines, and the Baroque, in which instrumental accompaniment and a more chordal texture prevailed. The result is a music that many interpretive questions prevent from being more widely performed.

"Around the turn of the century (1600), people decided that the expression of the words needed to be given more importance," Browne said. "Music should be written to illustrate the emotion of the word or phrase. This started out in secular music. In the 'Vespers,' Monteverdi was brave enough to take the styles of the secular into the sacred, as well as mixing old and new musical language."

Monteverdi is the composer known for the codification of opera, a brand-new genre in his day, as well as the Italian madrigal, so his secular credentials were unimpeachable.

"This combination places strong demands on the singers, particularly the soloists, who carry the load of the vocal fireworks," Browne said. "There are so many complicated runs, such rapid articulation, and ornamentation that is very period-specific."

She noted that the choral parts are not quite as forward-looking, but the soloists do things that are "amazing and acrobatic."

For those solo parts, Browne has enlisted the best available local and visiting singers, all early music specialists. Among these soloists are alto Marjorie Bunday, who was based in Denver from 2011 until moving to Seattle this year, soprano Amanda Balestrieri, still based in the area, along with local tenors Daniel Hutchings and Derek Chester.

The challenges for the choir have to do with the era's relative obscurity in choral practice.

"It takes larger forces (the "Vespers" splits into up to 10 parts), and what is on the page isn't necessarily what you actually sing, because of the ornamentation," Browne said. "It's a lot more complicated than the later Renaissance, and not as familiar as the later Baroque. It occupies this place between the two that is difficult for practitioners of either."

Pitch standards and tempo are major issues, as is instrumentation for the accompaniment, which is not completely indicated.

"All of this is decided by the conductor," Browne said. "Amazingly, George Washington University has an entire course of study for these 90 minutes of music.

"But it is such exciting music: angular, rhythmic — and could that man ever set an 'Amen'! What he can do with those two syllables is just terribly thrilling and expressive."

Regarding the accompaniment, period instruments will be used, including the cornetto and sackbut, wind instruments played by members of a visiting ensemble from Washington, D.C. In addition, there are baroque string instruments (including a local violinist and cellist), along with organ and harpsichord.

As a prelude to the "Vespers" performance, a Denver-only soloist recital will be presented Oct. 23 at St. Paul, including music for solo voices and chamber ensemble by Monteverdi and his Venetian contemporaries from the early 1600s.

After the Vespers, Seicento returns with its spring concert March 11-13. The March 11-12 concerts are set for the Denver St. Paul and Boulder First United Methodist venues, respectively. The March 13 performance will be at the new Stewart Auditorium of the Longmont Museum. That program, "Scarlatti: Father and Son," spotlights music of Domenico and Alessandro Scarlatti.

Domenico, a contemporary of Bach whose music dates from the early 1700s, is "pretty late for us," Browne said.

Domenico's "Stabat Mater" will be sung as the concert's anchor work, and harpsichordist Charlotte Mattax Moersch, Browne's colleague from her studies in Amsterdam, will play some of his solo keyboard sonatas, the genre for which he is most known. Opera arias and motets from father Alessandro, still a fairly late composer for the group, will be included.

"We sing music that is easily lovable but underperformed," Browne said.

Noting that other choirs such as Ars Nova and the Boulder Bach Festival perform repertoire on either end of their period niche, Browne said "it's just great that there is room for so much vocal music in Colorado."