Buy Photo Reporter Joseph Gerth (Photo: , Jessica Ebelhar/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

Things can get worse for Kentucky Democrats but, quite frankly, it’s hard to see how.

The party has been on tilt since the Nov. 3 election when Matt Bevin upset Jack Conway to become governor of Kentucky. And this week saw the party’s free fall accelerate as it saw its ever so-slight advantage in the House become even less stable.

Get used to it. There are no signs it’s going to stop any time soon.

Two more Democratic incumbents announced they were leaving the state House; their best, albeit slim, hope of winning the state’s open 1st Congressional district said he wasn’t running; and a source says that several top recruits for open state house seats decided that now is not the right time for them.

Even in Louisville, one of the few remaining Democratic strongholds, disarray and backbiting in the Louisville Metro Council’s Democratic caucus may open to a Republican council president – or at the very least, allow the GOP to decide which Democrat wins.

In some ways, it’s hard to imagine that has taken this long.

The southern United States has been solidly Republican for a long time and Kentucky’s House is the only legislative body in what was once known as the Democratic Party’s “Solid South” to remain Democratic.

The state’s not had a Democratic U.S. senator since 1998, has had a Republican majority in its congressional delegation for two decades and a GOP majority in the state Senate for 15 years.

For the second straight week, Bevin outfoxed the House Democrats by plucking one of their members from a swing district to give them a lucrative job opening up the possibility of flipping a seat during a special session later this legislative session.

First it was state Rep. John Tilley, of Hopkinsville, who Bevin chose to appoint his new justice secretary. Last week, it was Tanya Pullin, of South Shore, who was appointed as an administrative law judge. (Those appointments, of course, followed state Rep. Denny Butler’s decision to become a Republican.)

Just a few weeks ago, the Democrats had a 54-46 advantage in the state House. When the General Assembly convenes on Jan. 5, their advantage will be down to 51-45 after Republicans Ryan Quarles and Mike Harmon resign to take state offices.

If the GOP can sweep all the special elections – which is a possibility especially since the Democrats no longer hold any of the powerful offices in the state that can serve as a platform from which to raise money – one has to wonder if the Democrats will hold a majority in the state House when the legislature ends in April.

Are there more appointments to come? Can frightened Democrats in districts that voted Republican in last month’s election be induced to switch parties?

And even if the Democrats can stop the bleeding long enough to finish the legislative session with a majority they have held since 1921, next fall becomes even more perilous. Last week, Democratic state Rep. Mike Denham, of Maysville, announced that he will not seek another term in the Ohio River district that Democrats believe will be difficult to hold.

It’s still unclear if Butler will be able to hold his district, which voted for Barack Obama twice, in next year’s election. But they’ve got a good start on it, with Bevin headlining a fundraising for him on Dec. 18.

But with the fundraising advantage they should have, with U.S. Sen. Mitch McConnell helping to raise funds for GOP candidates, Democrats might want to look away from the carnage that could come next November.

And we didn’t even get a chance to talk about Democratic state Sen. Dorsey Ridley’s decision not to seek the seat of retiring U.S. Rep. Ed Whitfield. We’ll have plenty of time to discuss that later.

Joseph Gerth can be reached at 502-582-4702 or jgerth@courier-journal.com. Follow him on Twitter at @Joe_Gerth.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1lZqVf5