The U.S. National Team coach wrote you an excused absence slip from work this afternoon so you can go watch the U.S. - Germany game. And even Hulk Hogan got in on the fun: check out his pump-up video for the U.S. This is THE MORNING EMAIL for Thursday, June 26, 2014.

The Scuttlebutt

New information about Malaysian Airlines flight 370

Make sure your PayPal account is safe from a breach

Check out the 984 ways the U.S. can advance to the next stage of the World Cup

TOP STORIES

ISIS WANTS AN AIR FORCE, AND HERE’S HOW THEY’LL GET IT

“Militants attacked one of Iraq's largest air bases and seized control of several small oilfields on Wednesday as U.S. special forces troops and intelligence analysts arrived to help Iraqi security forces counter a mounting Sunni insurgency.” Here’s why this would be catastrophic. Meanwhile, meet the seven men who could replace Iraq’s Prime Minister. [Reuters]

MISSING MALAYSIAN PLANE UPDATE

“Investigators looking into the disappearance of the Malaysia Airlines plane are confident it was on autopilot when it crashed in a remote stretch of the Indian Ocean, Australian officials said Thursday as they announced the latest shift in the search for the jet.” Officials believe the crew was unresponsive, most likely due to a lack of oxygen. A new search area for the plane was announced this morning. [AP]

In duet news, watch this little girl sing with her dog.

INTERNATIONAL INTRIGUE: Kerry vs. Putin

John Kerry asked Russia to make moves on the Ukrainian crisis in the next few hours. China is beginning to build diplomatic ties with Taiwan. The U.S. is disbanding its anti-terror task force in the Philippines. And we actually don’t believe what city tourists around the world find the most welcoming.

In too cute news, here’s a sloth in a onsie.

In Flit news, watch this hummingbird play with water.

SCOUTING REPORT: Incredible Goal

This goal is why Lionel Messi is the best soccer player in the world. Tinder and Grindr have seen a massive uptick in usage in Brazil. Grantland shows how historically bad teams have been at picking furture stars first in the NBA draft. The freak is back: check out Tim Lincecum’s no-hitter against the Padres (granted, it was the Padres). And FiveThirtyEight breaks down how much money LeBron James brings in for his teams in ticket sales.

In chasing rainbows news, this dog doesn’t understand why they keep disappearing.

In scary news, this is what snake venom does to your blood.

In surviving Westeros news, here’s a chart that predicts your likelihood of staying alive in the world of “Game of Thrones.”

OTHER PEOPLE’S BUSINESS: Gentlemen Prefer Blondes

Stop the presses: Kim Kardashian’s a blonde...or not. See the first pictures of Beyonce and Jay Z’s secret wedding. You decide whether Keira Knightley can sing after listening to the lyric video for her upcoming movie. Chris Brown rejected his latest plea deal. Bindi Irwin has a refreshing message for younger girls: don’t feel like you need to dress older than you are. Adam Levine is trying to convince people he’s not an arrogant jerk, but then he says things like “If I knew everyone in the world, they would love me. Every single last f****** one of them.”

In helpful news, this cat basically does the laundry.

TWITTERATI

@katyperry: Remember kids, no real life decisions should be made until mercury is out of retrograde July 1st!

@AnnaKendrick47: Oh Charlize, always borrowing my clothes and being hot and tall and blonde in them. Classic Theron.



@spencerpratt: Tacos or burrito

@iamdiddy: R.E.A.L. = Remember Everyone Aint Loyal

@HistoryInPics: Alan Shepard plays golf on the moon, 1971



ONE MORE THING

In honor of the 100th edition of The Morning Email, check out Hollywood’s top 100 films of all time as ranked by Hollywood hotshots. Break out the popcorn.

Got something to add? Send tips/quips/quotes/stories/photos/events/scoops to Lauren Weber (lauren.weber@huffingtonpost.com). Follow us on Twitter (@LaurenWeberHP). Does somebody keep forwarding you this newsletter? Get your own copy. It's free! Sign up here.

More: The Morning Email