Search-and-rescue workers looked for survivors on Tuesday in the aftermath of a mudslide on Saturday in Oso, Wash., that killed at least 14 people and left many missing. David Ryder/Getty Images …

A ruined truck was among the debris left by the mudslide and flooding. David Ryder/Getty Images …

Derek Stephani took the day off from work to volunteer at the Oso Fire Department on Tuesday. Leah Nash for the Wall Street Journal …

A man in a search-and-rescue boat floated through the debris field on Tuesday. Matt Mills McKnight/European Pressphoto Agency …

Search-and-rescue worker Joanne Varney (left) with dog Maddee in the Highway 530 debris field. Matt Mills McKnight/European Pressphoto Agency …

Brian Anderson, left, and Coby Young searched through the wreckage of a home belonging to the Kuntz family on Sunday near Oso, Wash. The Kuntz family was at a baseball game on Saturday morning when a mudslide swept through the area. Associated Press …

Washington Gov. Jay Inslee spoke to the media in Arlington, Wash., on Sunday. David Ryder/Getty Images …

Steve Skaglund walked across the rubble on the east side of Saturday's fatal mudslide near Oso, Wash., on Sunday. Associated Press …

In this aerial photo taken Saturday, a massive mudslide is shown in between the towns of Darrington and Arlington, Wash. Marcus Yam/The Seattle Times …

Kristopher Langton shared a moment with his 5-month-old son at a temporary Red Cross shelter at the Darrington Community Center in Darrington, Wash., on Sunday. David Ryder/Getty Images …

An emergency vehicle was parked as a landslide and debris blocked Highway 530 near Oso, Wash., on Saturday. Lindsey Wasson/Reuters …

Paul and Keenan Kimball paused to look at a map of the mudslide area outside the Arlington City Hall on Sunday. Associated Press …

A helicopter flew low on Sunday over the area affected by the mudslide in Oso, Wash. Associated Press …

Waters from the backed-up Stillaguamish River flowed over structures on the Darrington side of the mudslide Sunday in Oso, Wash. Associated Press …

Residents watched as debris came down the Stillaguamish River from the Whitman Road bridge east of Oso, Wash., on Sunday. Associated Press …

This aerial photo taken Monday showed the massive mudslide near Arlington, Wash. Associated Press …

Rescue workers removed one of a number of bodies on Monday from the wreckage of homes destroyed by a mudslide near Oso, Wash. Associated Press …

Shelby Stafford, 14, and Hailey Hudson, 17, held a banner they made at Darrington High School in the wake of Saturday's mudslide. Associated Press …

Volunteers with chainsaws crossed a small creek on Tuesday as they headed to the scene of Saturday's mudslide. Associated Press …

Flowers were left on debris next to a demolished home where a woman's body was found after Saturday's mudslide. Associated Press …

Iraq war veteran and local Little League coach Matt Pater, 32, searched through debris on Monday near Oso, Wash. Associated Press …

Rescue workers removed a body from the wreckage of homes destroyed by Saturday's mudslide. Associated Press …