A congressional fund to compensate those who developed health problems after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks has agreed to dole out more than $1 billion so far, officials said Wednesday.

The number of people the fund has agreed to compensate is still far short of the expected number of claimants; every week, more people come forward saying they have been stricken with cancer and other illnesses. attorneys for some claimants say.

Congress created the $2.8 billion fund in January 2011 to help those who became sick after working near the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, as well as at a Shanksville, Pa., field where a jetliner also hijacked by terrorists crashed. Many victims and rescue workers began suffering from respiratory problems and various forms of cancer after breathing in toxic substances near Ground Zero.

The fund was originally expected to deal with roughly 34,000 claims, but it has approved just 10,549 so far.

Many victims are only now coming forward with health claims, which could exhaust the fund in future years, said Michael Barasch, managing partner of New York-based Barasch McGarry Salzman & Penson, which represents roughly 1,000 Sept. 11 first responders and workers with cancer diagnoses.

“We could hit 20,000 claims and there won’t be enough money for everyone,” Mr. Barasch said. “I get calls every week from people, mostly young men, saying their asthma has turned into lung cancer.”

As of March 31, 7,225 eligible claimaints had filed for compensation with the Sept. 11 Victim Compensation Fund, officials say. First responders account for 92% of the total amount that has been distributed. Other compensated victims include those who worked at Ground Zero, including those who performed maintenance and cleaning work.

Those with cancer diagnoses account for 27% of the total compensation amount.

The awards are calculated based on economic loss, pain and suffering, minus other payments such as pensions or disability payments for injuries.

The minimum compensation is $10,000. The largest compensation amount was for $4.1 million, with an average compensation amount at more than $241,000.

There are nearly 7,000 claims for eligibility that haven’t been decided yet because of incomplete paperwork or eligibility questions. The deadline to file a claim is Oct. 3, 2016. More than 65,000 people have registered for the program, although the vast majority have yet to file a claim.