With one day left before the last game of the season, Nick Saban and Dabo Swinney met with the media before Alabama and Clemson clash in the College Football Playoff National Championship Monday night.

With four quarters separating the Tide from a fourth title in their last seven years or the Tigers taking their first crown since 1981, the coaches discussed the chance at hand before the next chapter of their careers are written.

"Our players are very excited about the opportunity they've created for themselves to have a chance to participate in the College Football Playoff against arguably the best team in college football, which is the Clemson Tigers," said Saban. "Our focus and attention is to try to play the best game we possibly can, which is probably what we're going to need to have success."

"This has been great for our program, great for our team," said Swinney. "This was our goal was to have the opportunity to compete at the highest level, and not only are we getting a chance to do that, but we're getting a chance to play the University of Alabama, which to me has been the standard in college football for a long time."

For the players deciding the outcome on the field, they shared their thoughts on the game at Saturday's Media Day sessions.

"This is something I've always dreamed of, in the backyard and pretending that I was played for Alabama in the National Championship," said Crimson Tide QB Jake Coker. "There's no price that you could put on this. This is a dream of mine that I wouldn't trade for anything."

Tide running back Derrick Henry has the rare opportunity of capping off a Heisman-winning season with a national title, a feat also achieved by fellow Alabama back Mark Ingram.

"It would be a dream come true," said Henry. "Those two things don't happen everyday and for us to be able to win a National Championship, it would be so special with my teammates and it'll be an unbelievable feeling. It's something that no one could ever take away form us."

Clemson's star QB Deshaun Watson, who finished third in the Heisman voting, had 332 total yards of offense and three touchdowns against Oklahoma in the Orange Bowl. He will be the Tigers key Monday night in Arizona.

"You play fast when you are prepared and know what you are doing and that is the only way you can play fast and be confident in yourself," said Watson. "I'm confident in myself. I know the game plan and I know what I'm doing and that is one reason we play fast."

Kickoff at University of Phoenix Stadium is set for 7:30 PM CT.