East Hills-based North Shore-LIJ CareConnect, an insurance provider created by the North Shore-LIJ Health System, will be expanding its coverage area outside of New York.

Alan Murray, president and CEO of CareConnect, said on Tuesday that residents of northern New Jersey and southern Connecticut will be able to sign up under the insurance plan, which launched in October, through their employer - but only if the employer is based in New York state.

“The more counties you’re in, the more attractive you become,” Murray said. “We need a greater geographical market.”

He said people living in northern New Jersey or southern Connecticut will be able to use the insurance at any hospital or health-care system - a change from the insurance provider’s original plan, which only allowed those covered by CareConnect to receive treatment by physicians employed by North Shore-LIJ or affiliated with it.

Murray said CareConnect would partner with other hospitals or health-care systems in the future, if they agreed to the “mission” of the insurance provider, which he described as providing “great healthcare which is affordable and simple.”

“Our vision always comes first,” he said. “If they don’t agree with our mission, then we’ll find another partner.”

Murray also said the insurance provider would cut rates for individuals and small businesses, starting in 2015.

Insurance rates for individuals would be cut 1 percent om Long Island and 6 percent in New York City and Westchester counties, he said.

He said insurance rates for small businesses (two to 50 employees) would be cut 14 percent in Long Island and 20 percent in New York City and Westchester counties.

Murray said the provider was able to cut rates because their experience in the market has “been very favorable.”

“Our experience, especially in the individual market, has been very positive so far,” he said.

North Shore-LIJ CareConnect premiums for individual coverage currently range from $180.53 a month for catastrophic care coverage with a $6,350 deductible to $568.13 per month with no deductible for its platinum care coverage.

Three other plans, designated as bronze, silver and gold provide individual coverage for $330.13 a month with a $3,000 deductible, $419.62 a month with a $2,000 deductible and $487.34 a month with a $600 deductible respectively.

The creation of the insurance company and its health insurance products coincided with the introduction of state insurance exchanges under the Affordable Care Act on Oct. 1.

Consumers can access information about North Shore-LIJ CareConnect coverage or purchase insurance on its Web site at www.nslijcareconnect.com or by calling 1-855-706-7545. Information is also available on the New York State of Health website nystateofhealth.ny.gov.

Reach reporter Anthony O’Reilly by e-mail at aoreilly@theislandnow.com, by phone at 516.307.1045 x203 or on Twitter @reilly_anthony. Also follow us on Facebook at facebook.com/theislandnow.