Brookings, SD

Since 2003 the Boys and Girls Club has been giving kids in Brookings something to do. Tuesday, it's debuting a new facility just for teens. In a story you'll only see on KELOLAND News, we take you on an early tour.

Just across the street from Brookings' main Boys and Girls Club sits the new, 12,800 square foot teen club. It will welcome 6th through 12th grade students for a first look Tuesday. The Boys and Girls Club started construction last year, after seeing a need for more space.

"There's added programs that the teens are going to be able to participate in, and really have their own environment to come and learn and grow after school and in the summer as well," Advisory Board Member Mary Beth Fishback said.

The new facility creates separate social spaces for middle school and high school students to study, discover, and just hang out. The Boys and Girls Club also connects teens with businesses in the community according to their specific interests.

"So it's really taking it from inspiring them to love things into now what do I do with it as a career and as a productive citizen," Executive Director Vanessa Merhib said.

The Brookings Boys and Girls Club currently has 260 teen members, seeing about 70 of them each day.

The club also includes a basketball court, yoga and ballet area, movie theater, and even band practice rooms, to keep kids active, and out of trouble.

"We do feel like we play a critical role in being a safe, positive place," Merhib said. "And when you're in a safe, positive place, you just have less opportunity to make choices that might negatively impact you."

The teens will start using the club on Wednesday, and the public is invited to an open house on June 8th.

Along with major donors to the $2.2 million project, Tuesdays reveal will have a special guest: The CEO of the national Boys and Girls Club of America.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.