Fayette County stabbing suspect accused in 2009 attack

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

A Fayette County woman accused of stabbing her boyfriend to death Saturday was accused six years ago of attacking him with a knife.

State police arrested Lori Ann Tressler, then 38, on Aug. 30, 2009, and alleged she used a kitchen knife to stab Robert Lee Engle, then 23, in the chest, right shoulder and right forearm during an argument at their Georges Township home after a night of drinking, according to police reports at the time.

Tressler spent a few days in jail before posting $4,500 bond and, after a preliminary hearing was delayed several times, assault charges were withdrawn on Feb. 11, 2010, according to court records. Court records don't indicate why the case was withdrawn, and Tressler's attorney at the time could not be reached Sunday.

State police released no further details Sunday about the fatal stabbing at the home Engle and Tressler, now 45, shared on Ondrejko Road in Georges Township. The address is different from the site of the previous incident.

Coroner Dr. Phillip Reilly said an autopsy on Engle, 29, was completed, but he referred questions to state police. A criminal complaint was not available Sunday.

Arthur Engle of Smithfield called his nephew a laid-back, nonviolent person. Engle last saw his nephew on Wednesday.

“That wasn't even my nephew; that was my best friend in the world,” Arthur Engle said.

Engle's cousin, Stephanie Engle, established an online donation site at gofundme.com/robertengle on Saturday to offset funeral costs. Family members, including his mother, Ellie Engle, and father, Petey Mitchell, both of Masontown, were struggling to come to terms with his death, she said. He has a daughter, Stephanie Engle said.

“He was a very loving, caring, outgoing person,” she said. “There's a lot of people who are reaching out.”

Police were summoned to Ondrejko Road at about 4 a.m. Saturday, and found Engle dead of a stab wound to the chest. Tressler was not home when police arrived, but later was arrested, police said.

Stephanie Engle said the family needs to come up with $600 by Tuesday to secure a funeral home's services. The total cost is $2,200, she said.

Tressler is being held without bail at the Fayette County Prison on a homicide charge. A preliminary hearing is set for Sept. 1. Tressler did not have an attorney listed in online court records.

Renatta Signorini is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. She can be reached at 724-837-5374 or rsignorini@tribweb.com.