We know that school districts are not best friends with charter schools, those independent public schools that siphon dollars from districts and challenge their authority.

The Sunnyvale School District seemed to make that clear when principals and secretaries called charter supporters and hinted that their children would lose spots in their current schools if their parents supported a proposed Spark charter school.

Spark has petitioned to open an elementary charter next year. To house the school, organizers collected signatures of interested parents on a request for district facilities.

The district this month called each supporter and flatly asked if parents wanted to dis-enroll their children from their current schools in August.

Taken aback, most parents responded that they couldn't withdraw their children until Spark won approval. But the callers insisted on getting an answer.

"I said it sounds like a threat," Roza Leyderman said she told the principal of Fairwood elementary, who called her.

"She said it's not a threat," said Leyderman, whose daughter attends a magnet program at Fairwood with applicants districtwide competing for spaces. "But it was obvious that she was trying to get me to back down."

Angry parents at Cherry Chase, Cumberland, Vargas, Lakewood and San Miguel reported receiving similar calls.

"We're just trying to get a sense of the level of commitment of these folks," said Sunnyvale Assistant Superintendent Mike Gallagher, who said Superintendent Ben Picard asked schools to call parents.

If parents did feel concerned, Gallagher said, they could always call the district.

"No one intended anyone to feel threatened," Gallagher insisted.

In advance of a Thursday school board vote, the Sunnyvale district staff has recommended conditional approval of the charter, but the staff says that the organizers are unlikely to succeed with the school, in part "because the demand for this kind of program is limited."

Unions lambaste Reed's ballot measure revision

San Jose Mayor Chuck Reed last Tuesday submitted a slightly revised version of his statewide ballot measure aimed at cutting pension costs. And a coalition of union groups quickly fired off a statement proclaiming "the wheels are coming off the wagon of Mayor Reed's pension scheme."

The new version dials back a few minor provisions, including one that would have allowed the measure's proponents to recover attorney costs if the measure is passed and goes to court. And there's a change in the public officials signing on as supporters.

Santa Ana Mayor Miguel Pulido no longer is listed. Reed said Pulido is still supportive but no longer has the time to campaign for it and has withdrawn his name. Standing in for Pulido, who didn't have time to get back to us, is Vallejo Vice Mayor Stephanie Gomes, whose city went bankrupt a couple of years ago in part because it could not afford growing employee pension costs.

Reed's team also parted ways with the PR group that helped with the initial rollout as it looks to team up with a new firm for a signature-gathering effort.

"Even though Reed made cosmetic changes to it, the measure's weaknesses -- breaking the promise of retirement security to current public employees, increased short-term costs to state and local governments, and legal issues -- remain the same," the opposition's leader, Dave Low, said in the "wheels falling off" news release. Low is the chairman of Californians for Retirement Security, which represents government workers and retirees.

But Reed said the wheels of his wagon remain very much on.

In a statement responding to the unions' criticism, Reed said: "Over the past few weeks, we have received a great response from elected officials, organizations and individual citizens across the state who support what we are trying to do and want to get involved."

Xavier Campos talks to TV after taking the Fifth

Court transcripts last week showed San Jose City Councilman Xavier Campos repeatedly invoked his Fifth Amendment right not to potentially incriminate himself by answering questions before a criminal grand jury that indicted his friend and former boss, county Supervisor George Shirakawa Jr., on campaign fraud charges in Campos' 2010 election.

He wouldn't talk to us either. But he opened up to NBC Bay Area's Damian Trujillo in a TV news segment last week, explaining that his "confidence in being treated fairly" before the grand jury "was not there."

Campos told Trujillo his distrust stemmed from seeing "a number" of elected officials brought up on charges that later were dropped, "and their lives left in shambles." He didn't say who they were. Presumably he didn't mean Shirakawa, who pleaded guilty to unrelated felony charges of misusing public and campaign money, and was sentenced this month to a year in jail. Prosecutors say Shirakawa's DNA also links him to the illegal campaign mail.

When Trujillo noted that by refusing to answer questions under oath before a grand jury about the campaign mail, some folks might think he's hiding something, Campos insisted "that's the wrong implication" and that he would answer to "my community."

"I had nothing to do with those mailers," he said, which illegally impersonated his opponent Magdalena Carrasco's campaign and portrayed her as a communist.

The station spoke with a legal expert who suggested Campos may have dug himself a hole by spurning the grand jury and then blabbing on TV.

Santa Clara good guy retiring after 28 years

Here at IA, we operate on the maxim that if you can't say something snarky about someone, don't say anything at all. But in the case of Jeff Pedersen, the retiring manager of the City of Santa Clara's housing and community services division, we have to make an exception. Pedersen is retiring on Dec. 1 after 28 years with the city and a stint with county government before that.

As a former Morgan Hill council member, he understands politics. But Pedersen, 64, distinguished himself in Santa Clara by pushing for innovative projects like Home Safe Santa Clara (a women's domestic violence shelter), Peacock Court Apartments (for kids out of foster care); the Sobrato Family Living Center (homeless family housing), and the John Burns Garden (senior apartments with a 15-unit housing wing for the developmentally disabled).

A humble guy, Pedersen had a way of convincing everyone -- developers, city officials, service providers -- to do the right thing. He once described his job as being like an orchestra conductor who lets the musicians take the limelight. So what are his colleagues giving him as a going-away present?

A plaque with a conductor's baton.

Internal Affairs is an offbeat look at state and local politics. This week's items were written by Sharon Noguchi, Mike Rosenberg, John Woolfolk, Scott Herhold and Paul Rogers. Send tips to internalaffairs@mercurynews.com, or call 408-975-9346.