COLUMBUS – The federally run health insurance exchange opened in Ohio on Tuesday, but the state had no certified “navigators” to help consumers find insurance plans on the first day of the Affordable Care Act marketplace.

In addition to federal authorization and training, navigators here must also get approved by the Ohio Department of Insurance, the state regulatory agency that is monitoring the exchange. Chris Brock, a spokesman for the state insurance agency, confirmed Tuesday morning that none of the state’s navigator grant recipients, which received a total of more than $3 million to implement outreach programs and assist people through the sign up process, had been authorized by the state to fully begin their work.

The Ohio Association of Foodbanks, by far the largest of four navigator-grant recipient organizations (they got nearly $2 million), received notification that it was selected for the federal program on Aug 15. The organization, which will coordinate a consortium of about a dozen groups throughout the state that plan to hire about 30 to 40 navigators, just submitted its application for state navigator certification on Friday afternoon, only days before the marketplace opened.

Lisa Hamler-Fugitt, executive director of the food bank association, expects that navigators will be certified and trained to help consumers within a month. She said the delay was in part because of an extensive vetting process of consortium members that was required to comply with a conflict-of-interest law passed by the Ohio general assembly earlier this year. The law prohibits navigator agencies from receiving any financial compensation — including grants and pay for services — from an insurer offering a qualified health benefit plan through an exchange operating in the state.

Four organizations had to drop out of the association’s navigator consortium because of the law, Ms. Hamler-Fugitt said. “We’re going to make sure everything we do is correct. And if that slows down the process, then that is prudent to what we have to do.”

Ms. Hamler-Fugitt said she has been trying to manage expectations about the first day, which got off to a slow start. “It’s no indication of anything,” she said. “This is only day one. This is only the beginning. Everybody calm down. Everybody take a deep breath.”

Though they are not allowed to assist people complete the enrollment process yet, about half a dozen Ohio Association of Foodbanks employees, who have completed the navigator training but are still waiting for state authorization, were staffing a hotline on Tuesday, answering calls from people looking for more information about the exchanges.

By noon, they said they had received only a handful of calls from consumers. Some were confused about how the exchange would affect their Medicare or Medicaid coverage. One person was having technical difficulties with the Web site and was given the federal hotline number. At one point, the Ohio section of the federal exchange site was asking consumers to wait, citing a high volume of visitors.

Staff also were taking callers’ mailing addresses to send out “application preparation packets” to help people get their medical history, documents and income estimates in order, as well phone numbers for navigators to call consumers back once their state certification was completed.

The Ohio Food Bank Association plans to organize at least 250 community-based outreach and enrollment events between now and March 31. They will also run call centers and plan on setting up a table at a county fair next month.