Martha Ramirez first visited Los Barrios Unidos Community Clinic as a teenager and, later, as a young mother. More than a decade later, she still makes the trek from her Glenn Heights home to the West Dallas clinic because she wants a doctor who speaks her language.

“I feel more confident,” said the 29-year-old, who is expecting another child. “The nurses and doctors are really good people; plus with other [non-Spanish speaking doctors] I don’t feel very comfortable.”

Like many Hispanics in North Texas, Ramirez struggles to find adequate health care because of language and cultural barriers. Complicating the problem, doctors say, is the fact that Hispanics face higher rates of chronic conditions such as diabetes and heart disease than the general population.

“When it comes to health, it’s critical to be able to communicate your needs to your doctor,” said James Chanez, president of the North Texas Latin American Physicians Association, “and that can be hard if you don’t speak the same language.”

While the Latino population in the U.S. is steadily climbing, to 54 million in 2013, the number of Latino physicians hasn’t kept pace for the past three decades.

A 2015 study found that there were 135 Hispanic physicians for every 100,000 Hispanic residents in 1980, but only 105 doctors for every 100,000 Hispanics in 2010.

In Dallas County, there are about a million Hispanic residents, and three-fourths of them speak Spanish at home, according to the 2013 census.

That’s about 40 percent of the total population, but only 4 percent to 6 percent of area physicians are Hispanic, according to the North Texas doctors group. It’s unclear how many doctors of other ethnicities are fluent in Spanish.

About 5 percent of the doctors at Parkland Memorial Hospital are Hispanic, though about 22 percent said they were proficient in Spanish, said Ildemaro Gonzalez, chief inclusion and diversity officer for the hospital.

That’s important because more than half of the patients the charity hospital serves are Hispanic and about a third of them have limited English proficiency.

The Parkland network also employs 86 certified medical interpreters, all proficient in Spanish. Among them is Eduardo Gándara, an interpreter at Parkland’s DeHaro-Saldivar Health Center.

During a recent visit to the west Oak Cliff community clinic, Gandara introduced a Spanish-speaking patient to her doctor, translating what each person said verbatim, including the “ums” and “yeahs” and even gestures.

In January, Parkland adopted a diversity initiative to increase the number of minorities it employs. The plan also calls for the hospital to become more “culturally competent” by training or hiring staff members who understand the language and culture of patients.

Several other hospitals, clinics and nonprofits in North Texas are also trying to give Hispanics with limited means and English skills better access to health care.

That’s been Los Barrios Unidos’ mission since 1972, when residents came together to open the clinic in a portable building.

The clinic, now at the corner of Singleton Boulevard and Sylvan Avenue, has grown to provide primary, obstetric and pediatric care as well as mental health care and dentistry for children.

Los Barrios’ clientele is almost entirely Hispanic at 93 percent, and three-fourths of them are uninsured, according to spokeswoman Joleen Bagwell.

The clinic helps parents apply for WIC benefits and employs specialists to help enroll eligible patients in Medicaid, the Children’s Health Insurance Program and Obamacare.

After all, if the patient can’t pay, that sometimes forces them to seek routine care at a hospital ER.

“They can’t afford to or can’t get in to see a doctor at a private practice, so many go to the emergency room,” Bagwell said. “That is not where you want to get your primary care. It’s extremely expensive for them and for the state.”