4938652

Obamacare has faced repeated opposition from legislative repeal efforts and court challenges, and now a group of nuns is taking the law to the Supreme Court.

The Little Sisters of the Poor is fighting for an exemption to the Obamacare contraception mandate and released a series of videos introducing the women taking on the president’s law. The nuns have fought a long battle against the healthcare law, and the videos highlight Obamacare’s sticky situation, which the nuns say is forcing them to violate their consciences.

Hobby Lobby won a Supreme Court case last year that allowed businesses to opt-out of providing certain contraceptives for religious reasons. The Obama administration hoped to appease religious groups by allowing them to sign a form agreeing to provide the care without having to pay for it. The nuns, however, took issue with this and sued. Now their case is before the Supreme Court.

Religious groups say the exemption still keeps them involved in providing contraception. The Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA), they say, protects them from having to violate their consciences by providing contraception. RFRA law states that there must be a compelling government interest for violating religious beliefs and that it must be done in the least restrictive way possible, a tough burden for the government to prove.

“The mission of the Little Sisters of the Poor is to, as our foundress St. Jeanne Jugan showed to us, is to really care for everyone with great love and respect,” Veronica Susan says in her video. “Our work is to uphold the value of human life, the dignity of every human person.”

WATCH:

Sister Georgia:

Sister Veronica:



Sister Cornelia:

Sister Constance:



Sister Loretto:

Sister Therese Marie:

Sister Christian Maria:

Sister Mary Jamina:

Sister Lily:

Send tips to [email protected]. Follow Casey on Twitter and like him on Facebook.

Content created by The Daily Caller News Foundation is available without charge to any eligible news publisher that can provide a large audience. For licensing opportunities of our original content, please contact [email protected].