Texas Congressman Louie Gohmert (R) told Glenn Beck on Friday that Republicans may be considering a deal that essentially consists of “giving up on 99 percent of Obamacare” so they can say they won 1 percent.

Certain concessions may include changing the number of hours one works to be considered “part-time” or allowing businesses to have more employees before being subject to certain fines/taxes, but Gohmert said the country would basically be “implementing Obamacare for good, and that way we can say we got something for Obamacare even though it will ensure that it allows the total government control of everybody’s life like they were wanting to do.”

Gohmert said the plan would give the president “everything he wanted” and let him “throw us a few crumbs.”

After discussing the unprecedented “federal control over every individual life” that Americans would experience under Obamacare, Beck said that if House Speaker John Boehner makes such a deal, he is “the Sheriff of Nottingham.”

“The best thing that could happen in this country is that Obamacare goes away and the debt ceiling is not raised,” Beck asserted, adding that the second-best thing would be if every American realizes that the likes of Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, Texas Sen. John Cornyn, South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham, Arizona Sen. John McCain, and Boehner “are all the Sheriff of Nottingham. It would be the end of the Republican Party.”

Beck has been pushing the hashtag #DefundTheGOP and is urging Americans to stop giving money to the party at large; instead he’s suggesting support for individual candidates they trust.

Gohmert and Beck also discussed the latest on the “government shutdown,” and how it’s being portrayed.

“We didn’t want the government shutdown, but good night, the president stood there and he said you’re not going to use a gun [to negotiate] — are you kidding?” Gohmert said. “And I heard [White House press secretary Jay] Carney say yesterday, we’re not going to allow the Republican Congress to force us to pay them to do their job. He’s got it exactly backward!”

Rather, the congressman said: “They’re holding a gun to America’s head and saying, ‘Republicans, give us all the money in the Treasury — plus more than our children can ever pay for — and if you don’t, we’re going to burn down the country. We’re going to make it hard on veterans. We’re going to make it hard on disabled, people with cancer. We’re going to make the country miserable until you give us all the money.’”

Your browser does not support iframes.

The full episode of The Glenn Beck Program, along with many other live streaming shows and thousands of hours of on-demand content, is available on just about any digital device. Get it all with a FREE TRIAL.

–