<p>CARMEN SMYTH/SPECIAL TO THE STAR</p><p>Jonique Garcia (top), owner of Jonique Medical and Laser Aesthetic Center, hooks up the LiLa Laser machine and begins a fat reduction treatment on Heidi Balog.</p>

SHARE Jonique Garcia, left, owner of Jonique Medical and Laser Aesthetic Center, measures the waist of Heidi Balog, after she underwent the LiLa Laser treatment on her abdomen. Balog lost 4.2 inches during the treatment. The center offers the LiLa Laser treatment for localized fat reduction. This chart explains how the process works. Heidi Balog stands on the Whole Body Vibration Machine after receiving the LiLa Laser treatment. This machine works in tandem with the LiLa Laser treatment, and patients are encouraged to drink a lot of water and exercise for optimal results. Heidi Balog relaxes during the LiLa Laser treatment at the Jonique Medical and Laser Aesthetic Center in Westlake Village. The treatment dissolves fat in localized areas.

By Allison Bruce

When Heidi Balog learned of a laser treatment that could help the body break down and eliminate fat in targeted areas of the body, she was ready to try it.

Balog, who lives in Westwood, had the low-level laser treatments at Jonique Medical Aesthetic and Laser Center in Westlake Village. Balog has known owner Jonique Garcia for 17 years and trusted her opinion when it came to using the Lila Strawberry Laser.

After 10 treatments, Balog said she was pleased with the results, which targeted her upper abdomen, an area she had been self-conscious about for some time.

Balog previously had liposuction on her lower abdomen. Liposuction can have tricky results, since it removes fat cells and new fat can be unevenly distributed to where the liposuction didn’t remove cells.

“I needed something very specific,” Balog said. “I tried exercise and diet, but it didn’t work.”

So she purchased a $2,000 package deal of 10 treatments for the price of eight. She said the treatments, which involve placing a belt of paddles over the area to be treated, were quick and easy.

“You just lie there and don’t feel anything,” she said. “Maybe a little warmth.”

After that, she stood on a whole-body vibration machine, which helps the body process and eliminate the fat removed by the treatment.

Each area treated receives the laser light for 10 minutes per treatment, Garcia said. She has men and women undergoing the treatment, with the abdomen the most common target area.

Client Celia Kahn of Calabasas also wanted to lose stubborn fat around her stomach. She said now her pants fit better than before.

“On the other hand, you still have to watch what you eat,” she said. “Like anything else in life, you can’t just get these treatments and eat chocolates and fatty stuff. The treatments work with conscious exercising and proper eating.”

Along those lines, Garcia doesn’t just offer a quick-fix laser treatment. The price of the treatments includes access to the gym in her medical building with services ranging from Pilates to dance classes to meeting with personal trainers. She also gives clients vitamin shots and access to a nutritionist.

Balog exercises regularly. She continues to work out at her own gym, but also goes to the dance classes at the Westlake Village studio.

Garcia sees the LiLa laser as a way to target a trouble spot, but also a way to jump-start a new commitment to healthy eating and exercise.

For Garcia, who started offering the treatments at the end of last year, the timing seemed right for those looking to make a change.

“This is when people are getting serious,” she said. “Whether they stay serious or not is another story.”

At health and fitness clubs, memberships spike in January, with 12 percent of all memberships signed that month, according to the International Health, Racquet and Sportsclub Association. But at the same time that 88 percent of adults say they have not been satisfied with their weight or body shape at some point in their lives, 40 percent said they needed help starting a fitness program, according to the “Weight of the Union” report from Anytime Fitness.

The end of one year and beginning of another often marks a time for those kinds of commitments, which may be a good thing, said Michelle Moon, a clinical psychologist and associate professor at CSU Channel Islands.

The holidays often give people time to take stock, she said.

“People look at the new year as a chance to sort of get back on track from where they are,” she said, adding, “I think it’s a good thing to figure out what’s not working in your life and make the adjustment.”

Garcia said she finds that clients come to her center before the holidays wanting truly quick fixes, such as some Botox to minimize lines, so they feel good about how they look at holiday parties and while visiting friends and family.

At the start of the new year, however, she said she sees more clients thinking about the long-term and wanting treatments that fit with goals to be healthier and look better. They’re thinking about the way they look and feel and starting off fresh, she said.

“Somebody who is seriously coming in and trying to get healthy — it’s a rapid way to get there,” Garcia said of the laser treatment. “It makes it much more enticing to be on a diet and see results rapidly.”

Moon said a treatment that helps get the body looking more like someone wants can be a good motivator and create a more positive outlook. Dieting and exercise is a slow process, and, while it can lead to long-term health benefits, it can be hard to stay with for an extended period of time, she said.

A little bit of motivation — perhaps through seeing results in areas that just didn’t change enough with diet and exercise — can help people remain committed to those long-term goals.

“People are really hard on themselves and each other,” Moon said. “I think, when people find something that works, that can be a good thing — whatever that is.”

This story is part of an occasional series on how Ventura County technology companies are impacting people. If your company fits that profile and you would like to be part of the series, send information about your company and a contact number to DeAnn Justesen at dajustesen@vcstar.com.@vcstar.com.