Dining in the Dark raises money for the North Fort Myers nonprofit Lighthouse of SWFL while raising awareness of what life would be like with major vision impairment or blindness. (Photo: Special to The Cape)

As the season of fancy themed fundraisers winds to a close, there’s an event coming up distinctive from the rest. Benefiting a North Fort Myers-based nonprofit, Dining in the Dark will combine two foodie trends and serve them up in a setting that’s freshly fun and different from the typical cocktails-and-dinner events held at country clubs or hotel ballrooms.

The event will take place Saturday at Mike Greenwell’s 31 Produce, located between North Fort Myers and Alva, to raise funds for the Lighthouse of SWFL, which provides a variety of rehabilitation and support services to people experiencing major vision loss and blindness. Dining in the Dark will take a farm-to-fork meal served right on the farm where most of the ingredients were grown and combine it with the dark dining trend from Europe.

“We have a little cafe here and about 70 percent of what we sell, as far as vegetables, we grow right here on the farm and serve it in the restaurant,” said Mike Greenwell, the retired Boston Red Sox player who also founded the Greenwell’s Bat-A-Ball & Family Fun Park in Cape Coral. “People actually see it in the fields, see us picking it and see us preparing it in the kitchen, so that’s kind of a neat thing for people to experience besides just going to a regular restaurant. It’s truly about as fresh as you can get.”

The country-themed event will feature hayrides, bonfire, live music by the country band Rebel Heart, 15 country-themed activities such as blindfolded lasso throwing and a live auction. Mike Greenwell will attempt, while blindfolded, to hit a ball used in the sight-impaired adaptive game of beep baseball. Dark dining seeks to enhance the diners’ sense of taste and other senses by eliminating visual stimuli via the use of a darkened setting and blindfolds.

“It’s a simple idea — people go into a restaurant where the lights are out and get blindfolds,” said Doug Fowler, executive director of the nonprofit. “Food gets delivered to the table like normal in a restaurant, but then people have to figure out how to eat it. Our past Dining in the Dark dinners were suit-and-tie events. Everybody knew they were going to be blindfolded so they would probably spill stuff on themselves, but that’s just part of it. We even had some people who would wear Miami Vice-style white suits just to see how much wine and food they could spill on them, so it has fun twists.”

Now in its sixth year, Fowler said the Lighthouse has moved the event to Greenwell’s 31 Produce because it needed a venue where it could add additional fun activities to the evening as well as have room to expand, as event attendance has consistently outgrown its host venues. This year, the farm-to-fork dinner will be a country barbeque and served, for the first time, buffet style.

“We’re going to encourage the guests to put on their blindfolds, and our staff will help guide them through the buffet line, to their tables and through the process of eating,” Fowler said. “It’s always a blast, and there’s always people who cheat (and peek). Sometimes people will move food around on other people’s plates.”

Moving the food around pulls a prank upon a technique Fowler said the Lighthouse teaches its clients for managing meals, which is to use a standardized clock orientation of the food so that they know where each dish is on the plate, such as always placing the potato at the 12 o’clock position. This gives a much different meaning to the concept of presentation in restaurants, where chefs normally arrange food decoratively.

Although Fowler said that Dining in the Dark raises a lot of laughter along with money to fund the nonprofit’s mission, the event is one of very few fundraisers that, by its design, raises actual awareness of the cause. For a single evening, attendees get a glimpse into what life would be like if they became visually impaired or blind, which highlights the importance of the work of Lighthouse organizations worldwide that provide training and adaptive equipment so that their clients can lead productive, independent lives, with an emphasis on work skills training.

“Dining in the Dark is for one small moment putting on a blindfold and seeing what it’s like trying to eat a meal as a blind person,” said Evan Connell, who is both a board member and client of the Lighthouse of SWFL. “My own mother has gone to these events, and it was very difficult for her. You would think of all people — she has watched me grow up with this blindness — she would be able to understand it more, but she broke down on the appetizer. I told her to put her fork down, take a deep breath and I grabbed her hand. I calmed her down and walked her through it even though I couldn’t see her plate.”

Connell works as an analyst in the intelligence unit of the Lee County Sheriff’s Office. The Lighthouse helped him finish college by providing people who read his textbooks onto tape recordings when his vision diminished to where he could no longer read, and it provided him with the typing training he needed to obtain his job with the sheriff’s office. When his vision diminished further, he came back to the Lighthouse for white cane mobility training.

Fowler said that the services provided by Lighthouse organizations do not qualify for coverage by either health insurance or the Affordable Care Act because they are not deemed medically necessary. As a result, the organizations must rely upon grants from government and charitable agencies as well as fundraisers.

Approximately 2,000 people within the Lighthouse of Southwest Florida’s territory of Lee, Hendry and Glades counties qualify for services, although not all of them require service at the same time. Clients will take a life-skills course or receive some adaptive equipment and might not come back until they experience a worsening of their sight and need some additional help. Fowler said the center typically provides services for about 400 clients in any given year. Each Lighthouse organization is independent, so the money raised at the event will stay here to serve the local clients. Clients receive services at no charge.

The proceeds from Dining in the Dark fund the Lighthouse of SWFL’s services for blind children, which is an area where the organization definitely needs assistance. Presently, it only has funding to provide services for 10 of the 53 eligible children in its service area who need help.

“When people say, ‘I don’t know how you do it,’ I don’t have a choice,” Connell said. “You either curl up and die or you take up the challenge and move on. When you go to the Lighthouse, it’s a place of hope. When you go there, you’re scared and lost and you think you’re life is over, but by the time you go through the tour, you feel the peace and the opportunities. We teach you how to be independent and get your independence back. It was the proudest day when I got to go to Social Security and tell the person at the window, ‘I no longer need your services,’ because I had become a tax-paying citizen with a job and a career.”

If you go:

What: Sixth annual Dining in the Dark

When: 6-10 p.m. Saturday, April 9

Where: Greenwell’s 31 Produce, 18500 State Road 31, Alva

Cost: $75

Tickets: 997-7797; lighthouseswfl.org

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1SIWCEi