McHenry said a rewrite of the Affordable Care Act would return “to the basic principle of if you like your health care plan you can keep it.”

Buy Photo U.S. Rep. Patrick McHenry, right, speaks with Thermo Fisher Scientific employees during a tour and town hall-style meeting at the company’s manufacturing plant in Weaverville. (Photo: William Woody / wwoody@citizen-times.com)Buy Photo

Republicans in Congress will rewrite major portions of the Affordable Care Act this fall if the U.S. Supreme Court strikes down a key provision of the law, 10th District U.S. Rep. Patrick McHenry said during a visit to a local manufacturing plant Tuesday.

“I didn’t vote for it originally. I think there’s a better way forward and hopefully this fall we’ll be able to push for that better way forward,” McHenry told more than 60 employees of Thermo Fisher Scientific, which makes scientific instruments.

The court is considering whether to end payment of subsidies to purchase insurance to people who live in states, like North Carolina, that did not set up their own exchanges where people can shop for health insurance. A decision is expected no later than June.

McHenry said a rewrite of the ACA would return “to the basic principle of if you like your health care plan you can keep it,” allow consumers to buy health insurance plans offered in other states, enhance competition and lift restrictions on the types of plans that are offered through the law.

Any new legislation should retain the ACA’s protections for those who have pre-existing conditions and are seeking health care, said McHenry, a Lincoln County Republican who is House chief deputy whip.

“But there are better, more efficient ways to achieve it and legislation we address in the fall will have components that will do that,” McHenry said after a plant tour and meeting with workers.

McHenry noted in his remarks to employees that he had voted multiple times to repeal the law, but he did not advocate Tuesday a return to the status quo before the ACA was approved in 2010.

“Congress will have to rewrite the law and address this in a pretty wide-scale way,” he said.

He said legislation Republicans pushed in 2009 and 2010 would likely be a basis for whatever GOP plan emerges. It would have allowed buying insurance plans across state lines, encouraged small businesses to band together to buy insurance and enhanced state “high-risk pools” that would provide insurance for people with pre-existing conditions or chronic illnesses, he said.

The fact that the court has yet to rule means there are some unknowns, McHenry said, but, “We’re working diligently to be sure we have a package” to deal with issues a decision against the ACA would present.

On other issues, McHenry:

•Said that while President Barack Obama is “on to something very interesting” with his call to make it free to attend community college, “It’s not the most important thing we should be doing right now,” partly because it is “very affordable” in North Carolina already.

•Backed funding for scientific research through the National Institutes of Health.

“That is a high priority. It’s basic, sound science that may not lead to the market return that you need for a big pharmaceutical company to invest in that type of research,” he said.

NIH-backed projects are a significant market for Massachusetts-based Thermo Fisher, which makes scientific instruments at its plant on Aiken Road and has a major back office and technical support operation in Biltmore Park. The two together employ about 1,000.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1C2IKOL