Photo

WASHINGTON — After President Obama’s Affordable Care Act was enacted in 2010, Republicans at both the state and federal levels seemed to speak with one voice in flatly rejecting it.

But in subsequent years, though most Republican governors remained critical of the health care law, nine accepted a central but optional element, expanding Medicaid programs to cover many more low-income residents of their states. At least four others, urged on by hospitals and business groups, will try to do so this year.

And now, briefs filed last month in support of a major legal challenge to the law — King v. Burwell, which is now before the Supreme Court — are raising new questions about divisions within the Republican Party over the law.

Such filings, known as amicus briefs, allow interested parties to weigh in on either side of a case. Nearly two dozen briefs were filed on behalf of the plaintiffs in the King case, which the court will hear on March 4, but relatively few Republican state officials signed on.

The case focuses on the federal subsidies that help Americans buy insurance through marketplaces established under the law. The plaintiffs say the law’s wording allows subsidies only in states that created their own marketplaces. But the Obama administration argues that Congress intended to make the subsidies, which are considered crucial to helping millions enroll in coverage, available in all states, including those that rely on the federally run marketplace.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Six Republican state attorneys general — in Alabama, Georgia, Nebraska, Oklahoma, South Carolina and West Virginia — filed a brief agreeing that subsidies were illegal if distributed through the federal marketplace. “Those were the states that expressed an interest in joining,” said Aaron Cooper, a spokesman for Attorney General Scott Pruitt of Oklahoma, who led the effort.

The State of Indiana filed a separate amicus brief with its public school districts challenging the legality of subsidies in states that opted for the federal exchange, pointing out that the availability of subsidies can lead to fines for employers that do not provide to their workers what is deemed adequate health insurance. And Indiana and Oklahoma both have cases challenging subsidies that are pending in lower courts.

But 31 states have Republican governors, and most did not file briefs. State-level Republicans were far more involved in the landmark 2012 case challenging the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act, when more than two dozen Republican attorneys general were plaintiffs.

Federal lawmakers are taking a greater role in supporting the new case. Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, signed on to a brief with 14 other members of Congress, but the Republican attorney general of Florida, Pam Bondi, did not join the states’ brief. In Texas, Senators John Cornyn and Ted Cruz, both Republicans, joined the congressional brief, but the departing Republican attorney general, Greg Abbott, who was elected governor in November, does not appear in the states’ brief.

Photo

A spokeswoman for Mr. Abbott did not respond to calls and emails seeking comment. But Elena Marks, the president and chief executive of the Episcopal Health Foundation in Houston, noted that Mr. Abbott had shown an interest in “how the state might access the Medicaid expansion funds in a way that meets Texas’ needs.” The Houston Chronicle reported last month that Mr. Abbott had privately asked about Utah’s plan to use Medicaid expansion dollars to buy commercial coverage for low-income adults.

“It seems to me that the entire conversation around the A.C.A. has moved away from the hyperbolic, politicized and ideological and toward the pragmatic,” said Ms. Marks, who supports the law.

About five million middle-income people in more than 30 states receive subsidies to buy health insurance through the federal exchange. Without those subsidies, many would not be able to afford it. And without those people in the insurance markets, prices would probably rise for everyone else.

In a new study, the RAND Corporation found that eliminating subsidies for people in the 34 states that use the federal exchange would reduce the number of the insured by 9.6 million.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I suspect what’s going on is that Republican states realize what a disaster this would be for their insurance markets,” said Timothy S. Jost, a health law expert at Washington and Lee University in Virginia who supports the Affordable Care Act.

No amicus briefs have been filed in support of the government; they are due on Jan. 28.

Most of the amicus briefs supporting the plaintiffs were submitted by conservative organizations and scholars. But 19 Republican state legislators in Tennessee and two in Ohio joined the Galen Institute, a conservative research group, in filing a brief. And four Republican state legislators in Virginia filed a brief with several groups.

Sam Kazman, general counsel for the Competitive Enterprise Institute, a libertarian group financing the case, said the truest reflection of support from the states was the number — 34 — that had not established their own marketplaces. Still, Mr. Kazman said that amicus briefs filed by states were important, “just because in one sense the choices Congress gave to the states are the key issue here.”

Aubrey Jewett, a political scientist at the University of Central Florida, said he was somewhat surprised that Ms. Bondi had not joined the states’ amicus brief, given her long opposition to the health care law.

But he noted that a change may be underway, with Republican legislative leaders in Tallahassee suggesting recently that they might consider an alternative form of Medicaid expansion.

“I do think that there is an emerging schism in the Florida Republican Party on some aspects of Obamacare,” Mr. Jewett said, “and Bondi’s more cautious approach may reflect this.”