Conservative blogger Matt Drudge ripped into House Speaker John Boehner Friday for fast-tracking President Obama’s trade bill without telling the public what was in it.

The bill would severely restrict the U.S. Senate’s ability to influence trade deals by affording just 20 hours of debate on any a trade agreement, and requiring the body to approve or reject the measure without any authority to change it.

Many on both sides of the aisle believe the bill gives too much authority to the executive branch.

Drudge was even angrier about the clandestine way the bill was rammed through the approval process.

“Disrespect for voters is staggering,” he tweeted. “Boehner will not make public ‘most important’ trade deal in history? Hides behind ‘classified’ status.”

In another tweet, he added: “BOEHNER claims trade bill support from ‘farmers, manufacturers, small business owners’… HOW?? They have not read it.”

Many in the Twitterverse agreed with Drudge’s assessment of Boehner and company.

Disrespect for voters is staggering. Boehner will not make public ‘most important’ trade deal in history? Hides behind ‘classified’ status.. — MATT DRUDGE (@DRUDGE) May 23, 2015

BOEHNER claims trade bill support from ‘farmers, manufacturers, small business owners’… HOW?? They have not read it pic.twitter.com/t1qVrchCFm — MATT DRUDGE (@DRUDGE) May 23, 2015

If Republicans lose 2016, it can be traced to tonight’s trade deception. At least with Hillary we will get Sex, Drugs and Lawrence Welk… — MATT DRUDGE (@DRUDGE) May 23, 2015

@DRUDGE More corruption. Unbelievable. Now they “all” think we’re Gruber stupid. — ProudAmerican (@1776BetsyRoss) May 23, 2015

@DRUDGE Remember when Pelosi said we had to pass Obamacare to know what’s in it? How did that work out?! They should let voters see TTP now. — Adriana Cohen (@AdrianaCohen16) May 23, 2015

@DRUDGE There has been entirely too much passing of secret legislation and regulations lately…. The public should be very worried. — Anne Wilson Smith (@EarlyGirlSC) May 23, 2015

@Snap_Politics Apparantly we have to pass it to see what’s in it. And that’s worked out so well up to now. @DRUDGE — John (@john1gun) May 23, 2015

@DRUDGE My mother taught me to read at age 3, and not to ever sign documents I had not read. Why doesn’t Congress have that common sense? — Elle Kynzer (@ElleKynzer) May 23, 2015

@DRUDGE Benedict Arnold @SpeakerBoehner will lead the @HouseFloor to pass this awful trade bill @SenateFloor just passed it Bad implications — pam (@pamnsc) May 23, 2015

Don’t forget the Trade bill has support from ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS meaning the average USA citizen gets screwed in this deal CC: @DRUDGE — Thomas (@tjemery1) May 23, 2015

@PoliticalShort @DRUDGE By farmers, manufacturers and small businesses, he means the Chamber of Commerce. — Amy B (@RubyRedVette) May 23, 2015

@DRUDGE what’s the point in voting anymore. We gave them control and look what they’ve done — nani (@bestnaniever) May 23, 2015

Related:

Does Josh Earnest know what ‘snafu’ means? Social media mockery grows.