The Fitz Files

It's time: The Waratahs and coach Michael Cheika are primed for a big year - hopefully. Photo: Brendan Esposito

DEAR Waratahs,

Good luck on Sunday against the Force at the Sydney Football Stadium. We'll be watching. One thing though. You may know that story of the American journalist Barbara Walters, who visited Jerusalem in 1991, and interviewed a very old man who has visited the Wailing Wall three times a day to pray for the last 85 years.

"At dawn," he tells her, "I pray for world peace. At noon, I pray for peace in the Middle East. At dusk, I pray for all the peoples in all the world to come to know each other, and stop hating each other."

Why didn't James O'Connor take this kick?: Kurtley Beale slips at the vital moment of the first Test against the British and Irish Lions. Photo: Getty Images

"And what does that feel like," Walters asked, "having done that for all those decades?"

Advertisement

The old man looked at her and decided to give it to her straight: "Like I'm talking to a f----ing wall!"

And that, Waratahs, is how many of us have felt about you over the years. Of course, we love you, just on principle, but year after year after year, commentators and supporters alike have begged you to play the game the way it is meant to be played, most particularly in these parts - running the ball from everywhere, displaying thunder in the forwards, lightning in the backs and passion all over the field. Win, lose or draw, we want to sense that as enthusiastic as we are to see you play like that, it is as nothing to the furious fervour you have for playing that way.

Illustration: John Shakespeare

And year after year after year, though there have been glimpses of that approach, way too often you have regressed to kicking for the corners when in your own half, and then employing just two tactics in your half - the "up" and the "under". It's dull. And it's what has taken crowds of 35,000 or so down to 20,000 or so. We don't want it. We won't watch it.

Still, maybe this is the year. We hear that coach Cheika has you fit as fiddles, as primed as pumps, as bullish as a battleship on the charge. But we've heard that kind of stuff before, too. Now, we want to see it.

Go hard.

Yours, etc,

TFF

Kicking himself

TFF's treasured colleague and SMH rugby correspondent Georgina Robinson wrote a fascinating piece last week about how an academic had proven that of all the penalty goal kickers in all the world of professional rugby, the absolute No.1 gun in pressure situations - where the whole game is riding on it - is none other than Australia's own James O'Connor. That will be worth remembering when he no doubt makes his way back into the Wallabies next year for the World Cup. But it makes it all the more frustrating that for the final two penalty kicks of the first Lions Test last year - either of which could have won the game - O'Connor handed the kicking duties to Kurtley Beale who, unfortunately, slipped over while attempting the final kick.

Lucky strike

"When the going gets weird," the great Hunter S. Thompson once wrote, "the weird turn pro." As do lots of other sportspeople besides, with mixed results. For a very few sporting pros, everything goes brilliantly from the beginning, they make squillions and then retire, universally respected. (Off the top of my head I can only think of about two like that - you know who you are - but there must be a lot more!) The more common experience, however, is to struggle like a mad thing, and more often than not wonder if it is all worth it. I have never met Sydney golf pro Anthony Summers, but after the 45-year-old turned pro 23 years ago, and never cracking it for a win in all that time, he could be excused, once or twice, for wondering exactly that - most particularly, when he had to clean toilets at the SCG and SFS on weekends to make ends meet. Somehow, though he had got close many times, he had always fallen at the last hurdle.

Last weekend though, he might have had some confidence that he was finally going to win a big one - the Queensland PGA Championship - if not for the fact that, again, something goes wrong. After two blistering opening days of 61 and 62, he suffers a back injury to shoot a 70 on the Saturday and be one stroke off the pace, behind New Zealand's Ryan Fox - son of All Blacks great Grant Fox.

All he can do is get physio that evening and on Sunday morning, and hope that all these years on, his luck would change.

But no …

Just when he regains the lead on the 15th hole, and it looks like his two-decade drought is going to break, on the 16th he takes a three wood and shanks the bloody thing and finishes out in Marlboro country, deep in the trees. The hell with it. Furious, devastated - it's happening again! - he takes aim for a difficult shot, that needs to go under the branches, but still have sufficient height to get over the hill where the 16th green lies. He belts it. It misses the branch. It heads high. Over the hill. He holds his breath …

In the distance, he hears a roar …

The ball has dropped!

EAGLE!

"Sometimes," Summers said afterwards, "you just get lucky."

And about bloody time, too. Summers ends up shooting a seven-under-par 63 to win his first pro tournament, by three shots.

"I'm going through a whole bunch of emotions," he told journalists afterwards.

"It's so exciting and a relief. It's also a bit sad that my parents aren't here to witness it."

Congratulations to him. Onwards and upwards. And don't be surprised if, now that he has the monkey off his back, he turns into a gorilla of the game!

Swedish Warne

They tell me that people like Robert de Niro, Bill Murray and George Clooney love doing TV advertisements in Japan, because they can get big bucks without suffering over-exposure in the markets they truly care about - or even being seen to sell out to commercial interests. Now, I grant you, I have never discerned that our own Shane Warne has ever worried about either of those factors. But a Fitzphile reported from Sweden this week that he was having dinner with his Swedish hosts when who should come on but The Warnester himself, spruiking sports betting! Yes, his words were dubbed into Swedish, but it was him all right.

"I went into shock," he recounts, ''and said, 'Do you know who that is?' Nothing. So I had to explain to perfectly normal Swedes what a Shane Warne is. I don't think 'plonker' translates but they got the gist."

What gives, Warney?

What they said

Former Pakistan Cricket Board chairman Ijaz Butt, asked what he thought of the ‘‘Big Three’’ boards — England, India and Australia — replied: ‘‘Listen, don’t quote me but in my personal opinion all three are sons of pigs.’’ He was on live television at the time.



Australia’s 18-year-old speed skater Deanna Lockett at the Winter Olympics: ‘‘I think in the 1500metres I was pretty unlucky and my race was not very good but God was fair and he gave me a better opportunity in the 1000.’’ If you need me, I will be in my trailer having a little lie-down.



Collingwood captain Scott Pendlebury highlights the nickname problem we have with GenY: ‘‘One of the things I spoke to Taylor about when he first got here was that I expect him to be pushing guys like myself, Beamsy, Bally, Swanny, push us out of the midfield, take our spots, because that is going to make us better.’’



H.G. Nelson at the Winter Olympics, on Channel Ten: ‘‘The bagpipe is the missing thing between music and noise.’’



The man most likely to be Wallabies captain, @pocockdavid, tweeted on Tuesday, after the riots on Manus Island: ‘‘You can call Scott Morrison’s office to express concern re treatment of #asylumseekers and the death of a person in his care: 02 6277 7860.’’ I’ll say it again. Pocock is one of the most impressive sportspeople in the country.



June Steenkamp on the anniversary of her daughter Reeva’s death by Oscar Pistorius with the trial imminent: ‘‘Yes, I will be at the trial. For me, for us and for Reeva, but it will not bring back our beautiful baby. It never gets easier. In fact, it only gets worse.’’



Swans CEO Andrew Ireland on the cost-of-living allowance the Swans have that the other clubs want scrapped: ‘‘Our view is that it is a fair equalisation measure — not the other way around. We think if you take it away then it is disequalisation.’’



Port Adelaide president David Koch doesn’t like it: ‘‘Yes, Sydney is more expensive, but there are more commercial opportunities than for an Adelaide player. The Swans are big boys now. You are a glamour team. Glamour teams don’t need cost-of-living allowances.’’ That is, frankly, a reasonable point.



Chelsea manager Jose Mourinho on Arsenal counterpart Arsene Wenger: ‘‘He is a specialist in failure. I’m not ... Eight years without a piece of silverware, that’s failure.’’



David Warner on why he is in much better form these days with the bat: ‘‘Probably not going out and punching blokes at a club probably sums it up.’’



Ian Chappell on English cricket: ‘‘Contrast that with the mess England is in after sacking Kevin Pietersen in an attempt to bolster Cook’s captaincy. The ECB should be demoting those England players who DIDN’T question Cook’s lacklustre leadership in Australia.’’



Swimmer Scott Miller on drugs, prison and other mistakes: ‘‘I’m a drug taker. I don’t deal drugs.’’

Team of the week

Mitchell Johnson. Slayed ‘em in South Africa in the first Test, including a Valentine’s Day Massacre, taking 12wickets for the match. He has taken 49 wickets in his past six Test matches, while from the 17 before that he only took 50 wickets.

Brendon McCullum. The Kiwi cricket captain became his country’s first player in 84 years of Test cricket to hit a triple century, scoring 302 over 13hours to save a Test against India.

Sam Burgess. Announced he is leaving Souths this year, to try to make the English World Cup rugby team. For my take, google: SMH and Peter FitzSimons and Slammin’ Sam Burgess.



Sir Tom Finney. One of England’s greatest soccer players who was famously known as the ‘‘Preston Plumber’’, has died at the age of 91.



Karrie Webb. Rebounded from disqualification in the Australian Ladies Masters to win her fifth Australian Open.

North Queensland Cowboys. Secured the first title in their history by winning the Auckland Nines. Waratahs. Begin their season on Sunday at home against the Force.



The Loreto Kirribilli year 9 1st Quad. Won the under-16 state championship rowing last Saturday at the SIRC in record time. Congrats to Tara Rigney, Sophie De Angelis, Olivia Jackson, Phoebe Halley, Cox: Charlotte Shackley. Coach: Brynne Allen.



St Augustine’s College 1st IV. Won the Sydney University Cup at the Riverview Gold Cup to record only the second win in 30 years by a non-GPS school. Congrats to Sean Murphy, Will Greenwood, the fabulously named Zac von Appen, Jack Bray and cox Finnigan Mitchell — and their Olympian coaches, Matt and Judith Ungemach.



Renaud Lavillenie. The Frenchman broke Sergei Bubka’s 21-year-old indoor pole vault world record last Saturday, with a leap of 6.16 metres.



Sami Kennedy-Sim. Great effort making it to Sochi for the ladies’ ski cross that took place on Friday. After suffering a stroke during training, the Manly woman came through via qualification at the World Cup.

Twitter - @Peter_Fitz