Oil prices, which have plunged to a succession of new five-year lows over the past week, have taken center stage. Perhaps surprisingly, given that many frontier and emerging countries are net oil importers, the slump in prices has taken a heavy toll on investor sentiment.

Since mid June when oil prices began their slide, the MSCI Frontier Market index has skidded by over 11%. The MSCI Emerging Market Index has lost more than 9%.

Michael Levy, who manages UK-based Barings’ frontier markets fund, says the sell-off may be overdone. “Many frontier markets are net oil importers and…should benefit from the oil price fall,” he says. Levy believes Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Kenya are particularly well placed to benefit from cheaper oil. Even Nigeria and Saudi Arabia could present some interesting opportunities in the wake of the sell-off.

Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala. Reuters

Investors in Nigeria might be hard-pressed to find any cause for optimism, though. The naira, Nigeria’s currency, has crumbled in tandem with falling oil prices and the economy looks set to suffer, too. In an exclusive interview with the Journal, finance minister Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala admitted that growth could slow noticeably and the country would have to raise taxes and cut spending to compensate for falling oil prices.

Ukraine, another frontier market that is in the news for all the wrong reasons, is starting to exhibit clear signs of the catastrophic long-term damage that the ongoing strife is causing. The country’s president, Petro Poroshenko, laid out his vision for the future in an editorial in the Journal, triggering a lively debate on WSJ Frontiers.

Ethiopia provided some much-needed cheer among the gloom with its successful — and oversubscribed — $1 billion bond issue. And Sri Lanka’s central banker told the Journal the country was considering dipping its toe in the Chinese offshore bond market having already raised $1.9 billion in dollar-denominated bonds this year.

Bangladesh, another oft-overlooked frontier market with considerable promise, also provided some relief. Our Dhaka-based reporter Zain Al-mahmood writes that a consortium of global retailers has established a scheme to help apparel businesses in Bangladesh ensure their factories meet international safety standards.

Focus: Africa ‘Must Rethink Approach to Agriculture Investment’

Aziz Akhannouch. Dan Keeler/The Wall Street Journal

The future could be bright for Africa’s agriculture. But to realize its full potential the continent’s governments need to rethink their approach to encouraging investment, Morocco’s Agriculture Minister Aziz Akhannouch says.

In an exclusive interview with WSJ Frontiers, Akhannouch discusses the success of his country’s efforts to boost agricultural production and the lessons other African countries could learn from Morocco’s experiences. He presents a compelling case: agricultural output under Morocco’s ‘Plan Vert’ is up over 40% in six years.

Key Stories from WSJ Frontiers

Vietnam’s Trade With South Korea Set to Double as Trade Pact is Finalized

ICC Withdraws Charges Against Kenyan President

Argentina Offers to Pay Cash for Bonds Maturing in 2015

Venezuela Cuts Spending as Oil Prices Plummet

Fall in Oil Prices Threatens Africa’s Economic Growth

Around the Web

Sri Lankan Champ: John Keells Holdings became the biggest of the 34 companies in the MSCI Frontier Markets Asia Index.

Ups and Downs in Nigeria: Templeton’s Mark Mobius looks beyond Nigeria’s current travails and sees a brightening picture.

Frontier Favorites: T. Rowe Price frontier fund manager Oliver Bell offers his country picks for 2015.

Additional reporting by Javier Espinoza.