Buy Photo A registered nurse at Ingham County Health Department prepares a flu shot. (Photo: Lansing State Journal file photo )Buy Photo

Proponents of a countywide health plan for the poor and uninsured are asking voters to renew a millage to keep the program going, citing cuts to federal funding that would slow its revenue stream.

Ingham County voters would see a renewal of a 0.52-mill levy for the Ingham Health Plan that covers doctors’ visits and other health services for low-income residents. The Nov. 4 ballot issue would continue, not raise, a tax that last was approved in 2012 for an additional five years. The current millage expires at the end of 2015.

It would cost the owner of a home with a $100,000 taxable value $52 annually.

The renewal request comes despite the health plan carrying a $9.6 million fund balance, which officials say has accrued for at least six years.

Program advocates say they will have to dip into those reserves once federal funding ends after this year under a provision of the Affordable Care Act that widened coverage for the uninsured — including many people once covered by the county’s plan.

A final payment of about $800,000 should arrive this month, said Robin Reynolds, Ingham Health Plan’s executive director. That’s down from about $2 million the plan received quarterly, Reynolds said. Starting in 2015, the program will be funded entirely by local millage dollars.

The millage is expected to generate $3.4 million each year.

Yet, the Ingham Health Plan today is serving fewer customers. Enrollment plummeted 93 percent in the past year — from roughly 11,000 participants in 2013 to 800 — as most recipients were sent to shop for private insurance policies on a new statewide health exchange or were newly eligible for Medicaid that was a central part of President Obama’s health care reform law.

About half of those disenrolled in April have found coverage through either the Affordable Care Act insurance exchange or the state’s expanded Medicaid coverage.

Reynolds, who said 80 percent of the plan’s former customers were eligible for the federal Medicaid program, believes membership will rebound to between 4,000 and 5,000 by the end of 2015. The plan’s current members signed up after June 1, with at least 125 added monthly, she said.

“We didn’t want to use taxpayer money on someone who was eligible for another program,” Reynolds said. “We are trying to be good stewards of the (people’s) money.”

The Ingham Health Plan serves county residents who earn less than $28,000 annually for a single household and less than $55,000 for a family of four and don’t qualify for other types of insurance.

In 2013, the plan spent about $1.3 million on doctor visits and $659,000 on pharmacy services. The rest went for such services as radiology, lab work and outpatient care.

Participants in the plan have also benefited from preventive health care. Between October 2012 and June 30, the Ingham Health Plan paid for more than 6,000 such procedures, including mammograms, colonoscopies and blood tests.

The millage doesn’t have universal support: Don Vickers, a Republican county commissioner who represents parts of southern Ingham County, said he supports the health plan but it was supposed to be a “stopgap” until the federal health care reform law took effect.

Vickers said the county could wait to bring the issue before voters for another year. He’s also concerned about how the millage will be allocated.

“My biggest fear is people will come up with ways other than how that money was designed to be spent,” he said.

Vickers and at least one other county commissioner — Todd Tennis, a Democrat who represents southeastern Lansing — say the millage revenue may not be solely dedicated to the health plan and could be diverted to other programs.

That may not be true. Jared Cypher, the county’s deputy controller, said the ballot language is too narrow to allow many other uses besides health care for low-income residents.

The millage renewal has been supported by numerous public officials, as well as Lansing’s Sparrow Health System and McLaren-Greater Lansing hospital.

The plan “will remain in business until we don’t have any funds left to do so,” Reynolds said.

At a glance

Below is the full text of the ballot language for a reneal of a millage for the countywide Ingham Health Plan:

• INGHAM COUNTY HEALTH SERVICES RENEWAL MILLAGE

For the purpose of reauthorizing and continuing a millage at the same millage level previously approved by the voters in 2012 for funding of providing basic health care services to Ingham County residents who are not eligible for Medicaid under the Federal Affordable Care Act, and whose individual income is less than $28,000 and who do not have medical insurance, including use of these funds to help pay for access to doctor visits, generic medications, and essential care such as preventative testing and treatment for cancer, diabetes, heart disease and other serious illnesses for low-income residents, shall the previously approved millage above the constitutional limitation upon the total amount of taxes which may be assessed in one (1) year upon all property within the County of Ingham, Michigan, be continued and renewed at up to 0.52 mills ($0.52 per thousand dollars of state taxable valuation) for a period of five years (2015-2019), inclusive?

If levied in full, this millage would raise an estimated $3,425,803 in the first calendar year.

Read or Share this story: http://on.lsj.com/1wrR4mI