Near Brandon, SD

Some families in campgrounds Sunday could deal with severe weather in Eastern South Dakota, after the 4th of July weekend.

The weekend might almost be over, but tents are still going up at Jellystone Park. For a lot of people, they wouldn't want to spend the holiday doing anything else.

"Kind of like it, it's a little different than hotels. Obviously we can make our own time, our own little place to be. We can enjoy campgrounds like this, just have a good time," Michael Jorgensen said.

While they are outside, campers can run into a dangerous situation. The forecast shows the possibility of severe storms tonight, including strong winds and hail. Owner Bruce Aljets says the park has a plan in place.

"Make sure that they keep up on the weather. That they're aware that there is a possibility of thunderstorms and if they need assistance. Where to go, we tell them where to go and the two buildings that we have as storm shelters," Aljets said.

Aljets says the most extreme weather he remembers at the park was the storm two weeks ago that ripped through Garretson.

That same storm ripped through Palisades State Park. Campground Host Merle Wenge rode out the strong winds in this RV. While most of the campers are leaving the state park today, he still wants the ones left behind to be safe through tonight's potential storm.

"Well we just go out campsite to campsite and warn them what's coming. If a tornado is coming we tell them where to go and it's right over here in our comfort station. That's the most secure spot in the whole park," Wenge said.

Michael Jorgensen and his family will be staying in this pop-up camper at Jellystone park.

"It's always a risk you take when you're out camping. You just got to be prepared, be careful, and check the weather and everything. You just got to weigh the risks and the pros and cons basically," Jorgensen said.

A plan that he might have to practice Sunday night.

The National Weather Service says it's important for people to leave tents and RV's during storms to find a sturdier place for shelter.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.