If you thought yoga was just for yuppies and Indian gurus, you thought wrong. Yoga can do wonders for mental and physical health, which is exactly why the Prison Yoga Project wants to bring the ancient practice to prisons. Yoga that incorporates mindfulness and other embodiment practices can release Complex Trauma, a common condition in the incarcerated population, and alter damaging behavioral patterns. You can help provide prisoners with yoga manuals to further their practice here.

4. Sustainability in Prisons Project

6. Code.7370

The Last Mile believes that jobs are the key to breaking the cycle of incarceration. An estimated one million software engineering positions will open up in 2020, leading the nonprofit to launch Code.7370, the first computer coding curriculum in a U.S. prison, last year. Inmates at California’s San Quentin State Prison will learn the ins and outs of HTML, JavaScript, CSS, and Python, while building resumes that might soon interest Silicon Valley startups

For more information, watch WIRED’s short film on the innovative coding project:

7. The Inside-Out Prison Exchange Program

The Inside-Out Prison Exchange Program creates partnerships between universities and correctional systems in an effort to “deepen the conversation and transform our approaches to crime, justice, freedom, [and] equality.” College students sit beside inmates as peers for the duration of a semester-long course. Most notably, class participants collaborate on a final project, encouraging teamwork and mutual understanding. Not only do undergraduates get the chance to reexamine their stereotypes of prison, but inmates also benefit from regular access to higher education. Both groups benefit from new friendships and participation in an ongoing, evolving dialogue. This year over 100 universities and colleges will offer Inside-Out courses globally.

Michelle Alexander, author of “The New Jim Crow” explains precisely what makes Inside-Out unique and effective: “It’s so important that we end the separation between ‘us’ and ‘them’ — those labeled ‘prisoners,’ ‘criminals,’ ‘felons.’ It is this separation and demonization of the ‘others’ — and our failure to truly see, hear, and engage with those who have been locked up and locked out — that makes it easy for us to remain in deep denial about what we, as a nation, have done. Inside-Out challenges that denial in a powerful way.”

8. New Leash on Life