LOS ANGELES — After a confidence-jolting performance at the 2014 New York City Marathon, Kara Goucher wondered whether her career was over at age 36. Depressed with her performances and disillusioned with the sport, she had moved back to Boulder that year and went to work with Mark Wetmore and Heather Burroughs, the coaches who made her a three-time NCAA champion at Colorado.

They gave her hope and rebuilt her confidence, but she fell short of making her third U.S. Olympic team Saturday, finishing fourth in marathon trials staged in oppressive heat. The top three finishers make the team, and Goucher was devastated, weeping through emotional interviews near the finish area.

“I had a dream that I’m going to have to let go of now,” Goucher said. “Obviously it’s a really hard pill to swallow, but they were better.”

Goucher clung tenaciously to fourth place in the race’s later stages, hoping someone ahead of her would falter.

“I just kept thinking, ‘I don’t have to win, I just have to be in the top three.’ But I pretty much knew at 22 (miles) that it wasn’t going to happen,” she said.

Goucher made the 2008 Olympic team in the 10,000 meters after claiming a bronze medal in that event at the world championships the year before. She ran the marathon in the 2012 Olympics, but the past couple of years have been tough.

“I’ve been a dreamer,” said Goucher, 37. “It’s just the way I’m wired. I love it still. I love racing, I love training, I feel alive when I’m preparing for something. I feel happy. Sometimes it doesn’t go the way you hoped, but I have such a good life. Mark and Heather taking me back, it just turned my life around. They brought me back to myself. They gave me my life back. I would do it again in a heartbeat, even with the same result. I wouldn’t even hesitate.”

Temperatures in the mid-70s caused everyone to rethink race tactics. Shalane Flanagan, the favorite and 2012 trials winner, barely made it to the finish line before collapsing, taking third place.

“I was hoping that would happen to someone in the race,” Goucher said, meaning someone ahead of her failing to finish because of the heat. “I mean, that’s awful but, you know, there’s a dream on the line. That’s what I was hoping, that they would be in over their head, someone would peel off and I would be there. I was still fighting, but they were all composed until the end. They ran really great.”

She will try to make the Olympic team in the 10,000 meters at the track and field trials in June.

“I didn’t fight this hard to just fold right now,” Goucher said.

She fought to make one more Olympic team. She also went to the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency with concerns about former coach Alberto Salazar, and USADA has been investigating his methods. If this is how her career ends, she will hold her head high.

“I think I’m proudest of the last year,” Goucher said, “speaking out against what I saw and not backing down and coming back against all the odds.”