Second Amendment advocates, public transportation and Gov. Scott Walker also round out the year's most-read op-ed columns.

Buy Photo Dereck Simonsmeier, then of Schofield, wrote that he felt his rights were violated when he was asked to leave a local grocery store because he was carrying a gun. (Photo: T'xer Zhon Kha/Daily Herald Medi)Buy Photo

2014 was a good year for opinions. We saw great engagement from readers, some spirited debates in our pages and some terrific, affecting reader-submitted writing.

When it came to our most-read editorials and letters to the editor, it was November's elections that loomed large. Most of our most-clicked stories in those two categories revolved around the re-election of Gov. Scott Walker, with plenty of strong views in favor of and in opposition to the governor's agenda.

For whatever reason, though, our op-ed columns saw a much broader range of topics that became hits with our readers. Find excerpts below; for those still available online we've linked to the full pieces.

Here, in order according to online metrics, were most-read op-ed columns of 2015:

11. "Held hostage by stray cats!" Chris Filtz, published March 24

"For some time now, my home has been the nightly stomping grounds of more than one stray cat in Wausau.

"As a responsible pet owner myself, I find the kind of people who let their animals roam to be lazy, ignorant and selfish. (...)

"I know Wausau City Hall has been fighting a childish battle with the Humane Society over housing stray cats, and now it has come to a head where Wausau refuses to do anything about stray cats.

As if ignoring makes it go away."

10. "Walker and aides intentionally flouted Open Records Law. Why weren't they charged?" Mike McCabe, published March 12

"The latest symptom of the illness appeared in the wake of a state appeals court's order to make public close to 28,000 pages of emails that were uncovered by criminal investigators during a now-completed John Doe investigation. Six associates of the governor were charged and ultimately convicted of various crimes.

"No one was charged with violating the state Open Records Law, however, in spite of the fact that the criminal probe revealed government employees' widespread use of personal laptop computers, private Gmail accounts and even a secret wireless router to hide information about their activities and frustrate Freedom of Information requests by the media and general public."

9. "As cops, we accept scrutiny, value community," Capt. Ben Bliven, published Feb. 18

Buy Photo Capt. Ben Bliven of the Wausau Police Department wrote in response to issues of police ‘militarization.’ (Photo: Daily Herald Media file photo)

"In training we routinely discuss being safe and 'going home at the end of each shift.' This doesn't mean we advocate pulling the trigger when we aren't sure of the situation just to be safe. In fact, it's quite the opposite. We use the 'going home' mantra to advocate safe decision making. (...)

"'Going home' isn't the only mantra we use in law enforcement. We also routinely ask ourselves and each other 'Did you make a difference today?' There are few professions in this world in which people have the ability to touch the lives of people in their community every single day. That's why people get into policing; to touch people's lives and make our community a better place."

8. "Wisconsin is working again, but there is more to be done," Gov. Scott Walker, published Feb. 14

"People around the state tell me that the way to fuel the economic recovery is to put more money in the hands of the hard-working taxpayers. Our state's consumers and job creators will do more to stimulate the economy.

"We're turning things around. We're heading in the right direction, but there is more work to be done."

7. "Drug war charges don't address the root problems of inmates like me," Nikita Wilichowski, published April 8

Buy Photo As an inmate at Lincoln County Jail awaiting sentencing, Nikita Wilichowski wrote about the drug war from the point of view of an addict and offender. (Photo: Daily Herald Media file photo)

"I am The Problem. I eat, sleep, laugh and cry with all the other Problems. We are Problems, but we would no doubt become the stepping-stones to solutions, if only we were asked. There are lot of us locked up right now, fighting hefty charges doled out by the district attorney's office in an attempt to stall, not solve the crisis.

"Upon release, statistically, most will fail, many within six months."

6. "Thomas the Tank engine and other awful shows," Robert Mentzer, published Nov. 26

Thomas the Tank Engine (Photo: File)

"My 3-year-old son, Forrest, has largely outgrown 'Thomas the Tank Engine,' or at least it has fallen out of favor. Lately he has moved on to a new terrible cartoon called 'Jake and the Neverland Pirates,' which is also horrendous. Actually all of the shows he likes are terrible. Believe me, my son has many wonderful qualities, but his taste in television is awful. (He does not even like "The Wire.")"

5. "Why I carry a concealed weapon," Karyn Simmons, published April 26

"I moved to Marathon County with my parents when I was two and have lived or worked here ever since. (...) I have seen the city of Wausau evolve from a quiet, Midwestern town without even a Wal-Mart into the thriving, diverse cultural and sports destination it is today.

"With that growth, unfortunately, has come an explosion in drug use and drug-related crime."

4. "Why we need public transit," LuAnn Sanders, published Oct. 22

LuAnn Sanders of Weston wrote that her family has depended on public transportation since her husband’s heart and brain surgeries. (Photo: Contributed photo)

"When we moved to Weston in 2000, we were a typical middle class family. (...) Then, in 2003, our plans were changed for us. Our life was turned upside down by a surgery that did not go as planned. Since 2003 our man of the house has had four heart valve replacements, two chest surgeries, brain surgery, a stroke and has spent months in the hospital. The catastrophic events left him disabled, relying on others for transportation due to the residual effects of the stroke and surgeries. (...)

"The Weston bus routes allow my husband to travel to classes at Northcentral Technical College, errands and appointments and it takes some of the stress off of me."

3. "How Wausau's immigration fears failed to come true," Robert Mentzer, published Dec. 7.

Buy Photo Michelle Lor of Wausau laughs as she plays the traditional ball-tossing game with a male partner at the Hmong New Year celebration at Greenheck Field House in Weston in 2013. (Photo: Daily Herald Media file photo)

"The author of (a 1994 Atlantic Monthly story about the challenges of immigration in Wausau), Roy Beck, achieved national fame from it, and its publication set him on a career path that would make him arguably the nation's leading anti-immigration voice, as founder and director of the advocacy group NumbersUSA. In a profile this month, The New York Times called him "perhaps the most powerful member of the small but vocal movement that has helped scuttle every effort at an immigration overhaul for nearly two decades."

"The piece that started it all for Beck, though, doesn't really hold up. Shouldn't that cause him to rethink his positions on immigration?

"Someone should ask him. That someone, I decided, should be me."

2. "The real reason JC Penney left Wausau," Keene Winters, published Feb. 3.

Buy Photo The JC Penney store, one of the Wausau Center mall’s longtime anchor retailers, closed in May. (Photo: Dan Young/Daily Herald Media)

"Wausau's problem is that its demographics are getting less and less attractive. Since 1990, the city's population has only grown a quarter of a percent per year - about one-fifth of the national average. In 2011, the average income per tax return in Wisconsin was $47,640. For Wausau, it was only $41,620. We have become a slow-growth, below-average-income community.

"For a moment, imagine sitting in some corporate headquarters and ranking places to add or close stores based on their sales growth potential. It is not hard to see why the Wausau location ends up getting cut."

1. "I was kicked out of Pick 'N Save for legally carrying a firearm," Dereck Simonsmeier; published February 8.

Buy Photo Dereck Simonsmeier, of Wausau, poses for a photo Thursday, Feb. 6, 2014, at his apartment. (Photo: Txer Zhon Kha/Daily Herald Media, T'xer Zhon Kha/Daily Herald Medi)

"I am an American citizen, a college graduate, an Iraq War veteran, a brother, a friend, a role model. ... (T)here is always one constant: I carry a firearm, concealed or open, legally, for the protection of myself, my family and my friends.

"I do not carry it to be tough or to start a fight; I carry it because it is my right and to protect the ones I love. Yet even with the welfare of others in mind, I am scrutinized and mocked for exercising my Second Amendment right.

"I have become the target of unnecessary heckling and badgering; I know of others who have had similar experiences. My experience in late January at the Pick 'N Save grocery store in Weston is only the most recent example."

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1BgukHh