Watch #LiveonKVAL Monday, May 23 at 5 p.m. and 11 p.m. for Kelly Andersen's full report on the Lane County Treatment Court.

EUGENE, Ore. - It is graduation day for four treatment court completers. Inside Harris Hall, just a few yards away from the county jail - the place he could have called home -- 32-year-old Matthew Lofdahl stands up and accepts his certificate.

"I know who I am now, and I know where I'm going and who I'm going to become," he said.

Applause and a few whoops ring out from the crowd.

"I had my first can of beer when I was 12. My stepfather was an alcoholic and he offered it to me as a reward for shooting my first widgeon duck," said Lofdahl.

He entered drug court in 2013. He says he has been clean since 2011, but he was arrested for selling meth.

"What really changed my life was meeting someone in the program that showed me the way to Jesus. My life has been blessing after blessing after blessing," he said.

It has taken almost three years to get through the program, but since then, he acquired his GED, a full-time job, and he has been able to see his kids.

But Lofdahl still treads carefully, because he knows getting too complacent can revive old habits.

"When the situation is all nice and fancy and this and that, you've done so well and you know you have, the brain automatically clicks on- okay, I need to get rewarded now," said Lofdahl.

Lane County is home to one of the first treatment court programs in the U.S.

Treatment court is an alternative to jail for those who have been arrested for drug-fueled crimes.

According to their website, 75 percent of crimes committed -- locally and at the state level -- are drug related.

The District Attorney says since August 2015, there have been at least 221 charges of heroin possession, and at least 892 for meth.

In 2015, 17 people died from heroin or meth overdoses. And that does not include deaths from other drugs, or accidents caused by drugs.

But perhaps there is hope.

Since it began in 1994, the Lane County treatment court has graduated more than 1,544 participants successfully.

It has only a 40 percent success rate, but consider the following:

The court says that 84 percent of people who do the program, whether they finish or not, are not charged with any additional crime within a year of participation.

And for those who do complete, it is 98 percent.

"I want people to understand that they have the ability to change," said Lane County Circuit Court Judge Ilisa Rooke-Ley.

"To see a person suddenly stand tall and dress up or not have an attitude with me. To me means that they're hearing, that they're feeling that they're worthy. That they're worthwhile," she said.

Not everyone qualifies for treatment court, but for the ones that do, they're provided with counseling, addiction help, parenting classes, and other resources.

"We have four levels at the end of each level, their contact with the court decreases," said Treatment Court Coordinator Danielle Hanson. "So the longer clean time, the longer compliance that they have with probation and treatment the less contact they have to have with the court."

It starts out with a weekly court visit and three group meetings per week.

And by the end of the program, at least one year later, the court appointments are just once a month.

"By that point they've completed their treatment book work, they have employment, they've attained their GED and we're kind of letting them soar," said Hanson.

Treatment court aims to re-train a participant's thought process, according to court officials.

"Addiction is something that needs treatment. And treatment costs. But it costs a lot less and people will not recidivate if they're given the proper treatment," said Rooke-Ley.

According to the court system, it costs $96 per day to house someone in jail, but less than $9 daily to treat them with this program.

"We're trying to make sure there aren't barriers in their life and throwing them in jail for 30 days is going to impact things to the point where they might say you know what using is a lot easier than this," said Rooke-Ley.

As jail cells continue to overflow, treatment court is welcomed by local officials.

"Treatment court graduation is actually my very favorite thing of what I do because you actually see something in the system working," said Lane County District Attorney Patty Perlow.

Perlow, who oversees admissions, financing, and program progression says the program is continuing to grow. It added a section specifically for veterans more than a year ago.

Grants and the affordable care act, she says, are the lifeblood of the program.

As the opiate crisis continues to spread nationwide, treatment court continues to look for new ways to attack it.

A recent $40,000 grant allowed the program to administer Vivitrol, a medication that blocks the effects of opiates, removing the "high" feeling created by heroin, meth and other drugs. It is a big help in the road to recovery.

The resources are there, but the participant has to want them.

"People are going to do what they like to do. Ultimately the choice is theirs. If they want to change, they'll change," said Lofdahl.

Lofdahl's success may ripple through this community - he says he wants to continue his education so that he can one day be a counselor.