Published: Saturday, 8/22/2015 - Updated: 9 months ago



TEA PARTY, UNIONS CLASH IN BATTLEGROUND OHIO GOP candidates take stage in Columbus; Kasich absent



THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH Enlarge Demonstrators march down High Street heading north during a "Workers Rally" in Columbus. The rally urged Union members to convene in front of the Columbus Convention Center in order to, as quoted from the Ohio AFLCIO website, "protest the national gathering of the extreme right-wing group called Americans for Prosperity (Koch Brothers) and their anti-worker agenda to make Right to Work the law of Ohio and the entire country."

COLUMBUS — In an event that was part political convention and part Olympic-style torch-lighting ceremony, an estimated 3,800 conservative Republicans descended on battleground Ohio with the goal of defending what they see as the American dream.

Part of that dream for Americans for Prosperity, the conservative organization founded by billionaire brothers David and Charles Koch, is repealing Obamacare, building a wall on the United States’ southern border, school choice, and right-to-work laws.

A short distance away, roughly 3,000 union members and other largely Democratic constituencies rallied in a Columbus park for their own version of an American dream that includes a higher minimum wage, access to affordable health care, and safe drinking water.

In a fiery speech that got a greater response from the free-market crowd than fellow presidential candidate Jeb Bush before him, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal went after Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker and former Florida Governor Bush by name, and made implied jabs at celebrity billionaire Donald Trump and other governors and former governors running for president who, he said, falsely claim to have cut spending on their watches.

“It is time for conservatives to stand for our own principles,” Mr. Jindal said. “You may have heard Jeb Bush say that we have to be willing to lose the primary in order to win the general election. That is the establishment telling us, conservatives, ‘Hide your beliefs, hide your principles, try to get the media, try to get the left to like you.’

“I’m here to tell you, folks, that never works. If we do that again, we will lose again, and we will deserve to lose again.”

He and Mr. Bush called for repealing the Affordable Care Act, but when Mr. Jindal mentioned replacing it, a woman shouted from the crowd, “Don’t replace it! Just repeal it!”

Without mentioning the foreign policies of his former-president brother, Mr. Bush vowed to rebuild the U.S. military and rebuild foreign alliances.

“This world is a lot more dangerous than it was the day Barack Obama became president,” Mr. Bush said. “This world has been turned upside down for the lack of American leadership.”

U.S. Sens. Marco Rubio (R., Fla.) and Ted Cruz (R., Texas) and former Texas Gov. Rick Perry are expected to address the conference today. The event included an Olympic-style torch and pyrotechnics.

Ohio Gov. John Kasich was nowhere to be seen, and a spokesman for Americans for Prosperity declined to discuss who was and was not invited.

But he was not forgotten. Without mentioning him by name, AFP President Tim Phillips of South Carolina took aim at Mr. Kasich’s decision to expand Medicaid in Ohio in partnership with the federal health-care law that the organization disdains.

“Whether proposed by a Democrat or a Republican, we’ll continue to oppose it with all we’ve got,” he said.

The Americans for Prosperity Foundation unsuccessfully fought Mr. Kasich’s decision to expand Medicaid to about half a million mostly working adults. Mr. Jindal was praised when he was introduced for rejecting expansion in his state.

Mr. Kasich has promoted his conservative credentials while presenting himself as a more moderate alternate to most of the five presidential contenders attending the weekend summit.

At a nearby park, labor and Democrats took aim at the Koch brothers and what they said was the influence of their money on state and national politics.

“Their influence has been in Ohio in the past when they opposed the [Columbus] zoo levy, which so many in this community supported,” said former Gov. Ted Strickland. “The Koch Brothers are getting into local communities as well as nationally, and they have an agenda. Their agenda is to cut taxes for people like themselves, the wealthiest in our nation, while shifting the tax burden to actually the average working person.”

Mr. Strickland is vying with Cincinnati City Councilman P.G. Sittenfeld for the Democratic nomination to square off in 2016 against U.S. Sen. Rob Portman (R., Ohio), who is backed by the Koch brothers and is expected to speak at the summit today.

Many of the crowd’s protesters wore red shirts opposing passage of a right-to-work law in Ohio that would prohibit automatic deduction of fair-share fees in lieu of dues from paychecks of employees who refuse to join a workplace union that negotiates their contracts.

Inside the Columbus convention center, Mr. Phillips praised Midwestern states like Michigan, Indiana, and Wisconsin, which have recently enacted their own right-to-work laws.

Protesters said they don’t buy Mr. Kasich’s repeated statements that he doesn’t intend to pursue right-to-work in Ohio after voters in 2011 rejected a law he backed that restricted public employees’ union rights.

“If they’re coming to Ohio with the population and activities we’ve got going on, they’re going to really hit hard,” said Shawn Shaw, vice president of Communications Workers of America Local 4324 in Toledo. “If they were to come through with Ohio, other states may be a lot easier.”

Contact Jim Provance at: jprovance@theblade.com or 614-221-0496.