Topics: 2016 Elections, Bridgegate, Chris Christie, daily dot, New Jersey, Politics, scandals, the daily dot, Elections News, News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on The Daily Dot . Enter the URL of the original Daily Dot story.

Last week, a Monmouth University poll found that 50 percent of New Jersey’s adults believed Chris Christie was personally involved in the ongoing #Bridgegate scandal, a massive PR nightmare that’s become synonymous with his career and likely nixed his chances of ever running for president.

Yet regardless of whether the governor played an important role in the decision to shut down lanes of the George Washington Bridge as an act of political retribution, he has without question racked up a long list of scandals in the half-decade since he assumed the role of New Jersey’s chief executive, ones that even eclipse even #Bridgegate. They might not get Twitter‘s attention, but they shouldn’t be forgotten.

1) Since becoming governor, reports indicate he has grossly abused his expense account

According to New Jersey Watchdog, an Internet transparency group ran by Mark Lagerkvist, Chris Christie has spent $360,000 of his taxpayer-subsidized expense account over the last five years. Of that amount, $300,000 was used to purchase what the state budget describes as “an allowance of funds not otherwise appropriated and used for official receptions on behalf of the state, the operation of an official residence, for other expenses.”

More from The Daily Dot: “You can now order a Game Boy the size of a credit card”

In Christie’s case, this has meant food, beverages, libations, and desserts. Perhaps most conspicuously, Christie spent $82,594 to buy concessions at football games during the NFL season in 2010-2011 on 58 separate occasions.

Nor is this the first time the tab for Christie’s personal excesses has been picked up by taxpayers: Back when he was a federal prosecutor, Christie routinely stayed in hotels whose fares exceeded government guidelines, and a group tied to Hillary Clinton has already tried to make political hay over his use of the state helicopterfor unnecessary personal ends.

2) He has allegedly used Hurricane Sandy relief money for political purposes

As the Newark Star-Ledger reported last year, nearly one-third of the federal house aid money allocated to Hurricane Sandy victims went to areas of New Jersey that weren’t particularly impacted by the storm. “Nearly a third of the money—$47.6 million, earmarked for new affordable housing projects—landed in Essex and Middlesex counties,” wrote Ted Sherman, “while many hard-hit Jersey Shore communities in Ocean saw relatively little of it.”

He has also been accused by Hoboken Mayor Dawn Zimmer of holding hurricane relief money hostage unless she approved a redevelopment plan proposed by the Rockefeller Group, a claim that his own administration tried to put to rest with an internal investigation that Mayor Zimmer dismissed as an “one-sided whitewash.”

3) He has purportedly misused billions in Port Authority funds for unrelated projects in New Jersey

Only a few months after taking office, Christie killed an $8.7 billion transportation project known as the ARC Tunnel, which was already in development when Christie took office (and, indeed, had been development for 30 years) and aimed to clear congestion by providing commuters with a public train under the Hudson River connecting New Jersey to New York City.

More from The Daily Dot: “Blizzard bans more than 100,000 players from World of Warcraft”

While this could be construed as a legitimate attempt to save taxpayer money, that claim is undermined by what Christie did next—namely, use billions of Port Authority funds to bankroll transportation projects elsewhere in his state. As a result, the Securities and Exchange Commission is now investigating the Christie administration’s use of roughly $1.8 billion from Port Authority in tax-exempt bond financing for bridges and roadways on the New Jersey side near the Holland Tunnel.