0 shares Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Google+ Share on LinkedIn Pin to Pinterest Share on StumbleUpon +

Twenty States have rejected Obacamare’s full Medicaid expansion including Utah. The United States Department of Health and Human Services said that if Utah changes its mind, the program will help all those 42,000 uninsured Utah people who have either mental illness or substance abuse or both.

The US Department of Health and Human services looked at a report wherein it recognizes how behavioral health care might actually improve through the full Medicaid expansion. Of course, this is under the Obamacare which 20 states rejected it. This report does not hide the government’s intention for these states to heavily reconsider their position in this expansion.

“Today’s report shows that Medicaid expansion is an important step Utah can take to address behavioral health needs, including serious mental illness and opioid and other substance use disorders,” US Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell said in a written statement.

For years, Utah Legislature had fought over this and finally Gov. Gary Herbert finally signed a compromise, a scaled-down version of the Medicaid expansion. This program ought to help about 16,000 homeless people, and recently released ex-cons, and those who earn less than poverty level (55 percent below the poverty cap.)

Like us on Facebook

Utah’s Legislature is controlled by the Republicans and they prefer the scaled-down version. They believe that their version is more predictable and affordable in overall costs. Full expansion had no caps on how many people it might serve. The Legislature fears that the full-on Obamacare could lead to runaway costs.

President Barack Obama already proposed an extra incentive for the remaining 20 states that did not adopt the expanded Medicaid. Herbert, however, proposed his own compromise that was more generous than was the final version. Still, Herbert had to bite on the scaled down version to avoid a legislature gridlock, and it is something, better than nothing, when he remains stern on his proposal or takes on the President Obama’s version.

Photo: Pexel, YouTube