Florida's war on nature

As I read the news stories coming out of Tallahassee, it appears to me there is a war against nature being waged by politicians and special-interest groups.

Amendment 1 passed with a 75 percent majority; yet lawmakers ignore the voters' wishes. The Scott administration, while gutting the water-management districts of funding and experienced staff, claims to have spent a record amount on the environment.

State license-tag icons manatees, black bears and Florida panthers find themselves in the cross hairs of the battle to preserve Florida's environment. Deals to buy land in the Everglades lapse, our glorious springs decline, and fresh-water quality throughout the state continues on a downward spiral; yet state employees cannot use the words "climate change."

Ultimately, Mother Nature will win the war. This planet has supported life for billions of years. The question is, will anyone want to live in the Sunshine State once it has been paved from one end to the other and its natural resources have been exploited and ruined? The state will be left a scarred battleground in a pointless war.

Rick Kilby Orlando

Republicans should be held accountable

Republican legislators should be held criminally responsible for every avoidable death and preventable condition suffered by Floridians (and all other states' citizens) for their political decision to deny Medicaid expansion.

Obstructing our first African-American president for his entire term has harmed this country. Denying global climate change and efforts to save the people and planet are also unforgivable. But the needless, senseless deaths caused by Republicans' refusal to repair and improve the infrastructure, expand Medicaid and stop the dangers of pollution and fracking have caused economic, environmental and health and safety problems for too many.

People have died and suffered because of the disastrous and inhumane political decisions by Republicans who are in control of state legislatures and Congress. Less than 40 percent of the population voted in 2014. The voter suppression and purging (think Gov. Jeb Bush in 2000) prove Republicans cannot win on principle and policy, so they have to cheat.

President George W. Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney lied us into their war of choice, and far too many died or were maimed; yet they have never been held accountable. When will people examine the facts and reality and hold Republican legislators and elected officials accountable for the real harm they cause?

Darlene S. Wolfe Orlando

GOP right to stop another giveaway

Regarding the Sentinel's Saturday editorial "Failure to expand health care hurts all Floridians":

With what money are the feds supposed to pay for all of this? Haven't you heard? The feds don't have any money. We the taxpayers have an $18 trillion debt to pay off.

My hat is off to the Republicans who stopped another liberal unfunded giveaway program for many of whom are jobless and uneducated and are third-generation welfare recipients who think that those of us who have earned a way to pay for our own health care owe them a living.

Get real. If we could stop federal money from being drained by worthless federal programs started in the past 10 years to pay for expanded health care, then maybe. The better plan is to lower federal taxes on corporations and small businesses, cut the regulatory traffic jams and allow businesses to expand, hire more workers and increase taxes the natural way.

If the Sentinel can suggest a way to cut federal money going to nonproductive federal programs to pay for Florida health care, then fine. Otherwise, forget it. Obamacare's excessive costs might be eliminated as well.

The American way is, "You can have it if you can pay for it. Get off your front porch, get an education or learn a trade, and get a job." Only those who are physically or mentally disabled deserve to be helped at taxpayer expense.

Terry J. Firestone Apopka

Something in common

In response to Don Pittman's letter to the editor on Saturday criticizing Gov. Rick Scott: Cannot the same be said about President Barack Obama?

Despite admitted lies regarding his opponent by the Democratic leadership, intentional misleading statements about health insurance (Obamacare), stretching the boundaries of his office to the point the courts must step in and severely downgrading the country's standing around the world, an uneducated or simply lazy populace re-elected this man.

To quote Pittman: "I cannot believe that he was put back in office."

Mike Mullen Oakland

School Board puts tired students at risk

Save money and lose a child? Is this the Orange County School Board's intent in not changing school start times?

I know of a case in which an intelligent student has turned against school because of the situation where he had to catch the school bus at 6 a.m. in order to start class at 7:15 at a local ninth-grade center. He committed the grave sin of falling asleep in class and the teacher chose to ridicule him in front of the class.

The solution to this problem was to suggest virtual school, thus causing this student unending negative feelings of self-worth and the loss of an entire school year. Having taught students of his age myself, I would like to know what ridiculed 14-year-old would have even the slightest desire or motivation to do his classwork on a computer with no one at home to monitor his progress?

I consider this a perfect example of "saving money and losing a child."

Martha Tempest Orlando