Who wants lower maintenance in a gated community? Everybody knows that buyers resizing from older houses they’ve lived in for decades want less yard work – but KB Home is seeing other buyers who crave those features, as well: some singles, younger couples, even families with kids. “I have younger people telling us, ‘I’d rather spend my free time doing something fun with my family than taking care of my yard,'” says KB Home Colorado Division President Matt Mandino.

Today, a few minutes from Parker’s historic downtown, Sharon Ellis and Mario Fargnoli will show you Pinery West, an enclave designed by KB Home to cut across those demographics: offering not just luxury ranch plans appealing to the empty-nest crowd, but also attainable ones priced for the younger set, and a few family-sized plans, too – all on lower-maintenance lots, with an automatic gate as part of the package.

And for people wanting less maintenance, KB Home has two places to use the time saved – starting with Pinery Country Club, linked to KB’s enclave by a convenient path with its own underpass beneath Parker Road. The venerable club with its 27-hole golf course, great tennis and pool facilities has had an $11-million makeover – and offers a social membership with a $3,000 initiation; and a fall special on a golf memberships at only $9,000 (the golf monthly is $426, and for another $60 you can play Pradera, too). The club is a favorite of Parker families, but also draws from Highlands Ranch and Castle Rock.

Two quiet blocks west of the gate is the Cherry Creek Trail, spanning north seven miles to endless bike trails along 470; and someday will connect south to Castlewood Canyon, and north into Cherry Creek Reservoir. You can tour KB Home’s Hawthorne ranch – just short of 1,942 feet, plus a basement that’s shown as a Bronco fan’s media/rec area with bar and extra guest suite, showing how you could have that space completed now rather than later for as little as $25/square foot.

And you’ll visit a family sized Pinery 2-story, over 3,000 feet, with options for three-to-five bedrooms matched to loft/media centers – for kids that will be headed to Douglas County Schools right in the Pinery. If you like the look of that home, you’ll find KB Home has one you could be moved into by Thanksgiving, with a covered deck and 2-sided fireplace. It’s on a cul-de-sac site, priced at $510,000.

KB Home also has three ranches on track for move-in by Christmas, one at $439,766; another backing to open space at $477,000. If you have more time, you can pick a lot and use KB Home’s ‘Built-to-Order’ program to extensively personalize these homes – choose finishes and flex spaces to work for special work or hobby needs. Take E470 or Lincoln Avenue to Parker Road and head south through Parker, past Hess, past Stroh, to Pinery Parkway. You’ll see the country club to your left, but turn right (west) on Pinery to the models.

Pinery West by KB Home, newly completed models, family sized & ranch on lower-maintenance lots; Energy Star 3 rated; automatic gate, trail to Pinery Country Club, Cherry Creek Regional Trail. 6586 Club Villa Rd., Parker; from I-25 take Lincoln Ave east 5 mi. to Parker Rd., south 5-1/2 mi. (continue past Stroh Rd) to Pinery Pkwy, right

From the $350s

Today, 10 a.m. until 6 p.m.

303-868-0757 or 720-670-6762

Mark Samuelson writes on real estate and business; you can email him atmark@samuelsonassoc.com. You can see all of Mark Samuelson’s columns online at DenverPostHomes.com