Mike Lucas for Dow Jones

Top story in this morning’s LBO Wire: Chrysalis Capital Advisors has launched a new acquisition fund with a twist. Rather than a closed-end vehicle with locked-up capital, limited partners subscribe to the fund with the expectation of committing to transactions on a deal-by-deal basis, David Smagalla writes. The firm, based in Western Canada, is eyeing aging Baby Boomers who are ready to exit small and midsize businesses.

A few other stories available exclusively for LBO Wire subscribers: In other new-firm news, Solomon Owayda, formerly of Siguler Guff & Co., and Christine Patrinos, previously of HarbourVest Partners, have formed a new secondary advisory firm called Mozaic Capital Advisors LLC…Dawn Lim and Laura Kreutzer report that JLL Partners has made progress on a new fund, though a $150 million commitment from New Jersey State Investment Council remains in limbo amid questions about JLL’s investment in a pay day lender. Payday lending is illegal in New Jersey…and PSAV Inc., a provider of outsourced audiovisual services to the hotel industry that is backed by Olympus Partners and Goldman Sachs Group Inc., filed for an initial public offering.

(LBO Wire is a daily newsletter with comprehensive analysis of all the investments, deals, fundraisings and personnel moves involving private equity firms. For a two-week trial, visit our homepage http://pevc.dowjones.com, scroll to the bottom and click “try for free.”)

Elsewhere on the Web:

Cerberus Capital Management and Platinum Equity are among the firms interested in possibly completing what’s known as a private investment in public equity, or PIPE, deal with Avon Products, Dana Cimilluca, Dana Mattioli and Serena Ng report for The Wall Street Journal.

General Electric Co. said it is exploring the potential sale of its asset-management arm as part of an effort to focus on its core industrial businesses, Tess Stynes writes for the Journal.

Siris Capital is offering $1 billion for telecommunications provider Premier Global Services Inc., the Journal’s Maria Armental reports.

Meanwhile, Lyceum Capital Partners took a majority stake in Style Research Ltd., the asset management data provider owned by Robert Schwob. Style’s clients include a bevy of large institutional investors including include sovereign wealth funds, California Public Employees Retirement System, California State Teachers Retirement System, Hermes Investment Management and British Airways pension system, Mike Foster of Financial News reports.

Bankrupt surf and snowboard apparel maker Quicksilver Inc. has preliminary approval for a package that would give Oaktree Capital Management control of the restructured company, Stephanie Gleason reports for the Journal. The company is also moving forward with going-out-of-business sales at 27 of its stores.

The Journal’s Ben Fritz and Erich Schwartzel take a look behind the scenes at Relativity Media LLC, which filed for chapter 11 restructuring earlier this year, and the production company’s charismatic leader Ryan Kavanaugh, whom one group of lenders has described as a “con man” who misrepresented the financial health of the business. Relativity denied those allegations in a countersuit that alleged those lenders intended to damage refinancing efforts.

Write to Hillary Canada at hillary.canada@wsj.com