A Katy-based clinic providing healthcare for low income and uninsured individuals who do not have options to get on Medicaid or cannot purchase insurance is set to expand its services once again.

Christ Clinic board President Sherry Nelson says the clinic provides service for a need many may not realize even exists.

“Many people thougt that the Affordable Care Act was going to take care of everyone,” she said “Most people don’t realize the impact there still is with the fact that we did increase our Medicare expansion, there are still a lot of working poor out there who have to choose between eating and getting health care.”

“The reality is that in spite of the Affordable Care Act, Texas and our tri-county area remains one of the highest uninsured rates in the nation,” added Christ Clinic Executive Director Kara Hill. “It’s not just high income individuals moving out here. We have people who are working in the service industries, at WalMart, and they’re working when they don’t have insurance—and that’s who we’re here to serve.”

Christ Clinic’s humble beginnings came in 2000 as part of the Memorial Lutheran Church in Katy, operating out of the church gymnasium every Thursday night for six years.

In 2007, the clinic moved to its current location at 5504 First Street and expanded its services to open three days a week, operating as a ministry of the church until 2010 before becoming its own non-profit organization in 2011.

They employ 18 full-time staff members as well as 40-50 volunteers who come through our doors every month. Volunteers include five doctors, a volunteer podiatrist, volunteer dieticians and nutritionists, nurses and physical therapists.

“The value of our volunteer hours exceeds $200,000 every year, so because of those volunteers we don’t have to raise that money and it supplements and enhances what we do in the clinic,” Hill said.

Currently nestled in a 3,200 square-foot space with four exam rooms, a pharmacy and an education room, the clinic is looking at a 6,800 square-foot facility. The new center will contain 10 exam rooms, a larger education center to develop those classes more and a larger pharmacy. Hill says they are hopeful for an early 2016 move in date.

Nelson says that Christ Clinic serves those who might not come up in the average census data--those who may be forgotten in this world obsessed with dollar signs.

“When you do the census surveys, that population wasn’t always picked up--there are always huge pockets in the Katy area that are underserved or have no insurance,” she said.

The infrastructure of Katy has ballooned in recent years to rival that of the city of Pittsburgh, bringing with it the increased need for organizations such as the clinic.

In 2014 the clinic served 2,400 patients totaling 5,600 visits according to Hill. Fast forward to present day, and they are projected to provide 9,200 visits all within the same confined space.

“We’re at the point where we’re busting at the seams. We’re just way too big for our current facility. we need more space to be able to keep up with the need,” Hill said.

“We use every nook and cranny to be efficient and moving to a new space will just allow us to serve more people,” added Nelson.