Reprinted from REPORT ON MEDICARE COMPLIANCE , the nation's leading source of news and strategic information on Medicare compliance, Stark and other big-dollar issues of concern to health care compliance officers. Sign up for a $92 two-month trial subscription today .

Possibly because overpayments and fraud persist, and the jury is out on what exactly makes a compliance program effective, the Department of Justice (DOJ) and HHS Office of Inspector General (OIG) are wading into new waters in both realms. DOJ just hired its first “compliance expert,” and OIG has added new elements to its corporate integrity agreements that can be adapted by organizations not shackled to a CIA.

They are simultaneously flexing their enforcement muscles, with OIG forming a new litigation team dedicated to filing civil monetary penalty and exclusion cases (RMC 7/27/15, p. 1) and DOJ’s criminal division now putting its hands on all civil False Claims Act cases filed by a whistleblower (RMC 9/22/14, p. 1). Over in its corner is CMS, which presumably is drafting a regulation on the compliance-program mandate in the Affordable Care Act that made compliance programs a condition of Medicare and Medicaid enrollment.

“You have three different agencies with a dog in the fight,” says Atlanta attorney Sara Kay Wheeler, with King & Spalding. “It’s very interesting the Department of Justice is working on compliance effectiveness through its own lens, which can shine a brighter light on the effectiveness question.” Hopefully, DOJ and CMS will show their cards sooner rather than later in terms of what they think makes a compliance program meaningful, she says. Meanwhile, providers have more direction from recent additions to CIAs for health care organizations, such as compliance advisors to the board, risk assessments and revolving claim reviews.

DOJ Hires Compliance Expert

For its part, the DOJ criminal division now has its first-ever compliance expert. The person has not yet been identified, but he or she is a former prosecutor who ran compliance programs in the health care, financial and technology industries.

“Bringing to the Fraud Section a full-time compliance expert, with vast experience in the private sector, is part of our effort to reduce corporate crime,” says Andrew Weissmann, chief of the Criminal Division’s Fraud Section. “We are seeking to assure that companies have tough but realistic compliance programs that detect and deter individual wrongdoing by executives. Importantly, our compliance counsel will be instrumental in ferreting out whether a corporate compliance program is truly effective, or a mere paper tiger.”

At the same time, OIG has been adding CIA provisions that are designed to better prevent and detect fraud. “Our CIAs have always been evolving, and we make changes over time, but there have been more significant evolutions in the past year or so,” Nicole Caucci, senior counsel at OIG, tells RMC. For example, “we have incorporated the concept of risk-based reviews,” she says, although they appear so far in only two or three CIAs (see box, p. 6). While under a CIA, providers and their independent review organizations (IROs) propose areas to audit. “We can go with that or identify risks we want to look at” based on data mining and the Work Plan, for example, she says. A risk-based review is designed to “keep it fluid,” so the provider can identify ongoing risks and move beyond whatever led to the fraud settlement and CIA.

To former federal prosecutor Robert Trusiak, the burst of activity at DOJ and OIG is evidence that the government is trying to close perceived gaps in compliance/compliance programs. “Many hospitals care primarily about their bloc of referring physicians and are willing to play the high-stakes game of financial roulette,” says Trusiak, a principal of Health Care Compliance Support in Buffalo, N.Y. The recent developments from DOJ and OIG “underscore the view that hospitals — even those historically under a CIA — don’t get it.” For true compliance, the compliance officers must have senior management authority and a voice in important business decisions in the formative stages of the discussions to ensure compliance can help shape a compliant decision instead of an after-the-fact blessing, Trusiak says.

Some gears are clearly shifting, Wheeler says. “We can certainly guess that both agencies are trying to assert their jurisdiction a little more,” she says. Already there has been a change in the past six months during false claims settlement negotiations. “It used to be that you’d get through negotiations on the substance with the Department of Justice on the financial resolution, the scope of releases and the definition of the covered conduct and then move over to discussions with OIG on the CIA,” she says. Recently, though, Wheeler has seen OIG get involved earlier in the settlement process. It considers imposing a permissive exclusion on the providers settling a fraud case before there’s any discussion of a CIA, she says. “That is a big change for providers.”

Even if they are not resolving a false claims case, providers should take heed of CIAs. OIG has conveyed that even “non-CIA-obligated providers” could benefit from the elements of a CIA, Wheeler says. “We have always assumed providers not under CIAs can look to them as best practices,” Caucci added.

Another recent addition to some CIAs is the use of compliance experts, also known as compliance advisors, by the board of directors. The compliance-expert provision usually is drafted to require the person to conduct a review of the compliance program’s effectiveness, says attorney Stephanie Johnson, also with King & Spalding. That means evaluating the organization’s compliance staples, such as auditing and monitoring, reporting to a hotline, communicating with the board and returning overpayments. Wheeler is concerned about globalizing the compliance expert because of the expense. “It’s akin to a second IRO,” she says.

OIG Looks Behind Certifications

CIAs now also require annual certifications from managers that their departments are in compliance with relevant laws and regulations. They understand the risks unique to their department and are expected to communicate the risks and ensure their subordinates are trained on them. “[CIAs] definitely are sending a message it is not just the compliance officer’s responsibility to promote compliance,” Wheeler says. “There is a trend of a slew of managers who have to certify.”

Be careful, though, because OIG doesn’t take certifications at face value. It wants to know what managers based their certifications on. For example, when the chief financial officer certifies compliance, is she relying on concrete information from the controller, director of patient financial services and the person who prepares the cost report? “OIG is encouraging a regular schedule of underlying reports or data provided to the manager who ultimately certifies,” Wheeler says.

For providers not bound by a CIA, Wheeler isn’t suggesting they tie themselves up in knots to get certifications. “But the language that’s there for certifying employees or leaders is a really powerful message for the compliance and legal department to show what the government is expecting,” she says. And they can use it to train board members and the audit and compliance committee on compliance.

OIG reinforced the idea of spreading compliance responsibility around in the April 2015 OIG guidance on compliance oversight for health care board members (RMC 4/27/15, p. 1). “The guidance essentially requires boards to be more than a potted plant concerning its oversight of compliance matters implicating millions of state and federal taxpayer dollars,” Trusiak says.

Finally, the risk assessment “seeds” the claims review requirement in the CIA, which also has changed, Wheeler says. Claims reviews have always been part of CIAs, but now providers test a different risk area in every reporting year, Johnson says.

Caucci adds that reviews have been customized for “integrity agreements” vs. CIAs. There are differences between the documents, with integrity agreements used in fraud settlements with small physician groups or solo practitioners. “They are scaled down in terms of compliance-program structure,” she says. It doesn’t make much sense to have formal procedures when people in tiny practices are just talking across the computer. With integrity agreements, Caucci says, providers are still required to have an IRO, “but we thought quarterly reviews would be more helpful.” Also, integrity agreements last three years instead of the usual five for a CIA, she says.

Generally, the perception at OIG is that CIAs help health care organizations develop compliance programs that prevent and detect misconduct. But they have to want to change. “The impact may not be seen in a provider that’s resistant to the idea of incorporating compliance into its day-to-day operations or that refuses to do more than the bare minimum to be in compliance with the CIA and does not have as its goal the development of a compliance program that will continue after the term of the CIA expires,” Caucci says.

Identify, Evaluate, Disclose and Document

Whether tethered to CIAs or not, health care organizations have to get beyond the “four corners” of the compliance program, Trusiak says. The overriding goal should be to protect the organization by identifying, evaluating, disclosing and documenting problems, even if it means butting heads with senior managers.

Trusiak is skeptical that compliance on paper looks like compliance in the real world. “The Self-Disclosure Protocol is a failure, and it has nothing to do with OIG. The modest amount of money remitted is ridiculous,” he says. Some hospitals generally don’t understand that compliance means returning money they aren’t entitled to receive, whether it stems from inflated physician compensation, short stays or DRG upcoding, he says. “I find institutional providers satisfied with low-level compliance matters.”

The best way to light a compliance-program fire under organizations, from the government’s perspective, is to have more civil cases and criminal prosecutions, Trusiak says, pursued by more experienced DOJ attorneys to eliminate the belief, by some, “that culpable conduct with a financial reward is worth the risk.”

© 2015 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Read insightful articles and strategies on inpatient and outpatient billing, Stark, physician documentation, and other big-dollar issues of concern to health care compliance officers each week with your own subscription to Report on Medicare Compliance. Get more information and sign up for a $92 two-month trial subscription today!