Advertisement - story continues below

I’ve had a strange feeling lately that I am seeing a reincarnation of Jimmy Carter’s Rose Garden Strategy in a slightly different vein. Instead of staying holed up in the White House until the Iranian hostage crisis was over (which meant the end of the Carter presidency), Obama seems to be holed up within himself, or on the golf course for that matter. And, there is also a more militant desire to break the law by implementing legislative actions himself which is the purview of Congress. But the real canary-in-the-coal-mine that channels Jimmy Carter is the attempt by Obama to convince the public that everything is alright. There is nothing wrong. Stop worrying. So ISIS is threatening the United States, just go have a drink or play golf – that’s what I do, and don’t worry about it for goodness sakes.

Today, our Dear Leader gave a speech in which he tried his best to convince the country that America is still the indispensable nation to the world. We have the best universities, we are energy independent, the best military in the world, we are cutting the deficit… Excuse me but what does this guy have to do with the best military in the world, cutting the deficit, having the best universities, or being energy independent? The deficit is scheduled to explode in the out years as Obamacare is implemented. Our future energy independence has to do with fracking, which he has tried to fight at every turn. Romney was right to call him out on the reduced oil production on federal lands. He has to know this. I guess he is just lying as usual. Anyway, back to the point. I find it somewhat pathetic that President Obama has to lecture the American people on why things are great and they just don’t know what they are talking about. When someone has to tell you how great they are, that means they usually are just not that great.

Does anyone remember the fireside chats with Jimmy Carter? This was when Carter basically blamed all the problems America was facing on the American people themselves. A crisis of confidence was the term the Carter administration used to deflect the consequences of bad policy decisions to the American people themselves and not the the results of a hapless president. We are seeing a repeat of this syndrome today. As the world burns and Obama golfs, as the liberal rag newspapers turn on his presidency, as the Republicans build a steam-roller to retake the Senate, Obama tries to reassure everyone that everything is just alright and not to worry. Trust me, he says. Either this man is extremely incompetent or he is a wolf in sheep’s clothing. Either he is just pathetic or he is trying to destroy America. I guess we’ll find out one way or the other soon. It’s really too bad he was reelected to a second term and didn’t get relegated to the historical abyss with Jimmy Carter after four years.

Advertisement – story continues below

Photo Credit: Tyler Driscoll and Mitchell Weinstock (Flickr)

The views expressed in this opinion article are solely those of their author and are not necessarily either shared or endorsed by the owners of this website.