But many voters said that after watching the infighting in Washington — and considering the fact that Mr. Obama is heading into the twilight of his presidency — they did not think that anything made much of a difference.

“They just don’t seem to get anything done anymore,” said John Miller, an independent in Iowa voting at the Red Oak Fire Department. “All they do is fight between each other and don’t get anything done. So we — and I — need something different in there. Everything needs to change.”

Shari Pizarro, 49, a Democrat who works as a waitress in St. Petersburg, Fla., said she voted Democratic but had few hopes for Washington — now or in the future. “ I have no clue what’s going on in D.C., but what I do know is that you can’t really trust anyone,” she said. “It’s all screwed up no matter who’s in the White House.”

And in Racine, Wis., Jeffrey Kowalczuk, a 56-year-old account representative for a trucking company, seemed no less disillusioned than Ms. Pizarro after voting for Republicans in that critical state. “I’m just tired of all the fighting and bickering,” he said. “We’re all Americans. It’s just getting old with all that stuff.”

The interviews came in an election in which many analysts were expecting a notably low turnout, reflecting the distress many people have voiced about the state of the government. Again and again, voters said they were exhausted after having been deluged with attack advertising on television, emails pleading for money and election pamphlets clogging their mailboxes. Such bombardments only reinforced their disenchantment with Washington, they said.

“There’s no such thing as a good politician, I’m sorry,” said Christi Miller, 43, an Obama supporter from Hot Springs, Ark. “They may start out that way, but I think once you get in and once you get painted with bribes, and you have to take care of the people who contributed to you. ... ” Her voice trailed off. “They would care if they were actually running for office for the right reasons,” she said. “They’re running for office for money and power.”

In New Hampshire, Jennifer Giles, 48, a Republican, said she thought candidates spent too much time worrying about their own futures. “I think people are much too focused on getting re-elected instead of doing their job,” she said.

Photo

Some voters blamed both sides of Pennsylvania Avenue for the problem. “It’s as dysfunctional as you probably can get,” said Ken Berra, 60, a Democrat and lawyer in Kansas. “You have a president who unfortunately is a lightning rod — the Republicans, no matter what he does, don’t like it.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Kenneth Haynes, 60, offered a similar view as he came to vote at Luling Elementary School in Luling, La. “They’re always calling each other the bad guy when they’re all the bad guy,” he said.

Still, for the most part, views on who was to blame were, not surprisingly, divided based on party line. “I’m not a huge fan of Obama, but I do think he came in trying to compromise, and he was stymied,” said Bronwyn Williams, 53, a Democrat and a professor of English at the University of Louisville, as he cast a vote in Kentucky, where Mitch McConnell held on to his Senate seat. Mr. Williams added, “I do think there are Republicans who are interested in good governance, but Mitch McConnell isn’t one of them.”

Warren Sloan, 45, a mechanic, voted Democratic in the Georgia election and said that although he blamed both parties for the battling, he faulted Republicans more.

“Everybody’s doing their part,” Mr. Sloan said. “But one thing I’ve noticed about the Republican Party — and I’ve listened to Rush Limbaugh and Sean Hannity for years — is they can tell you what you’re doing wrong, but they can’t come up with a better solution.”

Midterm Elections 2014 The latest news, analysis and election results for the 2014 midterm campaign.

Ann Halloran, 72, an independent who said she had voted for Republicans as she left the polls in Salem, N.H., called Mr. Obama “the driving force that has caused us to go in the wrong direction, and hopefully these people are going to be the ones that are going to take a step back.”

The issue that the White House might have expected to boost Democratic candidates — the economy, which by many measures is in far better condition than it was even two years ago — may have in fact proved to be a negative for the president and his party. In preliminary exit polls of voters conducted by Edison Research, a large majority of voters described the national economy in negative terms and most said the United States economic system favored the wealthy.

“The economy is terrible,” said John Madron, 61, who has been unemployed since 2009, after casting his vote in this community outside Denver. “Especially for manufacturing. I’ve been in manufacturing all my life, and right now, I’m unemployed. There’s no positions throughout this country because it’s all been outsourcing.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Madron said he voted for Mr. Obama when he first ran for president in 2008, but after that voted Republican.

The public resentment toward Washington went beyond the people in charge; voters in states that had been at the center of these battles said they had been overwhelmed by advertisements paid for by wealthy donors.

“Since they’ve allowed all the money in politics, it’s gotten much worse,” said Scott Hasson, 40, a photographer who lives in Denver. “Everyone says our vote matters, but until we can check the system and start taking a lot of that money out, I feel like it’s just power, people with money have the power.”

The exit poll showed most Americans disapproved of Mr. Obama, and that clearly hurt Democratic candidates. “Obama has not accomplished what he promised to the community,” said Juan Neyra, 69, a retired security guard in Denver. He said he used to vote for Democrats, but this year had voted for the Republican Senate candidate, Representative Cory Gardner, who was challenging Senator Mark Udall, a Democrat. “And Udall supports Obama,” Mr. Neyra said.