Buy Photo ShopRite at South Walnut Street in Wilmington. (Photo: SUCHAT PEDERSON/THE NEWS JOURNAL)Buy Photo

Access to a steady supply of healthy foods is eluding many Delawareans.

The phenomenon is known as a food desert – areas where low-income communities have limited access to a grocery store – and it impacts most aspects of their lives, from health care to quality of life to obesity.

“It is surprising to me that the food desert situation does occur,” said Delaware Secretary of Agriculture Ed Kee, who noted that while the state has great farms and a large poultry industry, economics and demographics play a large part in these deserts.

“It’s about distribution as much as anything else and the economics of getting a truckload to an area that doesn’t have the infrastructure to put it on a shelf, put it on a freezer cabinet, put it on a fresh produce display,” Kee said. “That’s problematic.”

The closing of two Wilmington area grocery stores this summer will add to the problem. Sixty-one percent of Delawareans live in Census tracts where there is no grocery store, according to a report by the Institute for Public Administration, a unit of the University of Delaware’s School of Public Policy and Administration. Twenty-seven percent of the state’s population live in census tracts, usually consisting of 1,200 to 8,000 people, that only have one grocery store.

These numbers were released after New Jersey-based Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company Inc. said in July that they were shuttering the Pathmark located at 3901 Lancaster Pike near Wilmington and a SuperFresh at 2105 Philadelphia Pike near Claymont.

The closures come as the Montvale, New Jersey, company filed for bankruptcy protection. In a statement, the company, better known as A&P, said it was closing the stores “in the near-term due to lack of interest and significant ongoing store operating losses.”

Some shoppers of the Pathmark, which sits near a low-income community of apartments, told The News Journal in July that they felt unsafe and stopped going there at night. Others were concerned that they would soon have to drive an extra 10 minutes to the Pathmark along Kirkwood Highway.

The chain announced it was selling 120 of its stores to three grocery chains, including Acme Markets Inc., for $600 million. A&P officials could not be reached for comment as to what would happen to the store buildings in the Wilmington area.

The stores’ fixtures and equipment were auctioned off last week. And at least one commercial real estate broker doesn’t believe either building will be occupied by another grocery store.

“I’d be surprised if another grocery store came in,” said Bill Ganc, owner of Ganc Commercial Realty in Brandywine Hundred.

There is already a saturation of grocery stores, he said. And with Target, Walmart and Dollar General stores also selling food it makes it challenging to open new supermarkets.

“As these Dollar General and Family Dollar [stores] crop up, I think they keep taking a slice out of the grocery stores,” Ganc said.

Buy Photo Fixtures and equipment from the Pathmark on Lancaster Pike were auctioned off last week. (Photo: William Bretzger/The News Journal)

He added he could see the Lancaster Pike location being purchased by an existing business wanting to expand, while the Philadelphia Pike spot could become a flea market, sort of how the Wilmington Flea Market, now called Elizabeth Shopping Mall, moved into a former grocery store anchor location in the Canby Park Shopping Center off Maryland Avenue near Wilmington.

While some chains are leaving low-income communities, some supermarkets are taking risks – and succeeding.

In late 2008, the Kenny Family ShopRites opened a store in Wilmington’s Christina Crossing Shopping Center – an area undergoing redevelopment along the riverfront that still deals with pockets of poverty and lack of transportation.

The grocery store is among the busiest of the Kenny Family’s six stores and “sometimes it leads the pack,” said Melissa Kenny, an executive.

A large part of that success is the commitment that they are able to make in the community, she said.

“We’re part of the community and we are active in the community,” she said. “We’re active in the stores daily and we get to know our customers at a more intimate level than non-family businesses.”

The ShopRites participate in several programs, including a partnership with Goodwill Industries that helps people find employment. They also have the Kenny Family Foundation, which supports more than 1,100 local organizations.

This involvement with the community helps them know what their customers want to see on the shelves.

“One of our signature items that people told us they wanted and we developed is sweet potato products, and they have been wildly successful at the riverfront,” she said. “They’re available at all locations, but then again you tailor how much you have and when you have what people want.

“That enables you to operate efficiently and sustainably.”

As it becomes more difficult for some Delawareans to access grocery stores, alternatives are springing up to give people an ability to purchase healthy foods.

These alternatives include farmers markets, community gardens and even a new initiative to bring healthy food to the corner store.

Buy Photo Konrad Kmetz, in the Duffy’s Hope garden, is the project leader for Wilmington Healthy Corner Store Network, which encourages shops to offer healthy foods. (Photo: SUCHAT PEDERSON/THE NEWS JOURNAL)

Access to a private vehicle plays a large role in determining the ease of obtaining sufficient, healthy and affordable food. Konrad Kmetz, who started a program to bring healthy food to corner stores, said the closing of the two grocery stores leaves an immediate impact in nearby communities, especially people in the Lancaster Apartments that have little or no transportation to get to another grocery store. Access to a private vehicle plays a large role in determining the ease of obtaining sufficient, healthy and affordable food.

“Where do they go? They’re not going to go to Janssen’s [Market],” said Kmetz, referring to the upscale grocery store about 2.5 miles away in Greenville. “They can’t afford that.”

“It’s kind of shocking really,” he said

Because many of the larger chains are watching their bottom line, Kmetz said he wouldn’t be surprised if another store closes.

That’s where he hopes a project he is leading, the Wilmington Healthy Corner Store Network, can fill the voids.

After studying the problem for two years, the DuPont Co. retiree teamed up with the Food Trust of Philadelphia to help educate corner store owners on the importance of selling healthy foods. This would also include training in becoming profitable by selling these foods.

The program started this year in 12 stores in Wilmington – where there is greatest need, Kmetz said. He hopes to add eight more stores to the program before the end of the year and double the number of participants by next year.

“You can’t change it overnight, but if you come around with us to some of the places where the changes are happening, it’s pretty dramatic,” he said.

For now, Kmetz said he wasn’t sure what would happen immediately in locations where the stores closed.

“Something is going to have to replace the loss of these stores,” he said.

Contact Esteban Parra at (302) 324-2299, eparra@delawareonline.com or Twitter @eparra3.

Read or Share this story: http://delonline.us/1UPEZ4C