Pro athletes Rachel Joyce, left, who recently bought a home in Boulder, Mirinda Carfrae, of Boulder, and Daniela Ryf, of Switzerland, at the finish line of the 2014 Ironman World Championships on Oct. 11 in Kona, Hawaii. Carfrae won the women's pro race. ( Marco Garcia / AP Images )

Amateur triathlete Ida Jonsen, 56, of Broomfield, came in ninth in her age group with a time of 12 hours, 20 minutes and 16 seconds in the grueling Ironman World Championships on Oct. 11. (Courtesy photo)

A 56-year-old Broomfield mother of three tackled her first 140.6-mile triathlon last weekend at the Ironman World Championships in Kona, Hawaii.

And not only did she finish, she came in ninth in her age group.

Ida Jonsen's time was 12 hours, 20 minutes and 16 seconds in the grueling Oct. 11 event — a 26.2-mile run, 112-mile bike ride and 2.4-mile open-water swim.

"I didn't know what to expect, but it was over-the-top crazy," Jonsen said from Hawaii on Thursday as she packed to return to Colorado. "It's been wonderful."

Boulder County and Broomfield were well represented in Kona.

Among the pros, Boulder athlete Mirinda Carfrae won the women's race, and Ben Hoffman, of Boulder, came in second in the men's race.

Jonsen, originally from Rhode Island, said she moved to Broomfield 30 years ago when her husband was attending law school at the University of Colorado.

She began swimming competitively at age 6 and picked up running in the eighth grade, but she credited the conditions and resources in the Boulder-Broomfield area — training at altitude, extensive trail systems and access to top-notch coaches — for helping her reach her athletic achievement.

Louisville-based Nate Llerandi is her coach.

"We have a leg up on everybody, I believe," she said of Colorado-based athletes.

Advertisement

Dave Christen, race director for Ironman Boulder, said a quick review of the of the top 30 finishers in the men's and women's professional races in Kona turned up nine athletes who live and train in the Boulder County area part of the year, if not year-round.

Among them were Hoffman, a permanent Boulder resident, and Carfrae, a previous world champion from Australia who now lives in Boulder year-round with her husband and fellow Ironman Kona racer, Timothy O'Donnell. Justin Daerr, the champion of this year's Ironman Boulder race, placed 26th among pro men in Kona.

Amateur triathlete Kenny Withrow, of Broomfield, rides along 63rd Street in Boulder for Ironman training last month. Withrow, 29, was born and raised in Broomfield and made it to Kona with the help of a $2,500 online crowdfunding effort. (Cliff Grassmick)

"Boulder is the best place to train in the world," Christen said. "Professionals know that. That's why they come, and it shows in the results."

Hoffman, 31, originally from Grand Junction, said he lived and trained in Durango after college but decided to move to Boulder in 2010, calling it "a logical step in my career."

"This is kind of mecca for triathlon. It has incredible infrastructure and training resources," he said. "It's really where I think you need to be if you want to push your boundaries and become better as an athlete."

Rachel Joyce, a pro triathlete from the United Kingdom who took third in the women's race in Kona, was working as a lawyer in London when she decided to go pro. She and her partner, Brett Hodges, bought a place in Boulder in June, she said, noting the 300 days of sunshine a year and easy access to great road biking.

For Joyce, living in the Boulder area has other advantages. She has been able to connect with local company Friction Facts and uses its UltraFast chains on her bike. Her main sponsor, Newton Running, is also Boulder-based.

"In terms of sponsorship, relocating to this area is a definite advantage," Joyce said.

In addition to Jonsen, Broomfield was represented at the world championships by amateur Kenny Withrow, who made it to Kona with the help of a successful $2,500 online crowdfunding effort.

Withrow, 29, was born and raised in Broomfield. He said he has been participating in triathlons for six years, leading up to the Boulder Ironman triathlon in August, at which he placed second in the 25-to-29 age group and 17th overall, earning him a spot in Kona.

He came in 81st in his age group at the world championships with a time of 10 hours and 44 minutes, and he said he is OK with that result.

"Kona was kind of the reward, and it was amazing," Withrow said.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Joe Rubino at 303-473-1328 or rubinoj@dailycamera.com.