DUBLIN--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Research and Markets (http://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/dwljzx/behavioralmental) has announced the addition of the "Behavioral/Mental Health Software Market by Delivery Mode, Functionality, End User - Forecasts to 2019" report to their offering.

The behavioral health software market is expected to reach $1,494.1 million by 2019 from $752.6 million in 2014, at a CAGR of 14.7%

The global behavioral health software market is categorized on the basis of component, delivery model, functionality, end user, and geography. The subscription model segment is expected to register the highest growth rate in the behavioral health software market, by delivery model, during the forecast period. This favorable growth is attributed to its data centralization capabilities, greater level of interoperability, automatic software up-gradations, and easy customization. Furthermore, subscription model offers cost-effectiveness due to the elimination of upfront cost of software and hardware.

Major factors contributing to growth of the behavioral health software market include the behavioral health reforms and the rising number of people seeking behavioral health support. Furthermore, government support in the form of funding is another major factor providing impetus for growth of this market.

For instance, in November 2013, in November 2014, federal health officials granted $1.2 million under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) to Florida for expanding or initiating behavioral health services to 18,854 citizens. The relatively untapped markets of the Asian region and high adoption rate of subscription model have opened an array of opportunities for the behavioral health software market. However, the lower adoption rate of behavioral health EHRs, data privacy concerns, and dearth of psychiatrists and healthcare IT professionals are expected to restrain the growth of this market.

The Asian region, subscription model and integrated behavioral health software are expected to serve as new revenue pockets for the behavioral health software market in the coming five years.

Key Topics Covered:

1 Introduction

2 Research Methodology

3 Executive Summary

4 Premium Insights

5 Market Overview

6 Industry Insights

7 Behavioral Health Software Market, By Component

8 Behavioral Health Software Market, By Delivery Model

9 Behavioral Health Software Market, By End User

10 Behavioral Health Software Market, By Functionality

11 Geographic Analysis

12 Competitive Landscape

13 Company Profiles

Cerner Corporation

Netsmart Technologies, Inc.

Qualifacts Systems Inc.

Valant Medical Solutions

Mindlinc

Welligent, Inc.

Core Solutions, Inc.

The Echo Group

Credible Behavioral Health

Nextgen Healthcare Information Systems, Llc (A Fully Owned Subsidiary Of Quality Systems, Inc.)

Epic Systems Corporation

For more information visit http://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/dwljzx/behavioralmental