I am the Super Whooper, or so one of my very understanding clients calls me.

I don’t live under a rock, but until recently, I was not aware of the whooping cough (pertussis) outbreak in Denver. But I also don’t have children, so when local commercials with sounds of suffering babies trying to catch their breath come on, I kind of tune them out. After all, I got all my vaccinations as a wee one.

What I didn’t realize — and there has been little to no effort to warn people about — is that the pertussis vaccine begins to lose its effectiveness after about 10 years. It’s as simple as going into the nearest Walgreens and getting a booster shot, but I was wandering around thinking I was protected.

I wasn’t.

I do think people should vaccinate their kids, but this is not a rant to make that argument. I’m writing because adults, parents or not, need to go get vaccinated. Now. Whooping cough is out there, and don’t be fooled because it is “less severe” in adults. While you might not produce the signature “whooping” sound that infants make, this is not just a common cold. This is an infection that absolutely affects your quality of life and ability to maintain your daily routine … for 12 weeks.

My roommate and I are about seven weeks into our battle with the infection. The first few doctors dismissed my concerns and sent me home with inhalers and cough syrup, even though the test is a simple swab of your nasal passages. I missed the window to catch this thing early. I started feeling the symptoms during a hiking vacation to Peru that I had planned for seven months. There was no way I was canceling this trip. I coughed my brains out while trying to physically keep up with the group, kept fellow campers up all night with incessant hacking, and had to leave meals and conversations to spare others from my disconcerting fits.

The inhalers that promised to have me “ship-shape” before my trip did nothing. Neither did the codeine-laced cough syrup, lozenges, vaporizer, amoxicillin or shots of whiskey.

This put a damper on a wonderful vacation, but that isn’t even the point. I haven’t had a good night’s sleep in seven weeks, and I dread the fact there are likely six more to go.

Twelve weeks of dropping conference calls and stepping out of meetings — not to mention feeling like a zombie — is not conducive to getting a job done well.

Hacking away in the office we share with 20 other companies isn’t an option. Neither is going to a movie, driving, laughing, exercising or being in public without sending everyone in ear shot into a panic. I cough so hard that sometimes I vomit or wet myself. I have no idea how someone with this illness who is actually responsible for other human beings can handle this.

And I am angry. This is my favorite time of year. I have an awesome, extremely blessed life. I am not ignorant to the fact that the majority of the world’s population suffers from problems of significantly higher magnitude, but this particular problem is easily avoided.

Get vaccinated. Tell your friends to get vaccinated. You are not safe because you are childless or because you got vaccinated when you were young.

Make sure you get to enjoy all your exciting summer plans by stopping into the local pharmacy. And if you are a doctor, or in a position to get the word out, make it your cause. This is awful.

Jen Cadmus is a Denver resident and owner of The Dialog Lab, a communications studio for startups.