After six years of peeling back plastic and microwaving various meals from the frozen food aisle, Gregory Ng abruptly quit in the middle of reviewing an unhealthy kids meal. When he started the FreezerBurns blog posts and video reviews in 2008, it was in an effort to separate the best from the worst frozen foods by reviewing them. A total of 1,000 frozen items had been eaten and examined in nearly 700 episodes, but his most recent review was his breaking point.

Ng introduces the final frozen meal to his viewers by reading and criticizing the package. He reads the meal description, which says contains dragon-shaped breaded chicken nuggets, macaroni and cheese sauce, corn, and bug-shaped fruit snacks. As he eats from each compartment he describes his disappoint in the flavorless and overcooked macaroni, the watery and nutrition-devoid corn, and the “just not good” breaded nuggets. Once he places the tray down, he carefully explains why he’s disappointed with the meal.

“It says made with white meat chicken,” Ng says in his last video reviewing the Kid Cuisine Chicken Nuggets frozen meal. “There may be a little white meat chicken because it says white meat chicken and rib meat. I’m okay with it just being white meat chicken and rib meat, but the fact that this is breaded means that is basically breading with a hint, a hint of chicken on the inside.”

As a father, the idea of feeding his child one of these meals angered him and he explains the $2 price tag should be irrelevant considering the lack of nutrition that children need to grow into a physically and mentally healthy adult. The brain needs special fuel, such as glucose, vitamins, minerals, and other essential chemicals to run properly, according to neuroscientist Dr. Eric Chudler of the Center for Sensorimotor Neural Engineering. Today, children’s meals just like Kid Cuisine are carbohydrate- and sugar-laden abominations and poor excuses for meals to fill the USDA requirements in many public school cafeterias.

The health properties of frozen foods are different from fresh foods because of the preservatives, partially hydrogenated oils, and high sodium content that usually consists of 700 to 1,800 milligrams (mg) of salt, while recommended maximum dosage a day is 2,300mg. Yet, the frozen food and beverage industry still flourishes, with sales reaching over $52 billion, according to the Frozen Food Digest.

"What are we doing people?” Ng says. “This is Kid Cuisine. We’re feeding this to our kids? This is disgusting. I’m looking at these ingredients; I don’t recognize half of these ingredients. This is horrible. You know what? I can't do this anymore. This is horrible. We should not be feeding our kids this. We should not be eating this frozen food anymore. I'm done with this."