Topics: conlangs, david peterson, Game of Thrones, the art of language invention, Entertainment News, News

As most readers and viewers know, George R.R. Martin methodically built the world of “Game of Thrones” from the history up — his latest book, “A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms,” takes place a century before any of the events chronicled in the respective series — but there’s one challenge he wasn’t equipped to face, so when HBO decided to adapt his novels, they turned to linguist David Peterson to create living languages from the scraps of Dothraki and High Valyrian in the novels.

In his new book, “The Art of Language Invention,” Peterson describes the process by which he created those languages, and provides a template for neophyte “conlangers” — people who wish to invent their own foreign tongue — to produce their own. He graciously spoke to Salon about both process and product.

Could you talk a little bit about the role the Internet played in the development of conlangs generally, and yours in particular?

I started creating my first language in 2000, and I thought it was pretty good. I’d never heard of anyone else creating a language just for their own use, so I also thought I was the only person ever to do so. Had I never met another conlanger, I imagine I would’ve kept right on with that language and never created another. Its lexicon would’ve expanded, I would’ve done translations in it—I might even be fluent in it—so it would be large and functional, but it would also be irredeemably terrible. The language was a mess from start to finish, but having nothing to compare it to except Esperanto, I thought it was the greatest language ever created.

Most conlangers prior to, say, 2010 had very similar experiences with their own creations. Language creation was simply not well known, and generally one didn’t discuss it with others (few friends and family members end up being interested). Once the internet became more common in homes, the first language creation community formed—the Conlang Listserv—and little by little, conlangers began to find one another. This was key in the advancement of the craft, as for the first time in history, conlangers were comparing their work and actively learning from and teaching one another. It was there that I really learned how to do what I do today. Plus, it’s just amazing to be able to talk to another human being about the intricacies of language invention. There’s a camaraderie amongst language creators that’s really encouraging in what—especially prior to 1991—was a truly solitary practice.

What are the biggest misconceptions about conlangs? Do you think they’re legitimate, or part of a larger cultural bias against science fiction and fantasy?

Perhaps the biggest misconception is that creating a language is tantamount to creating a code for English, as opposed to creating every single aspect of an entire language. Simlish isn’t a conlang; whatever Furbies are doing isn’t a conlang; the Minions aren’t speaking a conlang; Pig Latin isn’t a conlang. They’re definitely creative uses of language, but they’re either based on English (or some other already existing language), or not linguistically coherent—or, as with, for example, penalty hand signs in American football, they aren’t complete systems.

A lot of the other misconceptions about language creation can be dispelled by recognizing that conlangs are art pieces. No one questions the value of a novel (a “fake” history), and at places like San Diego Comic-Con, we celebrate simply being a fan of something. If conlangs, like novels and television shows, are art pieces, they can be enjoyed and celebrated by anyone without doing any harm to their non-fictional counterparts—the natural languages of the world. Plus, if the language creators and conlang fans I know are any indication, those who engage with created languages are much more likely than those who don’t to enjoy, study, and value the natural languages present on Earth.

As a former linguistics major, I’m very amenable to the idea that people who study language are more open-minded, but could you go into detail of what you mean by that?

As tiny little humans, we naturally assume everyone else is like us until reality shows us something different. If our parents speak one language, and the community we’re raised in speaks one language, we think that’s how language works period; we never imagine a language could work any other way than our own. It’s easy to dismiss or “otherize” someone who speaks a different language—one we don’t understand and which doesn’t work the way we feel language “should” work. The first second language one comes to learn is key. It’s the first time we see that language has the ability to work differently—that the logic can be different. Many in the world are fortunate to have their first exposure to a second language occur simultaneously with their first. For those that don’t, the earlier the exposure comes, the better. If someone who otherwise would not be interested in language at all becomes interested due to exposure to a created language, I can think of no higher compliment to the creator.

What do you think the most successful fictional conlang is? Why?

It depends how one defines success with respect to a conlang. For a naturalistic language, when it comes to depth, ingenuity, artistry, and breadth, I’d think Okuna by Matt Pearson would be a strong candidate. If the size of the lexicon isn’t as much of an issue, I’d nominate Sylvia Sotomayor’s newer language Sodemadu, which is one of the most brilliant concepts I’ve ever seen executed. If one is referring to how well known a language is, it has to be Klingon taking the prize over either of Tolkien’s well-known conlangs, Sindarin and Quenya. Bear in mind, though, that the category of fictional languages automatically disqualifies certain other well-known languages, such as Esperanto, Lojban, or John Quijada’s Ithkuil, none of which are intended for fictional purposes.