Mike Kelly is a Record columnist. He may be contacted at kellym@northjersey.com.

IMAGINE filling Met Life Stadium with sand. That's quite a sand pile, right? Well, imagine filling Met Life with sand not once or even twice. Imagine doing it 60 times — filling up the stadium with sand, then carting it out, then bringing in more sand, then carting it out. Sixty times.

That is what our state has been doing for the past 30 years along beaches up and down the Jersey Shore.

We "replenish" the beaches by dumping sand, then watch the sand drain away with the waves of major storms. Then we dump more sand on the beaches, again and again and again. In three decades, the bill for this massive sand shifting is almost $1 billion, according to a recent report by Stockton University's Coastal Research Center. If you add in other expenses, the total exceeds $1.3 billion.

This is one of the expensive lessons from Superstorm Sandy. This is the lesson New Jersey won't listen to.

We have just passed the third anniversary of Sandy's wrath. And, frankly, there is much to celebrate, starting with the cops, firefighters and volunteers who braved rising tides, fallen trees and downed power lines to rescue stranded people from homes, cars and businesses. To be sure, the rescue efforts in those days after Sandy's waves and winds subsided — and, in general, the overall feeling in communities to help less fortunate neighbors — was inspiring.

But after the initial shock of how a massive storm could rip apart New Jersey, from boardwalk beach communities to low-lying towns near the Meadowlands, government officials and scientists began to discuss long-terms plans. And this is where things got complicated.

One of the key observations in the aftermath of Sandy was how overbuilt the Jersey Shore had become. It was one thing for so many people to want to live in close proximity to the beaches. In fact, it was entirely understandable.

But Sandy reminded us that building so many homes on vulnerable barrier islands was downright crazy. Barrier islands are just that — barriers to tides. But what makes them so vulnerable is the fact they are basically sand bars that rise only a foot or two above sea level.

Sandy's waves

Sandy's waves punched through scores of beaches on barrier islands, from Long Beach Island to Ortley Beach, wiping out thousands of homes. Some homes in Ortley Beach, one of the hardest-hit communities, were simply carried out to sea and never seen again.

This kind of devastation should have prompted a major debate about whether New Jersey ought to seriously rethink its zoning policies and find ways to encourage people to move from barrier islands. But that debate never took place.

Perhaps it is impossible for such a debate to occur in any meaningful way. Common sense dictates that our state's barrier islands should not be home to so many people — and so much valuable investment by businesses and homeowners. But dollars and cents dictate policy and politics.

The cost of moving thousands of people from the state's barrier islands would require billions of dollars. If you consider moving the casinos from Atlantic City's barrier island, the tally might run to more than a trillion dollars.

The alternative is beach "replenishment" or (my personal favorite) "nourishment" — two fancy engineering terms that essentially describe the pumping or dumping of sand on beaches, then pumping and dumping more sand on those same beaches after major storms roll through and wash the sand away.

These replenishment-nourishment programs also involve bulldozers pushing sand into dunes along beaches — this, as a barrier against rising storm tides from crashing over beaches and flooding nearby homes. It's a nice thought — all these dunes separating the sea from the Shore people.

But just last month, when Hurricane Joaquin rolled up the East Coast and did not even make landfall in New Jersey, the waves were so powerful that many dunes that had been recently constructed were carved up. In North Wildwood and on Long Beach Island, Joaquin's waves chopped the gentle dunes into cliffs with steep drop-offs.

That kind of damage from a storm that did not even strike land should be a warning. It's not, though. The beach replenishment-nourishment goes on — like sand pouring down a drain.

And that's not all. As my colleague, Record staff writer Kim Lueddeke, reported last week, municipal officials in towns near the low-lying Meadowlands are counting on a plan that includes a ring of protective berms surrounding the area to stop the sort of rising tides that flooded their towns when Sandy struck. The total price tag for the berm project has been estimated at $3.5 billion.

The federal government awarded $150 million last year to get the project started with the building of nine miles of earthen walls around Little Ferry, Moonachie, Carlstadt, South Hackensack and Teterboro. But it will take years to complete just this initial phase. State officials overseeing the project awarded contracts only last month to design the earthen walls and conduct feasibility and environmental studies. We may have to endure another Sandy-like storm before the walls are actually built.

Massive projects

These kinds of massive public works projects are being envisioned all over the New Jersey and New York region. New York City, for example, is projecting that it will have to spend $20 billion to fortify subway tunnels and build sea walls to protect itself form rising tides. The city has already built almost 10 miles of dunes in Brooklyn, Queens and Staten Island and dumped 4.2 million cubic yards of sand from Coney Island to the Rockaways.

Like New York, New Jersey has few alternatives, though. The tourism industry along the Jersey Shore alone generates about $40 billion a year in business and supports about 70,000 jobs, according to state figures. That kind of economic activity is why state officials are locked into plans to keep pumping and dumping sand along the beaches amid the ebb and flow of rising tides.

Just think of Met Life Stadium filled with sand. Now think of a storm washing all that sand away and having to fill the stadium again and again with sand.

This is what Sandy taught us.