Learn more • Aimee Heckel has been playing around with lining the waterline. She found it much quicker, easier and harder to mess up than cat eyes and other liner trends. Join the conversation on Instagram (instagram.com/heckela) and let her know your favorite fast-makeup tricks. • Get additional information about Suzanne Blons at suzanneblonsmakeup.com

Makeup tips from a pro Suzanne Blons has learned a lot of shortcuts and makeup tricks through the years. Here are a few of her favorite ways to make a big cosmetic impact fast: • Use ultra-light sunscreen makeup: Instead of all-over foundation, Blons applies Chanel's Vitalumiere Aqua around her eyes, nose and mouth, as well as concealer where needed. You need only a small drop of this light foundation. • Warm up with bronzer: Lightly apply bronzer under your cheekbones and a little on your forehead. • Get facials: "The basis of everything is beautiful skin, especially here (in Colorado) with it being so dry," Blons says. "If you take care of your skin, you don't need gobs of makeup." She gets a facial once a month at Creme de la Creme (boulderfacecare.com) in Boulder. • Line your waterline: Instead of applying eye liner above and below your lash line, use a waterproof pencil to line right inside your lashes. This frames your eyes in a crisp way and looks natural. If you have green eyes, use purple or rich brown; for blue eyes, navy or warm brown; for brown eyes, any color. If you're older than 40, line only your upper lid. Avoid black, unless you are African-American. "I've done this to women and their whole face comes alive," says Blons, who recommends waterproof gel pencils from Colorado-based LipBar (lipbar.com).

Hillary Clinton sits down in your chair. You have five minutes and a makeup case.

This isn't the setup to a joke, or even a hypothetical. This is Suzanne Blons' life.

Blons, who lives in Superior, is a makeup artist and stylist for television and publications. Before moving to Colorado, she did the faces of Al Gore, Barbara Bush, Bob Dole, Jesse Jackson and Larry King, to name a few. Now in Colorado, she has worked with the likes of Peyton Manning, although when she got hired for the gig, it took her a minute to remember who he was.

She lived in Europe for 15 years; soccer is more her style.

When Manning sat down in her makeup chair, she says she had it all planned out.

"I wanted to joke that I was thrilled with all of his home runs," she says. "I had two minutes to make him up, and he didn't say hardly two words to me. That's how it is. I wanted to say something, but I didn't get to."

So goes the life of a celebrity stylist.

Blons says she always is ready to disarm and charm her clients with friendly banter; her ability to get along with even the biggest divas — she won't names names — while still maintaining a level of professionalism and self-respect is what she attributes to her success in the industry, even more so than her makeup skills.

Stylist to the stars, Suzanne Blons, of Superior. (Dana Rogers / Courtesy photo)

"Dealing with the big players of the world is 80 percent interpersonal skills and 20 percent makeup skills. You've got to be able to deal with and work with people," Blons says. "I know loads of phenomenal makeup artists who can't do a collaborative environment with big egos. It's a tough gig. You've got to be able to dance that dance."

The work is also a total whirlwind, Blons says. She typically has about five minutes to polish up a face for the screen.

She approaches makeup methodologically. First, she applies concealer around the eyes and covers blemishes. Then she highlights, typically the eyebrow bone and lips. Then she adds blush, to prevent people from looking washed out on camera. Eyes are last, if there's time. A simple crease color, and off the client goes.

Blons first learned her quick-hit tricks in front of the screen. She worked as a professional model in the '80s. She was the "Charlie Girl" for the popular fragrance. You also might recognize her face from Revlon advertisements: In her early 20s, she was the face of Revlon for two years before she decided to quit.

"I just didn't enjoy it. I burned out," she says. "I'm fit but not skinny. You see models — they want you bone thin, and I'm 5-10, size 8. In the modeling world, that's obese. I had a hard time with that."

She decided what she enjoyed the most about modeling was the production and being part of a team, so she began studying makeup. She worked for five different cosmetic lines, including doing management for MAC Cosmetics for four years, and trained under the head makeup artist at CNN. That's where she got her political ins.

Today, she works with the Wilhelmina Denver agency and keeps busy as a stylist for Gaiam TV.

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay