The Eye

'Basketball Wives: LA' Stars Jackie Christie and Sundy Carter BLASTS Co-Star Draya Michele, Calls Cast Mate 'Very Immature' [WATCH]

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Instagram/Jackie Christie) Jackie Christie, Brittish Williams and Sundy Carter of "Basketball Wives: LA" dish on issues with cast mate, Draya Michele.

United we stand and divided we fall. The same can be said of the season three cast of "Basketball Wives: LA."



While it's pretty clear the cast is divided into two different teams, one being Team Jackie Christie, the other being Team Draya Michele, it seems as though Jackie and her gang will find any reason to tear down their costars.



Jackie along with her posse made up of Sundy Carter and Brittish Williams recently visited Vibe where they dished on the many issues they seem to have with their cast mate.



"I don't have a problem with Draya, you know it's just... She's so extra," Brittish stated.



"She's very immature in a lot of ways as well and I think a lot of the problems are brought on by her attitude," Jackie explained. "You have to have a good attitude, especially being in this type of group."



"I think that's my problem with her. It's her attitude," Brittish said. "It's like 'I'm on top of the world and no one's above me. That's what I feel she's extra on."



"I also feel like when you're in your thirties you can't turn 28 like 50 million times, but when you're actually are in your thirties you should act accordingly," Sundy pipped in.



While each of the women may have their own personal issues with Draya, it certainly seems to be the grounds in which their friendship has elevated from. The trio went on to discuss how much they've grown since filming the show, and Jackie described the group not as just friends but more like family.



"This is a consistent foundation," Sundy said.



"First of all I appreciate all the girls looking up to me," Jackie said. "I don't ask for anybody to fit in, like I'm better than them 'cause I'm not. I feel like we all bring something different and I also feel like some of the girls are intimidated by me as a woman and they're intimidated by my choice of real friends right here."



"'Cause we're not just friends we're family and I think that's why I try to instill in all of them and I do think there's some sense of sisterhood even on this show. You're gonna see at lot of fighting, cat fighting, back stabbing, all of that. But I think I bring em all together and show everybody where there's a common ground."



One thing all the women seem to agree on is that the show is not at a lack for drama, which is brought from both sides.



"I really think that you can expect so much emotion," Brittish said. "You get to see people crying, you get to see people laughing, you get to see people angry, you get to see all of these different emojis, you know, inside the show. And I think that's awesome because it's not happy-go-lucky and it's not all angry. It's in between."



Clearly such an opinionated cast will only lead to disaster over time. And as the season is only five episodes in, it's pretty clear that the tension between the groups divided will only grow. But as for Draya, the reality star is at a loss for why her co-stars have so many issues with her when she doesn't even know them.



As we previously reported, Draya recently visited "The Arsenio Hall Show" along with her show bff's Malaysia Pargo and Brandi Maxiell where she revealed she is more appalled by her new co-stars desires to tear her down given that she doesn't really know anything about them and vise versa.



"What you have to understand is, we don't know these girls. Like real life we don't know these women. They have so much to say about us and it's overbearing because for these people to come and do television shows and do interviews and they just discuss us in a negative way, its shocking," Draya said.



Check out Jackie's interview with Sundy and Brittish below!







SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.