If you’re one of the millions of Americans signing up for health insurance on HealthCare.gov, you probably have at least one question.

Through NewsOK, several readers have submitted questions about the Affordable Care Act and how it affects them.

Some of our readers had questions about employer-based coverage, including:

Reader’s question: If I have obtained a new job and am currently waiting until I qualify for insurance through my work (approx. 2 more months) do I still have to enroll in Obamacare?

Answer: There are exemptions that the Internal Revenue Service grants for people who have short gaps in health coverage.

According to the IRS:

If I change health coverage during the year and end up with a gap when I am not covered, will I owe a payment?

Individuals are treated as having minimum essential coverage for a calendar month if they have coverage for at least one day during that month. Additionally, as long as the gap in coverage is less than three months, you may qualify for an exemption and not owe a payment. See question 22 for more information on the exemption for short coverage gaps.

What qualifies as a short coverage gap?

In general, a gap in coverage that lasts less than three months qualifies as a short coverage gap. If an individual has more than one short coverage gaps during a year, the short coverage gap exemption only applies to the first gap.

Reader’s question: If I don’t qualify for a subsidy now but lose my job next year, can I re-qualify mid-year?

Answer: Generally, people have to enroll for health insurance on HealthCare.gov during open enrollment, which is going on right now. However, there are certain circumstances where this isn’t the case.

According to this NPR article:

Can I change insurance plans?

Generally, you are only able to enroll in or change plans once a year during an open enrollment period. This first year, that period runs from Oct. 1, 2013 to Mar. 31, 2014. In subsequent years the time period will be shorter, running from Oct. 15 to Dec. 7.

There are certain circumstances when you will be able to change plans or add or drop someone from coverage outside the regular annual enrollment period. This could happen if you lose your job; get married or divorced; give birth to or adopt a child; or move to a different state. Any of those life events triggers a special 60-day enrollment period where you can change or buy health insurance on an exchange. Otherwise, you’ll have to wait until the next open enrollment.

Additionally, if you lose your job-based health insurance, you have two primary options for health insurance coverage: a Marketplace plan or COBRA continuation coverage.

Reader’s question: What if my employer offers health insurance, but it’s not affordable? Can I still purchase insurance through the marketplace?

Answer: The health insurance marketplace, or HealthCare.gov, was largely created so that people who are uninsured could buy private insurance. However, you might qualify for health insurance that’s less expensive than the insurance your job offers. Here’s something to consider:

Qualifying for Marketplace savings

If you decide to check out Marketplace plans, be aware that you may not qualify for lower costs on your monthly premiums and out-of-pocket costs, even if your income would qualify you otherwise.

Whether you qualify for lower costs based on your income will depend on the coverage the employer offers. You won’t be able to get lower costs if your job-based coverage is considered affordable and meetsminimum value.

The employer can tell you whether the insurance plan it offers meets minimum value. It can provide you with information to determine if the plan is considered affordable to you.

Reader’s question: The benefits department at my work says they are not clear at this time whether the $95 penalty for not having health insurance will be $95 for the year or $95 each month. Can you clarify?

Answer: The penalty for not enrolling in an insurance plan will be deducted from your 2015 tax return. This excerpt from a Washington Post blog is probably the most helpful answer I’ve found.

What if I don’t want to buy insurance?

First off: Nobody will come knocking down your door, demanding that you purchase a health plan. But if you decide not to purchase coverage, you will have to pay a $95 tax penalty. This would be deducted from your 2015 tax return.

Now, whether that’s delayed, time will tell. Thousands of people are trying to sign up for health insurance through HealthCare.gov, the online insurance marketplace, and have faced an array of troubles getting enrolled. So whether the Obama administration will delay that penalty remains unclear.