The procrastinators among us have another reason to celebrate this year, getting three extra days to file their 2015 tax returns.

Tax day is Monday, April 18.

That's three days later than the usual April 15.

The delay is caused by Emancipation Day being celebrated on Friday, April 15. All federal offices, such as the IRS, will be closed on the holiday, which marks the day President Abraham Lincoln signed a bill ending slavery.

Emancipation Day is traditionally celebrated on April 16, but because it's a Saturday this year, the federal holiday is being remembered on the preceding Friday.

While April 18 is the deadline in Pennsylvania, taxpayers in Maine and Massachusetts will get an extra day. Their tax day is April 19 because government offices will be closed there on April 18 for Patriots' Day to honor the first battles in the Revolutionary War.

However, that doesn't mean you have to wait for the deadline to file.

Whether you're using a professional tax firm or filing them yourself, here are some things you need to know:

Expect delays

Identity theft is a growing problem in the U.S. and it rears its head seemingly every year during tax season.

In the last year, the IRS has developed steps to fight the fraud and will be using nearly two dozen pieces of new data to validate tax returns.

Taxpayers won't notice many changes while they're filing, but the through screening process on the agency's end of things could cause some delays in processing and issuing refunds, according to IRS Commissioner John Koskinen.

State police warn of IRS scam after Perry County woman loses $5K

Taxes and Obamacare

Taxpayers could face penalties or credits this year because of the Affordable Care Act, better known as Obamacare.

If a taxpayer doesn't have medical coverage, they will face a penalty up to $975 per household or 2 percent of the annual household income, whichever is the higher amount.

The maximum penalty increased from $285 in 2014 and grows to $2,085 for 2016 returns.

On the other hand, those who purchased Obamacare on the federal exchange or a state marketplace are eligible for a federal premium tax credit on their 2015 returns.

The credits range from 2 percent to 9.5 percent of monthly premiums and are based on household income.

Obamacare enrollment tops 2016 goal

State filing for same-sex couples

The historic Supreme Court ruling in June ensured gay and lesbian married couples can now file joint tax returns on the state level.

Same-sex married couples were already required to file federal taxes before the ruling.

This is a win for same-sex couples, who previously had to jump through hoops because many state tax offices use the federal filing as a basis for state returns.

What's more, same-sex couples may also have to option of amending prior state returns when they had to file as single taxpayers. They're advised to call their state tax departments for more information.

Same-sex couples married before Pa. ban was overturned can keep original anniversary dates