In the face of losses in the Affordable Care Act marketplace, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois is looking for new ways to cut spending.

Starting June 1, the Chicago-based health insurer will no longer accept credit cards as a form of payment for members who buy their own health insurance on or off the Illinois marketplace. The company began notifying customers of the change last month. Blue Cross will still accept other forms of payment, including debit cards.

The new payment policy will not affect customers in the group or Medicare markets.

In an email announcing the new payment policy, Blue Cross said, "Credit card fees are a significant expense that impact all members, not just those who use credit as a payment option."

Blue Cross and other health carriers are trying to drive down their costs because the newest policyholders under the health law have been more expensive to cover than those in employer-based group plans. The Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association, which represents 36 health plans across the country, studied the use of medical services by people enrolled in its plans before and after the ACA, sometimes called Obamacare, took effect in 2014.

People newly enrolled in individual health plans in 2014 and 2015 were found to have higher rates of certain diseases, such as high blood pressure, diabetes, depression, coronary artery disease, HIV and hepatitis C than people who already had coverage, the association said in a March report.

The report was released just before insurers have to file rate requests for 2017. Industry observers are expecting substantial rate increases in many states, as insurers have to cover their medical expenses.

Insurers are looking far and wide for money-saving measures. They have laid off employees and eliminated commissions to independent brokers on individual plans.

"We're trying to identify any avenue we can to lower administrative expenses that don't impact quality of care," said Blue Cross spokeswoman Jill Wolowitz.

She declined to say how much the company spends on credit card fees.

Blue Cross is a division of Health Care Service Corp., which also operates Blue Cross health plans in Oklahoma, New Mexico, Montana and Texas. Health Care Service Corp. adopted the new credit card policy in those other states too, Wolowitz said.

Land of Lincoln Health, Aetna and Coventry said they plan to continue accepting plastic as payment for monthly premiums.

asachdev@tribpub.com

Twitter @ameetsachdev