Topics: 2016 Elections, aol_on, Barack Obama, economic inequality, Labor, Labor movement, Unions, Politics News

On Wednesday, a fast-food worker named Terrence Wise introduced President Obama at the White House Summit on Worker Voice. Terrence spoke about his family’s struggle to scrape by on bottom-of-the-barrel wages despite working hard at multiple jobs. The Summit itself was also a reunion for he and his mother, also a fast-food worker. Because they don’t make a living wage, neither Terrence nor his mother had been able to afford to travel across multiple states to see each other in ten years, a point not lost on the President. Terrence’s story was no doubt all too familiar for the millions of Americans watching the promise of the middle class fade away in the face of growing income inequality.

But they haven’t lost hope. Workers like Terrence are on the frontlines of our nation’s fight to address income inequality and rebuild the middle class. From fast-food workers and pharmacists to reporters and adjunct professors, these workers envision a future where they will be able to support their families without relying on public assistance just to cover the basics. And if you ask them how we can achieve that vision, their answer is clear: unions.

Since fast-food workers first went on strike three years ago, workers have been sounding the call for higher pay and a seat at the table – and their voices just got a lot louder. A poll released last week by the National Employment Law Project (NELP) shows an overwhelming 72 percent of workers paid less than $15 an hour support unions.

The general public isn’t far behind. A recent Gallup poll found that support for unions had surged to 58 percent – an increase of five percentage points in the last year alone. And contrary to conventional wisdom, millennials have the highest rates of support. Meanwhile, economic experts like Former Treasury Secretary Larry Summers are increasingly identifying unions as critical to reducing income inequality and restoring the middle class.

It’s not hard to see why. Millions of Americans today rely on public assistance just to cover basic necessities like food, rent, and clothing for their kids – despite working full-time for some of the most profitable companies in the country. For these workers, joining together in a union is a time-tested path to the middle class. For taxpayers, fair pay and a voice on the job for underpaid workers means that we won’t have to make up the difference when major corporations like McDonald’s shortchange their employees.

While raising the minimum wage is an important step toward a stronger economy, it’s not enough. With families to support, workers see unions as a way to address their concerns with employers in real time. And our nation’s history teaches us that workers, the middle class, and our economy thrive when workers have a seat at the bargaining table. President Obama underscored this in his remarks last week when he noted that “as union membership has fallen, inequality has risen.”