BALTIMORE - It’s an invisible struggle for Gwenn Herman and the more than 100 million Americans dealing with chronic pain.

The complex problem, which Herman has been dealing with since she was injured in a car accident 20 years ago, carries mental burdens as well as physical ones.

As founder and executive director of Pain Connection Chronic Pain Outreach Center Inc., a Rockville-based nonprofit, Herman helps people who have chronic pain deal with its social and psychological aspects.

“It affects every aspect of your life,” said Herman, co-author of the book Making the Invisible Visible.

RELATED: Shining a light on 'invisible' disabilities

She and other advocates for those living with chronic pain are awaiting the development of a national pain strategy, a goal that arose from the federal Affordable Care Act.

“Every year I go to the pain convention at (the National Institute of Health), and there is so much information out there that is not getting to doctors,” she said. “Most of them are not educated on chronic pain—they’re educated on acute pain.”

Dr. Lynn Webster, past president of the American Academy of Pain Medicine and vice president of Scientific Affairs at PRA Health Sciences in Salt Lake City, Utah, said the lack of appropriate treatment has long been a barrier for patients.

“In 50 or 60 years, we haven’t made much progress,” Webster said. “We need more medicine developed. Pain is not just a symptom … it starts out as a symptom, but then it becomes the disease.”

In 2014, the Maryland General Assembly legalized medical marijuana, which some advocates say is a big step in the right direction toward alleviating chronic pain for sufferers.

RELATED: Commission approves medical marijuana recommendations

Last year, a study conducted by the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health and the Philadelphia Veterans Affairs Medical Center found that the annual number of deaths from prescription drug overdose is 25 percent lower in the 23 states with legal medical marijuana programs.

Yet anti-drug organizations, such as the Community Anti-Drug Coalitions of America, fear legalizing medical marijuana is a slippery slope that could lead to more youth using drugs.

Officials with CADCA say more than two-thirds of drug treatment admissions for patients under 18 involve marijuana abuse.

Webster can see potential benefits of medical marijuana for his patients, but said much more research must be done.

“I know that marijuana has chemical components that can be medicinal, they can be helpful, they can relieve pain,” he said. “But when you buy marijuana, you don’t know how much of the therapeutic chemicals that are involved versus the psychoactive properties.”

Webster believes if those two can be separated, there’s a real opportunity for patients to use marijuana rather than more risky substances, such as opioids.

Herman said she’s in favor of anything that can make people’s pain subside.

“We don’t push any kind of medicine or anything, but if they’re able to find something that helps them, that’s fine,” she said. “We don’t judge.”

Part of the Affordable Care Act required the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to enter into an agreement with the Institute of Medicine to increase awareness of pain as a serious public health issue.

A 2011 report from the IOM called for sweeping changes in how pain is perceived and treated in the U.S. The study estimated that the cost of pain care, including lost wages and productivity, could top $600 billion.

A task force made up of pain experts and patient advocates is developing a national strategy, though it keeps getting delayed, Herman said.

Following her car accident, she’s dealt with neck pain, then TMJ syndrome in her jaw, sometimes known as lockjaw, then fibromyalgia. She also has chronic fatigue.

Often, people who are dealing with chronic pain have multiple issues. Pain can compromise one’s auto-immune system. Many times, it leads to depression.

Herman, who is on disability, copes in part with her pain by using acupuncture. She says misconceptions regarding chronic pain abound.

“There are so many of them—that pain is your fault, that you did something to cause it, that it means you’re weak, that it means you’re broken,” she said. “Or that we’re drug addicts, and that’s just not true.”