CLEVELAND, Ohio—Charity care and community benefit at the Cleveland Clinic rose again last year, up to $652 million for 2013 for financial assistance or free care, as well as money spent on community outreach programs, research and physician training.

According to numbers recently released by the health system, the Clinic reported a 7 percent increase in net community benefit, to $652 million, up from $610 million the year before. The health system's total community benefit, which includes the value of externally-sponsored funding such as research grants, increased by 5 percent to $794 million.

Free or charity care at the Clinic, the region's largest health system and employer, increased by 9.7 percent to $169 million in 2013, while Medicaid shortfalls, the unreimbursed amount spent to provide care for patients enrolled in the federal government's health insurance program for the poor, increased at twice the rate, or 18 percent, to $124 million.

At University Hospitals, which last month reported steady community benefit spending in 2013, spending to cover Medicaid shortfalls fell 24 percent to $68 million last year from $90 million in 2012. The drop was due in part to a change in the Affordable Care Act, instituted January 1st of last year, that increased reimbursement rates for primary care physicians providing care to Medicaid patients to that allowed for Medicare patients.

The ACA's primary care increase, which will expire at the end of 2014, did not affect the Clinic as much because so many of its patients receive care from specialists or surgeons, said Steven Glass, the health system's chief financial officer.

"When you think about the Clinic, there are a lot of patients who are not here for primary care, they're here for much more specialized care," he said.

Glass said that in 2014, the Clinic has seen the benefit of Medicaid expansion in a drop in the number of uninsured patients and a corresponding rise in patients with federal health insurance.

"That will be a positive that we're getting paid on those patients instead of not getting paid, but we'll still be losing money in providing care," by covering the shortfall, he said.

Bad debt also continues to increase and will likely become a larger problem for the health system over time, Glass said, as individuals and families pick up health insurance on the exchange with high co-pay and high deductibles and then can't afford to pay for their care.

"Some of these benefit packages out there are first-dollar $5,000 deductible plans, and many of these families simply can't afford those deductibles so it ends up going through bad debt as opposed to being paid by the health plan," he said. "Pretty much all of the products on the exchanges are high-deductible plans."

While bad debt isn't currently tallied in a health system's uncompensated care total, there is debate about where it should fall in an organization's accounting.

"A lot of hospitals across the country have been looking into if they need to make changes to their financial assistance policy," Glass said. "It's a delicate balance on whether you start calling that charity care or bad debt."

The Clinic's community benefit spending rose or remained steady across the board in all but one area—research. But Glass said that does not reflect any cuts in research activity, only an effort to use more external grants whenever possible to fund its work. In 2013, the health system spent $203 million on research (down from $206 million in 2012) which was offset by $133.6 million in grants and other external funding.

UH, which reported its community benefit numbers in November, total spending on charity care, research, education and training remained steady last year at a total of $273 million.