By Frank Selker

Recently, Portland Parks & Recreation was gushing about the purchase of a vacant lot between Interstate 84 and Interstate 205 near the airport, and they said it would finally offer trail riding in Portland.

Also recently, a new study published by Portland State University shows concentrations of nitrous oxide air pollution. Look for Forest Park and what they call "Gateway Green" on the study's pollution map. Guess which area has the cleanest air in Portland and which has the dirtiest? Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) data on other toxic air pollution show the same pattern — "Gateway Brown" is surrounded by freeways and near the airport, meaning it has some of the most polluted air in Portland.

So why is the Portland parks department buying this for our kids to ride in when Forest Park could offer them clean air, actual beauty and 150 times more area? Because some northwest neighbors of Forest Park and other groups in town who use Forest Park don't want bikes in "their" paradise.

A former leader of a group influencing Forest Park policy calls these groups the "Green Mafia" because they have undue influence at City Hall and use environmental high-ground arguments to keep the park to themselves.

Consider the words of Audubon representative Jim Labbe a few years ago: "(W)e absolutely need to get behind expanding the park system to accommodate single-track (cycling) outside our existing protected natural areas. The Gateway Green project ... is a great start in that direction." And: "There may indeed be opportunities for expanding some access for mountain bikes ... in degraded areas."

In other words, we need to find some trashy place they can ride — so they leave Forest Park for us.

But they couldn't have done it alone: The "Green Mafia" had the help of a developer with investments near Gateway and politicians eager to appease cyclists while pursuing the worthy goal of offering more parkland (even if of marginal quality) to East Portland.

But why see the glass as half empty? Isn't a new bike-friendly park in East Portland a good thing?

Yes, it is. But in addition to offering bad air and freeways, it is a bone being thrown to delay offering fair and equitable access to the far more desirable Forest Park. Those privileged with current access to Forest Park trails are offering crumbs to appease cyclists, while keeping us stuck in the back of the bus. Perhaps if we take them at their word about this wonderful new park, they would trade Forest Park for Gateway Green? Go visit both; you will see why they wouldn't make such a trade.

I believe cyclists will ultimately get the rights and access to trails in Forest Park that others currently enjoy. City Commissioner Nick Fish's citizen committee (on which I served) said they should. A poll of 1,000 citizens commissioned by the city showed that most citizens — not just cyclists — want trails for bikes in Forest Park. And there is plenty of opportunity. User surveys show that portions of existing trails are barely used on many days, and there is plenty of space for dedicated cycling trails. Plus, quality trail riding would be a great tourist attraction. Mountain bikers now make a larger contribution to Bend's economy than does skiing. And, uh no, they won't come to ride at Gateway Green.

Which brings us to the proposed park bond. I will try to smile when they cut the ribbon on a polluted, vacant lot for bikes — surrounded by freeways; perhaps it is better than nothing. But we can do much better. Forest Park is about half of our total park land. Until parks leaders become inclusive rather than exclusive in managing what belongs to all of Portland, I will not vote for a parks bond.

•

Frank Selker, of Southwest Portland, served on the Forest Park Single Track Cycling Advisory Committee convened by Commissioner Nick Fish.