Arkansas employers will find out over the next year how much raising the state minimum wage will affect their balance sheet, but opinions vary on the move as a tool of inflationary adjustment.

Some say that while increasing the minimum wage puts more money in the hands of low-wage workers who need it, it also can push up prices for consumers. Others say the low wages have not actually caught up with inflation and the cost of living has long surpassed the wage.

Companies in Arkansas with more than four employees and $500,000 in annual revenue were already required to pay at least the federal minimum of $7.25.

With the passage of Issue No. 5 during Tuesday’s general election, the state minimum wage for employees will rise from $6.25 an hour to $7.50 on Jan. 1. This will be followed by increases to $8 an hour on Jan. 1, 2016, and $8.50 on Jan. 1, 2017.

Showing just how slippery the issue is, neither the Fort Smith Regional Chamber of Commerce nor the Arkansas State Chamber of Commerce took an official stance on the minimum-wage issue.

However, if the number of job applications to McDonald’s is any indication of how well the economy is doing, Fort Smith’s job market has rebounded and it is a non-issue.

Applications to area McDonald’s restaurants have come to a halt, which leads local franchise owner/operator Michael Hadley to believe the Fort Smith market is offering more higher-paying jobs. Hadley said his franchise’s average wage was over $8.50 an hour.

“McDonald’s pays quite a bit above the minimum wage already,” Hadley said. “So, those who were making more than minimum wage now will be barely above it.”

Hadley, who owns four McDonald’s restaurants in Fort Smith after building a new one on Old Greenwood Road, talked about the “domino effect” of raising the minimum wage to touch off the need for raises on a sliding scale. He is crunching numbers to make adjustments for the Affordable Care Act, so he said he still does not know if the minimum-wage increase will raise restaurant prices.

“The last thing we want to do is raise prices,” Hadley added. “We’re doing everything we can to stay competitive.”

Starting Jan. 1, restaurant owners paying tip pay of $2.65 an hour to servers will also need to bring pay up to meet the $7.50 mark on Jan. 1 if their servers don’t receive at least that much in tips and base pay per hour, says Denise P. Oxley, legal counsel with the Arkansas Department of Labor.

Miles Crawford, CEO of Go Ye Employment Services in Fort Smith, said the new wage rule’s tiered increase will help small businesses with five to 10 employees more easily adjust to the higher wages, but it could lead to some negative consequences.

“Generally, companies that are this small do not have enough existing clients to be able to minimally spread the increased labor cost among their clients,” Crawford wrote. “It’s not unusual for their price increase to result in a small business, with five to 10 employees, losing a contract to other companies who more capable to spread the cost more efficiently.”

The federal minimum wage was last raised in 2006 from $5.15 an hour to $7.25 in annual steps as part of a package deal to cut inheritance taxes on multimillion-dollar estates. Robert Reich, former Secretary of Labor for President Bill Clinton, stated in April at his website RobertReich.org that if the minimum wage of 1968 had stayed even with inflation, it would be more than $10 an hour today.