ENLARGE Warning signs for the tax season. Photo: iStock

Earlier this year, I kept running into the same advertisement in the London Underground: a rotating series of posters featuring self-employed people—a chef, a builder, a landscaper—sitting in a mid-air cross-legged lotus, a blissed-out expression on their faces. The ads were for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs department, the U.K.’s tax collector. In other words, these people had reached “inner peace” by meeting the Jan. 31 deadline for filing what the U.K. calls a self-assessment tax return for the self-employed.

Each time I walked past it, I silently thought to myself: “If only it were that easy.”

Everyone hates tax season, of course, but self-employed expats from the U.S. deserve a medal when tax season comes to its blessed close. The reason? America is the only advanced economy in the world that enforces extraterritorial tax law. In other words, the U.S. taxes nonresident citizens the same way it taxes those living within U.S. borders.

After five years of being a low-earning, peripatetic, twentysomething dual citizen (thanks to British parents who raised me in the U.S.) and freelancer who was confused about my tax status, I resolved in 2015 to switch from my American accountant to professionals who specialize in expat tax. Most accountants I found expressed sympathy that someone of my earning potential (or lack thereof) had to jump through such wildly complicated administrative hoops to comply with the tax codes of two nations. However, somewhat predictably, they did not advise that I attempt to do so myself.

A single accountant who was certified to file in both countries proved impossible to find. Instead, I hired two London-based accountants, one who specialized in the U.S. and the other in the U.K. tax codes. Both of them met my sole hiring requirement: speaking to me in words I could understand.

The first course of action in the U.K. was to align my tax year—which normally runs from April to April, with returns not due until the following January—to the U.S.’s more straightforward calendar-year system. This means calculating my U.K. tax liability long before it’s due to have my accounting done before the April 15 deadline in the U.S. This also lets me track my earnings from various employers in one dual-currency, 12-month spreadsheet.

It doesn’t matter if you’re a dual citizen like me, or simply living in a country on a work-sponsored visa, U.S. expats generally have to pay taxes to the country in which they’re living and using public services, as well as report to the IRS what they’ve paid. So, once I’d declared my worldwide income in the U.K., it was time for my U.S. accountant to step in. She explained that expats have two main choices to avoiding paying tax twice—a foreign tax credit or foreign earned income exclusion. Each has different benefits, and the second is harder to qualify for than the first, as you have to prove that you’ve been in your adopted country 330 days out of the last tax year (vacations or work travel to other nations are not included) or that you are a “bona fide” resident who has set down roots.

In my case, the second was the better option for me, since my income is all considered “earned” (I have no property or investments), my earnings fall far below the 2015 foreign earned income exclusion threshold of $100,800, and my residency status is indeed bona fide.

She then determined that I could opt out of state taxes despite holding a bank account in my home state. She also filed an exemption for the Affordable Care Act tax, which U.S. citizens who are nonresidents don’t have to register for since they don’t require healthcare coverage in the U.S. Finally, she told me that I only needed to file a Report of Foreign Bank and Financial Accounts (FBAR), a lesser-known requirement of U.S. expats, if I had more than $10,000 in my U.K. bank account at any time over the past year. Unfortunately—but also fortunately—I hadn’t.

When I reach the light at the end of this 2015 tax tunnel, a process I started last October, I will have spent more money paying these accountants than the amount I actually owe in taxes to either nation. And yet by expat standards, my situation is relatively simple: I don’t earn a lot of money, have no portfolio or passive income, and the U.K. and U.S. have a totalization agreement, which means that both income and Social Security taxes are protected from double taxation. In nations without that agreement, often only income tax can be exempted from double taxation.

However, for so many other American citizens living abroad, it’s not so simple. London Mayor Boris Johnson—who was born on U.S. soil—famously declared last year that he would start the onerous process of renouncing his U.S. citizenship after he had to pay capital gains tax to the IRS on the sale of his London home, despite not living in the U.S. since he was 5 years old. And since the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (Fatca) law came into effect in 2010—requiring foreign banks and governments to report to the IRS certain banking transactions done by their American customers—more Americans than ever before are renouncing their citizenship as they find that foreign banks are reluctant to take them on as customers.

Even though tax treaties mean that most American expats don’t pay income tax to a country they don’t live in (unless, of course, they live in a income-tax-free nation such as United Arab Emirates or Qatar), the process of proving to Uncle Sam that they are off the hook almost always requires expensive professional help, as the penalties for noncompliance are punitive. For instance failing to file Fatca and FBAR documentation can lead to fines of up to $10,000, a portion of your earnings, and even jail time.

I’m more than happy to pay taxes for the public services I use. I value the immense privilege of possessing a passport to two of the most powerful nations on earth. However, in 2015, that privilege cost me £1,420 in accountant fees, hours of research, and a lot of quality time with a spreadsheet. While expats of many other nations can simply say: “Hey, FYI I don’t live here anymore” to their home country, Americans are essentially on the hook forever.

As the April 15 deadline approaches, my American accountant informed me that one perk of filing taxes as an expat is the automatic extension to mid-June. “Get it done ASAP,” I said to her. “I’d like to have at least six months out of every year where I don’t have to think about my taxes.”

Rosie J. Spinks is a freelance journalist based in London. Her work appears in the Guardian, Fusion, Lucky Peach, GOOD, Sierra, and elsewhere. Follow her @rojospinks.

Email us at expat@wsj.com. Follow us @WSJexpat. Join our Facebook group.