Congresswoman says she made pay cut comment at meeting but not on campaign trail

PEORIA — U.S. Rep. Cheri Bustos admitted she spoke mistakenly when she told a Chicago Tribune editorial board during her 2012 campaign she would give up 10 percent of her congressional paycheck regardless of legislative mandates.

Audio from the editorial-board meeting, in which Bustos and then-Rep. Bobby Schilling squared off on issues including budget and pay for legislators, was released by the Schilling campaign last month.

Schilling, a Republican from Colona, is in a rematch this year against Bustos in the 17th Congressional District, which includes parts of Peoria and Tazewell counties.

In the recording, Bustos, a Democrat from East Moline, was asked about her desire to freeze lawmaker pay if a budget wasn’t passed, and an across-the-board cut of 10 percent of lawmaker pay. The Tribune board asked about her intentions to give up 10 percent of her own paycheck if elected.

“You would do it regardless of how the vote turns out?” a questioner asked, to which Bustos responded: “Yes.”

Bustos recanted that statement Thursday after a visit to the Center for Prevention of Abuse.

“I mistakenly made a comment about what I had been talking about for my entire campaign, which is that I support legislation for all members of Congress to give up 10 percent of their pay as part of a larger budget package,” Bustos said.

She also said the editorial-board meeting was the only time she made such a statement. She denied the comment constitutes a campaign promise to forfeit pay, as implied by her opponent.

“When I was in Chicago, I said something that I shouldn’t have said, but I never said it on the campaign trail. I never made it as a promise to the people in the 17th Congressional District,” Bustos said.

“Bobby Schilling and I both support the exact same measure, which is that all of Congress, collectively, would take a 10 percent pay cut as part of legislation that I have sponsored and I have supported.”

Jon Schweppe, communications director for the Schilling campaign, disagreed. Schweppe renewed a previous call for Bustos to surrender $34,000 in pay as a donation to veterans charities.

“A promise made should be a promise kept, and Cheri Bustos did make that promise to the Chicago Tribune ed board,” Schweppe said. “She’s trying to walk it back now, but she made the promise.”

Laura Nightengale can be reached at 686-3181 or lnightengale@pjstar.com. Follow her on Twitter @lauranight.