George Ford

BOARD MEMBERS

Big Brothers Big Sisters of Johnson County named to its board of directors Lew Montgomery (see photo), ACT; Patti Beeler (see photo), Pearson; Amy Haigler (see photo), P & G / Oral B; and Chace Ramey (see photo), Iowa City Community School District.

The Crisis Center of Johnson County has named the following to its board of directors for 2013-2014: Emily Bockelman (see photo) of Lone Tree, Christine Catney (see photo) and June Juenger (see photo) of Iowa City, and Jeremy James (see photo) of North Liberty.

Travis Hiatt (see photo), manager of Ruhl & Ruhl Realtors, Iowa City, was elected secretary/treasurer of the Iowa City Area Association of Realtors.

Legion Arts, Cedar Rapids, elected the following to its board: Greg Kanz (see photo), Shive-Hattery Inc., chairman; Katio Giorgio (see photo), non-profit network of Greater Cedar Rapids Community Foundation, vice chairman; Patrick DePalma (see photo), Transamerica, treasurer; RJ Holmes-Leopold (see photo), Cornell College, secretary; and Joanne Stevens (see photo), Iowa Realty Commercial, at-large.

Randy Novak (see photo), president of Novak Heating and Air Conditioning, Hiawatha, was elected president of the Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors’ National Association board of directors.

Joe Hearn, president and CEO of Dupaco Community Credit Union, was elected treasurer of the Credit Union Executives Society board of directors for 2013-2014.

Corridor members elected to the Iowa Association of Legal Assistants. Paralegals board of directors for 2013-2014 are Rosie Starr of Hayek Brown Moreland & Smith, Iowa City, treasurer and budget and finance chairman; Peggy L. Patters of Brady Preston Brown PC and Jill Jamieson of AEGON USA, Cedar Rapids, and Mary McChristy, Iowa City attorney’s office, all scholarship co-chairmen; and Dorothy de Souza Guedes of Wertz & Dake, Cedar Rapids, Region 6 director.

NEW HIRES

Jodi Schafer (see photo) was named assistant dean for the Tippie School of Management’s full-time MBA program at the University of Iowa Tippie College of Business.

GreatAmerica Financial Services has hired Carmen Weiland (see photo), previously with GE Capital, as account support adviser, and Newlin (see photo), previously with Rockwell Collins, as systems support analyst I.

McCord Research, Coralville, has hired Michelle Moore (see photo), an expert in the wound care education field, to be vice president of clinical affairs.

Kirkwood Community College has hired Greg Stewart (see photo) as director of transportation. Stewart was previously with Heartland Express of Coralville.

Timberline Manufacturing, Marion, has hired Jennifer Lawrence (see photo) as human resources manager. She was previously with The Advantage Companies in Cedar Rapids.

Miron Construction Co. has hired Elias Schroeder as project manager for its Cedar Rapids office.

Matt Baumann of Cedar Rapids has joined Northwestern Mutual The Zach Group in Hiawatha as a financial adviser. Baumann was previously an investment broker in Cedar Rapids.

PROMOTIONS

Patrice Carroll (see photo), formerly president and general manager, was promoted to president and CEO of ImOn Communications. Carroll also was named to the Cedar Rapids Bank & Trust board of directors.

Bridgehaven Pregnancy Support Center has promoted Leanne Rezac (see photo) from development assistant to volunteer and special events coordinator.

EXPANDED HOURS

Roaster’s Coffee House in NewBo City Market expanded its hours on Nov. 1. The shop is open 6 to 10 a.m. Monday through Friday in addition to the market’s regular hours of 11 a.m. to 8 p.m. on Thursday, 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. Saturday and 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Sunday.

NEW CLINIC

The University of Iowa College of Nursing Health Care’s Sycamore Health Center, a nurse-managed primary care clinic, has opened in the new Visiting Nurse Association Building, 1524 Sycamore St., Iowa City. Hours are 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday through Friday. For more information, visit www.sycamorehealthcenter.com.

LECTURES, WEBINARS, WORKSHOPS

The U.S. Small Business Administration will offer a webinar on the Basics of the Affordable Care Act and its potential impact on small businesses from 10 a.m. to noon Monday, To connect to the Webinar, go to https://connect16.uc.att.com/sba/ meet/? ExEventID =84554497. To connect by phone, call 1 (888) 858-2144, meeting access code 4554497#. For more information, contact Dave Lentell at (515) 284-4522.

“Winning the Money Game,” a lecture sponsored by the Luther College Student Activities Council, will be 7:30 p.m. Wednesday in Valders Hall of Science Room 206, Luther campus, Decorah. There is no charge.

An educational workshop on “When and How to Elect Social Security Retirement Benefits” will be presented at the Cedar Rapids Public Library at 10:15 a.m. Saturday, Nov. 23, and 6:30 p.m. Tuesday, Nov. 26. The free program will be given by Frank Varvaris. For more information, call (319) 862-0363.

KUDOS

Steven Pace (see photo), attorney and senior vice president of Shuttleworth & Ingersoll PLC, became a Fellow of the American College of Trial Lawyers.

The Iowa Grocery Industry Association inducted Denny Dietrich, president of Gary’s Foods in Mount Vernon, into its Hall of Fame, Dietrich also received the 2013 Retailer of the Year award.