Submitted Photo Weaving the Fate is from South Carolina.

You might think all the presents are unwrapped, but the holiday season has one more gift to give.

Around the world on Tuesday, crowds will gather and countdown to the new year.

Part of those crowds will be in the streets of South Carolina's capital for its third annual Famously Hot New Year 2014 celebration.

Located in downtown Columbia, gates open at 6:30 p.m.

Headlining this year will be the versatile Kool & The Gang.

The award-winning band is approaching its 50th anniversary next year. Brothers Robert “Kool” Bell and Ronald “Khalis” Bell make up the group's core with George “Funky” Brown and Dennis “Dee Tee” Thomas.

The pop/funk/R&B band released its first Christmas album this year.

It has over 20 studio albums to date with plans on making another next year.

Kool & the Gang went on tour with Kid Rock and Dave Matthews Band this summer.

Charleston was one of the tour's stops.

Robert's connection to the state roots a bit deeper.

“My mother is from Aiken,” said the New Jersey-native.

Kool & the Gang are scheduled to play at around 10:30 p.m.

Opening for this internationally-acclaimed band are Columbia-based group Weaving the Fate and blues-hop/soul singer ZZ Ward.

Weaving the Fate singer Brian Conner, bassist Bobby Dredd, DJ Able One and drummer Jeremy “Finesse” Roberson touch on multiple genres such as metal and jazz.

Conner began the band back in 2007.

Its name is a tribute to Conner's brother, Chris.

“Chris (before he passed away) had fronted a band called Sourwood Honey, and one of his songs, 'And the Weaving of Fate,' began to resonate even more intensely with Brian,” according to the band's biography. “He couldn't think of a better name for his new band.”

Weaving the Fate's self-titled EP is out on iTunes.

Ward is from Pennsylvania, according to her website.

Soulful music spoke to her from an early age.

“I grew up listening to my dad write and sing the blues and started performing with him in his blues bands when I was a kid,” Ward wrote on her website. “I fell in love with the sincerity of Etta (James), the soul of Muddy (Waters) and the power of Big Mama (Thornton).”

She produced three CDs last year: “Eleven Roses,” “Criminal” and “'Til the Casket Drops.”

Hosting for the night will be Wach-Fox anchor Tyler Ryan and former Miss Black South Carolina Pasha Franklin.

Ryan co-hosted last year.

A new addition will be the screen hanging by the stage that's “almost as big as the stage” itself, according to Sam Johnson, event co-chair.

Throughout the night, resolutions off the event's Twitter and video shoutouts from City and community officials such as Columbia Mayor Steve Benjamin will play on the screen.

“When people think 'New Year's Eve,' we want them to start thinking 'Columbia, S.C.'” Benjamin said in a release. “We've got something really special here, and we want everyone to see it.”

Benjamin will lead the countdown to 2014. At midnight, a firework display will shoot over the State House.

Kool & the Gang will then return to the stage to ring in the New Year.

Food and drinks such as beer, wine and champagne will be on sale for most of the night, according to the event's website.

General admission is free.

VIP Tickets of $125 will grant you access to all general admission areas in addition to the Absolut Crescent Lounge in the Capitol Center. The lounge will have open bars and endless hors d'oeuvres.

“It's all you can eat and drink,” Johnson said.

Parking garages will be opened up for the night. VIP ticketholders will be able to park in the City of Columbia parking garage adjacent to the lounge.

General admission can be upgraded to VIP access. However, it is advised to get VIP tickets early because “they go fast,” Johnson said.

Outside refreshments; pets, except service animals; umbrellas; lounge chairs and backpacks are not allowed.

The event will go on, rain or shine, according to Johnson.

The night is scheduled to end at 1 a.m. on Jan. 1, with gates closing at 1:30 a.m.

For more information, visit www.famouslyhotnewyear.com.

Stephanie Turner graduated from Valdosta State University in 2012.

She then signed on with the Aiken Standard, where she is now the arts and entertainment reporter.