Louisiana's most expensive Senate race ever, pitting a three-term Democratic incumbent who pledges to continue to use her seniority to help Louisiana against two Republicans who label her overly supportive of President Barack Obama, leads Tuesday's ballot.

Polls will be open from 6 a.m. to 8 p.m. Tuesday, with voters casting ballots in a Senate race that has generated plenty of national press coverage -- with Republicans given a good chance to capture the majority the GOP has attempted to make a referendum on the president's policies.

But there are other crucial races on the ballot. Among them six seats for the U.S. House of Representatives, 14 constitutional amendments, a Public Service Commission race, a host of local school board and judicial contests and mayoral and city council election in Harahan.

Still, the contest getting the most attention is the Senate race, with eight candidates on the ballot, led by incumbent Democrat Mary Landrieu and her two leading GOP challengers, Rep. Bill Cassidy of Baton Rouge and retired Air Force Col. Rob Maness of Madisonville.

The polls indicate that none of the three frontrunners are likely to draw the 50 percent plus one vote needed to win the election outright, setting up a likely runoff on Dec. 6 between the two finishers, likely to be Landrieu and Cassidy.

Cassidy's election strategy has been to try and link Landrieu to President Barack Obama, who is generated approval ratings of less than 40 percent in Louisiana, offering few specifics about his own Senate plans other than to fight to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act, fight for more energy development and against amnesty for illegal immigrants.

Landrieu has billed herself as one of the Senate's most moderate members who has effectively used her clout and seniority to deliver for her state -- from Hurricane Katrina recovery funds to revenue sharing from oil and gas development. She pledges to fix, but not replace the Affordable Care ACt that she says has allowed state residents with pre-existing conditions to get affordable coverage.

Maness, making his first run for public office, has run as a conservative outsider committed to killing the Affordable Care Act and combating illegal immigration.

If you haven't caught any of the Senate ads, some of them particularly nasty, you probably haven't been watching TV.

The race is the most expensive Senate contest ever in Louisiana, with outside groups spending over $17.3 million, using mostly donations that they don't disclose. The three candidates spent $25 million, as of Oct. 15 filings with the Federal Election Commission. Landrieu leads the spending, with $14.99 million, followed by Cassidy with $7.85 million and Maness, with $2.28 million.

To replace Cassidy in the House is a wide on open primary with Democratic Former Louisiana Gov. Edwin Edwards, back from prison after a federal corruption conviction, on the ballot with eight Republicans, two other Democrats and a libertarian. With so many on the ballot, a runoff is inevitable, with Edwards considered a lock to keep campaigning through Dec. 6. But it's a far less clear who among the eight Republican candidates will make it to the Dec. 6 runoff ballot.

Leading Republican challengers are Garret Graves, Gov. Bobby Jindal's former lead coastal restoration advisor; Paul Dietzel of Baton Rouge, who developed a successful software firm and is the son of a legendary LSU football coach, State Sen. Dan Claitor, R-Baton Rouge, who has continued to campaign despite a recent auto accident that took the life of his mother and seriously injured his father, and State Rep. Lenar Whitney, R-Houma, who has run ads calling climate change a hoax.

In the 5th district, incumbent Rep. Vance McAllister, R-Swartz, five other Republicans, a Democrat and a libertarian candidate are all on the ballot. McAllister generated unwanted national attention when a surveillance video was released showing him kissing a married staffer. It came after he won a special election last November for the House seat with help from Duck Dynasty stars. Now his opponents include a Duck Dynasty cousin, Zach Dasher, two fairly well known Republicans, physician Ralph Abraham and former U.S. Rep. Clyde Holloway and the field's only Democrat, Monroe Mayor Jamie Mayo. This is another race where a Dec. 6 runoff appears inevitable.

The incumbents running in the four other Louisiana House races are expected to win easily -- Rep. Steve Scalise, R-Jefferson, now the House Majority Whip; along with Reps. Cedric Richmond, D-New Orleans, John Fleming, R-Minden and Charles Boustany, R-Lafayette, can safely make their Washington D.C. housing arrangements for 2015.

The 14 proposed constitutional amendments on the ballot include proposals to eliminate the 70-year-old mandatory retirement age for state judges, provide a property tax exemption for certain disabled veterans and allow set a higher millage cap for police and fire protection in Orleans Parish.