Need still high across the county following 2013 flood

Some ways to help



What: Project Greatest Gift When: Through Dec. 7 Items needed: Christmas gifts. Suggestions vary based on individual. Drop-off location: White Fields Community Church, 700 Longs Peak Ave., Longmont More info: whitefieldschurch.com



What: Operation Christmas Child When: Through Monday. (Boxes can be dropped off at the Aurora location through Dec. 19.) Items needed: Toys, school supplies, toiletries Drop-off location: Front Range Christian Fellowship, 10667 Park Ridge Ave., Longmont, through Monday; Denver Processing Center, 16304 East 32nd Ave., Building 19, Suite 35, Aurora, through Dec. 19 More info: samaritanspurse.org



What: There With Care holiday programs When: Through Dec. 24 Items needed: Money, winter clothing for infants through 3-year-olds, baby toys Locations: 2825 Wilderness Place, Suite 100, Boulder, between 10 a.m. and 2 p.m. Monday through Friday More info: therewithcare.org Advertisement



What: I Have a Dream Foundation, Adopt-A-Center and Adopt-A-College Dreamer When: Through Dec. 31 Items needed: Items vary More info: aaf@ihaveadreamboulder.org



What: 49th Annual Christmas home tour When: Dec. 4-6 Proceeds/donations benefit Boulder County nonprofits that help homeless More info: thegiftofhome.org



What: Longmont Meals on Wheels holiday gift baskets When: Through Dec. 17 Items needed: Money, $5 grocery gift cards, dish towels, socks, gloves Drop-off location: Senior Center, 910 Longs Peak Ave., Longmont More info: longmontmeals.org



What: Angel Trees Items needed: Toys, gifts for children of inmates. Gift ideas specified on tags. Where: Various locations across Boulder County, including CENTRALongmont, 402 Kimbark St., Longmont; First Presbyterian Church, 1820 15th St., Boulder More info: Visit CENTRALongmont's website at centralpres.net; or contact Gwen Andersen at First Presbyterian Church in Boulder at dwandersen@comcast.net.



What: Sixth annual toy drive in memory of "Doc" Anderson When: 4 to 7 p.m. Dec. 4 Items needed: New, unwrapped toys Drop-off location: 2423 Frontier St., Longmont More info: 303-651-0164

Six-year-old Eli Criger stands in front of a Walmart rack displaying winter hats and gloves, carefully considering what he might want if he were two years older.

Batman or Superman? Both are good options, but the matching black accessories with the yellow Batman symbol ultimately win out.

Eli is shopping for an 8-year-old boy he has never met. The Longmont family is sponsoring three foster children this Christmas as part of the holiday drive Project Greatest Gift, offered through White Fields Community Church.

Along with the Batman hat and gloves, the 8-year-old is getting a superhero Lego kit and finger skateboards from the Dollar Tree Store, which Eli purchased with money from his piggy bank.

"I wish I could be there when he opens it," Eli said. " 'Cause that would be cool to get to see him be excited when he gets Christmas presents."

The Crigers also sponsored a 4-year-old girl, who is getting a "Frozen" microphone, a doctor toy kit, a puzzle and rainbow leggings; and a 4-month-old boy, who is getting a set of pajamas, diapers, a book and a cloth toy.

Holidays bring optimism

Some churches and nonprofits across Boulder County this year are preparing for their biggest holiday drives since the recession.

Project Greatest Gift is in the middle of its fifth year and largest drive yet.

Last year, church members and families from the Longmont community provided Christmas gifts to 92 foster children in Weld and Adams counties. This year, the church took on 145 individuals, including foster children and grandparents who care for their grandchildren. The church is still seeking sponsors for about 30 people, but with two weeks to go, organizers are optimistic.

Boulder County's I Have a Dream Foundation, a drop-out prevention program for low-income students, is hosting three holiday drives this year. The nonprofit is still seeking donors to help with its Adopt-A-Center and Adopt-A-College Dreamer programs, but it has already connected donors with every family that is part of the Adopt-A-Family program, said President and CEO Lori Canova.

"This is the earliest we've ever had all the families sponsored since the recession," Canova said. "Donations have been up this year, and for that we are extremely grateful."

The Longmont Community Foundation raised 21 percent more — about $50,000 — this year from January through August over the same time last year, said Executive Director Eric Hozempa.

"From speaking with donors, people are feeling much more optimistic about the economy, so they're more willing to think about philanthropic efforts," Hozempa said. "I do expect that the holidays will follow that trend, since the last quarter of the year is when people do the bulk of their giving."

Need high after recession, flood

Josie Heath, president of the Community Foundation Serving Boulder County, said it was too early to report any figures from 2014. But, anecdotally, things look to be on track this year as compared to last, she said, with the exception of donations for those affected by the September 2013 flood.

"We had a considerable outpouring following the flood, which was an anomaly," Heath said. "If you directly compared this year to last year, we're down from last year because of the flood, but otherwise we're on track."

Doug Yeiser, president of Foothills United Way, also said it was too early to project whether this year's donations will be higher or lower than 2013.

"We don't have enough news to say if it's up or down," Yeiser said. "I do think people are feeling more confident about the economy, but because of the flood, needs are still at a heightened level."

There are an estimated 600 families still working through flood recovery in Boulder County, with more than $8 million in unmet needs, Yeiser said.

And despite the economic recovery, many others are still struggling. Nonprofits across Boulder County have seen an increased need for services.

Donations may be up at the I Have a Dream Foundation, but increased need can quickly drain incoming resources, Canova said.

"The number of students living in poverty, who are eligible for the free and reduced lunch program, has increased," Canova said. "We continue to have a waiting list of schools and students who want to join our program, and the cost to attend college continues to increase every year."

Longmont and Boulder Meals on Wheels programs are on track to serve more clients than ever before this year.

The Boulder program estimates a 7 percent increase in the number of meals served, and Longmont estimates a 3 percent increase.

Donations in some of the Boulder and Longmont Meals on Wheels fundraising programs are up while others are down, making it difficult for the staff to estimate an overall trend before the end of the year. But both nonprofits are hopeful that the final quarter of the year will boost their totals.

"Year-end giving is our major fundraising opportunity, and we are hoping people will be even more generous this year," said Sally Sandoe, director of marketing and development for the Boulder program.

Inspired generosity

With need rising, volunteers are also in higher demand.

In the wake of the flood, locals have stepped up to help with recovery efforts across the county, according to Julie Phillips, Foothills United Way agency relations coordinator.

The organization has seen a 25 percent increase in the number of volunteers over the past year, Phillips said. And she expects the increase to continue through the holidays — which is a good thing because holiday volunteer opportunities have increased 29 percent from last year, she said.

"We know that traditionally the holiday season is a time when our community is eager to give back through volunteerism," Phillips said. "Our hope is that people will connect with an organization that they connect with and feel passionate about, and they will commit to volunteering with them throughout the year."

White Fields Church pastor Nick Cady said the holidays stir up the warm-and-fuzzy feelings that encourage people to give more time, money and gifts than they would earlier in the year.

"We do see an increase in giving in December with the holidays and the end of the year coming up," Cady said. "People are thankful for what they have, and they want to share that with others."

Despite an already-tight holiday budget, Tim and Lisa Criger said it is important to find room for giving during the holidays, which provides a good lesson for their three kids, Eli, 6, Reese, 4, and Emmy, 2.

"It's an opportunity for them to give and to share some of the blessings that we have," Lisa Criger said. "This is the time of year when we're thinking about family and spending time with family, and we want our kids to think about and give back to other families, too."

Whitney Bryen: 303-684-5274, wbryen@times-call.com or twitter.com/soonerreporter