BEGIN TRANSCRIPT

RUSH: It's pathological. With Clinton it was (Clinton impression), "I never had sex with that woman, not a single time, never, and I never asked anybody to lie." And that then became a controversy over the definition of "is." Remember that? Depends on what "is" is. This is pathological. Obama is now saying he didn't say what he said. Obama is now trying, by the way, if I can do this, he's trying to implement the Limbaugh Theorem.

This is the latest example of the very thing the Limbaugh Theorem described: The president pretending to fight against the snake oil that he created. The president pretending to be opposed to the very thing he created, meaning, "Oh, my God, I just now figured that people are losing their insurance and their doctors, and that was never the intention. We said that you wouldn't lose it if your plan didn't change."

Folks, it's really bad. I mean, the media is saying, "I've been covering the guy five years, he never said that." We got Ron Fournier of the National Journal: "Lying About Lies: Why Credibility Matters to Obama." This story is devastating, even though he tries to help Obama in this thing, he's trying to help him recover. People are flabbergasted out there over this. "The president is trying to reinvent the history of his you-can-keep-it promise on health care." This is just incredible.

So let's get started. By the way, telephone number, if you want to be on the program's 800-282-2882; the e-mail address, ElRushbo@eibnet.com.

Here is Obama yesterday at an Organizing for America event.

OBAMA: Now, if you have or had one of these plans before the Affordable Care Act came into law, and you really like that plan, what we said was, "You could keep it if it hasn't changed since the law's passed." So we wrote into the Affordable Care Act, you're grandfathered in on that plan. But if the insurance company changes it, then what we're saying is they've gotta change it to a higher standard.

RUSH: It's just not true, folks. He never, ever said it. Now, this tells me something, by the way. He knows what the law says on this now. The law does say that your plan is grandfathered, but if it changes an iota, if it changes by a nickel, if it changes in the slightest way, it's gone, and you lose your grandfathered status. What he's not telling anybody here is that Obamacare mandates the insurance companies to change these policies by mandating that they cover more, that they charge more. It was never going to be possible for you to keep your plan, is the bottom line, and that's what he doesn't know that he's admitting here.

Don't forget the news of last week and two weeks ago. The White House knew, remember, Lisa Myers, NBC News, uncovered this. They knew that Obama was gonna go out to lie. They put it on the teleprompter, they knew, and they made a calculated decision that it was better to lie about it to get the thing passed and then deal with the aftermath, which is what they're doing now. They also knew, and it was in the Federal Register, 93 million Americans were gonna lose their policies. Ninety-three million Americans could not keep their insurance.

Ninety-three million Americans could not keep their doctor. They knew this. This was in the media last week and the week before. It was known that Obama was telling a falsehood, and it was a calculated plan to do just that. They thought that his goodwill that he had built up with his fans would sustain him through this and that he'd be able to handle the aftermath in typical Obama fashion: deny it, and then claim he didn't know it, and that he's looking out for you -- i.e, the Limbaugh Theorem. But the media is having a tough time. I guess there's even a limit for them.

Here's the problem with this. These are lies. They are calculated purposeful lies. And this is really, really bad. This may be -- and I'm not exaggerating and I'm not trying to do anything for effect here. This may be the biggest presidential lie in our lifetimes. I don't know about things that happened when I wasn't alive, previous presidents, so I'm not gonna say that it's the biggest lie ever, but it certainly probably is the biggest presidential lie in my lifetime, and he knows it.

This isn't, as I say, "I did not have sex with that woman, not a single time, never, and I never asked anybody to lie." This is not "I didn't bug those offices." This is not, "I don't know where those Rose Law Firm billing records came from. The Map Room, you're saying?" Clinton lying under oath, the grand jury, that's a bad presidential thing to do, but this is lying to the American people. This is lying about your relationship with your doctor about your health.

Now, the Democrat Party, I'd peg this back to the eighties. Remember, there was a Pennsylvania Senator by the name of Harris Wofford, and Harris Wofford got this whole health care thing going. He ratcheted it up by saying (paraphrasing), "Look, if the Constitution is gonna guarantee you a lawyer, then why doesn't it guarantee you a doctor? If you get in trouble and you can't afford a lawyer, one's provided for you. Why doesn't that happen in your health care?" And that got the ball rolling. Now, national health care's always been a dream of the Democrat Party, and it's always been a relevant thing. But it's relatively new that people consider their health insurance the number one most important possession that they have.

For many people, psychologically, I mean, it has become more important than their house or their car or their flat screen, and it's all because the Democrat Party has spent all of these years ratcheting this up and telling people and warning people they could go bankrupt, they're one paycheck away from bankruptcy if they get sick. They've done such a great job of scaring people and creating a crisis out of poor health. I mean, getting sick now is a major crisis in people's lives. It doesn't require a catastrophe to make people paranoid.

The Democrat Party has made everyday health care a crisis by focusing on it as a political issue, by claiming that the Republicans and others don't care about your health by making it the number one employee benefit and all of that. In people's minds, they have made their health care the most important thing to them.

And now, having done that, they have changed the relationship between citizen and state regarding health care -- and they have let everybody known that they, too, the Democrats, think that your health is the most important thing in the world. "We know it's the most important thing to you and it's the most important thing to us," and now here comes Obama after ginning up all of this crisis and panic about everyday health care...

Snerdley, have I made my point here? I mean, health used to be important. Everybody wanted to be healthy and all. But in my lifetime, it has changed dramatically. Getting sick was never a crisis. It was not, ""Oh, my God, the end of the world!" People's health insurance, it was not the most important thing to 'em. It's not why they wanted to get a job. It wasn't the most important thing. I'm telling you, the Democrats have politicized this to the point that I think people have an irrational attachment to it.

However, it's real, whether it's irrational or not, and because it's gotten so expensive (again, that's because of the Democrats and government being involved) people can't take care of it on their own now. So it is a crisis that they have created, ostensibly for their political benefit, and therefore it is the most personal thing to millions of Americans. Their health, getting sick and being able get treated, is the most important thing to just gobs of people.

So given the highly personal aspect of this issue to people, the president of the United States lied -- purposefully, knowingly, willfully -- about the most important thing in most people's lives. "Mr. Limbaugh, are you saying that your health care is not the most...?" No, it's not, frankly. That's my point. It's not. I get sick; I go to the doctor. I don't live in of fear getting sick. I don't. My health care is not the primary concern I have about where I work.

It's not.

But for most people it is.

I don't even have health insurance. But I'm weird, I'm unique, I'm odd. I'm in a minority. I understand that. But I'm just telling you, I know how important it is to people, and I'm not criticizing it. I'm simply saying that is the reality now. The president, he coulda lied about other things. He can lie about Syria, he coulda lied about global warming, but this, he promised people that the most important thing in their life would not change, with his "reform."

Not only that, he told them the most important thing in their life would get cheaper. And he told them the most important thing in their life would become more accessible. And he told them the most important relationship in their life, their doctor, would be unchanged. He lied purposefully, willfully, and in a way that cannot be covered up. It cannot be said that it was a gaffe. It cannot be said that it was a screw up.

It was willful, it was political, it was for his and his party's advantage, and it was without compassion. He did this with no concern on the end result for people who believed hi -- and in that sense, it might have revealed who he really is. A lot of people who voted for him, and a lot of people on the Democrat side, a lot of people on the media side, that's what they're having to come to grips with today, and that's what many of them still remain in denial about.

This is lying about the most personal thing in many people's minds: Their relationship with their doctor and their health. Not only that, the health of their entire family. This is as personal a lie as this president or any president could have told people. That's why I say that this is the worst lie of any presidential lie I'm aware of. I don't think, because of the personal nature of this, that there could be a worse lie -- and they know it, and that's why they're trying to slither out of this.

They're trying to slither out of it by telling another lie, because it can never be that they lied. You just didn't hear right! You were lied to by others in the media that you listen to or watch. But the president didn't lie. The fact is he's lying again now. The media... Well, this Ron Fournier piece. Poor Ron, he's devastated by it. He does his best to save Obama in this. He does his best, but it's not possible.

He said, "Stop lying," and the media said, "Stop lying," and Obama told another lie! But I can't... I'm sorry to bludgeon this, but I can't emphasize it enough, and I think people inside the Beltway gonna miss this. This is reason I'm emphasizing it, the personal nature of this. To them, it's a bad lie. It's a bad lie because it's an obvious lie. It's a bad lie 'cause they can't get him out of it. That's not why it's a bad lie.

It's a bad lie because it's like Kyle Smith in New York Post said on Sunday. Obama's a BSer, but this is not BS. This is a flat-out deceitful, an intentionally deceitful lie that was only made to benefit Obama and the Democrat Party. When he lies and gets away with it, everybody else gets harmed. You don't keep your doctor. You don't keep your policy. You're faced with cancellation and renewed and increased prices, if you want to stay insured.

Remember, the Democrat Party has made this the most important thing in many people's lives. There are people who literally go through near panic each and every day over the fact they might get sick or their kids might get in a car wreck or something's gonna happen to bankrupt them, because the Democrats have told 'em that's what's gonna happen. The Democrats have told people, "You're one accident, you're one illness away from being bankrupt, and that's why we gotta do the reform! That's why we gotta do Obamacare."

Now it's Obamacare that's going to bankrupt people.

Now it's Obamacare that is one step away from bankruptcy, one paycheck away from it.

It's Obamacare that is causing all of this.

I think the Drive-Bys have to be aware of how bad this looks. Look at how many articles we've seen about Obama. "He had to lie 'cause the public's too stupid to realize how good Obamacare is for us!" That's one theme out there. "He had to lie! He had to lie 'cause the public, low-information crowd, they're too stupid to see how good this is for everybody. He had to lie about it, in order to get it passed. He had to lie because if he told the truth the Republicans would have used the truth against him. We can't have that!"

It's another theme that's out there.

BREAK TRANSCRIPT

RUSH: Man, I remember listening to this tune at 4:30 in the morning driving in to work when I was a deejay back in the old days. It's a perfect 4:30 in the morning song or late at night going to bed or waking up. Boz Skaggs and Lowdown.

"Obama lied, and your health plan died." It's exactly what's happened. You know, something else. I want you to listen to this again. I want to see if you notice a difference here. Ron Fournier did, in writing about this in the National Journal. Listen to the pronouns in this bite.

OBAMA: Now, if you have or had one of these plans before the Affordable Care Act came into law, and you really like that plan, what we said was, "You could keep it if it hasn't changed since the law's passed." So we wrote into the Affordable Care Act, you're grandfathered in on that plan. But if the insurance company changes it, then what we're saying is they've gotta change it to a higher standard.

RUSH: So the "I," "me," "my" president, all of a sudden now this becomes, "What 'we' said, what 'we' are saying." There is none of this, "What I said was, and what I told you, and what I did, and when I did it, and when I said." No, there's none of that. Now it's "we." Now it's some boobs that are gonna get canned for doing this. Now it's a mysterious "we."

Ron Fournier was just devastated by this. He writes in his piece today, " Watch the video of Obama reinventing history with the "what-we-said-was" construction. Notice how he is looking at notes. Remarkably, this was not an off-the-cuff remark; it was written, reviewed and approved by senior White House officials, then recited by the president." It was, he writes, "An orchestrated deceit."

So was the first lie that he told how many different times, 35 or 40 different times over three years. "If you like your doctor, you can keep your doctor. If you like your plan, you can keep your plan. Premiums will see an average price reduction of $2,500." All of those were written. All of those were on the prompter. None of those statements were off the cuff. They were all written. It has all been an orchestrated deceit -- and that, friends, is the entire Democrat Party.

BREAK TRANSCRIPT

RUSH: Remember, now, folks, this lie is about one of the most personal things to people. It was a lie that benefited Barack Obama only. It was a lie for the express purpose of getting Barack Obama elected. It was a lie intended to deceive people into supporting this disaster of a health care reform plan -- and it is a disaster. It's an absolute nightmare. People are learning this. It is near criminal.

All of this was known and could have been widely publicized prior to the vote on this. All of this was known. It was known that Obama was lying when he said you could keep your plan, because the law itself contradicted that -- and there were many of us that were shouting as loud as we could about it. The people just couldn't get their arms around the fact that good old Obama would lie to 'em.

But he did.

He lied for his own gain.

He lied about the most personal aspect of people's lives.

He deceived them all for his gain, all for his party's gain.

He goes into Virginia and he's campaigning. The fact that Terry McAuliffe... I'm thinking all day trying to figure a good way to analogize a guy like McAuliffe being a governor. I mean, it's just unseemly. It's just unseemly. And here's Obama -- who's now demonstrated himself to be a deceitful, purposeful, wanton liar -- going in, telling the people of Virginia how Terry McAuliffe is the best thing could ever happen to 'em, and it's the absolute opposite of that.

All he is, is a placeholder for Democrat moneyed interests to have their way in that state, and pave the way for Hillary Clinton's 2016 run. The guy doesn't know about being governor. It's just gonna turn the thing into a money-laundering clearinghouse for the Democrat and all that. That's what the state of Virginia is gonna become. It's just shocking to me -- literally, literally shocking. Terry McAuliffe? A bundler? It is what it is? By the way, there's a third-party candidate in that state today, a Libertarian.

Even Ron Paul has come out against that Libertarian candidate and an Obama bundler. Some rich liberal from Texas is bankrolling the campaign of that Libertarian candidate in Virginia to split the vote between the Libertarian candidate and Ken Cuccinelli. So Barack Obama is now seeking to undermine the state of Virginia with a placeholder named Terry McAuliffe, and this comes on the heels of this...

I don't know how to characterize this any more than I have. It's just an amazing insult to everybody, their intelligence. These are people that voted for Barack Obama. These are people that basically placed their lives in his hands. Many of these people turned over their very existence to Barack Obama because they trusted him. He engendered that trust, and he told them that he's the one that would look out for 'em.

He was the one that was gonna protect them. He was the one that was gonna guard them from these ravaging Republicans who didn't care about women, didn't care about blacks, don't care about anybody else. It's Barack Obama that purposely deceived these people for his own gain, for his own power and that of his party -- and he's now denying that he lied! He's compounding it. He's now denying that he ever said you could keep your insurance if you liked it.

He's denying that he said it. He now claims he said you could keep it if it didn't change. But the Obamacare law is written so as to make sure that plans change, so that they don't remain grandfathered. Folks, here's the dirty little secret. Obamacare can't survive if everybody's plan stayed the same. Can I ask you a question that I think is rooted in logic? If the president's number one selling point...?

Please focus on this question. It's really important.

If the number one selling point of Obamacare -- if the most important thing about it, if the thing that he's willing to lie about 29 times -- is that if you like your plan, you can keep it, would somebody tell me what was wrong with health care? If you like your plan, you can keep it, then why are we changing anything? Why are we doing this? What it tells me is that most people were satisfied with what they had, and they were not gonna get to keep it.

The president knew that, so he had to lie to them about it in order to implement this "reform," which is gonna end up being much worse for almost everybody. Not quite everybody, because some are gonna get subsidies like people that work for the government and members of the House and Senate and their staff. They're gonna have 75% of their costs taken care of by you and me and other taxpayers. But most everybody is going to be really financially impacted, damaged by this.

The president's out there telling people, "No, no! If you like your plan, if you like your doctor, you can keep it." Well, if you asked me, what was wrong with it, then? Why does it need to be changed? And if you gonna make a big deal out of lying to people about it, you must be of the impression that most people like their plans -- and in that case, why change it?

So, what did that become? "Well, we had to do it for the uninsured because we're big-hearted, compassionate liberals, and we have to take care of those who don't have any health insurance. It's just not right. The biggest superpower in the world has got 30 million people uninsured! What kind of rotgut people does that make us? Okay, so we're gonna do this to insure 30 million people."

Well, it turns out that the uninsured remain uninsured under Obamacare.

The only people that benefit from this are the Democrat Party. They're the only people that benefit, and how do they benefit? They now control one-sixth of the US economy that they didn't have under their control, and they now control the way people live, because every aspect of living has a health care cost component to it that they can deny treatment for unless you snap to and live the way they want you to live.

They're not content to let you live the way you want to live. You've gotta live the way they demand you live. This is so repugnant. So now Obama's denying that he ever said what he said, except he said, "Well, we now..." So I'm just gonna do this little sound bite roll here. We're gonna repeat number one. This is Obama saying, "No, no! We never said that you could keep your plan if it changed." Listen to this again.

OBAMA: Now, if you have or had one of these plans before the Affordable Care Act came into law, and you really like that plan, what we said was, "You could keep it if it hasn't changed since the law's passed." So we wrote into the Affordable Care Act, you're grandfathered in on that plan. But if the insurance company changes it, then what we're saying is they've gotta change it to a higher standard.

RUSH: Well, that's the mandate. They have to change it.

There was no way you were gonna keep your plan from the beginning, and they knew it. They knew that 93 million Americans were gonna lose their plans and the relationship with their doctor. They lied about it. They knew they were lying about it. They made a calculated decision to lie and deal with the aftermath. Now, try to follow this. It's the same press conference, a DC Organizing for America event. He says that if he had kept his first promise, he would have broken an even bigger one.

Now, this is where he attempts to implement the Limbaugh Theorem...

OBAMA: If we had allowed these old plans to be downgraded or sold to new enrollees once the law had already passed, then we would have broken an even more important promise: Making sure that Americans gain access to health care that doesn't leave them one illness away from financial ruin.

RUSH: There you go!

OBAMA: The bottom line is -- is that --

RUSH: There you go!

OBAMA: -- we are making the insurance market better for everybody.

RUSH: There you go.

OBAMA: And that's the right thing to do.

RUSH: That's what they've done for 30 years. One illness away from financial ruin. They've been talking like that for 30 years, and they've made people think that they're one common cold away from financial ruin. So here now the president says if he had kept his first promise, i.e., you get to keep your plan, he would have broken an even bigger promise. And if we had allowed these old plans to be downgraded or sold to new enrollees then we would have broken an even more important promise, making sure that Americans gain access. He says if we had let you keep your plan, we would not have been able to have other people who are uninsured get insurance.

Well, they don't get insured under Obamacare. The dirty little secret is that something like 20 million Americans, maybe it's 30, remain uninsured after full implementation. So this is pathological. This is purposefully pathological. How come we haven't seen any examples of people with lousy plans? Name one of them. The only thing we've seen is people who like their plans are upset they don't get to keep 'em, right? All we've seen are people who've been canceled, and they're upset about it, and they've been told that their replacement plan is gonna raise their deductible by three times, their premium by 150%, their out-of-pocket goes way up.

We haven't seen any examples of people happy that Obamacare has gotten rid of a lousy plan, have we? All we've seen are people ticked off that they lost the plan they had and liked. Which then again argues for the premise, why change it? And when you start answering that question then you find out what this is all about. And it isn't health care. Why change something that 95% of Americans liked? Most people like their plans, it turns out. Isn't that amazing? That's another thing people have been lied to about. You've probably gone through this whole debate thinking most Americans hate their doctor, hate their insurance company, hate their plan, and it turns out they all like their plan, and they're really ticked off they don't get to keep it.

Have you seen anybody come forward that had a lousy plan, happy it's gone? Snerdley, have you seen any example of that? I haven't. If there's any they're few and far between. Most of the people trotting out here, most of the people making news are people that have been canceled who like their plans. I haven't seen anybody come up say, "You know what, I'm so happy. I had a rotten plan, Obamacare got rid of it, and my new plan I really love." I haven't seen that person. Have you? They don't exist.

Folks, I can't categorize the scope of this scam that has been run on everybody. It's gotten away with because it takes place in the political arena, "Well, that's just politics." You take what happened here outside of the political arena, you put it anywhere, and you've got the Justice Department and lawyers out the wazoo trying to put people in jail. And I'm not exaggerating. You let a CEO lie to people about a product. (interruption) Sarbanes-Oxley, nobody knows what it is. Look at the Tylenol case. Somebody went in, poisoned a bunch of Tylenol, people got sick, they had to pull it off the market.

Imagine if Tylenol said, "No, there's nothing wrong with it. We're keeping it on the shelf. There's nothing wrong with it. You'll have no problem taking Tylenol." Or, "This new phone's gonna have a six-inch screen, full HD, it's gonna have a battery that lasts you a full week on a single charge." You go buy the phone, it's got a four-inch screen, the battery lasts eight hours, and it's not HD, what happens to that company? "Well, we had to lie to you to make sure you'd buy it." Well, yeah, we had to lie to you so you'd support Obamacare, so we Democrats can stay in power. That's all that's happened here. But this was personal, folks. There are gonna be ramifications to this.

BREAK TRANSCRIPT

RUSH: Folks, this is much worse than just lying, and I'm not trying to say that the personal nature of this lie is not all that bad. I'm not changing my premise here. I'm just saying that it's even worse than this. What President Obama has done here is just full out destroy the public trust. What he has done here is among the most outrageous acts a president can commit against his own nation. And that's why I say this is unparalleled. In my lifetime I can't think of a presidential lie that even approaches this, that even gets anywhere near it. This totally blows up the public trust.

He not only lied, folks, but he accused those of you telling the truth of fearmongering. Remember what he said about all those evil mortgage bankers? Oh, yeah, those evil mortgage bankers hoodwinking people that they could afford a mortgage when they couldn't. Yeah, hoodwinking people into bad mortgages. All those mortgage lenders shaking down people time and time again, when in fact it was Obama and Clinton's DOJ shaking down the mortgage bankers. But this has just blown up the public trust. And then he accuses those of telling the truth of being fearmongers and terrorists and of seeking to hold people hostage.

Up to October of this year, he forced a government shutdown to prevent a full debate before implementation, when he knew how flawed it was, and that it would not do what he promised. This is the thing, folks, Barack Obama and his administration and the Democrat Party have known from the get-go that this health care reform would not do what it was being promised to do. They have known that your premiums were not gonna get cheaper. They have known you weren't gonna keep your doctor. They have known you weren't gonna keep your plan, and they lied about it anyway. And then they accused the people of telling you the truth of being fearmongers.

They made a calculated decision to deceive everybody on this and deal with this aftermath that's happening now. Meanwhile, he won't even release the successful application numbers until mid-November, so as to not influence the outcome of the election in Virginia. They won't tell you that only six people have been able to sign up. That has to be unearthed. They can't even tell you the truth about who has and has not signed up.