GLENWOOD SPRINGS — The plastic wire wriggling like a minuscule worm on an empty surgical table in Valley View Hospital’s cardiac lab is no bigger than a bit of fishing line.

But it represents a huge first in medical technology for a little 78-bed hospital.

The moving wire, which is being demonstrated by a technician who controls it by toggling joysticks from a nearby lead-shielded “cockpit,” is part of a robotic device designed to unblock clogged arteries. If a patient were on the table, the wire with an inflatable balloon hidden in the tip would be snaking through an artery.

The device is the first of its kind in an eight-state Rocky Mountain region and the eighth to be used in a hospital. It is one of only 15 now in use in the country after the Food and Drug Administration in November approved the device for cardiac interventions.

Valley View landed the nearly $500,000 device ahead of larger hospitals partly because of its small size.

Corindus Vascular Robotics, the Waltham, Mass.- based maker of the robotic CorPath Vascular Robotic System, wanted to team up for research with a hospital that offers only interventional cardiac procedures. Interventional procedures include angioplasties and stent placements but not procedures that involve surgically opening a patient’s chest. Valley View sends patients needing that kind of surgery on to larger hospitals.

Valley View also has a record of getting patients from the emergency room to the cardiac lab to begin procedures in 45 minutes or less — about half the national average. And it has two interventional cardiologists and a cardiologist on staff in its Heart & Vascular Center. The hospital and its cardiac staff were willing to be one of five hospitals around the country participating in ongoing cardiac research with Corindus.

“Valley View was a very good fit for this technology,” said Corindus president and CEO Dave Handler.

Valley View interventional cardiologist Dr. Frank Laws was also instrumental in bringing the angioplasty robotic device to Valley View. He came to the hospital in 2006 and had been keeping a close eye on the development of the robotic device. He was ready to use it when it became available.

“I like to go where no one has gone before,” Laws said. “This is all new stuff.”

Laws said the robotic system brings numerous benefits to both cardiologists and patients.

For cardiologists tucked away in the cockpit, it means less exposure to radiation from the medium used to illuminate an artery.

For patients, Laws said he can be more precise robotically when moving through an artery and placing a stent to hold the artery open. He said he can often use one stent rather than the two he might have had to use without the robot. It is also done in less time.

Those factors can cut the cost of the procedure by as much as 20 percent, he said.

Jim Bickling of Gypsum was the most recent patient to experience the benefit of a robotic angioplasty. Laws used the robot device to open one of Bickling’s severely blocked arteries a week ago. Bickling is up and about and said he is feeling better than he did before the procedure.

“It was so simple,” he said, once he got through the frightening experience of being wheeled into a surgical room he likens to “a space ship” for a procedure that verged on science fiction for him.

Besides doing continuing research on angioplasties utilizing the robotic system, Laws said Valley View will eventually be adding robotic electrophysiology.

In that procedure, multiple catheters are inserted into the heart to measure electrical signals.

The hospital also plans to offer training for physicians. That will be accommodated in a monitoring room off the surgical suite that is outfitted with multiple monitors. Those monitors also can be used for consultations. The cardiologists at Valley View can send images of a patient’s artery to the University of Colorado while a procedure is underway.

Nancy Lofholm: 970-256-1957, nlofholm@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nlofholm