Economist Jonathan Gruber listens during a conference of the Workers Compensation Research Institute in Boston, Massachusetts, March 12, 2014. Dr. Gruber is a professor at MIT and the architect of the healthcare reform laws in Massachusetts and the American Affordable Care Act. REUTERS/Dominick Reuter (UNITED STATES - Tags: POLITICS BUSINESS) - RTR3GTIN

4401102

Infamous Obamacare architect Jonathan Gruber has parted ways with the firm Picwell, a government contractor set to analyze the health care choices made by Obamacare customers this enrollment season.

Gruber was previously touted as part of Picwell’s expert team as it launches a major project to analyze all of the choices made by Obamacare enrollees during the open enrollment period that began on November 15. But now Gruber’s photo and bio has been removed from the firm’s website.

Picwell is comprised of major Obamacare-world players, including former top UnitedHealthCare official Jay Silverstein.

Gruber once said that “seniors do a terrible job choosing” health care plans, so it would have been difficult for him to continue getting paid by the firm that will be advising the government on how to change plans based on customers’ choices.

As The Daily Caller extensively reported, Gruber called the American people “stupid” when detailing the deceptions that he crafted with President Obama in the Oval Office during the writing of Obamacare.

“Picwell will utilize de-identified data provided by state exchanges to measure and analyze the choices made by enrollees during the 2014 open enrollment period,” according to one of the first state exchanges to recently hire Picwell: Minnesota’s exchange MNsure.

MNSure CEO Scott Leitz said in October, “We are thrilled to work with Picwell on this groundbreaking study, the results of which will enable us to provide Minnesotans with the technology support needed to choose the right health plan with confidence.”

Picwell did not immediately return a request for comment as to whether Gruber was fired or resigned from the firm. The Daily Caller will update upon receiving comment.

An attempt to reach Gruber by phone at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology was not successful.

Follow Patrick on Twitter