In 2014, Americans weren't quite sure where to direct their political anxiety. Last year was the first since 2001 when less than 20 percent of Americans agreed on what was the country's top issue, according to Gallup. Government topped the list due to frustrations with President Barack Obama, Republicans in Congress and political gridlock. But the economy followed close behind, with Americans worried the recovery from the Great Recession is happening too slowly. Unemployment, health care and immigration followed.

Lindsey Cook for USN&WR; Source: Gallup

In some ways, the U.S. was fortunate in 2014 that there wasn't an issue big or hazardous enough to motivate total agreement among Americans. Since 2008, the economy led the list, topping out at 40 percent in 2009. Before that, the war in Iraq and terrorism were the central issues. 2014 found war and terrorism at the bottom of the list, with both only garnering 2 percent of votes each.

Courtesy Gallup

It's likely, barring some catastrophe, that the indecisiveness will continue in 2015, especially as presidential campaigning heats up and candidates choose to focus on different issues.

Concern about the government is likely to decrease in 2015 as Americans turn their attention away from Obama and toward the candidates eyeing the White House in 2016. And as the economy continues to improve and Obama continues to use executive actions to accomplish some of his priorities, his approval rating among Democrats likely will increase. Obama's standing with Hispanics – which got a boost after his recent action on immigration – sparked an increase in his overall approval rating at the end of 2014.

Increased confidence in Congress also may cause "government" to drop as a top concern. Approval of Congress within a party usually is higher when that party has control of both congressional chambers, as Republicans do in 2015, according to Gallup. Control of both houses also may lead to less gridlock and more laws passed, especially as politicians contemplating presidential runs seek to pad their political resumes going into the election. Obama, however, still wields veto power.

The economy will surely be a hot topic for Republicans and Democrats in the new year, even as economic confidence, the stock market and the job market are likely to improve. Gas prices and unemployment are also down. According to recent Gallup results, 50 percent of Americans said the economy was getting better and 45 percent said it was getting worse.



Worries about health care likely will increase this year, as provisions of the Affordable Care Act take effect and Republican candidates continue to use the bill to stoke political fires.