An anti-trust battle is brewing in Shreveport, Louisiana, between the operator of privatized LSU hospitals and a community health system that already has a large market share in the area.

United Health System (UH) is currently the clinical partner and hospital for the LSU Health Shreveport School of Medicine. But despite their partnership, it appears the board of supervisors at LSU wants to form a partnership with UH's competitor, Willis-Knighton Health System.

During a news conference Thursday, UH administrators claimed that documents show that Willis-Knighton Health System is indirectly trying to snatch away their contracted faculty employees and, as a result, a big source of their revenue--commercially insured patients.

Based on documents they obtained through a public record request, UH administrators claim Willis-Knighton intends to move contracted faculty to their clinics and treat commercially insured patients there instead of UH-Shreveport.

UH officials intend to meet with the LSU Board of Supervisors today to explain their concerns and how the plan would dramatically harm the system, which serves as a safety-net for indigent patients and depends on commercially insured patients to offset that cost.

The move will also increase Willis-Knighton's market share in the area, and, as a result, raise prices and limit access to healthcare, according to Steve Skrivanos, chairman of the board of directors at UH. "We believe the consequence of this action is significant," he said.

LSU officials declined comment Thursday. Although FierceHealthFinance couldn't reach Willis-Knighton officials for comment, in an emailed statement to The Shreveport Times, the system's spokeswoman Marilyn Joiner said, "At the request of the LSU School of Medicine, WK has recently enhanced our longstanding partnership with the school to improve and expand access to healthcare services for the entire community and provide additional training opportunities for residents and fellows. WK is proud to support LSU School of Medicine to ensure a stable supply of highly qualified clinical practitioners for all of Louisiana."

When the Times asked for clarification about UH's claims about the transfer of commercially-insured patients and monopoly concerns, Joiner replied: "No. That is not our plan."

UH Health has hired antitrust attorney David Ettinger of Honigman Miller Schwartz & Cohn LLP, who recently represented St. Alphonsus Health System in its successful suit against St. Luke's Health System in Idaho, forcing the Boise-based system to unwind the acquisition of the Saltzer Medical Group, the state's largest physician practice. That case was widely watched because it was the first to challenge a hospital-physician practice buyout since the passage of the Affordable Care Act.

Ettinger told reporters that Willis-Knighton already has a 74 percent market share of commercially insured patients in the Shreveport area, and the movement of faculty clinics from LSU could substantially increase that share. LSU physicians will likely refer patients to Willis-Knighton and not UH, Ettinger said. Economic research shows that in a monopoly environment, insurers, patients and employers end up paying substantially higher prices for healthcare services, he said.

The potential monopoly will likely not please the Federal Trade Commission, which these days often allows a deal to be completed before it takes action against a healthcare system. Ettinger said that the Willis Knight market share would be even greater than the one St. Luke's had in Idaho after it purchased the Saltzer practice.

Furthermore, Willis-Knighton in 2013 was in talks to be the partner for the privatization of the state-run hospital, but it withdrew, citing its own federal antitrust concerns. The Biomedical Research Foundation later formed the UH to save the hospital from closure. Ettinger said since then, the hospital has improved its financial management, patient access and quality of service.

Ettinger referred to the news conference and today's meeting with LSU as an "educational process" to explain what is a likely an unintended consequence of the board's discussions with Willis-Knighton and to convince board members not to sign the contract.

To learn more:

- here's the Shrevesport Times article

Related Articles

FTC's antitrust strategy: Unwind completed mergers and acquisitions

St. Luke's loses appeal on physician acquisition case

Federal court denies St. Luke's bid to rehear antitrust case

Despite increasing healthcare consolidation, FTC remains wary

Regulators hit Idaho health system for not unwinding physician practice acquisition