WASHINGTON–Sen. Ted Cruz has recognized how hard getting the Republican presidential nomination will be if he doesn’t win one of the critical early primaries or caucuses.

But as the crowded Republican field gets even more cramped, Cruz’s campaign team plans to pick up as many delegates as possible in other states–enough to keep him in the race until the Republican National Convention, according to Politico.

This strategy hinges on top-three performances in the three earliest states–Iowa, New Hampshire and South Carolina–and success in Massachusetts, Georgia, Oklahoma, Tennessee, Texas and Michigan, which are tentatively scheduled to vote in early March.

If no candidate has a winning share of delegates by the convention, it’ll be the first time that’s happened in almost 40 years. Then, Cruz would need to earn enough delegates from other candidates to reach the 1,236 needed to clinch the nomination.

Cruz stumps on border security, Obamacare in Rio Grande Valley

The senator spent Tuesday in Edinburg and McAllen for a briefing on border security and a fundraiser for his presidential campaign, according to the Texas Tribune.

Cruz, who’s visited the Democratic stronghold four times as a senator, told reporters it’s important for his 2016 rivals to visit here “to address seriously the problem of securing the border and to have a serious plan and to demonstrate a willingness to enforce the law.”

He later attended a private fundraiser at McAllen’s International Museum of Art & Science hosted by Lawrence Gelman, a local anesthesiologist. Cruz crafted his speech to mostly medical professionals–each of which paid at least $1,000 to attend–around his promise to repeal Obamacare, according to the Tribune.

President Cruz: A preview

There is still a lot of time before the start of a possible Cruz presidency, but the senator told the Washington Post what he’d do in his first 100 days in the White House:

Push Congress to repeal Obamacare and establish a flat tax (to get rid of the IRS)

Revoke every executive order from President Barack Obama that Cruz’s team deems unconstitutional

Review ways to make sure Iran doesn’t obtain a nuclear weapon

Stop using federal funds as incentives for states to adopt Common Core education requirements

Move the United States embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem

Cruz, during a New Hampshire town hall last week, also promised to send reporters flowers and condolence notes, and to hold a Cuban pig roast on the White House South Lawn for Christmas Eve.