Sec. Diana Dooley of the California Health and Human Services Agency delivered the lunch keynote address on April 6 at the 2016 Northern California State of Reform Health Policy conference. In her remarks, she evaluated how well California has implemented the Affordable Care Act during her five-year term. She also shared her vision for moving towards a completely integrated delivery system and how the state will get there.

With more than 1 million Californians enrolled through the state exchange and over 4 million enrolled through Medicaid expansion, HHS has a heavy lift ahead. Dooley suggested that changes to delivery must come to meet this volume.

“The very expansion of coverage has created the framework for a lot of the other changes, which is a fundamental change not only in the way that we deliver health care but in the way we think about health,” said Sec. Dooley.

Still, she candidly admits that implementing system-level changes to health care has not been easy.

“We are five years in, in my term, and I still feel like I’m running as fast as I can to keep the train on the tracks,” she said.

Dooley reflected on the old way of handling program and policy within the agency, which included the creation of “one off” programs as necessary for public health issues like HIV treatment and maternal health.

“Because [the system] didn’t have a concept of universal coverage, we’ve developed one-off programs for the last 50 years,” said Sec. Dooley. “But if we could rationalize the system with the notion that everyone is going to get coverage and coverage is going to be comprehensive based on the Essential Health Benefits, and these benefits are going to be designed in such a way that everyone can compare apples to apples—as we’ve tried to do on Covered California—then we can really get to a system of portability and people could move across the spectrum.”

The audience received a window into Dooley’s thinking for the future of HHS and programs in California.

“The horizon that I see across the windshield of this vehicle is Medi-Cal and Covered Cal and employer-sponsored insurance. We would have plans that are working in all of those sectors,” said Dooley. “Historically we created special plans that would only serve the Medi-Cal population because there was a sense that commercial plans wouldn’t touch Medicaid. We grew up with Medi-Cal plans. Now we have Medi-Cal plans that are offering products on Covered California. I think there is a future where plans that traditionally offered services to Medicaid populations may offer services to employers where they can buy LA Care for example and get their services through the LA County Health systems.”

View Sec. Dooley’s complete remarks above.