“It’s the Kentucky Kickback,” the Senate Conservatives Fund wrote in a blog post. Right rages at McConnell

Conservative groups ripped into Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, accusing him of earmarking $2 billion for a famously troubled lock-and-dam project that would benefit his home state as part of the bill to reopen the government and avert a debt default.

“It’s the Kentucky Kickback,” the Senate Conservatives Fund, which is considering backing McConnell’s primary opponent, wrote in a blog post. “In exchange for funding Obamacare and raising the debt limit, Mitch McConnell has secured a $2 billion earmark. This is an insult to all the Kentucky families who don’t want to pay for Obamacare and don’t want to shoulder any more debt.”

Story Continued Below

McConnell’s office said he had no role in securing the language, which was authored by Sens. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) and Lamar Alexander (R-Tenn.). Versions of the water project measure passed both the House and Senate earlier this year.

( PHOTOS: 25 great shutdown quotes)

“The provision was requested by the (Energy and Water Appropriations) subcommittee—as they have made clear,” a spokesman for McConnell said.

The measure, which is supported by the White House and doesn’t actually spend any money, would raise the amount authorized for the Olmsted Lock and Dam project to $2.9 billion from $775 million.

RedState editor Erick Erickson also said on Twitter that McConnell had “carved out an earmark for himself,” and Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) blasted the provision.

“These people are like alcoholics. They can’t resist taking a drink. It’s ridiculous. It’s absolutely ridiculous. It should have gone through the normal legislative process,” McCain told The Daily Beast.

“It’s their legislative reputation even more and makes it even more difficult for me to vote for the overall bill—-which I will. It shows that there are people in this body are willing to use any occasion to get an outrageous pork barrel project done at the cost of millions and millions of dollars. It’s disgusting,” he said.

The Olmsted project is located about 20 miles from the confluence of the Mississippi and Ohio rivers near where the borders of Kentucky, Illinois and Missouri meet. It was originally authorized a quarter-century ago and was only expected to cost $775 million. After decades of delays, engineering mistakes and cost overruns, the Army Corps of Engineers now expects to spend $2.9 billion on the project.

( QUIZ: How well do you know Mitch McConnell?)

Alexander, the ranking member of the appropriations subcommittee that funds water projects, said he and Feinstein, the committee’s chair, were responsible for the provision.

“According to the Army Corps of Engineers, 160 million taxpayer dollars will be wasted because of canceled contracts if this language is not included,” Alexander said in a statement. “Sen. Feinstein and I, as chairman and ranking member of the Energy and Water Appropriations Subcommittee, requested this provision. It has already been approved this year by the House and Senate.”

The Senate’s version of the Water Resources Development Act, passed in May, included more complicated language that had the same impact. It passed 83-14. The House’s version of the water appropriations bill included the same language and passed 227-198, with all but nine House Republicans supporting it.

While McConnell might not have written the provision, he is a long-time champion of the dam. Before Congress’ earmark ban started in 2009, McConnell requested hundreds of millions for the project.

Authorization doesn’t directly provide any additional money for the project but would make it eligible for inclusion in appropriations bills. The Army Corps of Engineers has a multibillion-dollar backlog of authorized projects that were never completed.

The Senate Conservatives Fund doesn’t seem to care.

“McConnell may try to blame someone else for this, but he wrote the bill and it’s not the first time he has sought funds for this project,” the blog post read. “He also requested $100 million for it in 2010. This is what’s wrong with Washington and it’s what’s wrong with Mitch McConnell.”

If the $2.9 billion is ever actually appropriated, half would come from general funds and half would come from a 20-cents-per-gallon fuel tax paid by barge owners under current law. However, provisions in both the House and Senate version of the Water Resources Development Act change that funding formula, meaning taxpayers could end up stuck with a much bigger portion of the cost.

Burgess Everett contributed to this report.