Republican presidential hopeful Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, brought his “Cruz Country” bus tour to Arkansas on Wednesday, making a stop in Van Buren along the way in support of his bid for the White House.

Addressing a large crowd at the Republican Party of Crawford County’s 2015 Lincoln Day Dinner, Cruz, one of the 17 Republicans in the 2016 presidential race, said Americans have grown weary of “campaign conservatives” and were looking for a consistent candidate who would remain truthful to campaign promises.

He promised if elected he would be tougher on illegal immigration, would secure the nation’s borders and would work to defeat “radical Islamic terrorism.”

He pledged as president he would defend free market principles, defend the Bill of Rights, and the Constitution.

Cruz said as president, he would repeal the Affordable Care Act, abolish the IRS and would “rescind every unconstitutional executive action” taken by President Barack Obama’s administration. He said he would “restore integrity” into the Department of Justice, beginning with instructing the agency to investigate Planned Parenthood.

He also promised to abolish the Department of Education and end Common Core.

Cruz said he would “end the persecution of religious liberty,” a statement met by a resounding standing ovation.

He also said he would “rip to shreds” and undo the recent nuclear agreement with Iran, which he considered “the single greatest threat to the nation.”

Cruz spoke of being chastised by the president, but also from his fellow Republicans on his over-the-top rhetoric about that deal, but said “the truth is not rhetoric.”

He also told the audience that Arkansas will play a critical role in the 2016 presidential bid. He noted Arkansas has joined other Southern states in moving its primary up to March 1.

A recent Reuters poll from Aug. 6-10 that surveyed Republican voters showed Donald Trump at the top of the crowded field with Cruz in eighth place, earning 5 percent of the support.

Cruz said what differentiates himself from his colleagues is that with him “you know exactly what you’re going to get, and I will do exactly what I say.”

Cruz said the GOP field contained a “wide array of young, dynamic talent” willing to step forward to lead the country a “stark contrast” to his opposition.

Speaking of his Democratic counterparts, he told the audience the candidates it had to choose from were a “consistent, wild-eyed socialist who is dangerous for the world,” and “then you have Bernie Sanders,” he said, taking a shot at Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton.

Cruz spoke to the media prior to his remarks and disputed the “Washington fallacy” that the only way Republicans can win is to run to the middle as “Democrat light.”

“Every time we do that, we lose,” he said.

He said American citizens need a candidate who will energize conservative voters, who will “fight against bipartisan corruption,” and the way for Republicans to win the 2016 election is to follow former Republican President Ronald Reagan’s principles to “paint in bold colors, not pale pastels.”

He mentioned to the media prior to his remarks his campaign has raised $14.3 million in more than three months. He noted his campaign has collected more than 175,000 contributions from residents in 55 percent of zip codes across the country.

Cruz’s stop in Van Buren was his third of the day, having also attended rallies in Little Rock and Russellville.

The tour kicked off late last week in South Carolina. Cruz is visiting seven states in seven days.

Cruz’s sweep through Arkansas was the third stop in the state for 2016 presidential hopefuls.

Trump headlined the state Republican Party’s annual Reagan Rockefeller fundraising dinner July 17 in Hot Springs.

Clinton was the headliner at the Democratic Party’s annual Jefferson-Jackson Dinner on July 18 at Verizon Arena in North Little Rock.