When Bethlehem resident Juan Del Valle lost his job five years ago after the New York hospital where he worked closed, both he and his wife lost their health insurance.

Del Valle, 48, found work as a mental health counselor, but his new job didn’t come with benefits.

All that changed last week, when Juan and Carmen Del Valle signed up for coverage through the health insurance marketplace that’s part of the federal Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare. They were able to get medical and dental coverage for $107 a month, a rate they said they were pleased with.

“We would take whatever free programs there were — it wasn’t enough,” said Carmen Del Valle, a 47-year-old homemaker. “This is a relief.”

Health insurance marketplace enrollment assistants say many people they’re encountering are like the Del Valles — waiting until just before the March 31 deadline to sign up. They are also generally pleased with the rates they’re getting.

Antoinette Kraus, director of the Pennsylvania Health Access Network, which has been helping to enroll people in the marketplace throughout the state, said about 80 percent of the people her organization has worked with have been able to get coverage for $100 or less a month.

My Lien Nguyen, a Bethlehem resident who has been volunteering to help people enroll, said most people she’s assisted also have gotten good rates.

“In general, they’ve been pleased with the rates and pleased with the offerings,” said Nguyen, who volunteers with the Reading-based organization Berks Encore. “In general, people are thrilled — you have people who haven’t been covered in five years in some cases.”

Most have qualified for subsidies to help pay for the insurance, enrollment assistants said. People who earn up to 400 percent of the federal poverty level — up to $45,000 for a single person and higher amounts for families — can obtain a subsidy.

Get Covered America’s New Jersey chapter estimates 85 percent of the people its workers have helped have qualified for subsidies, chapter spokeswoman Alescia Teel said.

“We really want people to look at their options because a lot are receiving it,” she said.

Pennsylvania enrollment assistants said their only real obstacle has been not being able to help residents who would have qualified for the Medicaid expansion had Gov. Tom Corbett allowed it. Corbett has applied to be able to use federal Medicaid dollars to subsidize commercial insurance for those who would have qualified but that plan has yet to be approved by the federal government.

“There are a lot of people falling through the gap,” said Cathy Cortijo, an outreach and enrollment specialist with the Neighborhood Health Centers of the Lehigh Valley.

One such woman was at an enrollment assistance session at the Bethlehem Area Public Library last week. The woman said she would have qualified for the Medicaid expansion but instead was offered a plan for $211 a month, an amount she couldn’t afford.

Wilson Borough resident Lisa Smith wasn’t sure if she also might fall into that gap. The unemployed 49-year-old has been twice rejected for Medicaid because she receives financial assistance from a friend. She attended an enrollment assistance session at Lehigh Carbon Community College’s Allentown facility last week to see what she might qualify for.

“You can see here a lot of people who need help,” she said, referring to the crowd at LCCC. “If you don’t have insurance and you go to the hospital, you’re not getting the proper help you should be.”

Through the end of February, 74,370 people in New Jersey and 159,821 in Pennsylvania had enrolled in the Health Insurance Marketplace. Another 123,000 in New Jersey had signed up under the Medicaid expansion.

Enrollment has increased significantly in March, with 800,000 nationwide signing up through March 16, boosting overall enrollment over 5 million. President Barack Obama’s goal had been to enroll 7 million by the end of the month.

Local enrollment assistants also are seeing a major increase in the last few weeks, they said. Cortijo said it’s been nearly impossible to keep up with her voicemails, and she is almost booked solid through March 31.

People who don’t have health insurance by April 1 face an annual penalty of $95 or up to 1 percent of their taxable income, whichever is greater. Fines increase annually.

Francisca Collado narrowly avoided those fines. The 53-year-old Allentown woman signed up for health insurance Thursday at LCCC. She had been without it since moving to the Lehigh Valley from the Dominican Republic 20 years ago.

“It’s a big relief because she knows now if she has to go to the emergency room or anything, there’s nothing holding her back in terms of worrying about payments,” said her daughter-in-law, Jennifer Collado.

Reporter Colin McEvoy contributed to this story.



*****



How to enroll in the Health Insurance Marketplace:

Healthcare.gov or call 800-318-2596

Pennsylvania residents can also get assistance by calling 855-486-9331.

Cognosante, a medical solutions services provider, is offering assistance enrollment sessions in Hunterdon, Warren and Sussex counties:

Phillipsburg Free Public Library, 200 Broubalow Way, from 3 to 8 p.m. Monday and March 31

Hunterdon County Library, north branch, 65 Halstead St., Clinton, from noon to 5 p.m. Tuesday and 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Friday

Hunterdon County Library, 314 Route 12, Flemington, from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. March 31

Sussex County Community College, 1 College Hill Road, Newton, N.J., from 10 a.m. to 7 p.m. Wednesday

GetCoveredAmerica.org also has information on enrollment events.