BUENA VISTA — Jed Selby spreads his arms wide, embracing the sprawling, pristine meadow beneath his feet in the shadow of Mount Princeton.

“Imagine it,” he says. “This is all terraced seating, overlooking the stage. There’s camping over there. Parks and trails. This could be a giant bar. There could be like 25,000, 30,000 people down there. Think how amazing this could be. Can you see it?”

A decade earlier, the former professional kayaker and his sister, Katie, had said almost the same thing as they stood amid a pile of broken bottles and rusted cans in the town dump on the banks of the Arkansas River in Buena Vista.

That neglected parcel is now home to 50 new buildings, and the Selbys’ South Main community has emerged as a beacon in the blossoming new urbanist architectural and design movement.

South Main weathered the economic downturn and spurred sweeping change in Buena Vista. Homes are selling. Construction is booming. Grand plans are unfolding.

And the Selbys’ successes are growing almost as fast as their dreams. Jed just finished a new boutique hotel — Surf Chateau — above the surf waves he helped build in the Arkansas River. Katie is building a mixed-use property on the town square.

“For somebody who has lived here for some time, I’m just in awe at all of it,” said Dennis Giese, the Chaffee County commissioner who worked in the county school district for 25 years before taking office. “I just stopped by the Buena Vista Roastery coffee shop, and I looked up and down Main Street and there were people everywhere. Young people, young families. And that’s what South Main has brought.”

Jed Selby champions new and different for Buena Vista. He has several major projects on the fire: an artist colony of galleries and affordable housing, a larger riverside hotel, a restaurant on the river, an organic grocery, more man-made waves in the river park, and an arts and parks trust that will feed the development of a musical venue in downtown South Main.

Dreaming bigThose are big dreams, but they’re nothing compared with what Selby has cooking for a 274-acre ranch he and his family just bought out of foreclosure along the banks of the rambling Cottonwood Creek.

With several meadows of rolling hay and rangeland partitioned by shadowy groves of towering cottonwoods and views of the snowcapped Collegiate Range, the ranch is a pastoral oasis, barely a mile from downtown Buena Vista. And it’s where Selby is incubating a vision that would put his hometown on an international map.

He’s talking with major music producers about hosting an annual, branded festival that could draw as many as 30,000 people. Those producers have hired site and traffic planners, he says, and the plan is gaining traction. It would take millions in investment to ready the former working ranch, which already includes a successful organic farm.

He has spoken with county planners but has not begun any formal process, instead waiting for a plan from a potential festival organizer before moving forward. It’s still in the “idea stage,” he says.

“I’m talking to all sorts of people and the consensus is that the site is magical,” says Selby, as he strolls along miles of irrigation ditches that crisscross the water-rich ranch, pulling out obstructions and adjusting flows. “This piece of property, in this location, this size, with this much water, we knew it was very special. There’s kind of nothing like this.”

(The property has a lengthy history in Buena Vista, including as the area’s first Post Office in the 1870s, when the town briefly was known as Mahonville. A decade ago a local developer proposed more than 700 homes on the site, but a close vote denied annexation in 2008.)

Chaffee County planning director Don Reimer said the plan would require Selby to address noise mitigation for neighbors as well as safety concerns with camping.

“If he is able to adequately address the potential issues, it is possible that he may be able to obtain a permit,” Reimer said.

“He values our input”Seth Roberts has anchored his organic Weathervane Farm on the property for eight years, weathering the development plans, the vote and eventual bank ownership. He’s happy to see Selby take control.

“I feel like he values our input,” said Roberts, whose farm takes up about seven acres with plans to expand to 10 next year and possibly 15 after that. “Jed doesn’t dream small, does he? I like being a part of that. He’s aiming big, and he’s ready to offer the support for us when we want to do the same thing.”

If it wasn’t for South Main — a jewel of Chaffee County, with its metal- roofed cupolas, tidy architecture and pristine town square — it would be easy to dismiss Selby as a pie-in-the-sky dreamer. But so far, every project the 35-year-old father conjures reaches fruition.

“So why not dream big,” he says, holding out a fist for a bump.

It’s hardly been easy. While he comes from a family of property-rich developers — his uncle developed the tony Four Seasons in Denver and his parents own commercial property in Tucson — he scraped by during the recession, a time that decimated real estate developers, especially fresh-faced newbies.

“It took nerves of steel to continue. We had just enough irrational people who loved the dream and stuck with us against all odds,” he said, noting that construction has never stopped in South Main.

Selby still maintains a bare-bones operation. A decade ago, he was erecting sheds in his buyers’ backyards, saving cash on construction.

Drop in today and he’s wiring WiFi routers in the 20-room Surf Chateau. He runs the sound for bands he hosts at South Main’s modest riverfront stage every Saturday night. He has spent the past several months clearing irrigation ditches on his new ranch while his in-house architects, engineer and broker keep things rolling.

His wife, Kennley, is South Main’s in-house designer, handling the décor of the European-influenced Surf Chateau.

“Who else is going to do it?” he says, noting that his financial planning includes a salaried general manager once things turn more profitable. “But I like to get my hands dirty.”

Breaking evenLast year, his various companies — a vacation-rental outfit, construction, architectural and design firms and a real estate brokerage — finally broke even after a decade.

The recession was daunting for his older sister. He and Katie birthed South Main and fostered their vision for several years. But last year, Katie, now a mom of two toddlers, assumed a more conservative approach and divided South Main with her brother. She and her husband, freestyle kayak champion Dustin Urban, have about 45 undeveloped parcels in the southern portion of South Main, and they are taking calculated steps, while Jed pursues projects such as hotels and a festival venue.

A new 5,800-square-foot building Katie has planned and funded on the town square will host a major rafting outfitter and several other commercial operations with five apartments on the top floor.

The commercial operations are an essential component of success in South Main, fueling the trust that supports park development and delivering the vitality that feeds urban enclaves.

“We have the same goals in terms of the outcome of South Main, but on how to get there, we are different people,” Katie says. “My brother has very little limit to his risk tolerance. I know he will have success, but I’m a lot more mellow. I don’t think I’d be able to sleep with the loans he has. Dustin and I don’t have as high a risk tolerance.”

Most people don’t.

Jed Selby’s undaunted pursuit of goals stems from his career as a pro paddler, when he was renowned for prowess navigating some of the West’s burliest whitewater rapids for filmmakers.

The Selbys’ audacious efforts in Buena Vista have sparked a renaissance. The town is undergoing a sweeping Main Street renovation, with new shops and restaurants along freshly paved streets and new sidewalks. There’s a new mayor, a new administrator and fresh, young faces on the City Council, guiding the city of 2,700, up from 2,200 in 2004.

Along a block in downtown, Jed Selby has erected nine energy-efficient cottages used by Hurricane Katrina victims in New Orleans. He has invested $55,000 in each, building river-stone porches, new sidewalks and landscaping. He has nine more ready for the other side of the block.

“Jed is his own person, isn’t he? But in terms of forward-thinking entrepreneurs, I think Chaffee County is really lucky to have him,” said Wendell Pryor, director of the Chaffee County Economic Development Corp. and who has particular praise for Selby’s development of affordable workforce housing. “Some entrepreneurs are stepping up and getting it done, and Jed feeds that. He has a lot of positive energy that keeps everybody on their toes.”

Jason Blevins: 303-954-1374, jblevins@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jasonblevins