An Australian tourist on vacation in Bali discovers a tropical spider lived in his body for three days after burrowing itself into his appendix scar.

An Australian tourist on vacation in Bali discovers a tropical spider lived in his body for three days after burrowing itself into his appendix scar. DailyMail

An Australian man’s vacation to Bali, Indonesia, has morphed him into something little boys and even some grown adults wish they could be: a real-life Spider-Man. Dylan Thomas, a 21-year-old from Western Australia, awoke to an unusual 2-inch red trail from his naval to his chest, which grew to 2 or 3 inches later, resembling an insect bite, according to doctors at Bali International Medical Centre. A day later, after waking up with painful blisters, a dermatologist gave Thomas an unexpected and unusual diagnosis: A tropical spider had burrowed itself into his appendix scar to his stomach and crawled through his body for three days.

“It was a bit bigger than the size of a match head. It takes a lot to deter me, but I do feel violated. It was a very bizarre experience just to know something like that was in my body for a couple of days,” Thomas told NT News.

Initially, Thomas was given an antihistamine cream to treat what doctors originally thought was an insect bite. “It was as if someone had scratched me with the tip of a knife,” said the tourist about the red mark. However, it wasn’t until Thomas woke up the next morning that he started feeling the pain of the bite. “That’s when it became painful, it was a searing burn,” he said.

A visit to the dermatologist confirmed Thomas’s suspicions it wasn’t an insect bite but an eight-legged creature that burrowed its way through a small scar from a recent surgery for appendix removal. According to Thomas, doctors retrieved a tropical spider from his abdomen. Doctors have put the spider in a container to take it away for testing to determine the species of the spider that inhabited the tourist’s body for three days, the Daily Mail reported.

Spider burrows through man's appendix scar and crawls under his skin http://t.co/pbNc9kGcjA pic.twitter.com/DVVTvY5NtC — Daily Mail Online (@MailOnline) October 16, 2014

Skeptics like Christopher Buddle, an associate professor at McGill University's Department of Natural Resource Sciences, have several qualms with Thomas’s unusual account. “I think this is extremely suspect, unusual, and likely not possible. Simply put: It is not plausible, and I can think of no valid reason why a spider might 'crawl beneath skin through a scar'” Buddle wrote in an email to Snopes.com. He believes the spider moving up the body defies logic and what is known about the biology of spiders. Moreover, like the rest of us, he is skeptical because the spider itself has not been presented.

Whether or not Thomas’s account is true has yet to be determined, but a previous account has found eight-legged creatures have made their way inside the human body for days. A woman referred to only as Ms. Lee, arrived at China's Changsha Central Hospital of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery complaining of an itchy ear hoping doctors could treat her, RedNet News reported. When Dr. Liu Sheng took a look inside her ear, he found a spider living in the woman’s ear canal. Apparently, the spider crawled into her ear canal while she slept and lived inside her for five days.

Like the popular Internet phrase goes, “pics or it didn’t happen.”