ENLARGE Cameron Wagar of MIT David Silverman

For more than a century, the geniuses at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology have focused on fairly trivial matters, such as coming up with the scientific advances that change the world. That kept them busy for a while. But now they are finally paying attention to the stuff we really care about—like inventing a respectable football team.

This season counts as MIT’s football breakthrough. The Engineers are undefeated at 8-0. They won their first-ever New England Football Conference championship on Saturday. They also clinched a spot in the Division III playoffs. They would be favored to complete an undefeated regular season by beating the U.S. Coast Guard Academy on Saturday if betting on low-level college football were common.

To put MIT’s football achievement in terms that quantum physicists may understand: It’s like winning a Nobel Prize—only far more impressive.

MIT’s students, faculty and alumni won 80 Nobel Prizes between 1944 and 2013. In that time, MIT won a total of 80 football games, though it didn’t have a varsity team for decades. With all due respect to the school’s sailing and pistol teams, its only national champions in recent memory, MIT’s football team may be engineering the greatest athletic accomplishment in school history.

“It’s nice to walk through campus and have every other person congratulate you and know who you are,” MIT football coach Chad Martinovich said.

That got us thinking: When were MIT’s academic peers most relevant in sports?

Princeton’s upset of UCLA in the 1996 NCAA men’s basketball tournament, for example, still beats its squash and lacrosse dynasties as the school’s athletic highlight. Harvard’s football team was the Alabama of the early 20th century.

But others have more humble athletic histories. The University of Chicago’s sports legacy is the school’s incredible decision to drop its football team after the 1939 season. (Chicago now plays football on the D-III level.) Then there is the California Institute of Technology, which is most legendary for pranking the crowd at the 1961 Rose Bowl into displaying the word “CALTECH”—the closest that Caltech has ever come to winning a major bowl game.

ENLARGE

Write to Ben Cohen at ben.cohen@wsj.com