BOULDER — Colorado is desperate for any kind of traction in a Pac-12 Conference that is quickly leaving it in its basement dust. The last thing the Buffaloes (3-4, 0-4) need is a game at a No. 17 UCLA team that has been dusted each of the last two weeks.

Or is it?

“There’s a two-edged sword there, but I’ve always thought that a team that was winning and on a roll, they’re always more focused,” first-year Buffs coach Mike MacIntyre said. “They’re always on top of everything, and they know what’s at stake. Those are more dangerous.

“Now, they can come out and kill us, too, or we could kill them.”

With star receiver Paul Richardson (ankle/probable) and leading rusher Michael Adkins II (concussion/game-time decision) limited in practice this week, CU’s sputtering offense could be further slowed.

There is no shame in losing to Stanford and Oregon, which UCLA (5-2, 2-2) just did. It only knocked the Bruins out of the top 10. They’re still tied for second in the South Division and control their destiny to the Rose Bowl.

This brings up MacIntyre’s timing. He came to Colorado during a Pac-12 renaissance that has seen it nipping at the SEC’s heels as the best league in the land.

MacIntyre’s San Jose State team nearly won at UCLA two years ago and at Stanford last year. His Colorado team, a 27-point underdog, has lost its four league games by an average score of 50-17.

“In the league, all those young quarterbacks have matured,” Mac Intyre said. “All those young players have matured. It’s kind of at a good peak right now in the upper-echelon teams. My hope and my plan is those guys will ease out and my guys will keep growing and getting better, and we’ll be there.”

He needs his defense to get better. Now. In league play, it’s giving up 624.2 yards a game, including 287.5 on the ground. It has been especially vulnerable to running quarterbacks and faces another Saturday in Brett Hundley.

“Honestly, we’ve done some things that if you sat down and watched the film with me you’d think I was crazy, but we were in every spot (in Saturday’s 44-20 loss to Arizona) except one time,” MacIntyre said.

For what it’s worth, Hundley is slumping. Against Stanford and Oregon he was 37-of-58 for 256 yards with four interceptions and two touchdowns. He ran for 99 yards in those two games.

Then again, those were Stanford and Oregon. And Hundley had three true freshmen starting on his line. UCLA started eight freshmen against the Ducks.

“You ask any quarterback, college or pro, guys that are aware players, they’d tell you, if they’re being honest, that has an effect on them when there’s some uncertainty in their mind as to who’s playing in front of them,” UCLA coach Jim Mora said. “If it’s a new group, a lack of continuity, that’s going to affect you mentally.

“But what Brett has taken from the Oregon game is that group played well.”

That’s not good news for a Colorado team with a struggling defense and a banged-up offense. The Buffs just hope they don’t land on another sword.

John Henderson: jhenderson@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnhendersondp