Kyle Scott’s Nov. 13 column in the Observer exposed one of Lone Star College’s dirty little secrets while simultaneously pointing out one of the fundamental differences between the progressive and conservative philosophies. Mr. Scott was bemoaning that the Affordable Care Act might force Lone Star College to give some of their adjunct faculty full time status, thus making them eligible for health insurance benefits.

Let’s look at the current lot of an adjunct professor trying to support a family and earn a middle class living by teaching at Lone Star. An adjunct can teach a limit of three classes per semester at a campus, earning approximately $5000 with no benefits. Lone Star refuses to let them teach a fourth class on any campus because that would make them a full time employee eligible for those benefits which Mr. Scott bemoans. An ambitious adjunct can repeat this schedule at two additional campuses, bumping their income to $15,000 per semester. They still receive no benefits, despite working 60-80 hours per week. With some summer work, they can earn $35,000 in a year with no benefits, while burning 5-10 percent of their income on gas driving to classes which are scattered all over town.

Advertisement

This practice is akin to McDonald’s hiring you to work 60 hours a week, but demanding that you do it at three different restaurants so you would not be considered a full time employee at any of them, thereby making you ineligible for benefits and/or overtime pay.

The Affordable Care Act (aka Obamacare) is designed to prevent employer abuses like this. Closing this loophole and forcing large employers to give health insurance benefits to their full time employees is not an unintended consequence of the Affordable Care Act. It is an intentional action designed to bring health insurance to every hard working American.

In my opinion, if there is demand for a class to be taught multiple times, there should be a full time professor hired. This welcomes another family to the middle class.While there are many excellent, dedicated adjunct faculty working at Lone Star, the current system cheats the students by effectively turning classrooms over to the low bidder, encouraging adjunct faculty turnover, and preventing many of the stable student/faculty relationships that are critically needed by so many of the students on any college campus.

In my progressive philosophy, every hard working American should have access to health insurance especially if they are working full-time. Access to health insurance is one of the markers that define membership in the middle class, and a large thriving middle class keeps our economic and political system stable. I think it is proper for our government to pass laws that protect workers’ rights, protect worker safety, and protect our environment.

In the Tea Party driven conservative philosophy, the employer writes the rules. A large employer can save money by hiring a full-time worker with no benefits. OSHA worker safety rules are something to be condemned because they represent government interference in the free market, despite the lives saved. Environmental regulations represent further government meddling in the free market, despite the clean air and safe drinking water we now enjoy thanks to those regulations.

I guess Mr. Scott and I will just have to agree to disagree on these issues. That’s OK. This is America where people are allowed to disagree, and philosophical differences like these are settled at the polls.

And on a closing note, Mr. Scott also revealed that adjuncts are paid around $2,000 per course. That is a very interesting bit of information. The adjuncts I spoke with are paid less than that. They will be in your office shortly asking for their raises.