LARRY ZIMPLEMAN: While corporate benefits have been changing over the past 20-30 years, they remain an important part of your overall compensation package. Be sure to ask about benefits as part of the decision process before joining a company. Corporate benefits can comprise as much as 30% of your base salary–so they are very important.

That is why you need to take full advantage of the benefits offered to you–whether mandatory or voluntary. Even if some portion of the corporate benefit package is voluntary (such as group life), the cost inside a corporate benefit package will normally be much better in price than if you purchase it on your own on a retail basis.

Corporate benefit packages vary considerably, so it’s difficult to offer broad guidelines on which benefits to choose. Assuming these benefits are offered by your employer, here are a few ideas to consider:

1. Save at least 10% of your base salary into the 401(k) plan. Hopefully, your employer will match that with a contribution of 4%-5%, so that the total retirement contribution approaches 15% of your salary.

2. Group life (term) insurance of two to three times your base salary. Your employer may provide the full cost of one times salary and you have to pay for the extra coverage. However, the cost of group life in a voluntary program is usually much better than buying term insurance on your own.

3. Long-term disability of 60% to 65% of your salary. The benefit period for the payments should be in the range of three to five years. Younger people often think long-term disability benefits are a waste of money, but statistics show this is not the case.

The corporate benefit undergoing the greatest change the past few years has been employer provided health insurance. If you still have access to employer provided coverage, by all means take advantage of that. Often, the employer pays from 60% to 80% of the overall cost of the coverage. More plans are changing from the “indemnity” form of coverage to health savings accounts where the plans require you to cover the first level of charges before the employer provided coverage kicks in. The idea of these types of plans is to make you a more knowledgeable consumer by virtue of you having to incur the first layers of charges. Either way, be sure that you take full advantage of this important benefit.

Larry D. Zimpleman is chairman and chief executive officer of Principal Financial Group.

Read the latest Wealth Management Report.