Topics: innovation, nature, sesame street, sustainability, technology, Video, zachary levi, Innovation News, Sustainability News, Technology News

It is spring! Or so I’m told that somewhere in the world isn’t experiencing massive rain storms, or scorching temperatures and wildfires.

And in the spirit of sunny weather, Zachary Levi (from “Chuck”), Bert (of “Sesame Street”) and the folks at Mashable have made a video about detaching ourselves from our many screens, and heading outside. (Only problem is you have to watch the great video on a screen.)

But after you watch this video, maybe get off Facebook, step away from snapchat and take a look at the blue skies. As Bert sings, “Just look up and there will be/Bright blue skies, don’t need a/Weather app to tell you that/Subscription to this cloud is free.”

It stars Levi, Bert, Grover, Kal Penn and others. The song is called “Lovely Sunny Day” and is below:

Also, from Mashable, here are the lyrics:

Every day I sit right there

Sit and stare and check my Facebook, Email, Instagram

Chatting with my friends and making plans.

But on days with lots of sun

I say goodbye to everyone online

And say hello, cuz I know there’s a place where all the Bees are always buzzing ’bout the flowers they have seen.

And every tree is trending,

I don’t miss my little screen, because

The sky won’t need a filter

And the birds tweet just to say:

You should really take a walk on this lovely

sunny day. In the park I reconnect

Take some time to self-reflect

Yo, this Snapchat is going to be cray!

No hashtag selfie, put that thing away.

The pigeons make it feel like home

Follow me and we can can roam

Across the grass and see

That now we’re running faster than 4G! On the playground there’s a million games to play.

We don’t need a fancy tablet with a

retina display. Because… The Bees are always buzzing ’bout the flowers they have seen.

And every tree is trending,

I don’t miss my little screen, because

The sky won’t need a filter

And the birds tweet just to say:

You should really take a walk on this lovely

sunny day. Just look up and there will be

Bright blue skies, don’t need a

Weather app to tell you that.

Subscription to this cloud is free. Bees are always buzzing ’bout the flowers they have seen.

And every tree is trending,

I don’t miss my little screen, because

The sky won’t need a filter

And the birds tweet just to say: You should really take a walk on this lovely

sunny day.