More options: Share, Mark as favorite

A draft report published recently by the Institute for Clinical and Economic Review (ICER) attempts to answer a question that has long vexed patients, insurers, and the government: What should I pay for a new, potentially life-saving treatment?

ICER states that $2,177 a year is the “alarm bell” price for a new class of anti-cholesterol medicines. But the alarm bell is ringing in Medicare, which will soon rely on similar kinds of complex models — based on arbitrary assumptions and limited data — to determine how much spending is to be cut.

The drugs in question are PCSK9 inhibitors, which control cholesterol levels in patients for whom other treatments (such as statins) have failed. In the words of ICER president Steven Pearson, $2,177 a year is the “alarm bell” price. Specifically, if the cost is more than $2,177, “drug companies, doctors, insurers, and other parties may need to…limit the use of these drugs,” find other health savings, or adopt other measures to make the drugs affordable. As a former fellow at Britain’s National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) and adviser to the Coverage and Analysis Group at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), Pearson surely includes government intervention on his list.

Before discussing the broader significance of the ICER report for health care generally and Medicare specifically, I must correct a statement in my earlier review. My thanks to Mitchell Stein, policy and communications director at ICER, for clarifying the differences between 2 critical numbers in the report.

The $8 billion annual budget for the drugs assumes all eligible patients are treated when the cost of treatments is set at $2,412 a year. At that price, the cost for every additional year of life gained (called a “quality-adjusted life year, or QALY) is assumed to be $50,000 — see p. ES-15 of the report. The lower $2,177 price is calculated assuming that total health spending is held to grow 1 percentage point faster than the economy (or GDP + 1%), that total drug spending should not grow as a share of total health spending, and that new drugs should equally divide up the full increase in annual drug spending assuming that total spending on existing drugs remains unchanged— see p. 47 of the report. Using the latter approach, ICER assumes an annual budget for the two anti-cholesterol drugs of $1.8 billion—substantially less than $8 billion, but built on very different assumptions.

That is the point. Different assumptions using different models lead to different, often irreconcilable, results. There is no one correct answer because there are numerous plausible assumptions for every factor in the model — and not all relevant factors can be included in the modeling. This generates plenty of grist for academic researchers and commentators, but it ought to raise serious problems for government policymakers eager to cut a budget.

That is precisely where the Medicare program fits in. As part of the President’s Affordable Care Act, authority to hold down Medicare spending was given to a new agency, the Independent Payment Advisory Board (IPAB). The IPAB is charged with recommending policies to keep Medicare spending from growing faster than a target. Recognizing that aging of the population will propel Medicare spending upward even if no new medical treatments are introduced, Congress limited per beneficiary spending to economic growth per capita plus 1%.

The IPAB faces an arbitrary budget that recognizes the country’s fiscal capacity but ignores both the health needs of Medicare beneficiaries and the growing array of medical treatments available to help patients who previously faced less productive and shorter lives. Perhaps we as a society will be willing to pay more in the future for health care. Perhaps the medical sector will find new approaches that treat diseases more efficiently and more effectively, possibly even lowering long-run health costs. No formula can take this into consideration because these are matters of value and conscience, not simply numbers.

An alarm bell is ringing. It is warning us that we cannot easily convert matters of judgement into simple yes-no decisions. The models will continue to change as researchers learn more about their own analysis. The data will improve, although the hope of instant real-time patient information that is meaningful and usable remains in the distant future. The assumptions will always remain uncertain, precisely because they are assumptions and not facts. We can continue to improve our understanding of the science. We must do better improving our understanding of the patient. Setting arbitrary budget limits misses the hardest and most important part of the decision.