Topics: Hong Kong, Hong Kong Protests, Mong Kok, Video, Politics News

HONG KONG — Thousands of protesters are enraged at the police for allegedly allowing them to be attacked last night by a mob in the commercial district of Mong Kok.

And though they won’t say it publicly, Hong Kong’s police are furious with the protesters in turn.

A police officer with years of experience tells GlobalPost that when the news came in that student protesters were being attacked Friday by disgruntled citizens — some of the them with gang ties — police officers were “cheering.”

“They were celebrating,” said the police officer, who requested to remain anonymous. “Everyone was watching the news. They were cheering, saying [the protesters] deserved it.”

Why? The officer cited anger over long hours during the course of the seven-day protest, and a widespread sense that demonstrators had violated the dignity of the profession by blocking police vehicles and demanding to search them for weapons.

“They hate the protesters,” the officer said.

On the streets in Mong Kok on Saturday, the police were present in greater numbers than the day before, when tensions ran highest. Still, when scuffles broke out in sections of the crowd, protesters felt it was necessary to chant, “Arrest Him!” or “Shame on police!” to gain the authorities’ attention.

Though the atmosphere was calmer on Saturday, anger and suspicion were still running hot. Throughout the day Hong Kong residents shared videos from the Friday melée that allegedly showed anti-occupy activists groping women or committing violence, and then being released by police without arrest.

Others lamented that one of the victims of Friday’s attacks, who was taken bloodied to the hospital, was arrested for disturbing public order after his treatment, while his alleged attackers walked free.

The police, for their part, issued a statement in response to rumors that they were deliberately allowing gang members to beat and bloody students in order to clear the occupied areas. The police confirmed that eight of 19 people arrested in violence on Friday had triad connections.

“Police acted swiftly,” said Lai Tung-Kwok, secretary of security for the police, in the statement. “The Police officers at the scene tried their best to handle the situation under chaotic conditions and to maintain order in an impartial way. I note that some people have claimed that the government allowed triads or even worked with triads. These allegations are totally untrue, unfounded and beyond belief.”