A Denver woman cringes as she reads the virulent messages her son has written online from his new home in Istanbul — statements that are accused of helping incite a string of bombings in Egypt, targeting American businesses including KFC restaurants.

“Based on the quotes he’s saying, it’s troubling. This is not what I would approve of in any way, shape or form,” said Linda Bolsen, who added that she is afraid for the safety of her son, Shahid King Bolsen. “From what I’ve read in his articles, it scares me.”

Shahid Bolsen, 43, who grew up in Boulder and took political science classes at Metropolitan State University before dropping out, has garnered a large social media following in the Middle East.

After converting from Catholicism to Islam, Bolsen eventually became a vocal opponent of “globalization,” blaming the West for policies that impoverish the Third World, according to his online writings.

It’s unclear to what extent his messages may have triggered the recent bombings of mainly empty banks, stores and restaurants in Cairo, including six on Thursday, according to The New York Times. The attacks killed two and injured nine, including four police officers, an article in The Times said Saturday.

But the “Popular Resistance Movement,” which took credit for the bombings, uses slogans first popularized by Bolsen, according to a Friday article on the Hudson Institute website called “Allah Versus KFC,” co-written by Mokhtar Awad, a research associate for the Center for American Progress, and Samuel Tadros, a senior fellow at the Institute, a pro-business think tank founded in 1961 by Herman Kahn. Popular Resistance seeks to topple the military regime of Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, their article says.

“Bolsen’s influence stems from his innovative efforts to fuse early-twenty-first-century, anti-capitalist ideology with the tenets of ultra-conservative Salafi Islam,” the article said.

Linda Bolsen said her son was “basically a good kid. He was very curious. He had an awesome sense of humor.”

He was born Shannon Morris.

“I know he researched a lot of different religions,” his mother said. As he was growing up, he admired the life of the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr., she said. He originally became interested in Islam through Malcolm X, and joined the faith in 1997.

After converting to Islam, he took on a new name: “Shahid” is the Arabic word for “martyr,” “King” stands for Martin Luther King, and he took his mother’s maiden name.

Bolsen met his wife, Asya Abdul-Hadi, 51, a Palestinian from Gaza, after she won a fellowship to work at the Rocky Mountain News. In 1996, she wrote an article in which she described her background, while criticizing how Western media sometimes mischaracterize Muslim women.

“I am a Muslim woman. Though I grew up in one of the Gaza Strip’s densely populated refugee camps, I earned a bachelor’s degree from an Islamic university. I’ve been able to travel — alone — within the Middle East, Europe and now the U.S., have a thriving career and share decision-making with the men in my family and office,” she wrote.

Staffers at the News recall that Abdul-Hadi came to the Rocky in 1996 through the Alfred Friendly Fellowship program, which sought to tutor young Third World journalists on the ways of western media.

They remember Abdul-Hadi was a hardworking, smart reporter and that Bolsen — who worked in the circulation department — occasionally would show up in the newsroom to see his future wife. “She met Shahid while she was there, and they ultimately became a couple and had children,” said John Ensslin, formerly of the News and now of the Bergen Record newspaper. Ensslin was the longtime coordinator of the fellowship program.

“I mostly remember Asya as a very smart and intelligent woman from Gaza, who had a keen sense of wit and was a really good journalist,” Ensslin said.

Rob Reuteman worked as an editor at the Rocky for 26 years and said Bolsen made an impression.

“He was a white guy, and he wore a white-knit skullcap all the time and Arab clothing,” Reuteman said. “But he was not a reporter. I just saw him hanging out at her desk from time to time. He sort of stuck out in the newsroom because he was dressed like an Arab guy and nobody else was.”

Three years later, Bolsen took upon himself the role of defender of Muslim culture when he wrote an opinion piece that appeared in the News on July 2, 1999, headlined “Violence Against Women is a Worldwide Problem.” In response to an article about “honor killing” in the Middle East, Bolsen accused the reporter of “distortive imbalance” and having an agenda to selectively indict Islam.

Bolsen later moved his family to the United Arab Emirates and opened up an Internet cafe. He ended up spending seven years in prison.

“I know nothing about his life over there,” said Linda Bolsen, who also worked at the News, but not in the newsroom.

A story in a UAE publication called The National said Shahid Bolsen was living in Sharjah when he killed German engineer Martin Steiner, whom he met online. Prosecutors said Bolsen had lured Steiner to his apartment on the false claim that he could have sex with Bolsen’s maid.

Bolsen told officials he unsuccessfully attempted to persuade the engineer not to indulge in his “sinful desires,” but when the drunken German attempted to sexually assault the maid, Bolsen said, he smothered him with a rag soaked in chloroform to subdue him. Instead of knocking him out, it killed the man, according to the publication.

He was caught after stuffing Steiner’s body in a blue suitcase, dumping it in the desert and attempting to flee the country. Originally sentenced to death, his sentence was reduced to manslaughter and then was commuted in 2010 after he paid $55,000 in “blood money.”

In recent years, Bolsen has cemented himself as an opponent of Western commercialism.

“No army ever takes a step except that it is following or followed by business,” wrote Bolsen on his Facebook page accompanying an image of the silhouette of a soldier emblazoned with the logos of KFC, Starbucks and Coca-Cola.

In one article, Bolsen wrote that “economic globalization has left most Third World governments with little more to do than carry out the edicts of Western powers.”

He wrote another article called, “When there is blood in the streets, see who is investing.”

Linda Bolsen said her son’s message has been of nonviolence, but on Saturday she looked at a statement he wrote in which he called unintended deaths during the bombings of commercial properties “collateral damage.”

“That is his life. I do not approve of anything outside of nonviolence,” she said.

Kirk Mitchell: 303-954-1206, denverpost.com/coldcases or twitter.com/kirkmitchell

Peter Dettmann of The Denver Post and Alex Burness of the Daily Camera contributed to this report.