Topics: Architecture, Books, Editor's Picks, Must-Do, Nonficiton, Nonfiction, What to Read, Entertainment News

You would think architecture, the art form we live inside, would be the art we feel closest to. But in its modern incarnation — the kind that gets written up by critics and praised by other architects — architecture can seem forbidding and impenetrable. You don’t have to be Prince Charles (a notorious modern-architecture skeptic) to stand before Jacques Herzog and Pierre de Meuron’s de Young Museum in San Francisco’s Golden Gate Park and feel you’re in the presence of something oppressive and monstrous. Then again, if you simply turn around in the same spot, you can refresh your spirit with Renzo Piano’s ravishing California Academy of Sciences, built only three years later.

The layperson couldn’t find a better guide to this enigmatic terrain than Witold Rybczynski’s “How Architecture Works: A Humanist’s Toolkit.” Despite the title (apparently inspired by literary critic James Wood’s “How Fiction Works”), this isn’t a book about how buildings stand up or the steps by which they’re erected. Rather, Rybczynski, emeritus professor of architecture at the University of Pennsylvania and a celebrated writer on the subject, provides a tour of the factors every architect must consider when designing a building: site and setting (not the same thing, Rybczynski takes pains to explain), the plan, the skin, the style and above all the idea. For it is “an enduring truth” Rybczynski writes, that “great buildings are often the result of a single — and sometimes very simple — idea.” “How Architecture Works,” he explains, is “a conceptual toolkit for thinking about the experience of architecture.”

Not all of the examples Rybczynski picks are modern; among others, he discusses the Pantheon, Christopher Wren’s St. Paul’s Cathedral and the villas of Andrea Palladio, iconic structures that influence architects to this day. But modern buildings are his primary focus, and that’s just as well. They do seem to need more explaining.

Not that Rybczynski has much regard for what he sees as “attempts to impose intellectual theories on buildings” or academically driven schools of architecture “whose work is accompanied by long — and often labored — explanations.” He describes himself as someone who “has lived through both the decline and resurgence — in altered form — of modern architecture,” and he’s not afraid to cast a jaundiced eye upon, say, Louis I. Kahn’s paradoxical commitment to revealing the structure of the buildings he designed, even at the expense of their function. He thinks Frank Gehry’s famous Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, Spain, doesn’t really work in its setting, but that Gehry’s Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles does. Rybczynski has a lot of opinions without being doctrinaire, and his tastes are wide-ranging and omnivorous.

There are photos and illustrations in “How Architecture Works,” but its intended audience will get a lot more out of it with the assistance of Google Image Search. I kept my iPad at my elbow whenever I opened the book, and that made it a much richer and more exciting (if also considerably more time-consuming) experience, whether I found myself agreeing with Rybczynski or not. The chapter on details, for example, looks at how several different contemporary architects handle balustrades (the railings on the edges of terraces or balconies) and banisters. Even though the chapter is well-illustrated, being able to see color photos of Bing Thom’s facility for Simon Fraser University in British Columbia online helped me to see how his use of wooden handrails warms up the glass plates that form the guardrails. (The Internet also comes in handy if you’re the sort of person who can never remember what a mullion is.)