Topics: Animation, Education, gross science, nova, parasites, PBS, Science, Video

Why do certain sicknesses make you smell weird? How do sea cucumbers shoot their organs out of their butt? And are we seriously not in hell? Because there is a parasite that eats a fish’s tongue and then pretends to be that tongue, and that is demonic.

“Gross Science,” a new YouTube series produced by NOVA and PBS Digital Studios, will answer all of those questions and more once a week through beautifully animated short videos.

Salon spoke with Anna Rothschild, the brain behind the series (she produces, hosts, writes and animates the videos) about why she is fascinated by things that are horrible.

This interview has been lightly edited.

What is your background?

I studied biology as an undergraduate and I worked at the American Museum of Natural History, in a lab there, for a few years after college but then I went to graduate school for science journalism.

How did you some up with the idea for this series?

Well, when NOVA started thinking about doing an original series, the first thing that came to my mind was to do something on gross science for a couple reasons. The first stories that really grabbed me and drew me to science were disgusting ones; dissecting owl pellets when I was in sixth grade or playing with a slime chemistry set. Those were the first times that I really saw science as a narrative and understood it as an epic story, so that was how I first got interested in science. On top of that I used to make web videos for NOVA and I had had some success doing episodes that were about kind of gross stuff like how smart slime molds were or why you should eat insects, so I knew there was an audience out there for this kind of material.

What is the production process like? Is it true that you animate all of it?

Yeah, I animate them myself, though I do have some wonderful interns who help me. What usually happens is that I’ll read a paper or talk to a scientist or something and hear a story that just really grabs me. I’ll start by writing a script, and if I ever get stuck I’ll just start animating one of the characters because it kind of helps me bring the story to life a little bit. Like, oh, that’s the personalty! But usually I’ll start by writing the script and then I’ll start illustrating it afterwards. I’ve started to use a combination of watercolor and collage to make the animations.

How did you learn to do that?

Honestly, it was just an exercise in experimentation, like I think most of what’s on the internet is. I knew I wanted to make the series… I don’t know if you would call it beautiful, but at least somewhat visually pleasing because gross stuff is not going to appeal to everyone, you know? I wanted to make sure that there was something to balance the gross and give other types of people something to cling to. I’m not a visual artist at all, so I just kind of started experimenting with watercolor and collage— which weren’t things I’d done since, I don’t know, maybe eighth grade— and it just came together. Just as a side now, I would encourage anyone who’s ever interested in doing animation to just give it a try, because— seriously— you so don’t need to be a visual artist to make something if you have a vision.