Edmundson Elementary School students Donavan Peoples, 8, left, and Mason Garner, 8, race on scooters to pick up math problems Tuesday in the gym at the school in Loveland. The boys solve the math problems as they scoot back to Anthony Urrutia, their recess coach. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Anthony Urrutia is not your typical coach.

As he tossed the football back and forth with Abel Jaramillo at Larurene Edmondson Elementary School last week, he quizzed the 10-year-old on his spelling words.

As he urged Donovan Peoples to speed across the gym on a scooter, 8-year-old Donovan was solving math facts along the way.

As Kamryn Sanford pumped out jumping jacks, Urrutia tossed math problems her way, or while she hopped on one foot, he gave her spelling words.

Urrutia is one of the Thompson School District's new recess coaches, a program paid for by a $100,000 wellness grant from Kaiser Permanente.

And while the coaches do what their titles say — work with kids at recess to keep them active, which helps them socialize and learn and retain their spelling and math lessons — they also work with small groups of students in need of extra help.

"While children are learning while moving, they retain 90 percent of what they learn," said Urrutia, who uses methods from Academics in Action, created by Fort Collins teacher Chris Hunt. "It's getting them to move and be active."

Urrutia splits his days between Garfield, Laurene Edmondson and Monroe elementary schools, while a second recess coach works part time at Winona Elementary School. They work with small groups of students, help youngsters play during recess and, at Edmondson, will soon launch before-school intramural games to help prime students' minds for a day of learning.

Advertisement

"We know there's a huge link between academics and health and between academics and physical activity, so we're looking to support student learning in any way we can," said Kathy Schlepp, wellness coordinator for Thompson Schools.

"We've just really been looking to increase physical activity with our students wherever we can."

The concept of a recess coach was developed in Oakland, Calif., in 1996 with a nonprofit agency established to help student with academics, social skills and other issues by creating a healthier experience on the playground.

In the past 18 years, SportsKids has spread to 23 states, other programs have been developed and research has backed the link between activity and learning.

A 2010 study by the Centers for Disease Control connects physical activity with improvements in cognitive skills, grades, test scores and attendance and a reduction in disciplinary issues, according to information from Hunt. The study also shows that increased physical education time, in fact, led to moderate to high gains in student achievement in math, reading and writing.

For Hunt, the link between healthier and more active students and learning is backed up by studies but is also real and tangible at Traut Elementary School in Fort Collins, where he has helped incorporate the concepts throughout the school. In full-day kindergarten alone, students were a quarter year ahead of other students on their sight words after Academics in Action.

"It's been great," said Hunt. "We've had incredible results."

The recess coach program is new this year to Thompson schools, but Urrutia said he has already seen positive results. The students are improving on math and spelling, and officials hope for even better results as the year progresses.

They plan to track the results and see, at the end of the year, if there are renewed or continued grants or other ways to continue the program.

"Potentially, it could spread to other schools in the district," said Schlepp. "Are there ways that staff that are already on board could implement these strategies?"

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Pamela Johnson at or johnsonp@reporter-herald.com