PRESCRIPTION KIDS: Read the Denver Post special report on use of psychotropic drugs in the Colorado foster care system.

A medical director would oversee the levels of mind-altering psychotropic drugs prescribed to children and teenagers in Colorado’s foster care system and at the Division of Youth Corrections under a budget request submitted this week.

For the first time, the state child welfare department wants to hire a staff of medical professionals — headed by a physician — to monitor prescription medication use in youth corrections and the child welfare system, as well as other health issues. Officials have asked the legislature’s Joint Budget Committee for $700,000 to hire a contracted doctor and four staff members, including two nurses.

Colorado is one of only 10 states without a medical director overseeing the foster care system.

Rising numbers of foster children nationwide are prescribed potent psychotropic medications because of behavioral problems, anxiety and depression, often brought on by trauma in their lives. Child advocates have called for fewer drugs and more therapy to treat the root cause of the children’s behavioral problems.

Critics say that few studies have examined side effects on children and that heavy doses make kids seem detached and sedated.

About 4,300 of Colorado’s 16,800 foster children were prescribed psychotropic drugs in 2012, according to a University of Colorado analysis released to The Denver Post under open-records laws and published in “Prescription Kids,” an investigative series in April. Among teens in foster care, 37 percent were prescribed psychotropic drugs.

Foster children were prescribed the mood-altering drugs at a rate five times greater than other children in the Medicaid system, the study found.

Another study found that one-fourth of children in Colorado’s foster care system were taking four or more mental health drugs at one time, above the average of nine states included in the 2011 study by Medicaid Medical Directors.

In their budget request, Colorado child welfare officials listed three reasons for the high prevalence of psychotropic drug use among foster kids, all of which a medical director could investigate, they said.

County child welfare departments have the advice of only the prescribing physician or psychiatrist when trying to determine whether foster children are taking appropriate medications or doses, the request said. Also, officials are concerned that children in rural Colorado are taking psychotropic medications because there is limited access to mental health treatment.

And, the request said, it’s possible children who have been abused or neglected are receiving mental health drugs to treat the symptoms of the trauma.

The medical director would have the authority to examine child case files, draft policies regarding psychotropic medications and act as a consultant to county caseworkers.

“Caseworkers aren’t necessarily trained medical professionals, so to be able to have that higher level of consultation is really important,” said Julie Krow, director of the Office of Children, Youth and Families in the Colorado Department of Human Services. “It doesn’t make sense not to have a medical director who can advise us about best practices.”

The medical director would not have as much authority as in some states, where the director can approve or reject prescriptions for children. The director could start July 1 if the budget request is approved, Krow said.

Stephanie Villafuerte, executive director of the Rocky Mountain Children’s Law Center, called the request “bold and necessary.”

“I hope this proposal garners support in the legislature quickly, because our kids cannot wait,” she said. “As we discuss this issue, too many kids will continue to be prescribed inappropriate medications in unacceptable doses.”

Concerns about use of psychotropic medications within the Colorado youth corrections system were revealed in a state audit in August.

Auditors found that in some cases, corrections staff members did not obtain consent to prescribe psychotropic drugs to youths in custody. Also, there was “almost no evidence” in many cases studied that corrections medical staffers monitored teens’ blood pressure, weight or heart rate after changing doses of medication, which is the national standard.

The child welfare department’s request includes $150,000 to study what general medical needs are lacking for children and teens in foster care and youth corrections.

It also seeks $35,000 to link the computer systems used by child welfare and the state Medicaid office so child protection workers can see insurance claims for medical treatment and psychotropic medications for children under their care.

The lack of a bridge between those two computer systems “makes it a cumbersome and inaccurate process” for caseworkers to figure out what medications foster children are taking, the request says.

The legislature’s budget committee is expected to hear the request next week.

Jennifer Brown: 303-954-1593, jenbrown@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jbrowndpost

Prescriptions

A CU study found that foster children in the state were prescribed psychotropic drugs at a rate five times greater than other children in the Medicaid system in 2012. Children 5 and younger were more than four times likelier to be given the drugs.

• Percent of foster children on psychotropics: 4.9% ages 5 and under; 24.3% ages 6-11; 37.6% ages 12-17; and 25.7% ages 17 and under

• Percent of nonfoster children on psychotropics: 1.0% ages 5 and under; 5.5% ages 6-11; 8.5% ages 12-17; and 4.5% ages 17 and under

Source: CU

PRESCRIPTION KIDS: Read the Denver Post special report on use of psychotropic drugs in the Colorado foster care system.