Buy Photo Asbury Park NJ . The popular Mr. Pizza on Springwood Ave a convenient store that sits in the middle of one of Asbury Park's toughest neighborhoods. 081815 (Photo: Tom Spader/Gannett)Buy Photo

ASBURY PARK – One by one, flour-coated wings and thighs are dropped into the hot, bubbling oil of the deep fryer.

The aroma of frying chicken fills the convenience store as customers come and go through the door propped open on a hot August afternoon.

Some are hand-fanning themselves as they wait for their food in the unairconditioned blue and gray-painted corner store.

“Let me get a three piece,” a man in black basketball shorts and a white T-shirt said to “Nick.” Everyone that came in seemed to be on a first name basis with the 47-year-old Middle Eastern owner of Mr. Pizza.

Nick Ismael had to move fast.

It was 1 p.m., and the lunch rush quickly depleted the fried chicken in the heated display case.

Granddaughters run historic Asbury Park fortunetelling shop

“We have our own spices, and we make this chicken taste better than everybody else’s,” Ismael said. “That’s why everybody comes here.”

Ismael also serves other hot foods including pizza — which he initially thought would be the big seller when he named his store Mr. Pizza. But while the chicken is king, he has no plans to rename the store Mr. Chicken.

Buy Photo Asbury Park NJ Nick Ismael owner of Mr. Pizza on Springwood Ave. in Asbury Park. The popular Mr. Pizza convenient store sits in one of Asbury Park's toughest neighborhoods. 081815 (Photo: Tom Spader/Gannett)

Birth of Mr. Pizza

Ismael moved to the United States from Jordan in 1989 with plans to pursue a graduate degree in electrical engineering.

He started working part-time jobs, mostly at restaurants in northern New Jersey, but never had the time or money to enter a masters program.

Instead, he learned how to run a kitchen, cook chicken and pizza, and make hot or cold subs. That’s how he came up with items for his menu.

Ismael and a friend were working in the kitchen at Mr. Spot Pizza on Memorial Drive in Asbury Park and wanted a place of their own.

So they found a building for sale at the corner of Springwood and Ridge, took out a bank loan and bought the shop that was formerly a Jamaican restaurant. The two men opened Mr. Pizza in 2000.

“I wasn’t that familiar with Asbury Park,” said Ismael, who was living in the Clifton area at the time. “I was just lucky to get a location that was nice.”

Ismael said he spent about three months fixing up the building before opening Mr. Pizza. Today, the convenience store is the go-to spot on Springwood Avenue.

The store thrives even though it is centered in a tough neighborhood known for poverty, shootings and drugs.

Condos, hotel planned for Asbury Park eyesore

Crime has fluctuated over the years, Ismael said. However, he believes there was more crime in the earlier years of Mr. Pizza.

Ismael remains committed to serving this southwest Asbury Park community where there are plenty of families but few merchants.

“Everybody knows us, and we get respect and I think that’s the main reason I get the same customers every day,” said the married father of three.

Buy Photo Asbury Park NJ Nick Ismael owner of Mr. Pizza on Springwood Ave. in Asbury Park. The popular Mr. Pizza convenient store sits in one of Asbury Park's toughest neighborhoods. 081815 (Photo: Tom Spader/Gannett)

Fried to perfection

Ismael wouldn’t share his fried chicken recipe with the Press because, “Then you can open up a store next to me, and I’d be out of business,” he said, with a chuckle, during the interview.

Ismael said it took him a year to perfect the recipe after opening Mr. Pizza.

“You try so many different spices, and then you come up with the right ones,” said Ismael, who lives in Ocean.

For many customers, the convenience store and the hot, crispy and juicy chicken is a part of their daily routine.

Some come from as far as Toms River and Lakewood to get their chicken fix, Ismael said.

Markym Edwards claims he was one of the first customers at Mr. Pizza when it first opened.

“They got the best chicken around here, the best cheesestakes and the pizza is delicious,” said Edwards, 28, of Asbury Park.

When Madeline Calderon walked in the store, Ismael smiled. “Here is one of my favorite customers,” he said.

Asbury Park selects developers for blighted Boston Way

“I like their staff, I like their (chicken) thighs, and I love Nick,” said Calderon, a 50-year-old Asbury Park resident who ordered a small box of chicken thighs and a bottle of peach soda.

Troy Velez, 28, of Neptune, said he has been going to Mr. Pizza for longer than he can remember.

“It’s convenient when you need something really quick,” Velez said. “And it’s safe... with the police out here at night.”

Buy Photo Asbury Park NJ Nick Ismael owner of Mr. Pizza on Springwood Ave. in Asbury Park. The popular Mr. Pizza convenient store sits in one of Asbury Park's toughest neighborhoods. 081815 (Photo: Tom Spader/Gannett)

A side of mayhem

The Asbury Park Police Department increased its presence in the Springwood-Lake Avenue corridor last year after the neighborhood saw a wave of shootings and murders in 2012 and 2013.

At least one fatal shooting stemmed from a fight that started outside Mr. Pizza involving alleged gang members in January 2013, according to police.

Months later a 20-year-old man was beaten and robbed inside the food store. Five Asbury Park men were arrested and charged in connection with the incident.

In April 2014, a large fight erupted outside of Mr. Pizza resulting in several arrests and injuries, police say.

On any given day, foot patrol officers are seen walking near the corner of Springwood and Ridge, where Mr. Pizza building sits. Across the street are three boarded up vacant houses where squatters are known to sleep.

Asbury Park: Johnny Mac's decor must go

Yet, Mr. Pizza is one of few eateries in Asbury Park that stays open until 2 a.m.

Ismael said most community members respect his business enough to keep trouble outside. And he noted that his business has never been robbed.

Occasionally, he has to call the police on disorderly people or tell people to leave if they are loitering

“I take care of my own business, I worry about what’s happening in my business,” Ismael said. “What they are doing outside, I let the cops take care of that.”

Despite the challenges of the neighborhood, Ismael said he has never considered leaving.

Similar to any other business in an urban community, Ismael is meeting a need and has a customer base that depends on him every day of the week.

Mr. Pizza is so essential to the neighborhood that some customers get upset when it closes early for holidays, Ismael said.

“I think people are so used to us, and it makes it harder for them if I’m not there,” Ismael said.

Buy Photo Asbury Park NJ Nick Ismael owner of Mr. Pizza on Springwood Ave. in Asbury Park. The popular Mr. Pizza convenient store sits in one of Asbury Park's toughest neighborhoods. 081815 (Photo: Tom Spader/Gannett)

A devoted neighbor

In its 15 years, Mr. Pizza has become more than just a neighborhood store.

During superstorm Sandy, Ismael gave away chicken and snacks to residents without electricity. He has donated food to area Little Leagues, churches and events.

And when his regular patrons are short on cash, he allows them to take their items and pay him later.

“You gotta give back to the community,” Ismael said.

Rising from rock bottom: The fight is one to save homeless youth at the Shore

Ismael said he watched many of his customers grow up from children to young adults.

Jamarri Harbison, 19, remembers riding to Mr. Pizza on two wheels to get candy when he was younger.

“It’s the best store in town,” Harbison said, as he walked out the store with a box of chicken and an Arizona Fruit Punch. “They’ve got good chicken.”

Nicquel Terry; nterry@gannettnj.com; 732-643-4023

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1EreQan