The Charleston Gazette-Mail printed an op-ed signed by Congressman Alex Mooney that seriously misstated key facts, and continued the moral exhibitionism that has characterized his tenure thus far. It requires debunking.

Mooney’s article begins with the Republican party’s frankly bizarre campaign against birth control coverage. Regarding the “Little Sisters of the Poor” case, Mooney claims that, under the Affordable Care Act, the religious order “is forced to provide [birth control] to their employees.”

That is false, full stop.

There is no ambiguity, or wiggle room, or doubt about it. The law clearly states that any religious organization desiring not to provide birth control simply has to say so by filing a form or sending a letter and it will be exempted from the requirement to provide that kind of coverage. Virtually any source on the subject confirms this accommodation exists, but Mooney clearly is not interested in facts.

Justice Anthony Kennedy, who provided the fifth vote in the Hobby Lobby decision, wrote admiringly of this accommodation the law provides religious organizations, stating:

The accommodation works by requiring insurance companies to cover, without cost sharing, contraception coverage for female employees who wish it. That accommodation equally furthers the government’s interest but does not impinge on the plaintiffs’ religious beliefs.

If a religious organization wants to opt out of the ACA’s rule that women are entitled to birth control coverage, all the organization has to do is say so. The ACA then arranges for those women, who have a constitutionally-protected right to use birth control, to get coverage without any contribution from the religious organization. Mooney’s claim that the Sisters are forced to provide the contraception is the opposite of the truth. A correction should be run.

In the Supreme Court, the religious organizations are arguing that because their employees will still get birth control coverage (from a third-party) after they opt-out, they are somehow “involved” and that this violates their conscience. It’s an extremely weak argument that is far more political than it is religious. After all, employees can spend their money, earned working for a religious organization on birth control (or gambling, or alcohol, etc.) and no one takes seriously the idea that the religious organization has a right to prevent them doing what they want with their money.

But it’s obvious that Mooney doesn’t care what the mechanism is for women to obtain birth control coverage — it’s against his religion and he doesn’t want them to have it. If his religious views are not followed by others, he howls at the moon that it’s “oppression” by “liberals.” His effort to impose his beliefs on women who don’t share those beliefs threatens our freedom and our constitutional values, and it must be opposed.

Apparently unsatisfied lashing out against women’s health insurance, Mooney then has the nerve to bring up the millions of immigrants who have come to the United States fleeing “tyranny” and “persecution,” as part of a rhetorical nod to the Thanksgiving holiday.

This is the same Alex Mooney who voted to prevent Syrian refugees from coming to the United States one week before publishing this op-ed! The same Alex Mooney who opportunistically praised the Syrian people to the sky (“I rise today to give a voice to the people of Syria ... ”) in a YouTubed floor speech so he could attack the president this past June. A few months later he votes to slam the door in Syrians’ faces.

In spite of this, would you believe Mooney’s op-ed contained the word “hypocrisy?” It did. I kid you not.

Of course, because of the deep unpopularity of President Obama in West Virginia, Mooney’s actions make political sense. He thinks he can misrepresent the law and get away with it, as long as he claims he’s “opposing Obama.” He can pretend to “stand with Syrians” to oppose the president in June, and jump on board with legislation attacking the very same Syrians in November, so long as he carefully plays the anti-Obama chords.

But what happens to West Virginia while Mooney is posing?

We’re short a congressman, is what. Mooney has not taken a single action that benefits his constituents — actual West Virginians — since he took office. He basically uses public office as a platform to promote himself. The centerpiece of his op-ed is a resolution that does nothing. Resolutions don’t have the force of law — no one here will benefit from his grandstanding resolution even if he gets it passed — very much the same way no Syrians will benefit from his pretending to be their ally in his big floor speech, only to stab them in the back when it suited him later.

West Virginia has real problems a congressman could work to solve. We need federal road money to rebuild our highways and create new ones. We need funds to recover old industrial sites and to retrain workers for new industries. We may need accommodations on bonding requirements to keep mining companies in business. We need help with the prescription drug epidemic. A congressman who was interested in West Virginia could get to work on these things instead of always jumping on the latest hot talk-radio issue that contains the word “Obama.” But we don’t have that congressman — we have Alex Mooney.

When you hire a congressman who is only in it for himself, that’s exactly what you get. West Virginia needs to send Alex Mooney on down the road.

Christopher J. Regan is vice chairman of the West Virginia Democratic Party and an attorney at Bordas & Bordas in Wheeling.