VAIL — Kelly Clark rebounded from Olympic bronze last month to win her seventh Burton U.S. Open title in Vail on Saturday, spinning the loftiest, most technical tricks of the contest.

Improving her score on her first two runs, Clark steadily increased the difficulty of her tricks to earn 89.33 points and the win. On her final run, with her victory secured, she almost stuck a first-ever cab 1080.

“I’m definitely a strategic rider. I go out and put down the run I want to do that day and then I give myself the opportunity to kind of push myself and push my riding,” said the 30-year-old, who has won more contests that any snowboarder in history. “I think it’s really important to do tricks and really push yourself regardless of being a U.S. Open final. For me, even my victory laps I’m still pushing it because it is about the riding for me. For me it is about the sport of snowboarding. It is about progression. It is about inspiring people and if I’ve ever been in that position to inspire someone to dream big and believe that nothing is impossible … if I can do one thing that would be at the top of my list.”

Spain’s Queralt Castellet stomped a pair of 900s, with solid grabs on a pair of 540s and an off-axis 720 on her first run to score 85.73 and win second place. Castellet struggled to land a run at the Winter Olympics last month.

“It’s been a tough, intense season,” she said, noting that she had looked forward to the U.S. Open all season. “For me it was more doing a contest that I could just enjoy and close the season with a fun contest. It was a pipe I was able to have fun in.”

Chloe Kim, the 13-year-old prodigy whose spectacular season has left her heralded as the future of halfpipe snowboarding, won third with off-axis tricks sandwiched between style-drenched switch straight airs that earned 83.95 points.

The switch airs were something she had worked on in practice but never thrown in competition. She said she was partly inspired to throw the trick after Danny Davis floated his signature switch method — a style-over-spinning tossback to snowboarding’s roots — to win the Aspen X Games last month.

“It could be a Danny thing,” she said. “That’s the best switch method I’ve ever seen. So I was like, ‘Yeah I want to do that too.’ “

Jason Blevins: 303-954-1374, jblevins@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jasontblevins