DOMINIC LAWSON: Angelina, Mr Hague and the women victims betrayed by our own courts

One of our great newspapers last week devoted its first five pages to a London conference held to deplore sexual violence in military conflict.



It is indeed a shameful fact that soldiers down the ages have treated the bodies of their enemies’ women as part of the spoils of war; what is happening now in Africa is exactly what conquering Soviet troops did to German women in 1945.



But what elevated this particular anti-rape conference to the front pages of almost all our newspapers? There is one reason only: it was graced by the disconcertingly skeletal presence of the Hollywood actress Angelina Jolie.



The only reason this particular anti-rape conference hit the front pages is that it was graced by the disconcertingly skeletal presence of the Hollywood actress Angelina Jolie

Ms Jolie — who if she were dressed in rags and pictured on the mud tracks of a Third World village would herself not look out of place on an Oxfam poster — is a UN special envoy. That global body has long recognised the value of recruiting showbusiness to its causes. It knows politicians find it impossible to resist the magnetism of silver-screen celebrity, and the stardust it sprinkles on their activities.



Thus both the Prime Minister and the Foreign Secretary posed with ‘Dame’ Angelina in Downing Street: David Cameron pledged to ‘protect victims and punish perpetrators of rape’ in countries such as Somalia and the Congo, while William Hague declared that rape as a weapon in war was the ‘moral issue for our generation.’



I wonder if those two highly intelligent men really believe that this country has any power to deter African soldiers from raping and pillaging in what are often unspeakably savage civil wars.



Both the Prime Minister David Cameron and his Foreign Secretary William Hague posed with 'Dame' Jolie

Cameron told the conference that ‘this Government will always seek to protect the most vulnerable in society, both at home and abroad’. Perhaps I underestimate the might of our Department for International Development, but is it really up to the task of preventing even one vulnerable woman in Somalia from being raped?



It would be more realistic and useful if our most senior politicians put as much emphasis on the problem of sexual violence within our own society — and if our courts did more to protect those victims.



What criminologists term ‘domestic violence’ remains the single biggest category of offence in Britain — consuming almost 10 per cent of the caseload of the Department of Public Prosecution.



This certainly underestimates its extent, given the reluctance of so many women, often for reasons of sheer terror and intimidation, either to report their assailants to the police or to give evidence in court.



As the DPP noted in its most recent report: ‘6,741 domestic violence cases failed in 2012-13 because the victim either failed to attend court or retracted their evidence; that equated to approximately 37 per cent of all unsuccessful domestic violence cases.’



A friend of mine, who worked in one of Birmingham’s biggest hospitals, told me he had been ‘absolutely horrified by the scale and extent of domestic violence, yet so much of it never reaches the public’s attention, or the courts: in one case, I saw a woman whose jaw was broken by a man who had murdered his previous girlfriend and who had been released only the year before. She was too scared to report the incident to the police, as hard as we tried to persuade her’.



That’s right: someone who murdered one woman was out and about, brutalising others with near impunity.

We may have a better record of locking up the perpetrators of violence against women than the countries of which David Cameron and Ms Jolie are so critical — but we also have a remarkable ability to let them out again.



Only last week the Mail reported on a case in which a London mother-of-three called Jageer Mirgind was left blind and hideously scarred for life after her father-in-law, Manjit Singh Mirgind, slashed her wrists and gouged her eyes with a knife.



Manjit Singh Mirgind, left, attacked his daughter-in-law Jageer Mirgind after he accused her of having an affair, slashing her wrists and gouging her eyes with a knife in front of her children



Apparently, Mr Mirgind, a Sikh, was under the impression that his daughter-in-law had been having an affair with a Muslim man. In fact — and not that it makes any difference to the wickedness of the attack — the woman hadn’t been conducting an affair: Mr Mirgind had fallen for what was described as ‘a series of prank calls’. He told the court: ‘I was trying to protect her. I am a peaceful man.’ How very reassuring.



Anyway, what sentence do you think the perpetrator of this horrific attack received? Ten years — which under our system of automatic release after half the term is served, means he will be out in five.



Even more appallingly, according to the report in the Mail, he had initially been charged with attempted murder, but prosecutors later accepted his guilty plea to causing serious bodily harm with intent ‘in order to avoid having to go to trial’.



Yet Mr Mirgind — as the court was also told by one of the victim’s terrified children, who were present throughout the appalling assault — had shouted out: ‘I am going to kill you.’ It is disgraceful that such a man should be allowed to plea-bargain his way out of an attempted murder charge.



This case has echoes of a no less barbaric assault three years ago, in which Tina Nash, a 33-year-old mother-of-two from Plymouth, was subjected to an attack lasting 12 hours by her partner, Shane Jenkin.



After breaking her jaw and nose, he gouged out her eyes, declaring: ‘You’re never going to see your kids again.’ Jenkin was sent to a secure mental health unit and ordered to serve — wait for it — ‘at least six years’.



What would we think of a country in the developing world where a man convicted of torturing and blinding his girlfriend had been given the chance of serving only six years? Would our Foreign Secretary make a fuss?



Oddly enough, the British Foreign Office did protest in 2011, expressing ‘deep concern’, when Iranian courts decreed that a man who had blinded with acid a woman who spurned his advances should — if the victim demanded it — be blinded himself.



Eventually the woman concerned was persuaded not to exercise her right — but I am unconvinced that ‘an eye for an eye’ is a more inappropriate remedy than six years imprisonment for such extreme sexually motivated violence.



And I am even less convinced that our politicians are in a position to lecture other countries about the judicial protection of women. We should do more to look after our own — even without photogenic assistance from Hollywood.





Does China want to buy the Queen?

Chinese PM Li Keqiang has threatened to cancel his trip to Britain this week unless he gets an audience with the Queen

According to an investigation in the Mail, property developments in the English Home Counties are being bought up by the Chinese middle classes.



While it might be a concern to families who will see this as another obstacle to acquiring homes at affordable prices, it is not just property China is buying up in the UK, as two stories last week illustrated.



It was revealed that a professorship in ‘Chinese Development Studies’ at Cambridge University had been set up with £3.7 million in funding from members of the family of China’s former Prime Minister, Wen Jiabao.



Cambridge insisted it was not selling out to the totalitarian government of the People’s Republic — but a number of its academics expressed concern that the University refuses even to discuss the donors’ links to the Beijing political establishment.



And we also learned that the current Chinese PM, Li Keqiang, had threatened to cancel his trip to Britain this week unless he got an audience with the Queen (even though it is not a state visit).



Asked about this, a British Government official admitted: ‘The Chinese are hard negotiators.’



Perhaps the Chinese want the monarch to apologise in person on behalf of her great-great-grandmother, Queen Victoria, for the opium wars. I’m sure they’ll let us know if she does.

Last Wednesday the BBC screened Faster Than The Speed of Light?, a documentary which ‘explores the recent discovery of particles that appear to travel faster than the speed of light’.



Which particles would those be?



According to the film, these were neutrinos detected by the CERN laboratory, near Geneva, zooming faster than the 186,000 miles per second hitherto considered the universe’s speed limit.



Amazing: Einstein’s theory refuted. Only it hadn’t been.



A few months after the CERN team declared it had found particles which had got to their destination before they departed, it was revealed that a loose fibre-optic cable had introduced a delay in their timing system.