People in Business for June 15, 2014

People in Business for June 15, 2014

BATON ROUGE AREA

Jeffrey H. Skaggs has been named senior vice president of policyholder services and agency relations at Louisiana Workers’ Compensation Corp.

Skaggs was vice president of regional operations for Texas Mutual Insurance Co. in Austin, Texas.

Melissa “Missy” Pace, of Denham Springs, has been named senior vice president for Baton Rouge area commercial lending at Investar Bank.

Pace was vice president and commercial banker at Whitney Bank.

Randy A. Ledet has been named managing partner at Planche Politz Ledet LLC.

Ledet is a native of Houma. The Baton Rouge-based firm has locations in Houma and The Woodlands, Texas.

Lindsey Robinson-Jones has been named branch manager and business development officer at the Gonzales location of American Gateway Bank.

Robinson-Jones was assistant vice president/branch sales and service manager at Teche Federal Bank.

Business First Bank has named Sonya Burton as chief risk officer and Ann Walton as chief credit officer.

Burton, a senior vice president, will oversee underwriting and loan operation functions in addition to audit, loan review, compliance and regulatory services and board relations.

Walton was associate chief credit officer. She will be responsible for credit, underwriting and loan operations.

Nenette Gray has been named business development executive at Puryear IT, concentrating primarily in the health care sector.

She has worked in sales and business development for health care company Takeda Pharmaceuticals and Pharmacia (now Pfizer), as well as energy companies ComEd and NIPSCO.

NEW ORLEANS AREA

Chris Remont has been named director of program management at Bollinger Shipyards’ new construction facility in Lockport, with an emphasis on the U.S. Coast Guard Fast Response Cutter program.

Remont was director, engineering, central planning and production control of Avondale Engineering and Construction, a subsidiary of Huntington Ingalls Industries.

Larry Daniels has been named regional vice president of operations for HRI Lodging with direct oversight of the company’s entire HRIL-branded portfolio.

Daniels was vice president/general manager of HRI Lodging, with responsibility of the company’s assets owned with investor group Carey Watermark Inc.

The Marketing Center has named Doug Thomas as interactive manager, which includes overseeing search engine optimization and marketing, paid search and website development.

He was search engine optimization and marketing specialist.

LAFAYETTE AREA

Mitch Thibodeaux has been named president of Superior Performance Inc. in Lafayette.

Thibodeaux was vice president of operations.

Gregory Zaunbrecher has been named director of global business administration at Knight Oil Tools.

Zaunbrecher has served as manager of business process and assistant global business manager.

AROUND LOUISIANA

Five architects have been elected to one-year terms on the state Architect Selection Board, beginning Sept. 15.

They are Daniel Taylor, New Orleans, District 1; Samuel E. Fauntleroy, Covington, District 2; Sean M. Johnson, Baton Rouge, District 3; Charles W. Abell III, Lafayette, District 4; and James Robert Ellis, Monroe, District 5.