By Kevin McKenzie of The Commercial Appeal

A medical study of how text messaging and health coaching may help African Americans with uncontrolled diabetes will be launched in Memphis with a $5.2 million research award to a University of Tennessee Health Science Center researcher, officials announced today.

The Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute, created through the Affordable Care Act, approved the funding for the study to be led by Dr. Jim Bailey, director of the Center for Health System Improvement and professor of internal and preventive medicine in the UTHSC College of Medicine.

The chief executive officer of Methodist South Hospital, James Robinson, is co-principal investigator for the study. With the focus also including underserved areas, a broad group of primary care providers has been assembled, including Methodist Primary Care Group, UT Family Medicine, University Clinical Health and Christ Community Health Services.

"Limited access to primary care, poor primary care infrastructure and poor patient engagement in both primary care and self care serve to compound the disproportionate suffering experienced by individuals in these underserved communities," Bailey said in a statement.

The funding will be spread over about four years.

Participants in the text messaging part of the study will work with members of their primary care team. For the look at health coaching, participants will schedule visits with diabetes wellness coaches.

"We anticipate that health coaching will be the best for the most medically and socially complex patients," Bailey said in a media release. "But text messages tailored to patients' interests will work just as well for most patients, and both coaching and texting will improve patient self-care more than distribution of standard educational materials."

Researchers plan to enroll 1,000 patients and follow them for a year for the study. The PCORI award has been approved, but is still subject to a review and formal contract, according to UTHSC officials.