We all know what a bumpy path it’s been with the roll-out of the Affordable Care Act. Tuesday, November 19th, the Pasadena Chamber of Commerce and the Los Angeles Association of Health Underwriters (LAAHU) are looking to smooth that path by hosting an enrollment fair at Pasadena City College.

Initially, attendees will hear a ten-minute breakdown of what is required for individuals in regard to the ACA. People may call and reserve a time for a one-on-one meeting with an insurance professional (call 626.795.3355).

Questions will be answered and, if desired, agents will sign up people for new insurance coverage. Twenty certified insurance specialists, several Spanish-speaking, will be available. Reservations may be made for 2 p.m., 3:30 p.m., or 5:30 p.m.

Deirdre Kennedy, President of LAAHU and a Certified Health Reform Specialist who has been working, studying, and lobbying for a workable health care system, encourages people to make an appointment. Using an insurance broker, she tells us, costs the individual absolutely nothing. She asked that we emphasize this point as it is a common misperception. And using a health insurance broker significantly increases one’s understanding of the options available and rates are calculated. For example, when cost is initially calculated on the Covered California site, one’s gross income is used, which is not indexed for cost of living. It is only when one actually applies MAGI—modified adjusted gross income—that one’s monthly cost for health insurance may be truly determined (and possibly lowered).

Kennedy walked us through the national AHU site and encouraged readers—if they are unable to attend Tuesday’s enrollment fair—to take a look. Once logged onto the page, look below “About Us” and click on “Find an agent.” Type in your zip code and put a radius of ten to fifty miles. Before hitting “enter,” scroll down to “certified to sell health insurance exchange marketplace coverage,” and click on California. This will provide you with a list of professional insurance brokers who can help you navigate ACA—with no added cost to you.

Affordable Care Act Enrollment Fair

Tuesday, Nov. 19th, 2-7 p.m.

Pasadena City College, Crevelling Lounge, 1570 E. Colorado Blvd.

Parking available in PCC student lots for $2

For more complete info, visit Pasadena-Chamber.org

~~~

The Pasadena Bar Association (PBA) partners with Public Counsel (www.publiccounsel.org) to help meet the legal needs of the community. The Pro Bono Clinic is open to all members of the community who need legal assistance but lack the financial resources to retain an attorney. The clinic offers free legal advice in the areas of immigration, criminal, DMV, eviction, personal injury, family law and other areas of law.

“The Pasadena Bar Association is pleased to join forces with Public Counsel to meet the legal needs of our fellow community members,” said Don Schweitzer, PBA president, and founder & partner of The Law Offices of Donald P. Schweitzer. “Legal assistance can make all the difference for someone who is facing immigration challenges, foreclosure, eviction or struggling with other legal circumstances. This event can make a difference in the lives of people in need of legal advice, who otherwise would not be able to afford it.”

Pro Bono Clinic with Public Counsel

Saturday, Nov. 23rd, 7 a.m.-1 p.m.

All Saints Church, 132 Euclid Ave., Pasadena 91101

For more info, call Michelle Paniagua at 626.793.1422