WestSouthwest with Bob Goodrich

The CEO of the Goodrich Movie Theater chain says the country is going through a transition and issues such as income inequality aren't being addressed.

Goodrich says there are few opportunities for employment and the jobs that are available don't provide enough work or pay. Goodrich sat down with WMUK's Gordon Evans and Battle Creek Enquirer Executive Editor Mac McCullough at Western Michigan University's Kendall Center in Battle Creek. Some highlights:

Wealth

The questions started with one about people who live above the poverty level, but not able to meet basic needs. Goodrich says taxes have been cut too much. He says that has eliminated public sector jobs and left the government without enough money to improve infrastructure, fund higher education or provide for people in need.

National Security

Asked about under what conditions, he would authorize deploying U.S. troops overseas, Goodrich says the President has been given broad authority when it comes to the military. He says the current situation is complicated. Goodrich says that requires an "analytical approach," rather than an "ideological short cut." He says the U.S. spends an "enormous amount" on the military. Goodrich says that has to be "revisited."

Health Care

Goodrich says it is "exhilarating" that more people are signing up for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act. He says the other big challenge is brining down hospitalization costs. Goodrich says the benefits will soon become more apparent. Asked about any changes to the act, Goodrich says he would like to see more people covered. He says it should be expanded to people in the country who are not citizens.

Campaign

Asked about his chances in November, Goodrich noted that 44% of Republicans did not vote for Amash in the primary (The Congressman defeated GOP challenger Brian Ellis in August). He says that gives him hope for the November election.

Interview with Bob Goodrich - web version

Discussion of other issues can he heard in the web version of the interview.

Changing Workplace

Goodrich says robotics is making it easier to eliminate jobs. He's not sure what can be done. But Goodrich says Amash's talk of liberty and Constitutionality doesn't address the problems faced by the American workforce.

Campaign Finance

Asked if he would support a Constitutional amendment to overturn the U.S. Supreme Court's "Citizens United" decision, Goodrich calls that "a necessity." He says it has put too much wealth in too few hands. Goodrich says thanks to the Supreme Court, they also have an outsized influence on campaigns and election. Goodrich says he has been able to finance his own run for office, but he says there should be public financing of campaigns. Asked if the current Supreme Court would go along with big changes like that, Goodrich says there will always be changes in who serves on the Supreme Court.

Tax reform

Goodrich says he would like to see a "stock transaction tax," and reforming the estate tax. He says there is also an almost "rapacious desire" to avoid taxation. Goodrich says although there is a 35% corporate tax rate in the United States, the effective rate is much lower because corporations can take advantage of loopholes and tax shelters. Goodrich says that has left less money available for infrastructure improvements and helping people in need. Goodrich does not a favor a "flat tax," which he says is too regressive.

More on Health Care

Asked if a "single payer" system would be best for health care, Goodrich says that would be "optimum." He says how Vermont's new system works will show whether it can be taken nationwide.

Immigration

Goodrich says he wants to allow people to come to the United States if their lives are threatened if they return to the home country. But otherwise, he says they should be deported.