What do you do when your company is recovering from a series of spills?

You acknowledge the repair process is a Herculean effort.

You replace members of the executive team.

Then you work on your pitch.

That's the task facing Dr. Emad Rizk, who was appointed CEO of Chicago-based Accretive Health in July, taking over a company reeling both from accusations that it preyed on vulnerable hospital patients and from the need to restate years of financial reports.

Accretive, which specializes in helping hospitals collect bill payments from patients and insurers, is among the biggest independent companies of its kind. But it faces stiff competition, not just from other players in the hospital billing industry but also from health systems that are bringing the function in-house.

The sector is ripe for growth, experts say. Under the Affordable Care Act, hospitals are undergoing a dramatic shift in how they are paid, making their billing process even more complex. At the same time, consolidation is making health systems even bigger, prompting them to chase after more bills.

“Hospitals and physician groups are coming together trying to figure out how they can be more efficient,” says Dan Marino, a Chicago-based senior vice president at health care consultancy Camden Group. “Once you figure it out, the opportunity (for companies like Accretive) is going to be gone.”

Accretive stock reached a four-year high in August 2011, trading at nearly $31, before it came crashing down. During that time, the Minnesota attorney general accused the company of sending aggressive debt collectors into hospitals to get money from patients. Accretive eventually settled and left the state.

Then the company had to restate financials dating to 2009. It was delisted from the New York Stock Exchange. Accretive CEO and co-founder Mary Tolan was replaced. Next up was Stephen Schuckenbrock, who left his gig at computer maker Dell to take over Accretive. But he left after a year, succeeded by Rizk, previously president of McKesson Health Solutions. The division of San Francisco-based McKesson helps hospitals manage health care costs.

Experts estimate the market opportunity for the hospital billing industry is up to $50 billion. Keeping costs down is essential for health systems as their reimbursements from insurers decline and they are paid to keep patients healthy and away from costly overnight visits and procedures. This shift has involved new programs through private and government insurers such as Medicare, with each program paying hospitals in a different way.

DIRECT COLLECTIONS

At the same time, employers are introducing high-deductible health plans, forcing employees to shoulder a larger portion of their bills before benefits kick in. That means hospitals are collecting directly from patients with these plans.

Accretive's clients include 83 hospitals, such as St. Louis-based Ascension Health, the largest Catholic hospital chain in the nation.

The company manages about $17 billion in net patient revenue for its customers. It is projecting to generate up to $233 million gross cash from customer contracts in 2014 and up to $250 million for 2015. That's barely 1 percent, or $1.6 million, less than the company pulled in during 2013.

Rizk says many of those customers held on through the turmoil. But investors didn't. On April 2, the stock traded at $5.59, the lowest in four years. It closed at $5.75 on April 17.

Rizk has hired new executives, and restated financials for 2009 to 2013 were released in December. They expect to have financials for 2014 finished by midyear.

He proselytizes that Accretive can reduce the cost of managing claims by up to 30 percent while boosting hospital revenue by about 4 percent. The company does this partly by harnessing technology to make billing and collecting more efficient. Accretive has seven centers in the U.S. and India that centralize functions hospitals typically would perform, such as scheduling patient visits and verifying insurance eligibility. That creates scale to lower costs, Rizk says.

“It was a Herculean effort in many ways,” he says of fixing the company. “Instead of making promises, I had to just show that our performance was going to get significantly better, and that's exactly what we did.”

Matthew Gillmor, senior research analyst at wealth management firm Robert W. Baird, is enthusiastic about Accretive's long-term performance.

A big test will be whether investors share his optimism. “What will be key from an investment standpoint is demonstrating an ability to win new clients and demonstrate an ability to grow the business again,” he says.