BEGIN TRANSCRIPT

RUSH: I came across what I think is conclusive evidence that Obamacare is a scam designed to fail during implementation so as to hurry and further along single payer socialized medicine run by the federal government. I found this in a story, a column at Forbes magazine, and it all focuses on the Obamacare benefit that allows you to keep your kids on your health care plan up until they are 26 years old.

Here's how this works. And this why I don't think this is an accident. I don't think that this is a, you know, too many chefs cooking the recipe and not knowing what everybody's doing. I don't think this is leftist incompetence. I don't think it's, you know, bureaucrat malaise or any of that. I think it was purposefully.

What do they need to make Obamacare sustainable, as designed? I mean, they've told you. This is not supposition. They need young, healthy people in the 18-to-34 demographic who do not get sick and therefore who are not going to be making claims for coverage. They need them to buy policies, and that's why we have the mandate. The individual mandate is to force people to buy. But the punishment for failing to do so and how they get it is where the trick here is revealed.

Two things. Number one, a large percentage of that demographic, 18 to 34, is also aged 18 to 26. And that's important because they're not buying their own policies. They can stay on mom and dad's up until they're 26 years of age. So the very financial foundation, young people required to buy insurance plans is already subverted by Obamacare's own benefit that allows the same people requiring to buy health insurance to pay for it to stay on their parents' plan, not paying anything, not having their own policies.

That means they're not buying their own policies, they're not paying their own higher premiums because of the Obamacare requirement that these children be covered on their parents' plans. So the imperative of getting young people to buy coverage is undermined by Obamacare's own coverage mandate. It's designed to fail.

And then the second aspect of this, how do they collect the fine when somebody doesn't pay? You're mandated. We are required by law to go out there and buy health insurance, and if we don't, there's a fine. How do they collect it, you know? (interruption) Right. Snerdley on the case. They deduct the fine from your tax refund. But what if you don't get a refund? They don't collect the fine. They don't send you a bill.

So if you happen to get no refund, if you arrange your taxes, your withholding so that you don't get a refund, which is the smart way to do it, actually, but I know people love getting a big lump in their hands, but if there's no refund, there's no way to collect the fine if you don't buy it. But the point is they're undermining their own financing mechanism. The whole thing is built on 18 to 34-year-olds who are healthy buying insurance, and they knew that 18 to 34 years old would not buy it on their own, that's why the mandate. That's why the force of law making them do it.

At the same time, they let children up to age 26 out of the deal, stay on their parents. They're not even serious about funding it, folks. In fact, they want it to be unfunded. They want it to fall apart. Now we've got United pulling out of the exchanges. We got some of these other health care plans saying we're losing money, we're pulling out, right on schedule. Every time you open the paper, you crack the Web or do whatever and you find problems in Obamacare, your reaction should be, "Mission accomplished." It is designed not to work. It's designed to implode on itself.