As online options become more prevalent among universities, they are earning a reputation as an alternative, but not less prestigious, route. (iStockphoto)

Christine Shakespeare, assistant vice president of continuing and professional education at Pace University, and her colleagues frequently describe the interrupted educational paths of their adult student population like this: “Life gets in the way.” By enrolling in online courses, however, students are able to reintegrate higher education into their lives without their studies getting in the way of their work or family commitments.

“We are dealing with an adult audience; many have started and stopped,” she says.

Students who graduate from iPace, the online version of the undergraduate program at Pace University in New York, receive the same diploma as the traditional students. “Part of the myth is that online is easier,” Shakespeare says. In actuality, students need to be self-disciplined and dedicate the same amount of time and effort as if they were participating in person, even if the majority of iPace students are part time, she notes.

As online options become more prevalent among universities, they are earning a reputation as an alternative, but not less prestigious, route. In addition to establishing programs targeting adult populations, some higher education institutions rely on new technology to increase traditional undergraduate and graduate student course and degree enrollment. The trend has influenced educational startup companies to offer innovative learning platforms and professional development opportunities.

The online department at Washington State University grew out of a distance-learning program created in 1992. At that time, recorded lectures made up most of the material. “The whole process was very laborious, but it provided the chance for people to get a degree from WSU who wouldn’t be able to otherwise,” says David Cillay, vice president of Washington State University Global Campus.

“As more interactive and collaborative tools became available, we began to experiment with how we could build a virtual community,” he says. “We felt that we could deliver the full campus environment in an online environment.”

Online WSU students attend career fairs and social events, and participate in student government through the Associated Students of Washington State University Online Degree Programs.

“As more and more programs offer degrees online, we’ve really made the commitment that we’re not looking for students who want to click a button and get a degree,” Cillay explains. Students want to be involved on campus and in the community, he notes. “Assignments affect their community and their online community.”

The majority of students participating in iPace and the WSU programs are in their 30s. Bachelor’s degrees are valuable in the United States labor market, and online learning gives older students another way of earning one and potentially advancing their careers. The Bureau of Labor Statistics projects that between 2012 and 2022, there will be a 12.1 percent increase in jobs requiring a bachelor’s degree.

For traditional undergraduate students, technology provides greater access to campus offerings.

Serving a statewide population, officials at the University of California noted that there were too many students – and too few seats – in its pre-major and general education requirement courses. To ensure more immediate access and, thus, timely graduation rates, UC designed the Innovative Learning Technology Initiative.

ILTI is an outgrowth of Gov. Jerry Brown’s proposal earmarking $10 million from UC’s fiscal year 2014 budget to the development of technology as a means of addressing growing university enrollment. UC established the Cross-Campus Enrollment system to enable students to take classes for credit across the nine undergraduate UC campuses.

Brown “facilitated cost-effectiveness and cost efficiencies in our undergraduate education,” said Aimée Dorr, University of California provost and executive vice president for academic affairs.

“The push is for the technological systems to work well.”

Publicizing these options to students and managing the additional costs incurred by individual campuses when students cross-enroll are also priorities of the initiative, Dorr adds.

Students who have had a traditional undergraduate campus experience or who maintain a busy schedule may prefer online graduate programs. The BLS estimates that by 2022, there will be 18.4 percent more jobs requiring a master’s degree than there were in 2012.

Simmons College in Boston offers graduate programs in its School of Social Work and its School of Nursing and Health Sciences in partnership with 2U, an educational technology company. In November, Simmons and 2U will begin a continuing education undergraduate nursing program where registered nurses will work toward a Master of Science in Nursing. Starting in January 2015, registered nurses will have the option of earning a Bachelor of Science in Nursing as an alternative.

“It’s a sweet spot for online education at this time,” observed Helen Drinan, president of Simmons College.

“The National Institutes of Health of this country has said that to provide the level of medical care this country will require with the combination of the Affordable Care Act and the aging of the baby boomer population, we need a more qualified nursing population,” Drinan says.

Simmons opted to partner with 2U in order to expand its reach beyond the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic regions.

“No university our size could generate the marketing resources and technology delivery to support that in the same way that the 2U platform can,” Drinan says.

“2U builds the technology, brings courses online, offers live classes with 24/7 support, trains the faculty and retrains the faculty,” adds Chip Paucek, 2U’s co-founder and chief executive officer. 2U invests $4 million to $9 million at the outset of a partnership with a school, and profits from a percentage of tuition revenue.

In Boston the large number of colleges and health care institutions limit the opportunities for clinical placements. A student in Simmons’ online program, however, can be flexible about where he or she studies, opting for areas with more clinical placements – and without a saturation of applicants.

“The American degree is extremely alive and well today and during the MOOC mania, it’s all about the impact,” Paucek says. If students graduate from a good school, doors will open, he points out. Why shouldn’t students have access to degrees if they need a flexible schedule?

Worldwide, people who aim to learn new skills or simply seek intellectual challenges have been enrolling in Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) offered through companies such as Udacity. Generally, universities are unable to update courses at the same rate that companies create new technology, explains Sebastian Thrun, co-founder and chief executive officer of Udacity.

Similar to registered nurses, professionals in the tech industry find they need to expand their knowledge base to remain current and competitive.

Udacity and AT&T will debut their own nanodegree this fall taught via the MOOC format for working students. While Udacity will handle logistics and offer customized coaching and career services, AT&T will guide content to prepare graduates for entry-level software jobs at the company. The nanodegree is designed to take less than one year to complete at a cost to students of about $200 a month – less if they receive a scholarship organized through nonprofit organizations. AT&T will provide up to 100 paid internships for graduates.

“Education should be shorter and longer – shorter to get to next step and long[er] to last over a lifetime,” Thrun says. A nanodegree is a “footprint that makes it as short as possible.”

The idea encourages continuous learning with the goal of acquiring knowledge rather than accumulating university diplomas.

“In general, we know there are some industry clusters that do not necessarily recruit entirely on the basis of degrees,” says Cathy Sandeen, vice president of education attainment and innovation at the American Council on Education. Some Silicon Valley tech companies focus on skills rather than degrees earned, as do some branches of the entertainment industry. “It is a competency-based process rather than credential-based process for hiring,” Sandeen points out.

WSU’s Cillay views technology as a way to foster global and experiential learning. For example, a student taking classes on campus could take a two-week break for an internship in New York, return to his campus and find the lectures he missed online.

“A powerful part of what you’ve learned is students getting experiences all over the world, and never interrupting their study,” he says. The Minerva Schools at KGI, a new American four-year undergraduate program, started courses Sept. 8, offering an online, residential and experiential college education to its first international class. Students will live in up to seven different cities, such as San Francisco, New York, Berlin, Buenos Aires and Mumbai, changing locations each semester. They will participate in seminars through an interactive synchronous learning platform.

“For us, the side effect of technology-mediated education in a formal curriculum is to have complete flexibility in experiential education which is all offline,” says Ben Nelson, founder of Minerva.

Time will tell how students fare in their professional lives after such a nontraditional learning experience. With the constant innovation, the experimentation will carry on.



Updated on Sept. 25, 2014: This article was updated to specifically reflect the Minerva Schools’ offerings.