The Summerville High School baseball team has dedicated its season to honor a former player who passed away in December. Saturday was Tripp Rabon Day, a celebration of his life. His legacy is impacting people in the Summerville area and beyond.

If you walk in the Green Wave baseball stadium you'll see everyone is "All In For Tripp." It's on the back of T-shirts, car stickers and hats. It doesn't stop there.

"We really see kind of like the impact he had on everyone," Tripp's sister, Lydia Rabon said. "There's people being supportive all the way from Dabo Swinney at Clemson to different baseball teams around the area."

Tripp was a senior football and baseball player at Summerville High School and a beloved friend to all. In December, he passed away in a car accident while on a duck hunting trip with three of his closest friends.

"I was with him when he passed and it's been really hard," Tripp's friend and teammate, Cameron Almond said. "Coming out here everyday you expect to see him."

On the baseball field Tripp was number 19. Now his jersey number is retired with one exception. The team has decided to choose one player in select games to wear it in his honor. His friend Cameron was the first.

"Getting to put it on and wear it and have him with me on the field, that just means the world to me and means the world to the whole community really," says Cameron.

Though there's only one number 19, there are more than a thousand shirts with the memory of Tripp on their backs and in their hearts.

"Just seeing people wearing them even if we...don't personally know them it's just nice to know that they have that little connection that they somehow knew him," says Lydia.

"It's like Tripp is still around we're keeping him so that's he's still there with us everyday, we're never going to forget him," Tripp's friend, Hundley McCurry said.

His memory will remain permanent and his legacy of love, kindness and compassion will live on.

"He loved to dance at baseball games even in the dugout he was dancing all around," says Lydia. "He would definitely you know just try to make anyone smile that he could even if he had to shake it somewhere random or tell a joke, so that's definitely one of our favorite things about him."

The family created a Tripp Rabon Memorial Fund on Go Fund Me. So far they've raised more the $24,000. The money will be used to award a yearly scholarship to a Summerville High School student who exhibits Tripp's qualities.

The Summerville baseball team beat South Aiken 4-0.

Copyright 2016 WCSC. All rights reserved.