…my child’s life is worth all this political strife.

By Lauree Benton

Editor’s Note: This is a follow up to a previous contribution, “One Woman’s Story: Why I Will Be Enrolling in the ACA (Obamacare) Marketplace.”

My baby boy has insurance!

I came to that realization just after the clock struck midnight on New Year’s Eve, ringing in 2014 and all the possibility it brings.

I let out a huge sigh of relief—one so large that it may have improved my posture. I stood up straighter than I had in seven long months. I may have even let out a tear or two. Happy tears. Relieved tears. Tears of a mother who no longer has to worry that little kid’s tendencies toward hurting themselves could send my family into financial chaos.

We no longer have to pay out of pocket for his doctor’s visits. We no longer have to take him to a separate clinic, with a doctor who makes me uncomfortable, to get his vaccines. We no longer have to worry that if I uselessly panic (again) sending us to the hospital at 2 a.m. on a Tuesday, that it will cost us the equivalent of a month’s rent, or more. Most importantly: if something really does go wrong, we don’t have to worry that we will spend his college fund on healthcare bills.

And we can afford it. Albeit still expensive, the Healthcare.gov marketplace is saving us $250 per month over his previous plan (the one that got canceled because it didn’t get paid.) And this plan has no deductible! So there are few out of pocket costs associated with his doctor’s visits. Whereas before, even with insurance, we paid for a majority of his healthcare as a newborn– nine months later we are paying much less for more benefits. I never thought I would get so excited over something so boring as insurance.

But it’s not boring. It’s potentially life saving. And my child’s life is worth all this political strife. So is yours. It’s worth the arguments with the tea partiers. It’s worth the electoral battles. It’s worth the headaches that have been associated with being a Democrat post 2010. It’s worth the fights that will continue until the ACA is fully implemented and perfected, and every parent in a similar situation in every state can have the relief I felt on January 1.

Happy and HEALTHY New Year to all!