Once Mason Finley is finished smashing records as a track and field giant, he’d love to be a bouncer. Or a thug. Some sort of monster perhaps.

Don’t get the wrong impression, Finley is not a bad guy. Far from it. Classmates at the University of Wyoming call him “a gentle giant.” At 6-foot-8 and 395 pounds, though, he must be the nation’s biggest theater major. A top contender to claim the NCAA championship next month in the discus, and a potential Olympian, he would like to become an actor when his career as an athlete is over.

“With my size, I don’t think I’ll be playing Romeo or Hamlet,” Finley said. “But I’ll have a niche. I can get roles that others can’t — if they need a football-type player or a big, bad guy.”

Lou Anne Wright, a distinguished professor and acting coach at Wyoming, would prefer Finley not typecast himself. He may seem larger than his Colorado hometown of Buena Vista, but there’s a big, wide world out there. And Wright believes Finley has the potential to make a name for himself in show biz.

“Watching Mason act, and the way he conducts himself, I always thought, ‘This guy has the heart of an athlete but the soul of an actor,’ ” Wright said.

Having the experience of being an elite athlete will serve Finley well as an actor, she said.

“One feeds off the other,” Wright said. “Mason has been in front of people and failed. Athletes have to do that. It doesn’t bother him.

“A lot of people that go into acting face the terror of, ‘What if I fail? What if I make a fool of myself?’ Mason is past that. He’s not afraid of failure.”

Of course, Finley knows well the sweet taste of success. At Buena Vista High School, he set a national high school record in the discus with a throw of 236 feet, 6 inches and a Colorado high school record of 71-8½ in the shot put.

Heavily recruited, Finley chose Kansas and competed there for three years. Including the indoor and outdoor seasons, he earned a total of four individual Big 12 Conference championships. He was a four-time NCAA runner-up — twice in the discus, twice in the shot put — but something was missing.

“I had some really good times at Kansas,” he said, “and met some great people. (But) I wasn’t really improving after three years, so I decided to make a change.”

“I finally found it”

In the summer of 2012, Finley transferred to Wyoming, where his father, Jared, had been a standout discus thrower. After sitting out a year because of NCAA transfer rules, Finley has earned two All-America honors with the Cowboys. He aims to add another at the June 11-14 NCAA track and field championships in Eugene, Ore., assuming he advances past regional competition this week.

He has been concentrating on the discus during the outdoor season this year, and his throw of 210-6 with the heavier college discus ranks fifth nationally, second best all-time at Wyoming.

He’s glad he made the move to Laramie.

“I feel like athletes are like puzzle pieces and you’re not going to fit everywhere,” Finley said. “You have to find a place you’re comfortable in. I finally found it at Wyoming.”

Paul Barrett, Wyoming’s longtime throwing coach, must have set a personal best in jumping for joy after receiving word that Finley would become a Cowboy. Barrett recruited Finley out of high school. “But Mason was getting offers from all the big schools, and I knew for us it was a longshot,” he said.

Finley initially signed with UCLA. But he asked for a release from that letter of intent before enrolling, because the Bruins’ throwing coach resigned.

“I think Mason, coming from a small mountain town, really likes the atmosphere at Wyoming,” Barrett said. “He’s a very quiet guy, very humble. He has zero ego. You would never know he was an elite athlete. Being a small-town guy, he’s not looking for a lot of outside activities. In Laramie, he can concentrate on school and athletics. He’s not going to get distracted.”

The best-case scenario, Barrett said, is that Finley wins the NCAA title in Eugene and then gets selected by the U.S. Olympic Committee to be a resident athlete at the USOC track and field training center in Chula Vista, Calif., near San Diego.

A golden opportunity

As much as Finley loves the challenge of theater, he likely has a long career as an athlete ahead of him. World-class weight throwers usually do not reach their peak until after their 30th birthday. Finley plans to focus on the discus to make the Olympics.

“Mason definitely has gold medal potential,” Barrett said. “I think he should make the Olympic team in 2016. And in 2020, I could see him vying for the gold.

“We’re working to trim him down. That’s where he will make his biggest jump. Mason is still going to be a big guy. But he got really heavy at Kansas. That, in my opinion, hurt his progress. He is incredibly mobile and coordinated for somebody that size. But he knows he needs to get quicker and more explosive to reach the top.”

It has not gone unnoticed that Hollywood is only about a 2½- hour drive from Chula Vista. Finley said training for the Olympics will take precedence in all that he does, but it would be wonderful if he could find time to take some acting classes.

His background as an athlete has enabled him to anticipate and appreciate the work required to become a successful actor. Great actors, like great athletes, make it look easy.

“I can see Mason becoming a pretty sophisticated actor,” Wright said. “He has the ability to work with people and to listen. He wants to explore. He wants to become an actor. He wants to do this stuff. You can see into his soul. The camera will love him.

“I think he has a really good chance. I do.”

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler

Laramie legends

Mason Finley is attempting to become the fourth individual NCAA track and field champion in Wyoming history:

1974: Wesley Maiyo, men’s 1,000 yards, indoor, 2:08.00

1996: Ryan Butler, men’s weight throw, indoor, 71 feet, 1½ inches

2005: Shauna Smith, women’s 400-meter hurdles, outdoor, 54.32

Source: University of Wyoming

Ring of fame

Mason Finley’s career-best performances:

COLLEGE INDOOR

Shot put: 66 feet, 3¼ inches (2014, Wyoming record)

COLLEGE OUTDOOR

Shot put: 67-11½ (2013, unattached)

Discus: 210-6 (2014, second-best throw in Wyoming history)

HIGH SCHOOL

Discus: 236-6 (national record)

Shot put: 71-8½ (Colorado state record)