Associated Press file In this July 30, 1965 file photo, President Lyndon Johnson signs the Medicare Bill into law while former President Harry S. Truman (right) observes during a ceremony at the Truman Library in Independence, Missouri. At rear are Lady Bird Johnson, Vice President Hubert Humphrey, and former first lady Bess Truman. When Johnson signed Medicare and Medicaid into law Americans 65 and older were the age group least likely to have health insurance.

By Matthew Waller of the Caller-Times

AUSTIN — Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, hospitals have been penalized by taking away Medicare dollars for people who are readmitted.

New records show that in the fourth year of the federal program, hospitals lost out on $420 million nationwide.

Readmission rates have lowered since before the penalties started, according to data from the Kaiser Family Foundation, which analyzes health data. Heart failure readmission rates were up at 24.7 percent between July 2008 and June 2011, but dropped to 22.7 percent between July 2010 and June 2013.

The estimated penalties, however, have increased during the past few years, from $290 million in fiscal year 2013 to more than $420 million in fiscal year 2015.

Federal lawmakers are saying that the program should look carefully at socioeconomic status, because it seems hospitals with such disadvantaged patients are penalized more.

"With 3 years of data on penalties, the evidence suggests that hospitals that care for chronically ill and low-income patients are far more likely to be penalized than other institutions," according to a paper in the Journal of the American Medical Association that U.S. Sens. Joe Manchin, D-West Virginia, and Roger F. Wicker, R-Mississippi, wrote together with Dr. Andrew Boozary, a health policy expert.

The senators touted a bill that they've put forward called the Hospital Readmissions Program Accuracy and Accountability Act of 2014.

"The bill is straightforward," the authors wrote. "It requires CMS to consider socioeconomic status when calculating penalties for readmission."

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, in adopting new rules, said the organizations would not itself be making those changes. The organization pointed out that even hospitals with many disadvantaged people can do well.

"While we appreciate these comments and the importance of the role that sociodemographic status plays in the care of patients, we continue to have concerns about holding hospitals to different standards for the outcomes of their patients of low sociodemographic status because we do not want to mask potential disparities or minimize incentives to improve the outcomes of disadvantaged populations," the agency wrote in their rules. "We routinely monitor the impact of sociodemographic status on hospitals' results on our measures. To date, we have found that hospitals that care for large proportions of patients of low sociodemographic status are capable of performing well on our measures."

According to data from Kaiser Health News, an independent part of a nonprofit that analyzes health care issues nationwide, Texas had 203 of the 2,592 hospitals penalized nationwide.

The penalty nationwide was a 0.61 percent Medicare payment reduction per patient stay. For Texas, the payment percentage was 0.53. Staff with CMS did not have an exact amount of reduced Medicare dollars for Texas.

Lance Lunsford, a spokesman for the Texas Hospital Association, said a hospital with more than 300 beds, such that could serve a mid-sized city, could bring in $300 million in Medicare dollars, meaning that a 1 percent penalty could cost the hospital $3 million.

"What you've seen in hospitals is an embrace … to change practices," Lunsford said.

He said hospitals are giving home care, communicating better about what patients need when they leave the hospital, and in some cases use predictive software to find out which patients might be most vulnerable when they leave.

Lunsford said the association would favor the addition of socioeconomic factors in considering readmissions penalties.

"Hospitals don't have sole control over what happens in a readmission," he said.

This month saw the 50th anniversary of Medicare, signed in 1965 by President Lyndon B. Johnson. More than 54 million people are enrolled in Medicare, according to the Center for Medicare Advocacy.

Matthew Waller covers state news as the Austin Bureau chief. Contact him at matthew.waller@caller.com and follow him on Twitter @waller_matthew.