Jason Helgerson. | WMHT via YouTube Cuomo officials back in Puerto Rico as crisis looms

State Medicaid director Jason Helgerson is back in Puerto Rico trying to put the finishing touches on an application for a Medicaid waiver the island can send the federal government.

The waiver, modeled loosely on New York's own successful application, would let the island, currently struggling with $72 billion of debt, restructure its health care delivery system using federal dollars.

Story Continued Below

The plan, while not a panacea, does not need congressional approval — which makes it Puerto Rico's best hope for a quick infusion of cash that can be used to reform one of its most costly and least efficient sectors.

Staff from the state's Medicaid Redesign Team are looking to submit a plan to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services by year's end, according to a spokesperson for the state Department of Health.

Helgerson has pursued the waiver since Gov. Andrew Cuomo traveled to Puerto Rico over Labor Day weekend to show his support for the island's governor and its beleaguered finances.

The governor has repeatedly called for Congress to let Puerto Rico declare bankruptcy, and on Sunday, Sen. Chuck Schumer, State Sen. Gustavo Rivera and New York City Council Speaker Melissa Mark-Viverito urged Congress to do the same.

House Republicans so far haven't warmed to the idea.

On Monday, the speaker and Mayor Bill de Blasio released a joint statement saying "there is simply no reason our fellow citizens in Puerto Rico shouldn’t be afforded the same protections available to all 50 states."

"New York City urges Congress to act swiftly before it’s too late and this very real fiscal crisis turns into a humanitarian one," they said.

Improving health care delivery is crucial for Puerto Rico, New York officials have said, because two-thirds of the island's population rely on some form of government-run health care.

But with hospitals and other medical facilities lacking basic necessities like functioning HVAC units, delivering cost-effective care is a challenge. When the result is patients being sicker than they need to be, the government spends more than it should on health care, adding to its financial woes.

If approved, the waiver wouldn't solve the larger problem, which is how Puerto Rico pays for its Medicaid program.

Currently, the island receives about 55 percent reimbursement for its approximately $2.8 billion Medicaid program. But those federal dollars come from a $6.4 billion pot that was set aside as part of the Affordable Care Act.

That pot of money was supposed to last Puerto Rico through 2019, but cost overruns mean it will likely run out within the next 18 months. When it does, the federal contribution toward Puerto Rico’s Medicaid program is capped at $400 million. Given the size of the program, that’s an effective rate of 14 percent. (New York, a far wealthier state, receives a 50 percent match from the federal government.)

The looming crisis has forced doctors to flee the island in search of better rates and patients to flee in search of better care, only exacerbating Puerto Rico's problems.

The only way to change the Medicaid reimbursement rate is through Congress, and if that does not happen, an administrative waiver that brings back federal dollars to reduce the costs of care takes on even greater importance because the island will need to find a way to stretch the dollars it does receive, and reduce the overall expense of the program.

Authors: