For about an hour, it was a clever, if not particularly memorable, speech. Embarking on his fifth State of the Union address, with the lowest approval ratings (forty-three per cent, according to Gallup) of any second-term Oval Office occupant at this point in a Presidency since Richard Nixon, President Obama eschewed the grand pledges that he had made last year to move forward with gun-control legislation, immigration reform, climate-change policy, and tax reform. This year, the first three of those topics got one paragraph each—and tax reform was hardly mentioned.

Instead, the President talked about how “inequality has deepened” and “upward mobility has stalled.” He put forth a series of modest proposals designed to provide “ladders of opportunity into the middle class,” such as raising the minimum wage for federal contract workers. And he expressed his determination to enact some reforms without congressional approval, saying, “America does not stand still, and neither will I.”

To that point, it was pretty much what the advance leaks had indicated: a determined rearguard action from a President who knows that he is down, and who needs a political strategy that can take him and his party through an election year, until, hopefully, a resurgent economy rescues them both. Prone to occasional lapses into passivity and fatalism, here he was sharp, feisty, and funny. This was the Obama of the second 2012 Presidential debate, not the first one.

He castigated the Republicans for depriving “hardworking, responsible Americans” of the chance to receive extended unemployment benefits while looking for a new job. To support his case, he pointed to one such woman, Misty DeMars, who was conveniently sitting in the gallery. DeMars is a college-educated mother of two who lost her job last year. Obama delivered a strong, and much needed, defense of the Affordable Care Act, invoking another White House invitee, Amanda Shelley, who signed up for her new health coverage on January 1st, got sick two days later, and needed emergency surgery on January 3rd. Obama even elicited a quick thumbs-up from John Boehner by pointing out how “the son of a barkeeper is the Speaker of the House.” (It is not to be doubted that some Tea Party members in Ohio are already planning a primary challenge.)

But it was toward the end of the speech, when Obama made the customary pivot to foreign affairs and national-security issues, that the real drama occurred. A tipoff had come from an article at the Daily Beast on Tuesday, which was written by Jon Favreau, the speechwriter who worked on Obama’s previous State of the Union addresses. It explained how much time and effort that the President’s staff would put into finding “ordinary Americans whose lives touch us in extraordinary ways.” Favreau went on: “This is President Obama’s favorite part, too—particularly the story that’s often told to conclude the speech. My old boss is a sucker for good endings, and he would send us far and wide to find just the right anecdote.”

The subject of this year’s concluding story was Army Sergeant First Class Cory Remsburg, a Ranger who first met the President in 2009, at Omaha Beach, on the sixty-fifth anniversary of D Day. In Obama’s telling, Remsburg helped walk him through the program, joked around, took photographs, and left the impression that he was “a strong, impressive young man, with an easy manner, sharp as a tack.” Just a few months later, the President went on, “on his tenth deployment, Cory was nearly killed by a massive roadside bomb in Afghanistan. His comrades found him in a canal, face down, underwater, shrapnel in his brain.”

Even through the television screen, you could almost hear the nervous intake of breath inside the packed chamber. Remsburg was sitting in the gallery too, of course, wearing his full ceremonial uniform, squeezed between his gray-haired father, Craig, and Michelle Obama. As the President explained what Remsburg had subsequently been through—a coma, ten surgeries, the loss of his voice, blindness in one eye, the loss of movement, and “years of gruelling rehab” to regain some of his faculties—the wounded soldier looked gamely ahead, the rigors of his experience plainly visible on his face and head. And after Obama said, “Cory is here tonight…. Sergeant First Class Cory Remsburg never gives up, and he does not quit,” Remsburg pulled himself to his feet, with a bit of assistance from his dad, and acknowledged the thunderous applause that went on for minutes, and was quite unlike anything that had been heard previously.

The President and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Remsburg’s ultimate commanding officers—the men who had overseen his deployment in Afghanistan—were on their feet, staring up at him and applauding. So were the five Supreme Court Justices who showed up. And so were the members of the Cabinet, White House staff members, and, of course, the assembled senators and congressmen. Remsburg waved his one good arm, tried his best to smile, and got a quick rub on the back from the First Lady. Truly, it was hard to watch. But it was even harder to look away.

What did it all signify?

On one level, of course, it was a political ploy—a fiendishly effective way to leave us with something else to talk about than an embattled President defending his policies and seeking to turn the conversation from whether he’s a lame duck. But it was also something bigger and more justifiable. Obama’s speechwriters and spinmeisters didn’t pull Remsburg’s name from a hat. A 2013 piece in the Times reported that the President had met him twice since the D Day celebrations—once at a military hospital near Washington and then at a high school in Phoenix. This was their fourth encounter.

Ever since he ran for President, in 2008, Obama’s underlying message has been that too much of what happens in Washington is an insiders’ game that ignores, and often tramples upon, the wishes and interests of ordinary Americans. By inviting Remsburg—and DeMars and Shelley, too—Obama was taking part in what’s now a traditional ritual for speech-givers. But he was also trying to bridge the gaping chasm between politics and political decision-making as experienced by its practitioners in the nation’s capital and by the grunts out there in the factories, offices, and Army battalions.

He was also invoking the concept of public service, which, in Washington these days, is routinely subjugated to partisan advantage. And, finally, he was saying that we can do better, and we know we can—just look at this young man.

“None of it is easy,” Obama said. “But if we work together; if we summon what is best in us, the way Cory summoned what is best in him, with our feet planted firmly in today but our eyes cast towards tomorrow, I know it’s within our reach.” In a bitterly divided chamber, and a bitterly divided country, it was a fanciful vision to end the speech with. For a moment, though, you got the sense that even the President’s foes gathered before him couldn’t have disagreed with his sentiments.

Read the rest of our State of the Union coverage: Jeff Shesol on executive orders, Amy Davidson on Cory Remsburg and the meaning of war, Evan Ratliff on the many scandals of Michael Grimm, and a live chat about the speech with Davidson, Steve Coll, Rebecca Mead, and Evan Osnos.

Photograph by Alex Wong/Getty.