Businessman Gary Kiehne doesn’t like to lose.

Even when it’s close.

When he lost the Republican primary for Arizona’s 1st Congressional District to former House Speaker Andy Tobin last year by less than 1 percent, he knew it wasn’t the end of his political career.

Kiehne declared his candidacy for the 2016 election in January – giving him as much time as possible to cover the congressional district that stretches from Flagstaff to northern Tucson.

He campaigned nonstop for 11 months in the last election, and still came up short.

“There is no way physically that you can cover this entire district in that short of time,” said Kiehne, who has homes in Casa Grande and Springerville in eastern Arizona.

Despite the early start, a poll by political consultant Mike Noble had him trailing Pinal County Sheriff Paul Babeu among Republican voters.

Kiehne is undeterred by the poll; he considers it a “joke.”

“It’s just a game they play,” he said. “It doesn’t have any relevance.”

He was the first person to officially declare his candidacy for the CD1 seat. A Phoenix television station reported that fellow Republican Ken Bennett – a former gubernatorial candidate and ex-Secretary of State – announced Thursday he is running.

Last year’s GOP nominee for the seat – former state Speaker of the House Andy Tobin – said Sunday in a statement that he would not pursue the seat again in 2016.

Democratic state Sen. Barbara McGuire of Kearny may also toss her hat in the ring. She represents Legislative District 8, which includes most of Pinal County. She announced last month she is exploring a possible run for Kirkpatrick’s seat.

Kiehne doesn’t expect the GOP primary to be a crowded race following the recent U.S. Supreme Court decision preventing the state Legislature from redrawing Arizona’s congressional districts.

It’s speculated the district would have been reconfigured to be more favorable for Republican candidates.

Though CD1 will remain intact, Kiehne said it won’t alter his grassroots style of campaigning.

Hitting the road across eastern Arizona, he operates on the simple strategy of shaking hands and meeting voters one-on-one.

His message has upheld the same conservative themes from the last election: reducing government spending, repealing the Affordable Care Act and reining in the federal bureaucracy.

He’s critical of politicians with little life experience in the private sector – or as he calls it, “no dirt under their fingernails.”

Kiehne thinks he’s the right candidate to represent CD1 due to his activity in multiple industries found throughout eastern Arizona, such as agriculture, tourism and energy production.

“You name the sector of business throughout our entire district, and I’ve been in each and every one of them,” he said.

Kiehne grew up learning the ins and outs of business through his family’s cattle ranch and hardware store. He paid his way through New Mexico State University by selling cars in the summer and would eventually spend 30 years in the oil and gas industry.

He said he has experienced the highs and lows of business prosperity. The sharp drop in oil prices in the 1980s put him in a crunch, but he said he’s learned to navigate the curveballs of a sporadic economy.

Unlike some of his Republican contemporaries, Kiehne argues the key to greater job creation is not through cutting taxes. He said expanding access to financing allows more entrepreneurs to generate jobs through start-up businesses.

He said U.S. Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick has an unusual way of convincing voters she’s capable of creating jobs. He pointed out her support of the Affordable Care Act and lack of action against the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency as areas where they strongly differ.

At the end of the day, Kiehne said what distinguishes him from other candidates is that he doesn’t think of himself as a “career politician.”

“I’m not doing this cause I need a job,” he said, “I’ve got plenty to do win, lose or draw.”

Kiehne’s campaign reported having $500,000 on hand at the end of last quarter. CD1 is considered one of the most expensive congressional races in the country – over $4 million was raised between Kirkpatrick and Tobin for the 2014 general election.

Kiehne said the high demand for cash doesn’t worry him going into the race.