WASHINGTON -- The Center for Responsive Politics (CRP) is projecting that $4 billion will be spent on this year's congressional elections -- making it the most expensive non-presidential U.S. election ever.

When the battle for Congress ends, CRP projects that Republican and conservative-leaning candidates, party committees and outside groups will spend at least $1.92 billion, compared to at least $1.7 billion for Democratic and liberal-leaning candidates and groups.

Some of that money is being spent in the hotly contested Louisiana Senate race.

The CRP, the non-partisan organization that evaluates campaign spending, said that so far $14.7 million has been spent by outside groups in Louisiana. Of that total, $8.93 million was spent against leading Republican Senate candidate Bill Cassidy; and $4.49 million against Democratic incumbent Mary Landrieu.

But CRP said the anti-Landrieu funding doesn't include large, but unspecified allocations by the conservative Americans for Prosperity, which said the preponderance of its negative ads against Landrieu were issue advocacy -- most urging her to change her position on the Affordable Care Act -- and weren't required to be reported to the Federal Election Commission.

A total of $418,170, all from the Senate Conservatives Fund, was spent to promote the candidacy of Tea Party Republican Rob Maness.

The biggest outside spenders, according to the CRP's review of Federal Election Commission filings, are:

Democratic/liberal: Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, $3.67 million; Patriot Majority, $2.14 million and Senate Majority PAC, $2.44 million. The Senate Majority PAC is headed by two former top staffers to Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid. The Patriot Majority doesn't disclose its donors, while the DSCC and Senate Majority PAC does list donors and their contributions to the FEC.

Republican/conservative: Crossroads GPS, $1.63 million; National Rifle Association, $1.68 million; NRA Institute for Legislative Action, $529,102; Senate Conservatives Fund, $418,170; Americans for Prosperity, $330,053; and National Draft Ben Carson for President Committee, $219,580. Among those groups, only the Draft Ben Carson committee and Senate Conservatives Fund discloses donors.

Americans for Prosperity, which is reported to be heavily financed by the industrial Koch Brothers, said the $330,053 in recently disclosed spending against Landrieu ask voters to oppose Landrieu's re-election, in direct contrast to the earlier ads that urged people to call Landrieu and ask her to change her position on the Affordable Care Act, but notably did not suggest how they should vote.

In addition to the outside groups, which have been free to raise unlimited amounts of money because of a Supreme Court ruling that declared limitations on advocacy spending represents unconstitutional restrictions on free speech, the major candidates have also raised large sums of money,.

Through Sept. 30, Landrieu has raised $12.34 million; Cassidy, $10.49 million and Maness, $2.34 million.