ENLARGE Photo: The Wall Street Journal

Missouri and North Carolina have gotten the least public attention among the five states that will vote on Tuesday. But they could be particularly meaningful for Texas Sen. Ted Cruz.

The two states are just about the last on the nominating calendar with large numbers of evangelical Christians, a group that Mr. Cruz has tried to consolidate. After Tuesday, the primary calendar shifts to states with smaller shares of evangelicals.

The evangelical shares of Missouri and North Carolina residents are 36% and 35%, respectively, according to data from the Pew Research Center. The only state with a larger evangelical population that has yet to vote is West Virginia, where 39% of residents identify as evangelical Christians. That state doesn’t vote until May.

Mr. Cruz’s campaign, which emphasizes social conservative values, was supposed to be built for states with large evangelical populations. But seven of the 10 states with the largest evangelical populations, according to Pew, have voted so far, and Donald Trump has won six of them: Tennessee, Alabama, Kentucky, Arkansas, Mississippi and Georgia. Mr. Cruz won only Oklahoma, which borders on his home state of Texas.

As upcoming primaries and caucuses move north and west, away from the states that were supposed to be Mr. Cruz’s base, he could use a win or two. Missouri and North Carolina would give any winning candidate a boost. Together, they award 124 delegates, more than Florida’s cache of 99, the biggest prize on Tuesday. They award their delegates proportionally, so Mr. Cruz could lose the states but still emerge with a prize.

Mr. Cruz may have greater success in Missouri than North Carolina. The state borders Kansas as well as Oklahoma, both of which Mr. Cruz won. But the two states also present challenges.

Both have lower-than-average median household incomes—Missouri at $47,700 and North Carolina at $46,600, compared to the U.S. median of $53,482. Exit polls show that Mr. Cruz routinely does better with evangelical voters who have higher incomes.

And North Carolina has a large African-American population; more than 22% of its residents are black. So far, every state with an African-American population larger than the U.S. average, 13.2%, has gone to Donald Trump. That’s not because Mr. Trump wins the African-American vote, but he seems to do especially well with white voters who live near blacks.

The upcoming primary calendar includes a long list of states that are less hospitable to Mr. Cruz’s brand of conservative than the states that have already cast ballots. They include New York, Connecticut and Maryland, to name a few. On Tuesday he’ll want a strong showing and a large chunk of delegates out of the states that were supposed to be favorable ground for him.

MORE:

Campaign 2016 Shatters the Reagan and Clinton Coalitions

Temperatures Rise on Eve of Next GOP Contests

Rubio Wins GOP Contest in District of Columbia

Sanders Puts Emphasis on Delegate Math

What to Expect if Republican Convention Is Contested