How to prioritize your credit card debt. (Photo: Getty Images/Creatas RF)

Q: I have two credit cards that I have been trying to pay down. One has about $5,000 and the other $6,000. The interest rate on each card a month is practically eating me alive. Heather DeAtley, Winchest, Ohio

A: You've got options to consider, but first create a budget and determine how much extra, beyond the minimum amounts due, you could put toward paying down the credit card debt.

Now we don't know the interest rate on your cards, but let's say, for example, the card with $5,000 has an interest rate of 18.99% and the card with $6,000 has an interest rate of 17.99% and that the minimum payment due equals 2% of the balance due.

In that case, your minimum payments would be, according to Bankrate.com's calculator, $100 and $120, respectively. And if all you paid each month was the minimum due it would take you 97 months to pay down your cards.

Now let's say, after you created your budget, you can throw another $250 a month toward paying down your credit cards. So how might you divvy up that money? Typically, you might choose one of two pay-down methods: the snowball, in which you put the extra $250 toward the lowest balance first or the avalanche, in which you put the $250 toward the highest interest rate card first.

In your case, you'd pay down — using either method — the card with the $5,000 balance in 17 months and the card with the $6,000 balance in 30 months. By the way we used a free software program downloaded from Vertex42.com to run these examples.

Given that the interest rate you pay on your cards might be different than the ones used in our example, you should definitely run the numbers to see which method is best for you. By the way: Vertex says the main benefit of using the snowball approach is the "psychological effect of seeing the number of debts disappear more quickly." And the main benefit of using the avalanche method is that you'll pay the least amount of interest. If, however, the difference in the total interest is not significant use the lowest balance method, given its psychological benefits, says Vertex.

Now, along the way, if you free up some extra cash, throw that money toward paying down your debt. The extra cash might come from a pay raise or maybe you can trim your discretionary expenses even more with some extra will power. For instance, you could easily free up an extra $25 by not eating out or ordering take-out or buying specialty coffee. You might also consider, though some experts would disagree with this advice, suspending contributions to your 401(k) plan and using that money to pay down your debt faster.

Robert Powell is editor of Retirement Weekly, contributes regularly to USA TODAY, The Wall Street Journal and MarketWatch and teaches at Boston University. Got questions about money? Email rpowell@allthingsretirement.com.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1LltMbC