State Health Officer Mary Currier (Photo: Clarion-Ledger file photo)

The Mississippi State Department of Health, faced with an $18.5 million budget deficit, is seeking to reduce some services and raise fees.

Health Officer Dr. Mary Currier said the department’s revenue is declining. One reason cited is that more people are going to private providers because more providers are accepting Medicaid under the federal Affordable Care Act.

As an example, the department has seen reimbursed fees dropped from $28.5 million in Fiscal Year 2009 to $19 million in Fiscal Year 2014.

Currier gave the department’s budget request for the next budget year, which begins July 1, 2016, during the Joint Legislative Budget Committee hearing this week.

Lt. Gov. Tate Reeves said the Legislature has provided the health department about $10 million more from the general fund over the last four years, leading him to surmise that the Legislature isn’t likely to go along with the request for an $18.5 million deficit appropriation.

Currier said the department has seen a decrease in almost all services, including in vaccinations.

The deficit is due to a $10 million cash transfer from the health department to the state’s rainy day fund in 2010, a one-third decrease in Medicaid reimbursement from 2012-2014, and a $5 million deficit due to the closing of home health care from 2007-2014. Also, Currier said the state’s new accounting software system contributed to the department inability to determine its cash balances this fiscal year.

Currier said there is no projected improvement in the funding stream for the current budget year, which began July 1.

“Therefore, the Mississippi Department of Health must address all operations, services, staffing and other expenditures to live within the current appropriations into the future,” Currier said.

Currier said some department fees haven’t been raised since the late 1990s and no longer cover the costs of the service provided.

The state Legislature mostly determine the fees that the department can charge. Currier is requesting that the department be allowed to set fees with oversight from the Legislature, the Legislature watchdog group PEER, or the state auditor to make sure fees only cover the cost of providing program services.

Also, Currier is asking that the department be allowed to come from under state Personnel Board rules for the next two years.

However, state Sen. Willie Simmons, D-Cleveland, said he isn’t generally in favor of state agencies coming from under state Personal Board rules and regulations. The department is looking at decreasing local clinic capacity and staffing to better match available resources.

Contact Jimmie E. Gates at (601) 961-7212 or jgates@jackson.gannett.com. Follow @jgatesnews on Twitter.

Mississippi State Department of Health fast facts:

•Total budget: $385 million, with $35.3 from the state general fund

•Employees: 2,173

•District offices: 9

•County offices 96

•WIC distribution centers: 95

Source: MSDH

Read or Share this story: http://on.thec-l.com/1Kxp20o