More than 100 guests attended Turning Point Behavioral Health Care Center's 14th annual Town Hall Meeting on mental health care at the Skokie Public Library on Friday, Feb. 13. The morning began with a light breakfast and resource fair with information on community services and programs. Skokie Public Library Director and Turning Point Board Member Carolyn Anthony welcomed the audience, and then Turning Point CEOAnn Fisher Raney moderated the panel discussion and question and answer session with elected officials and local experts.

Questions for the panelists ranged from the impact of the Affordable Care Act and high deductible plans on access to mental health services, to availability of affordable housing and crisis training for police officers.

Raney explained the reasons for the Town Hall meeting, and how the nonprofit organization copes with ongoing state budget concerns. "It is essential for everyone to be educated and aware of available needs and resources in the community. Turning Point's commitment is to provide expert, affordable care to all that need it, and we depend upon our local professional providers and legislators to collaborate with us to make that happen."

Panelists included Illinois State Sen. Daniel Biss and Illinois State Rep. Robyn Gabel, who both represent Evanston, as well as Illinois State Sen. Ira Silverstein, Illinois State Representative Laura Fine, Skokie Mayor George Van Dusen, Suburban Director for U.S. Congresswoman Jan Schakowsky Ann Limjoco, Turning Point CEO Ann Fisher Raney, and Associate Director Region Services Illinois Department of Human Services, Division of Mental Health Dan Wasmer.

Other local experts who spoke included Erie Family Health Director Erie Evanston/Skokie Clinic Lisa Robinson; Erie Family Health Behavioral Health TherapistsRobert VanTrek; Skokie Chamber of Commerce Executive Director Howard Meyer; Skokie Public Library Director Carolyn Anthony; State of Illinois Human Services Department's Director of the Division of Alcohol and Substance Abuse and Acting Director of the Division of Mental Health Theodora Binion; Community Behavioral Healthcare Association of Illinois Public Policy Social Worker Marvin Lindsey; CJE Senior Life's Manager of Consumer Assistance Danielle Clemens; Erie Family Health Behavioral Health Therapist Sheila Fleming; Open Communities Coordinator Jackie Grossman; Skokie Director of Health Catherine Counard; NorthShore University HealthSystem Administrative Director of Psychiatry Deborah Taber; NAMI-CCNS Executive Director Nancy Carstedt; Niles Township Social Worker Jackie Walker-O'Keefe and New Foundation Center Executive Director Sue Shimon.

For more information visit www.tpoint.orgor call Turning Point at 847-933-0051 ext. 442.