Readers sound off about the CIA torture report release

Buy Photo Syndicated cartoon: Cheney and the CIA torture report. (Photo: Special to The Tennessean)Buy Photo

McCain correct on torture report release

Thank you, Sen. John McCain, for taking a stand in opposition to most of the other GOP Senators in support of the release of the CIA Torture Report.

Senator McCain (a survivor of torture himself) on the Senate floor said, "The use of torture has damaged our security and our reputation as a force of good".

Seems to me in the so called "war on terror" we lost our soul.

Gary Bergin

Nashville 37215

Torture saved lives, prevented another 9/11

Democrats should be ashamed of their leadership. Sen. Dianne Feinstein's release of the Senate's intelligence report blasting the CIA's enhanced interrogation of 9/11 mastermind terrorists was irresponsible, partisan, unprofessional, and inaccurate.

The report is suspect on several levels. First, the release was sudden and imperils American embassies and citizens worldwide. Democrats have obviously learned nothing from Benghazi. One wonders if they even care.

Second, the Democrat-run Senate investigation never questioned CIA administrators or agents. As a result, it's one-sided and incomplete.

Third, the report blithely claims techniques of water boarding, sleep deprivation, and diet management were torture and yielded no results. Funny thing, the intelligence gleaned has prevented, so far, another 9/11 and led to the eventual killing of Osama bin-Laden.

I suppose, in the aftermath of the horrific 9/11 attacks, captured al-Qaida planners were supposed to be put in time-out, given cookies, and asked to please, pretty please, tell us about their organization and its future murderous plans.

Most Americans see through the political motivations of left-wing lame-duck Democrats in the Senate. To those sanctimonious, politically spiteful politicians, I ask which they would choose: uncomfortable questioning by the CIA, or being arbitrarily executed by an Obama-drone?

Terry Kimbrough

Lebanon 37087

Problem is drones, not torture

Much condemnation has been served up following the release of the Democrat-led Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA interrogation methods.

In comparison please consider that in the past ten years, in Pakistan alone, drone strikes have killed over 3,000 people, only fifty of which were the intended high profile targets. All the rest were innocent civilians including many children.

Most of these fatalities were the results of the greatly increased number of drone strikes in the past four years. I do not know of a single terrorist who died from waterboarding let alone innocent civilians and children.

Drone strike deaths took place far away in Pakistan and as the old saying goes, out of sight, out of mind, however the media has done much more to try and make us cringe at what the CIA started doing under a Republican administration than what the authorization for and continued use of drone strikes by the current administration has done and continues to do.

David Benedict

Mount Juliet 37122

Belmont's Gonzales should be investigated

After days of national and international news about CIA torture, how is it possible that The Tennessean has carried nothing about Belmont University Law School Dean Alberto Gonzales' role in providing the legal justification for torture?

As attorney general under the George W. Bush Administration, he is one of the former high-ranking officials who would and should face prosecution. Didn't you think this might be of interest to the readers?

Warren Duzak

West Meade 37205

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1BdLmpD