This article is a collaboration between MedPage Today® and:

Action Points Note that this study was published as an abstract and presented at a conference. These data and conclusions should be considered to be preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

Lung cancer screening of the Medicare population would have a big impact on stage at detection, but at the hefty price of $9.3 billion over the first 5 years, researchers found.

Whether Medicare will pick up the tab for annual low-dose CT screening for high-risk individuals remains to be seen when the final coverage determination comes out in November, although a Medicare advisory committee to the federal agency voted heavily against it last month.

CHICAGO -- Lung cancer screening of the Medicare population would have a big impact on stage at detection, but at the hefty price of $9.3 billion over the first 5 years, a modeling study showed.

A conservative phase-in of screening for those 65 and older would more than double the proportion of lung cancers caught at a localized stage -- 32% over 5 years, up from 15% currently -- Joshua A. Roth, PhD, MHA, of the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, and colleagues projected.

That would mean a corresponding drop in late-stage lung cancer diagnoses from the current 57% down to 40%, Roth reported at an online press briefing, ahead of presentation at the American Society of Clinical Oncology meeting here.

Screening would shift the stage so that 89,000 of the approximately 50 million Medicare beneficiaries would be diagnosed at the more treatable early stage, Roth told MedPage Today.

Whether Medicare will pick up the tab for annual low-dose CT screening for high-risk individuals remains to be seen when the final coverage determination comes out in November, although a Medicare advisory committee to the federal agency voted heavily against it last month.

Either way, private insurers under the Affordable Care Act are obligated to begin reimbursing for it Jan. 1, 2015, based on the grade B recommendation by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF).

Healthcare systems should get ready for the increased screening demand and growing early-stage lung cancer population, Roth suggested, which has been increasing as a result of screening programs rolled out across the nation.

Overall, an extra 54,900 lung cancers of any stage would be detected compared with no screening over 5 years, his group projected.

Extrapolating the National Lung Screening Trial findings to that number, an estimated 2,745 lives would be saved over the first 5 years, Tawee Tanvetyanon, MD, a thoracic oncologist at the Moffitt Cancer Center in Tampa, Fla., calculated.

Roth's study did not include cost-effectiveness, life-years gained, or survival impact analyses.

"It may be true that lung cancer screening will increase the cost of care, especially in the short term," he argued in a statement to MedPage Today. "The primary issue is about saving lives. The goal of our healthcare should be to enhance our life and increase our longevity. Its goal should not be to save money."

The low-dose CT scans would be the biggest contributor to the extra cost incurred by screening, even when factoring in the differences over the course of treatment through to terminal care, Roth noted.

The total tab for lung cancer screening would even out to approximately $3 per Medicare member per month in the base projection.

There's no good comparator data for the Medicare population, Roth noted, but pointed to a 2012 study suggesting that breast cancer screening added $2.50 per member per month across the privately-insured population and colorectal cancer screening added $0.95 per member per month.

At the Medicare determination committee meeting, an actuarial analysis suggested an extra $1 per Medicare beneficiary per month for lung cancer screening by the USPSTF recommendations.

Assumptions about who will actually get screened are a big factor in the projected impact, cautioned press conference co-moderator and ASCO President Clifford A. Hudis, MD.

"It will be interesting to see what kind of real numbers we get from the actual rollout of this in some form or fashion," Hudis, of Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York City, told MedPage Today.

Overall, though, the stage shift looked very similar to what happened with breast cancer after introduction of mammographic screening mammography, he told reporters at the briefing.

Roth's base model assumed phased introduction of lung screening similar to what was done with mammography, where 20% of screening candidates would be invited per year and half would actually accept and get screened.

Another projection of faster diffusion with 75% screening came in with much higher-stage downshifting but greater cost of $12.7 billion over 5 years, while a model with only 25% screening boosted stage I diagnoses by less than 10% but at a cost of $5.9 billion.

Costs included in the projection were low-dose CT screening and follow-up, confirmatory bronchoscopy or biopsy, and stage-specific lung cancer treatment through to terminal care.

The study was funded by Genentech. The researchers disclosed no relevant relationships with industry; one is an employee of Genentech.

Reviewed by Robert Jasmer, MD Associate Clinical Professor of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco