So it looks like Gov. Tom Wolf has carried through on his campaign promise to scrap ex-Gov. Tom Corbett's "CorbettCare" alternative to the Medicaid expansion authorized under Obamacare.

The PennLive Opinion Desk inbox is already filled to overflowing with Wolf's announcement today that the state will embrace the full expansion of Medicaid, which will extend coverage to about 500,000 uninsured.

From the biz-friendly Americans for Prosperity's Beth Anne Mumford, we get this:

"There is a big difference between healthcare funding and health outcomes, and Governor Wolf's proposal will not improve the latter," she said. "Our poorest residents are subject to substandard care under Medicaid. Adding even more able-bodied adults to a program intended to serve our poorest residents will only increase the strain on the system and exacerbate the existing problems. We need to reform Medicaid to offer better outcomes at a lower cost, not add more people to the system."

And from the left-leaning Keystone Progress' Mike Morrill, we get this:

"Keystone Progress applauds Governor Tom Wolf's decision to reverse course on the flawed Healthy PA program, and instead move Pennsylvania towards full Medicaid expansion immediately. Millions of Pennsylvanians will be able to get the health care they need because Governor Wolf recognizes that the expansion of Medicaid as offered in the Affordable Care Act passed in 2009 is the smartest, most efficient, most cost-effective way to get affordable care for the most people in the Commonwealth," he said.

"It is unfortunate that it took this long for the state to move in this direction. According to researchers at Harvard Medical School and the City University of New York, there were as many as 1,491 deaths due to the lack of Medicaid expansion in Pennsylvania. Beyond that, a Families USA study estimates Medicaid expansion could create an estimated 41,200 new Pennsylvania jobs. This is the right thing to do for Pennsylvania," Morrill concluded.

What do you think? Have your say in the comments.