Medicaid gaps are the remnants of political and legal battles that eroded the ACA. Obamacare's haves and have-nots

ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. — April Gomez-Rodriguez hopes Obamacare changes her life.

Daniel Hughes says it’s like the health law never happened.

Story Continued Below

The difference between them: one state border.

Gomez-Rodriguez and Hughes are both uninsured. They don’t get coverage through their low-wage jobs, but they don’t qualify for traditional Medicaid. There’s no way they can afford to purchase health insurance on their own.

But Gomez-Rodriguez, 32, who works with kids at a behavioral health center, lives in New Mexico, where Gov. Susana Martinez was among the first in the GOP to embrace the Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act. On Jan. 1, Gomez-Rodriguez and her husband will have health coverage for the first time in years.

( POLITICO's full Obamacare coverage)

Hughes, 40, who works in home repair, lives in Texas, where Gov. Rick Perry’s staunch opposition to Medicaid expansion and other key elements of Obamacare shut him out.

It wasn’t supposed to be this way. Obamacare was supposed to create a health care safety net from coast to coast, across income levels, putting everyone within reach of health coverage. But in some states, there’s a gaping hole. In half the states, millions of poor people are left out.

Those gaps weren’t part of the law that Congress passed and President Barack Obama signed in 2010. They are the wreckage of the years of political and legal battles that eroded some of the original promises of Obamacare.

( Also on POLITICO: Obamacare figures leave a lot unsaid)

The Affordable Care Act required all states to expand the program to encompass people with household income up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level — about $15,000 for a single person, about $31,000 for a family of four. The federal government would have paid the bill entirely for the first three years and then gradually phased back to a 90 percent contribution.

The Supreme Court changed that. In a 7-2 ruling last year, the court found that it was unconstitutional to require the states to expand Medicaid. It had to be optional. More than half of the nation’s governors have decided not to expand or are leaning in that direction. In an odd quirk of how the law works in the states that opt out, people who are just a tad over the poverty line — from 100 to 133 percent of poverty — can go into the new exchanges and get a subsidized health insurance policy. But the poorest — those with incomes less than 100 percent of poverty, whom the laws’ authors thought they had protected through Medicaid — have nothing.

( POLITICO's guide to the Affordable Care Act)

Texas is the largest of the 26 states to not expand. As the health law rolls out this month, 5 million low-income Americans like Hughes are left with nothing, according to estimates from the Kaiser Family Foundation.

“You can just cheer all over the United States for everyone else but not for me, because I don’t get this opportunity that everybody has worked so hard for,” says Daniel’s wife, Dena Hughes, 44. “Philosophically, [the law] is great. But right here on the streets of Texas, it’s not that big of a difference.”

Hughes just started a new home repair business. It’s hard for him to know exactly what his family will earn, but he estimates it will be just above or below $31,590 — the income requirement for a family of six to get tax subsidies next year. If he’s below it, he’ll remain uninsured. If his new business lets him cross over into a slightly higher income bracket, he may be able to get some help in the exchange.

Texas’s Medicaid program is among the most restrictive in the country. Coverage for poor adults is almost nonexistent because the income requirements are so low — about $4,000 per year for a family of three. Perry said repeatedly that he was skeptical of expanding Medicaid because of the federal promise to pay the Medicaid expansion bill. He said he feared the feds would cut and run, leaving the states with an enormous bill.

( WATCH: Health care: What Obama said, why it mattered)

But other governors, like Martinez, thought the feds were offering a good deal. In New Mexico, expansion will cover some 170,000 people in a state that has a big problem with coverage despite a large Medicaid program. According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, New Mexico’s Medicaid program covers 22 percent of its population, the fourth highest rate in the country. Even with that help, about one in five people in New Mexico is uninsured, the third highest uninsurance rate in the country.