PA-Gov: Corbett Releases Radio Ad (AUDIO)

Written by Nick Field, Contributing Writer

Governor Corbett is out with his latest radio commercial today, a one-minute spot that takes aim at several of his Democratic opponents.

The premise of the ad, titled “Ding Dong”, is that all of Pennsylvania’s voters ring your doorbell and ask you to decide who their choice for Governor should be. While that’s not the best concept in the world, it does allow the narrator to get to the point, disparaging the history of various Democratic candidates.

Rep. Allyson Schwartz is recognized as a liberal who voted to raise taxes over 60 times. Then they turn to John Hanger, who is painted as a looney liberal who wants to legalize marijuana, there’s even a helpful “cuckoo” sound effect in case you missed the point.

The ad then focuses on Rob McCord and Tom Wolf, who are identified as multi-millionaires who want to cut Medicare by $715 billion (this claim concerns the candidates’ support of Obamacare which proponents assert reduced waste in the program rather than cut funds).

Finally, the voiceover ends by listing the accomplishments of Governor Corbett during his time in office.

“Our opponents have run to the extreme left of the electorate trying to win this primary,” the Governor’s campaign manager Mike Barley stated. “From higher, job-killing taxes, to the proliferation of illegal drugs to their unwavering support of President Obama and his hallmark legislative disaster Obamacare, they are proving every day that they are out of touch with hardworking Pennsylvanians.”

Interestingly, the ad suggests that the Corbett campaign believes Allyson Schwartz is their most likely opponent. They chose to lump her in with the most liberal candidate in the race, John Hanger, and only dealt McCord and Wolf glancing blows by comparison.

It’s highly possible that this focus will change given the new polls showing Wolf in the lead. The ad also completely neglected some top-tier candidates like Katie McGinty and recent entrant Jack Wagner.

To listen to the ad click here.

February 26th, 2014 | Posted in Front Page Stories, Governor, Top Stories | 5 Comments