On December 20, 2012, United States District Judge Richard Kyle denied American Sniper Chris Kyle’s motion to dismiss a defamation lawsuit brought by wrestler-turned-governor Jesse Ventura over a passage in Kyle’s bestselling 2012 book involving an alleged bar fight after a funeral. Less than two months later, Chris Kyle was dead: On February 2 of this year, he and Chad Littlefield were shot to death at a shooting range about 50 miles southwest of Fort Worth. Eddie Routh, an Iraq war veteran, will stand trial for their murders.

But the increasingly contentious court case initially filed in February 2012 lives on, with Chris’s widow Taya now the defendant. She has already failed at her attempt to move the federal case to Dallas, so she could be closer to home and her kids during the trial. (Ventura’s attorneys claimed that moving the case here would have given Kyle home-field advantage, because in Dallas, they wrote, “Chris Kyle is revered as a hero.”)

But once more she’s attempting to convince the course to dismiss the suit.

This week Kyle’s attorneys filed yet another motion for summary judgment, which spends some 40 pages detailing the few pages in the book involving the alleged scuffle between Chris Kyle and Jesse Ventura, who is referred to solely as “Scruff Face” in the book. (Ventura’s identity was made public only during subsequent interviews Chris Kyle did to promote American Sniper.)

Long story short, says the motion: Kyle’s legal team has interviewed numerous witnesses who witnessed the bar fight and can corroborate the sniper’s story.

“Chris Kyle’s account is essentially that Ventura loudly criticized the Iraq war and American leaders, that Ventura told Kyle ‘you deserve to lose a few’ and made aggressive gestures towards Kyle, and that Kyle punched him,” says the motion. “Substantial evidence supports Kyle’s account. Ventura’s disputes — whether over specific details or choice of language or what details are or are not included in every recounting of the events — do not alter the substantial truth of the witnesses’ consistent core accounts. Ventura cannot meet his burden of proof simply by disbelieving or discrediting Kyle’s evidence.”

The motion for summary judgment is below, along with depositions from witnesses who say they can corroborate Chris Kyle’s account of the bar fight — including a woman who says Ventura’s “entire presence that night seemed pretty offensive to me.”

No doubt the legal documents below will be joined in coming days by a response from Ventura’s legal team, which has already accused Taya Kyle of looking to the court for a “plea for sympathy” when she tried to transfer the case from Minnesota to Texas.

Taya Kyle Dec 2013 Motion to Dismiss

Supporting Docs in Ventura v Kyle