Buy Photo John Bergmann is director of Popcorn Park Zoo in Lacey. (Photo: DOUG HOOD/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)Buy Photo

It began decades ago with a mistreated fawn and an injured raccoon.

Now, some 37 years later, a location in the midst of the Pine Barrens here continues to be a haven for animals of all kinds that have been abused, neglected, abandoned, injured, are sick or are otherwise unwanted or unable to be cared for at other facilities.

One might view the Associated Humane Societies' Popcorn Park Zoo in the township's Forked River section as an island of misfit toys for animals. But it also serves as an attraction for visitors who can get a closeup look at and compassion for many different species, including lions and tigers and bears, exotic birds, monkeys, reptiles, deer and farm animals that make their home in a peaceful setting on seven acres in the country, off of Lacey Road.

And now, it also serves as a penitentiary of sorts for Ocean County's most notorious four-legged outlaw – Rocky, the hybrid bobcat from Stafford, who on Dec. 19 was ordered by Stafford Municipal Judge Damian Murray to live out his life at the zoo after continually breaking out of his owner's home over the course of the year.

But, it's not so bad for the feline outlaw. You might say that Rocky is serving his life term at one of those "country-club prisons.''

After his repeated escapades roaming the Manahawkin section of Stafford upon managing to get out of an enclosure at owner Ginny Fine's home, Rocky, now estimated to be about 50 pounds, is actually living the American dream. He has his own house, which measures about 12-feet-by-7-feet, and an enclosed yard that is about 42-feet-by-20 feet, on the grounds of the zoo.

Rocky seems content

The zoo's director, John Bergmann, says Rocky keeps to himself, but seems content in his surrounds in the park. One recent afternoon, the hybrid bobcat sat perched atop rafters in his yard and stared down at visitors who had come to see the notorious creature. Bergmann said Rocky has a steady diet of chicken, which is a delicacy for the animals at the zoo who are generally fed beef.

"He can go wherever he wants – up, down, around or inside," Bergmann said of Rocky.

Rocky is not the zoo's only famous resident. Popcorn Park was home for 10 years to Princess, a 27-year-old camel who gained fame by successfully picking the winners of NFL games during her stay at the zoo. Princess was euthanized in January when the arthritis she suffered from rendered her unable to stand.

"She passed away in January, but she lived a long, happy life," Bergmann said.

The zoo director recalled how he would get the camel to make predictions on the outcomes of NFL games – he would put a graham cracker and the name of a team in each of his hands and wait for Princess to pick one.

At one point, Princess was on a streak, successfully predicting the outcome of 11 games in a row, Bergmann said.

She accurately predicted 113 matches, including six of the last seven Super Bowls.

"She was only wrong once in the Super Bowl," he said. "She never liked the Jets much. She stopped picking the Eagles because of Michael Vick."

Like Princess, every animal at the zoo has its own story.

Buy Photo Popcorn Park Zoo is a wildlife rescue animal sanctuary offering refuge for various animals in need. (Photo: DOUG HOOD/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)

Pike the goat, Boo-Boo the bear

Take Pike the goat, for instance, who was given the name because he made his home for about a year on a New Jersey Turnpike overpass and was often seen running on the toll road, Bergmann said.

"People thought he was going to get killed," Bergmann said.

Then, about two months ago, Pike was captured on Route 206 in Bordentown and brought to stay at the zoo, Bergmann said.

Then, there is Boo-Boo the black bear, who was serving as a roadside attraction in Iowa before her owner used her as a down payment on a car at a less-than-benevolent car dealership, Bergmann said. The dealership used the animal to bring in business before she was rescued by the zoo at age 2, some 17 years ago, he said.

The zoo is almost constantly getting calls about all kinds of animals in turmoil or in need of homes, Bergmann says.

The facility opened in 1977, after one of the Associated Humane Societies' directors took in a mistreated fawn on the grounds, and then the directors received a call about a raccoon that got a leg caught in a trap and wound up having to have the limb amputated, Bergmann said.

Not wanting to let the mutilated raccoon out in the wild, "We built a cage for it in front of the shelter, and that was the start of the Popcorn Park Zoo," Bergmann said.

"It wasn't meant to be a zoo," Bergmann said. "It was supposed to be a dog and cat placement facility – an adoption center."

But the rest is history.

Buy Photo Popcorn Park Zoo is a wildlife rescue animal sanctuary offering refuge for various animals in need. (Photo: DOUG HOOD/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)

Peacocks strolling

Upon entering the tranquil grounds, visitors are greeted by crowing roosters and colorful peacocks that stroll around the park. They soon are treated to sights of horses, cows, goats, tigers, bears and lions.

One of the creatures at the zoo with a hard-luck tale is Dante, an 18-year-old male tiger originally intended as a target of an out-of-state illegal hunt, Bergmann explained. Dante was rescued and has resided at the zoo for 12 years, he said.

But now, Dante has been battling cancer, and is thin from chemotherapy, he said. And the animal is practically blind in one eye.

"He's been through a lot," Bergmann says of Dante.

About a year ago, the zoo got a call to take in a blind white female tiger named Kya, who is now about 4½ years old, Bergmann said.

"No one wanted to take a blind tiger," he said. "I told them, we have just the place for her."

Buy Photo Kya, a blind white female tiger, is one of the animals found at Popcorn Park Zoo in Lacey. (Photo: DOUG HOOD/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)

Personal history

Bergmann is used to taking in animals that others don't want. He has been zoo director since the facility's inception, after first being hired by the Associated Humane Societies as an animal control officer.

"I always had an interest in animals and drove my mother crazy, bringing home stray dogs and stray cats," he said.

Now his son, Jonathan, shares his love for animals and is a vetiernarian who cares for the creatures at Popcorn Park, the director said.

The zoo relies on donations and is open seven days a week, he said..

"We're always looking for help with donations," Bergmann said. "One tiger eats 15 pounds of meat a night at $1 a pound.

"We take animals that no one else wants," Bergmann said. "We want people to walk out of here with more compassion than they walked in here with – that's our goal."

More information on the zoo and how to help can be found on the Associated Humane Societies' website: www.ahscares.org.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1ARggpQ