Photo

Good Thursday morning from Washington, where the Islamic State fight has a new, not-so-scary name, a bizarre dispute over perspiration overtook a Florida debate, and President Obama is hunkering down to deal with the Ebola epidemic.

Weeks after the Ebola epidemic became a global threat, the White House on Wednesday suddenly moved to convey that it was in crisis mode.

With the revelation of a second infected health care worker at a Dallas hospital, White House officials suddenly scratched President Obama‘s political travel for the day and hastily scheduled a cabinet-level meeting to coordinate a response to the Ebola outbreak.

That meeting lasted more than two hours, twice as long as expected. Reporters asked about virtually nothing else at the press secretary’s daily briefing. Aides described the president’s calls to five world leaders.

At the same time, Mr. Obama faced mounting public criticism from Republicans on the campaign trail, many of them calling for West Africa travel restrictions.

The events echo another crisis: the 2010 Deepwater Horizon oil rig disaster in the Gulf of Mexico. It took weeks of political turmoil before Mr. Obama and his aides adopted a crisis footing that involved around-the-clock briefings and a barrel-chested Coast Guard commander heading up the response. In June, two months after the explosion, Mr. Obama canceled a trip to Indonesia and Australia so he could oversee efforts to cap the gushing oil.

White House aides later said privately that the oil spill prevented them from dealing with much else that summer.

Will the Ebola crisis have the same impact? Late Wednesday evening, the White House canceled a second day of trips, including an economic-themed speech in Rhode Island and fund-raising in New York City on Thursday.

But what seems clear is that a switch has been flipped at the White House. And it’s unlikely to switch back until the Ebola threat subsides.

— Michael D. Shear

It lacks the ferocity of Operation Desert Storm in Iraq or the idealism of Operation Odyssey Dawn in Libya. Instead, United States military officials took a more delicate and ambiguous approach in their belated naming of the campaign against the Islamic State — Operation Inherent Resolve.

And that may be the point.

“It doesn’t have that boo-yah attitude,” said Dean Crutchfield, a business consultant and brand expert. “It’s not ferocious, or too hard or frightening in a way that would make America seem to be the aggressor. It’s coming to protect.”

The military names operations for administrative and public relations purposes. Yet Inherent Resolve, which was disclosed on Wednesday, may not bring up images of enemy annihilation as much as it does household chores.

“The first thing that came to mind was that this didn’t make me think about hitting the bad guys in Syria and Iraq, it made me think about cleaning my carpet,” said Jonathan Schanzer, a former Treasury Department analyst, “ISIS being among the tough stains it would get out.”

— Alan Rappeport

It was perhaps the most bewildering seven minutes of this election cycle.

A high-profile televised debate between Gov. Rick Scott, a Republican, and former Gov. Charlie Crist was held up for what seemed like an eternity Wednesday night over a surprising dispute over sweating and an electric fan.

The perennially tanned Mr. Crist had placed an electric fan at his feet, as he often does, to prevent him from perspiring on stage. But Mr. Scott refused to come out after his aides showed debate organizers the rules, which prohibited its use.

That left a table of moderators and panelists facing a single candidate. “I don’t know, what can we say?” one moderator said.

“Ladies and gentleman,” he added, “we have an extremely peculiar situation right now.”

After seven minutes of a lot of back and forth between the Scott team and the organizers, Mr. Scott finally appeared, the fan stayed in place, and, by the debate’s end, no one was sweating that we could see.

In the explosion of Twitter jokes that followed, Ben Smith of BuzzFeed may have summed it up best. It was, he said, “the dumbest, most Florida thing.”

— Steve Kenny

The unemployment rate is down, but the percentage of Americans who actually have a job has hardly budged. Housing prices are on the rise, except where they aren’t. Corporate profits have soared, but wages have stagnated.

In this “on the one hand, on the other” economy, the stock market has been one of the few unambiguous bright spots, with Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index rising nearly 30 percent last year alone.

But now, less than three weeks before the midterm elections, the markets are gyrating on fears of a global economic slowdown, adding a dose of uncertainty for voters already unnerved by the Ebola, Islamic State and Ukrainian crises.

And that’s not likely to help the Democrats, whose fortunes are tied closely to those of President Obama.

The stock market has always been a much debated measure of the economy. Yet bull markets – especially during the 1990s – have made Americans more optimistic, improved economic fortunes on Main Street as well as Wall Street, and benefited the party that controls the White House.

But this week’s dismal stock market performance has dimmed, if not killed, any hope that voters will see such a “wealth effect” before Nov. 4 that will buoy Democratic chances.

— Jonathan Weisman

President Obama remains at the White House, where he will meet with Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel and monitor the Ebola response.

Officials from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the National Institutes of Health testify before the House Energy and Commerce Committee at noon.

James B. Comey, the director of the F.B.I., will make his first major policy speech at the Brookings Institition in Washington.

Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky swings through New Hampshire for campaign rallies.

Representative Bruce Braley and Joni Ernst hold their final debate in Iowa at 8 p.m.

Mitt Romney has lost none of his fervor in calling the Obama administration a failure.

He made that clear on Wednesday when he made a return campaign trip to Hudson, N.H. to stump for Republican Scott P. Brown.

“They say they’re trying to reduce income inequality – that hasn’t happened,” he said, ticking off an anti-Obama checklist. “They misjudged the importance of having our forces remain in Iraq. They made so many mistakes.”

Some Republicans have been trying to persuade Mr. Romney to mount another presidential campaign in 2016. But he gave little indication that his latest trip to Hudson was a warm-up.

His wife, Ann, has pretty much quashed that notion.

“Done,” she told The Los Angeles Times on Tuesday. “Completely. Not only Mitt and I are done, but the kids are done. Done. Done. Done.”

After his brief speech, Mr. Romney introduced Mr. Brown’s wife, Gail Huff. So eager was he to call Mr. Brown “the next senator from New Hampshire” that he accidentally called Ms. Huff “the next wife” of the next senator.

Ms. Huff laughed. “I’m not sure I could deal with that,” she said.

– Katharine Q. Seelye

Representative Michele Bachmann may be leaving the Hill, but Roll Call says she’s “still in the game.”

Ms. Magazine lists the state ballot measures that it says are most important for women’s rights.

Attorney General Greg Abbott of Texas, the Republican nominee for governor, talks to Esquire about the jogging accident that paralyzed him.

The Patriot-News in Harrisburg, Pa., profiles the state representative who engaged in a shootout with a robbery suspect this week near the State Capitol. It wasn’t the first time he’s had such a run-in.

New York magazine looks at what it says is the right-wing campaign against Mayor Annise Parker of Houston, the first openly gay mayor of a major American city.

Correction: An earlier version of this post misstated the party affiliation of Attorney General Greg Abbott of Texas. He is a Republican, not a Democrat.