The impact on the Baltic states from the Russia-Ukraine crisis is so far limited to a few companies and sectors but could lead to bigger problems, especially on the energy side, if the conflict escalates, Swedbank’s chief economist in Latvia said at a conference in Stockholm Wednesday.

Stockholm-based Swedbank, which has substantial operations in all Baltic countries—Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia—expects Russia to dip into recession this year before returning to flat or slight growth the year after.

WSJ Frontiers Newsletter Enter your email to be notified when we launch the new WSJ Frontiers weekly email newsletter

“But it’s not the basket case of the 90s, we’re not talking about Russia collapsing,” Martins Kazaks, Latvia chief economist and group deputy chief economist, said.

Russia’s slowdown is likely to drag growth in the Baltic countries down by 0.5-1 percentage points this year, Mr. Kazaks said. Exports to Russia are in the range of 11% to 20% of all exports from the Baltic countries. The bank forecasts around 3% growth in both Latvia and Lithuania this year, and somewhat lower in Estonia.

The biggest risk to the Baltic economies is their reliance on gas exports from Russia, Mr. Kazaks said.

“Overall, this is the major potential problem issue. If there is an escalation in the conflict and Russia starts to introduce supply interruptions for natural gas, it will of course affect the Baltic states,” Mr. Kazaks said. Such a development would lead to a spike in energy costs, further devalue the Russian ruble and reduce exports to Russia, he said.

Efforts are underway to cut the dependency, including construction of a new energy terminal in Lithuania and plans to link the Baltic states’ supply to Poland.

Both Estonia and Latvia have recently adopted the euro and Lithuania is also on track toward adopting the common currency.

“The euro, politically also given the Russian situation, is good for the Baltics,” Mr. Kazaks said. Being in the euro zone has helped bring stability and reduced risk for the small open Baltic economies, but it won’t solve all problems and measures to increase productivity and boost the education system are needed, he said.

But unlike Sweden, which has chosen to stay out of the euro zone, the Baltic countries really didn’t have an option but to adopt the currency. “For us, it was a decision of whether to float [the currency] or join the euro, and given that we had never defaulted on the currency, that would have been a very risky endeavor,” he said.

Write to Anna Molin at anna.molin@wsj.com.