We do a lot of thinking about digital storytelling at AIDS.gov. In particular, we think about using digital tools and social media channels, like video and images, to help share content and to support HIV testing, care and treatment.

Wikipedia definition: “Digital storytelling” is a relatively new term which describes the new practice of ordinary people who use digital tools to tell their ‘story‘. Digital stories often present in compelling and emotionally engaging formats, and can be interactive.”

We will soon be launching Positive Spin, an exciting new project that uses the power of digital storytelling, to raise awareness for those at risk for HIV and those providing HIV services about: the stages of the HIV care continuum; the steps people living with HIV (PLWH) can take to live longer, healthier lives; and the actions PLWH can take to reduce their risk of passing HIV to others.

Because “story” is so important to us, we’ve published 16 blog posts about the topic, which emphasize the importance of digital storytelling. Below are some highlights:

Home in Story

By: Ken Williams, May 1, 2014

Storytelling is a tool for self-expression; a method for transferring information. It is a practice so innate to our human construction that we perform story, naturally, several times daily, without ever pausing to realize that we’ve done it. Just think… how often do we answer everyday questions with story? [read more…]

Storytelling for a Spring Weekend



By: Miguel Gomez, April 14, 2014

This morning, while getting ready for work, I heard an audio storytelling segment on public radio. This piece was about a young woman who was born with HIV. It was an illustration of the power of storytelling through new media. Digital storytelling is the use of new media and technology to share everyday stories. It allows those who are affected by HIV to share their experiences, raise awareness, and help end stigma. [read more..]

Stories that Change Behavior:

By: Sonja Noring, May 29, 2012



Heard any good stories about HIV or STIs lately? Told any? What makes a good story? Dr. William Smith, Editor of Social Marketing Quarterly, asked about 20 invited participants at a May 18, 2012 workshop, “Telling Stories to Fight STIs and HIV/AIDS,” to consider the elements of a good story and then use them to create one. [read more..]

What’s next?

Stay tuned for details about Positive Spin and how you can get involved. Share this post on social media using the hashtag #MyPositiveSpin.