House Foreign Affairs Chairman Ed Royce, R-Calif. (L), and top Democrat Eliot Engel, D-N.Y., converse after committee Democrats unanimously reject the Republican sanctions bill that would preclude US obligations under the Iran nuclear deal, Washington, Jan. 7, 2016. (photo by Julian Pecquet)

Is Iran deal the GOP's new Obamacare?

Author: Julian Pecquet

A key House panel on Jan. 7 passed Iran sanctions legislation along party lines, breaking a long tradition of bipartisan cooperation on the issue.

Summary ⎙ Print Iran sanctions bills have always been bipartisan. Not anymore. Author

The House Foreign Affairs Committee approved a bill that critics say would make it impossible for the United States to live up to its end of the Iran deal. The full House will vote on the measure Jan. 13 before Republicans leave for their annual retreat, a House leadership aide said.

Not one Democrat on the panel ended up voting for the measure, prompting comparisons to repeated Republican efforts to repeal President Barack Obama's health care law that have energized the party faithful in election years while accomplishing little of substance.

"Congress had an opportunity to vote on the [Iran] deal, and we lost," ranking member and Iran deal opponent Eliot Engel, D-N.Y., said before voting against the bill. "I don't want to vote 62 or 63 times on killing the Iran agreement. We already had one several months ago, and this is now the second one. And I'm afraid we're following the same path that we're following with the Affordable Health Care Act."

The House voted 269-162 against approving the Iran deal Sept. 11, with 25 Democrats joining Republicans in voicing their disapproval. A resolution blocking implementation of the deal failed in the Senate at that time, preventing Obama from having to veto it.

Republicans in Congress have voted 62 times to repeal the president's signature health care law since its passage in 2010. On Jan. 6, the House finally succeeded in sending it to the president's desk, where Obama will certainly veto it.

The timing and nature of the latest Iran bill, coming just days into the new year, suggest it was imposed on the committee by House leadership. While sanctions bills have traditionally been co-written by Engel and committee Chairman Ed Royce, R-Calif., this one was introduced by Armed Services member Steve Russell, R-Okla., with no input from Democrats.

The Republican aide confirmed that the House leadership had a hand in the timing of the bill.

"We wanted to send a message that if you're going to test missiles, you're going to face sanctions," the aide told Al-Monitor.

More such votes can be expected both as Iranian actions "warrant" and as dictated by election-year politics, the aide said.

Russell's bill would prohibit the president from lifting nuclear-related sanctions on Iranian banks as called for under the nuclear deal because of their links to Iranian entities engaged in terrorism and Iran's ballistic missile program. The Obama administration told Al-Monitor on Jan. 6 that it "strongly opposes" the bill.

"As we have long said, we are opposed to any legislation that interferes with the implementation of the JCPOA [Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action]," a senior administration official told Al-Monitor via email. "From what we have seen of this bill, it would interfere with the implementation of the JCPOA, and therefore, the administration strongly opposes it."

Republicans on the committee argued that the bill was necessary because the Obama administration isn't living up to its commitments to keep pressure on Iran.

"Since the Obama administration sealed the Iran nuclear deal, Tehran has been on a roll," Royce said. "It has accelerated its missile program, taken more Americans hostage, and stepped up its slaughter in Syria. And in a few weeks, it will cash in with tens of billions in sanctions relief."

"All of this comes with no pushback from the administration," Royce added. "And now we understand that some entities set for sanctions relief — like Iran’s Bank Melli and Bank Sepah — will be given a pass for backing ballistic missile development and terrorism."

Democrats countered that partisan bills to kill the Iran deal are going nowhere and only waste time that could be better served crafting bipartisan legislation. They pointed out that the House Foreign Affairs Committee has traditionally been among the most hawkish on Iran, and unanimously passed a hard-hitting Iran sanctions bill in May 2013 that cleared the House 400-20 but ended up dying in the Senate.

Seven of the 25 Democrats who did not support the deal sit on the House Foreign Affairs panel: Florida Democrats Ted Deutch and Lois Frankel; Pennsylvania's Brendan Boyle; New York's Grace Meng and Engel; California's Brad Sherman; and New Jersey's Albio Sires. Not one could be seen voicing approval for the Russell bill during the Jan. 7 voice vote.

"Instead of looking for partisan ways to try to stop the deal, we should be looking for bipartisan ways to ensure that it is enforced with vigor and with the most stringent verification and compliance," Deutch said. "And if a violation occurs, that we have the tools — and teeth behind those tools — to enact punishing new sanctions."

Sherman suggested that blowing up the deal right after Iran delivered on its end by shipping out its enriched uranium would be a "spectacularly well-timed bait-and-switch" unworthy of the United States.

"If [Florentine political philosopher Niccolo] Machiavelli were advising us, he would say now is the precise time to pull out of the deal, since we've gotten the good parts delivered to us already," Sherman said. "I don't think that is the process America will take."

Sherman said Congress would be better served by focusing on the hundreds of Iranian financial institutions not mentioned in the deal to see if there's cause for sanctioning them.

While Republicans certainly have political motivations to take repeated shots at the Iran deal, it is equally true that Democrats have struggled to offer alternatives that punish Iran for non-nuclear behavior without imperiling the president's diplomacy. Engel has said he hopes to work with Royce on Iran legislation in the coming months, but the two tried and failed to hammer out such an agreement last year.

Meanwhile, Deutch, the top Democrat on the committee's Middle East panel, introduced bipartisan legislation along with former panel member Joe Kennedy, D-Mass., on Jan. 6 that would expedite new sanctions if Iran commits acts of terror or uses ballistic missile technology in violation of international law. And Rep. John Delaney, D-Md., announced the introduction, also with Kennedy, of legislation slapping sanctions on entities that transfer ballistic missiles or advanced conventional weapons to Iran.

Read More: http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2016/01/iran-deal-sanctions-bill-congress-partisan.html