CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Seven Ohio state and local programs -- including the Cuyahoga County Board of Health (CCBH) and the YMCA of Greater Cleveland -- will receive part of $7.9 million in federal grants to prevent chronic disease through awards funded in part by the Affordable Care Act.

The grants, which range from $450,000 for the Lima Family YMCA to a $3.5 million state grant, will be administered by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

"These grants will empower our partners to provide the tools that Ohioans need to help prevent chronic diseases like heart disease, stroke, and diabetes," Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell said in a news release. "Today's news is important progress in our work to transition from a health care system focused on treating the sick to one that also helps keep people well throughout their lives."

The goals of the grant funding nationally are to reduce rates of death and disability due to tobacco use, reduce obesity, and reduce rates of death and disability due to diabetes, heart disease and stroke.

Grants in Ohio were awarded to:

State and Local Public Health Actions to Prevent Obesity, Diabetes, and Heart Disease: State of Ohio -- $3,517,118

Partnerships to Improve Community Health: Hospital Council of Northwest Ohio -- $837,389; The Lima Family YMCA -- $450,000

Racial and Ethnic Approaches to Community Health (REACH): Asian Services in Action, of Akron -- $422,123; Cuyahoga County Board of Health -- $997,349; YMCA of Greater Cleveland -- $986,270

State Public Health Actions: State of Ohio -- $767,986

The nearly $1 million grant to the CCBH will fund The Health Improvement Partnership of Cuyahoga County (HIP-C), a consortium of county and neighborhood organizations whose focus is on improving health. The REACH grant will provide funding to increase access and opportunity for better nutrition, increased physical activity and improved chronic disease prevention and management in 22 census tracts across six neighborhoods within the cities of Cleveland and East Cleveland, according to CCBH.

The YMCA of Greater Cleveland's REACH grant will help fund efforts to make Cleveland streets safer places to walk, run and bike, and to to further develop the "We Run This City" marathon partnership between the YMCA, Cleveland schools, and the Rite Aid Cleveland Marathon. The grant will also help expand Healthy Eating/Active Living initiatives, and to increase chronic disease prevention efforts by partnering with community-based health centers.

"Tobacco use, high blood pressure and obesity are leading preventable causes of death in the United States," CDC Director Dr. Tom Frieden said in a news release. "These grants will enable Ohio local health departments, community organizations, and other partners from all sectors of society to help prevent heart disease, cancer, stroke, and other leading chronic diseases, and help Ohioans to live longer, healthier and more productive lives."