Boulder-based Embrazio has created a uniquely designed belt that is shaped to fit your body. ( Ann-Nicole Duryea / Courtesy photo )

A close-up look at the Curva belt made by mbrazio. (Embrazio / Courtesy photo)

Tough — so don't mess with me — but still kinda pretty.

That's how Stephanie Boyles' daughter described herself when she was 9.

That's how Boyles describes her leather accessories, too.

Even though the Boulder-based Embrazio line is quite a bit more refined than that, and not kinda pretty but legitimately gorgeous. Definitely tough. Add in unique and practical — the kind of thing that makes you say "Why doesn't that already exist?" — and you've got the spirit of Embrazio.

The company started out tough, pretty and practical with something you've surely never heard of before: a cell phone holster, specifically designed for horseback riders.

Boyles, of Boulder, who has a tech background, launched a series of popular horse-centric cell phone apps, such as 101 Dressage, featuring tips and exercises for training horse and rider. The problem: How do you carry your cell phone while you ride a horse?

Boyles began mulling cowboys of the past, who carried their most important tool — a gun — on a holster strapped to their thigh, for easy and quick access. So she and her husband, Scott Schaefer, designed a leather holster for the most important (for better or worse) modern tool.

Boyles wanted the holster to connect with a belt that had to fit perfectly. And that led to another practical question: Why are belts made in a straight line when our bodies are anything but straight?

She draped a belt over her body and erased preconceptions about what a belt should look like. To hold your pants up without creating a gap, it would need to go down in the front, up over the hips and down again in the back, to follow the lines of the body.

"If you wear a belt for 20 years, it'll take on that shape," she says. "Why not start it off at the beginning to fit comfortably like that?"

The belts took off with greater gusto than the holsters, and soon Embrazio was offering them in a variety of styles, widths and colors.

Boyles then began considering the holster further.

"That little phone case is nice, but when I travel, I want something for my lipstick and sunscreen," she says. "But I still want the freedom of a really small bag."

Embrazio decided to try to design the ideal lightweight travel bag, which would be made of uber-soft sheepskin, so it would not irritate the skin, and would have plenty of zippers for storage and organization, without anything extra to weigh one down. She also wanted the bags to offer just as much fashion as function.

They designed a line of bags that can be worn cross-body or clipped on to a belt loop, for those who are on an active adventure and need both hands (and shoulders). With luxury materials and careful details, they're still beautiful enough to pair with even a glam gown.

Today, Embrazio's bags, belts and holsters are available online at embrazio.com or in 85 shops across the country, including Barbara & Company and Weekends, both in Boulder, and The Hitching Post in Niwot.

Find four types of bags in 20 different styles, five types of belts and two styles of phone cases. Prices range from $30 to as much as $350 for the high-end bags.

In each piece, echoing Embrazio's unusual roots, you'll still see equestrian-influenced, classic style, handmade by leather crafters in Leon, Mexico.

Definitely tough. Definitely pretty.

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay