Colorado’s health insurance marketplace is anticipating a $4 million hike in the cost of keeping its call center functioning.

The exchange opened Monday for early shopping with no big technical glitches surfacing in light early volume, although 2015 enrollment doesn’t begin officially until Saturday.

However, one wrench was thrown into the works. A drop in tax credits for up to 60 percent of enrollees — about 88,000 people — is driving down the numbers of consumers who can automatically renew through the state exchange, Connect for Health Colorado.

Exchange staffers said the changes in the subsidies should spur more comparison shopping for lower premiums, more questions and more demand on their call center. Its 2014-15 budget has grown by $4 million since June.

Staffers on Monday requested an additional $875,000 to handle the spike in call volume. The board approved it 7-1, with one abstention.

The low premiums charged by one nonprofit insurance cooperative, Colorado HealthOP, have skewed a key index. Under the Affordable Care Act, subsidies are tied to the cost of the second-lowest-priced silver plan in each geographical area.

Those premiums fell sharply and, as a result, so did tax credits across the board. Consumers are looking at an average increase of 77 percent in their share of insurance premiums unless they shop and switch. Only Mesa County escaped the shake-up.

“We’re seeing a huge market shift. We didn’t think that would happen,” said state Insurance Commissioner Marguerite Salazar. “I don’t think the carriers have yet figured out where they ought to be in terms of what they should charge. … Our plan was to do auto-enrollment with 75 percent of clients. That fell apart.”

Exchange officials said they also underestimated by 45 percent how many customers who enrolled in 2014 would stay enrolled. Taken together, more consumers with more questions means the staff is now forecasting 60,000 more calls, or a total of more than 158,000, between Nov. 15 and Dec. 31.

The increased expenditures won’t shorten average call-waiting times, which are 15 to 30 minutes, said Adele Work, implementation manager, but it will keep callers from hearing that all operators are busy.

The stated ultimate goal is to get 80 percent of calls answered in 90 seconds.

The Service Center budget for 2014-15 had been $13.6 million. Other previous increases in staffing levels had brought that up to $16.9 million. With this latest change, the year-end forecast is $17.8 million.

“I don’t question the need for increased calls service,” board member Dr. Michael Fallon said. “But we have a $4 million variance over what we discussed in June. … I want to know where the money is going to come from, and ‘reserves’ is not a great long-term answer.”

The exchange has $28.5 million in operating reserves.

ur