By Austin Frakt

One weekend afternoon a couple of years ago, while turning a page of the book I was reading to my daughters, I fell asleep. That’s when I knew it was time to do something about my insomnia.

Data, not pills, was my path to relief.

Insomnia is common. About 30 percent of adults report some symptoms of it, though less than half that figure have all symptoms. Not all insomniacs are severely debilitated zombies. Consistent sleeplessness that causes some daytime problems is all it takes to be considered an insomniac. Most function quite well, and the vast majority go untreated.

I was one of the high-functioning insomniacs. But it took a toll on my mood, as well as my ability to make it through a children’s book.

Which remedy would be best for me? Lunesta, Ambien, Restoril and other drugs are promised by a barrage of ads to deliver sleep to minds that resist it. Before I reached for the pills, I looked at the data.

When it comes to insomnia, comparative effectiveness studies reveal that medications aren’t the best bet for a cure, despite what the commercials say. Several clinical trials have found that they’re outperformed by cognitive behavioral therapy. CBT for insomnia (or CBT-I) goes beyond the “sleep hygiene” most people know, though many don’t employ — like avoiding alcohol or caffeine near bedtime and reserving one’s bed for sleep (not reading or watching TV).

CBT — through therapy visits or self-guided treatments — includes strategies like sticking to a consistent wake time, relaxation techniques and learning to rid oneself of negative attitudes about sleep.

A systematic review of CBT for insomnia, in the Annals of Internal Medicine, quantifies how much relief it can provide.

Combining data from 20 clinical trials, using over 1,000 patients with chronic insomnia, the authors calculated sleep improvements after CBT treatment, relative to no treatment. On average, treated patients fell asleep almost 20 minutes faster and were awake in the night almost half an hour less. The total amount of time they were sleeping when in bed increased by nearly 10 percent. These results are similar to or better than improvements from many sleep drugs, and lasted longer.

My experience is consistent with these averages. The CBT treatment I received, through an online program recommended by my doctor, also included keeping careful track of how much sleep I got each night.

This proved very helpful. It demonstrated progress — the nights in which I got only four or five hours of sleep became less common, and, on average, my sleep lengthened by 30 minutes.

My sleep log also helped me be more objective. Many nights I might have considered “bad” — and fretted over — were ones in which I got only one hour less sleep than my target of seven hours. Recognizing that’s not really so bad helped me relax, and relaxing helped me get better sleep.

CBT practitioners learn that if you label a night of sleep “bad” and expect a bad day to follow, you’re more likely to get it, as well as more likely to be anxious the next time you attempt to sleep.

Like a patch on faulty software, CBT reorients one’s thinking and behavior so that sleep is first thought to be — and then soon after actually is — a more positive experience.