Among the cast of characters in Ypsilanti, few, if any, are more colorful and beloved than musician, puppeteer and artist Patrick Elkins.

So it comes as no surprise that the community is pulling together to help Elkins as he deals with medical debt accumulated from treatment of deep vein thrombosis, a disease that causes painful and life-threatening blood clots in his legs.

Elkins just received a $9,000 bill for an overnight stay at the University of Michigan Hospital that will pile on top of the nearly $10,000 in medical debt accumulated from previous treatment.

What’s more, the arrival of the latest bill coincided with Elkins learning that his contract for his full-time job would be terminated at the end of December.

For an uninsured man, it's a daunting bill, but Elkins’ friends are getting creative in trying to raise money to help pay down the debt. So far, more than $1,400 has been raised on the website FundRazr. Money has also been raised through a coupon deal at Sidetrack, and on Friday, Elkins' friends will present an evening of music and art with an auction of leg-themed works from more than 20 local artists.

There will also be baked goods for sale, live screen-printing and hair cuts with donations from local businesses, including Mighty Good Coffee, Get Curious with Safety Girl (located in Bongz and Thongz), VG Kids and more.

The public is invited to the event at Woodruff’s Friday at 36 E. Cross St. in Ypsilanti’s Depot Town, and doors open at 7 p.m.

“It’s super awesome,” Elkins said of the benefit show. “It’s really overwhelming in a positive way.”

Elkins said he plans to present money from the fundraiser to bill collectors with the hope of renegotiating or lowering some of the debt.

Elkins’ problems started in 2003 when he tore a leg tendon, causing problems in his legs, including blood clots.

Despite being uninsured at the time, he underwent a couple of surgeries, including one which led to complications.

“It was going to be an hour long, and I woke up eight or nine hours later with a breathing tube in. It was not at all not what I expected. Or what the doctors expected,” Elkins said.

Blood clots recently reformed again in his leg, which he said were so painful that he could barely walk. He now takes blood thinners that are greatly reducing the pain and have helped the condition.

With no employer-provided insurance and his future employment up in there air, Elkins said he is looking forward to signing up for insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

“I'm really encouraged by the fact that I'll be able to purchase insurance now, which previously wasn't an option given that I have a pre-existing condition (chronic deep vein thrombosis) and don't have access to insurance through my employer,” he said.

In the meantime, Elkins' friends hope to help take a chunk out of his debt.

Mark Maynard, who helped organize the event with Jennifer Scroggins, said the number of people involved with the fundraiser speaks to the impact Elkins has on the community.

"He plays a super vital role in making Ypsi and Ann Arbor the vibrant and arts friendly place that it is. People do good work, but there are few people who others rally around and make magical things happen," Maynard said.

Entry for the show is $10 and all money plus 20 percent of the bar tab goes to Elkins. People can also donate at https://fundrazr.com/campaigns/8Zoi6

The musical lineup for Friday’s festivities at Woodruff’s includes Minus 9, Laser Beams of Boredom, Thom Elliot, Moonhairy, Shells and Fred Thomas, Glass Glue, Izzy Johnson and special surprise guests.

And in true Ypsilanti fashion, the band Girth is staging a satirical protest, joking that Elkins really has bionic legs and is holding the fundraiser for personal profit. They'll be playing a "protest set" from their car in the parking lot.

Tom Perkins is a freelance writer for The Ann Arbor News. Contact the News desk at 734-623-2572.