Name: Duane Ham

Age: 43

Occupation: Duane is a trusted community leader and successful small businessman. He has built several businesses and employed hundreds of Texans.

Position Sought: State Representative, District 16

Reason for running and what makes you the best candidate: As a successful business owner, Duane has seen firsthand the burden that government regulations cause for our business community, our economy and our families. He is concerned about the danger of Obamacare, excessive regulatory burdens and an intrusive federal government that unfairly affects Texas families and business owners. When Brandon Creighton decided to not seek re-election, I knew that it was time to stop watching from the sidelines and that I must step up and bring my proven real-world experience in building businesses, creating jobs, defending our freedoms and fighting for less government to the Texas House of Representatives on behalf of my friends and neighbors

Experience: Duane Ham is a successful entrepreneur and businessman. He is qualified to take his brand of conservative leadership to Austin, with the back-to-basics thinking and the concerns of the voters of Montgomery County. Family values, sound business values and experience will drive his leadership.

Community Service: Duane has been an active and trusted community leader always willing to step up and lend a hand whether to a neighbor in need or supporting our schools and vocational agriculture programs. He is a member of the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo, a Life member of the Montgomery County Fair Association and a member of the Montgomery Performing Arts Society.

Family: Duane Ham and his wife Jena have three children. His children all attended public schools. Duane grew up in Killeen, where his mother and father instilled the values of family, hard work and education. Duane’s father was superintendent of the Killeen Independent School District. A turning point in Duane’s life was when he attended high school at the South Texas Children’s Home Ministry (STCHM) where his life was changed and a future leader was born. While at STCHM, Duane had the opportunity to become more involved in the agriculture industry working a ranch in South Texas. There he trained horses, hauled hay, worked cattle and learned the value of hard work. As a true entrepreneur, after high school he began his first business.

Website: www.duaneham.com