TOP STORIES

There was direct and indirect blowback after the Eli Lilly heart drug announcement. Lilly’s stock dropped almost eight percent and analysts were cutting 2020 sales projections by five percent. There was also nuance amid the evacetrapib failure, though: Lilly’s pipeline could provide get it through this.

However, Lilly wasn’t the only company to take shrapnel over the announcement.

The odds that Merck & Co’s high-stakes cholesterol drug will succeed have dropped dramatically after Eli Lilly and Co said its similar medicine failed to reduce heart attacks and strokes.

Stay tuned. – Wall Street Journal, Pharmlot and Reuters

Forbes editor and minor healthcare rockstar Avik Roy has joined Marco Rubio’s campaign (Roy had been with Rick Perry’s campaign). – The Hill

No candidate expresses—and embodies—the American dream better than @MarcoRubio. I’m honored to be advising Sen. Rubio on policy. @TeamMarco — Avik Roy (@Avik) October 12, 2015

LIFE SCIENCES

New York’s attorney general is looking into Turing Pharmaceuticals. It’s not so much for the price increase but whether Turing violated antitrust laws by restricting Daraprim’s distribution. – The New York Times

Just in time for the Democratic presidential debate: U.S. prices for the world’s 20 top-selling medicines are about three times higher than in Britain. – Reuters

St. Jude Medical’s HeartMate 3 implantable heart pump won its CE Mark. – MassDevice

Varian Medical’s latest proton therapy system has been approved for Europe. – MassDevice

Seattle is almost out of quality space to house biotech companies. – Puget Sound Business Journal

PAYERS-PROVIDERS

Inside the mind of consumers: 73 percent trust their hospital while 49 percent trust their health insurance provider, according to new research on patients’ points of view. – Becker’s Hospital Review

Another study shows hospital gowns are nothing more than an iconic anachronism that cause more trouble than they are worth. Hospital gowns transferred bacteria to clothing beneath almost half the time. – Los Angeles Times

In a not-shocking development, doctors would prefer retail clinics serve as a backup to a patient’s regular doctor. How quaint. – Reuters

A nurses union alliance is almost over: the California Nurses Association and National Union of Healthcare Workers are likely to separate. – San Francisco Business Times

The Texas Medical Association has come out against the Aetna-Humana merger. – San Antonio Business Journal

TECHNOLOGY

CareFirst BlueCross BlueShield will award $3 million to nonprofits or government organizations to develop new programs using telemedicine around in the Washington, D.C-area. – Baltimore Business Journal

Wearables company Movable has been acquired by DHS Group. – Houston Business Journal

Doctolib, a French version of ZocDoc, raised $20.5 million to expand across Europe. – VentureBeat

German women’s fertility mobile app Clue has raised $7 million. – MobiHealthNews

Take a look at Children’s Hospital Los Angeles’s sickle cell app, R-Helper. – iMedicalApps

Probably no healthcare impact, but just in case: Stephen Gillett, former COO at Symantec, is joining Google Ventures as an executive in residence. – TechCrunch

POLITICS

Healthcare.gov is getting a facelift to make it easier to find health plans. – The New York Times

Jeb Bush said he would repeal Obamacare. – Associated Press

A LITTLE BIT EXTRA

The Democratic presidential debate is tonight. Here’s something I bet you did not know: there are five candidates. – ABC & NPR