Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

ANCHORAGE, Alaska (AP) — Wagging tails and smiling faces were plentiful in downtown Anchorage on Saturday as fans got to interact with the real stars of the Iditarod — the sled dogs.

Thousands of people lined the route for the ceremonial start of the Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race. It’s an event designed for fans, allowing them to interact with the mushers, take photos and pet the dogs.

The “ceremonial start is honestly the most fun day because you really get to show everyone, I mean, all of Anchorage and then plus everyone whose come here, your sport. And you get to show it with passion, which is so cool,” said Aliy Zirkle, a fan favorite who has four top five finishes in the last four Iditarods.

“So running down Forth Avenue, 12 dogs, someone in your sled, it’s fun and it should be fun,” she said.

The ceremonial start in Anchorage went forward despite a lack of snow in Alaska’s largest city this winter. Snow even had to be shipped this week to Anchorage from Fairbanks for the event. After all that, it snowed about an inch Friday.

Janet Zoellick of Anchorage was so excited for the ceremonial start, she dragged her boyfriend out of bed at 6:30 a.m. so they could get moving early.

“I said, ‘C’mon we got to get down there early. I want to get parking, I want to be in on the action, I want to meet all the mushers, I got to take pictures, I got to wish them luck,” said Zoellick.

She is a Chicago native who visited Anchorage for the ceremonial start in 2012.

“I fell in love with it, and I knew this was the land for me,” she said. Two years later, she moved to Anchorage “for good.”

The ceremonial start usually covers an 11-mile (17.7-kilometer) route, going along city streets and trails from downtown Anchorage to the east side of the city.

But the lack of snow forced organizers to shorten the race to a 3-mile (4.83-kilometer) route.

The competitive race, which spans nearly 1,000 miles (1,600 kilometers), starts Sunday in Willow, about 50 miles (80.46 kilometers) north of Anchorage. Organizers say trail conditions largely improve after Willow, but mushers are wary of the conditions.