Volvo’s sales in China have lately risen. EPA

For years, Audi’s sleek sedans have been the hands-down favorite car among Chinese officials and others in China aiming to affect an air of authority. But increasingly China’s leaders seem enamored by Volvo, a car brand known more for family-friendliness than official gravitas.

On Tuesday, Chinese President Xi Jinping and wife Peng Liyuan stopped by a Volvo car plant during a visit to the Belgian city of Ghent, accompanied by no less than the country’s royals, King Philippe and Queen Mathilde.

The visit came after Volvo was added last fall to the list of brands eligible for purchase for government use, a market worth $20 billion a year, according to UBS Securities. Meanwhile, other foreign luxury brands — among them Audi — have been dropped.

Now it looks as if China’s government’s budding romance with Volvo is continuing to bloom, thanks largely to company chairman Li Shufu’s increasingly cozy relationship with the country’s ruling elite. Mr. Li is a member of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference.

After Chinese car company Geely’s 2010 purchase of Volvo from Ford Motor Co., for a while it seemed unclear whether the Chinese government would treat Volvo as a Chinese or foreign brand. Mr. Xi’s factory visit would appear to have set matters straight.

Photographs from this week’s event suggest Mr. Li stayed close to Mr. Xi’s shoulder, most likely bending his ear on all things auto.

Volvo needs all the help it can get in China, where it is still relatively small player in China’s market for luxury cars. In China, German brands Audi, BMW and Mercedes-Benz together hold around 70% market share. Still, Volvo’s sales are picking up: In the first quarter of this year, the company sold 17,286 cars in China, up 25% on the same period a year earlier.

Geely and Volvo in China were not immediately available for comment Wednesday.

Last month, during China’s annual parliamentary session, in an interview with China Real Time, Volvo’s Mr. Li outlined areas where he believes China needs to step on the pedal to develop its auto industry, including relaxing caps on foreign investment in car-producing joint ventures.

Under current regulations, global auto makers can own only as much as half of their joint ventures in China. Most foreign car companies such as General Motors Co. and Ford Motor hold 50% shares. One notable exception is Volkswagen’s joint venture with FAW Group, in which the German automaker holds 40%.

“Rather than only imposing limits on shareholdings, China should develop its auto industry in a fair and transparent manner,” Mr. Li said.

By the same token, CRT wonders if perhaps China’s president should start visiting other Chinese car makers’ plants, too?

–Colum Murphy and Lilian Lin. Follow Colum on Twitter @Colum_M

Follow @ChinaRealTime on Twitter for the latest updates.