U.S. Labor Secretary Thomas E. Perez joined Jersey City Mayor Steve Fulop and U.S. Sen. Cory Booker at a Jersey City community center on Monday, where they were joined by seven low-wage workers as part of an Obama administration push to increase the federal minimum wage.

Perez said Obama, who has called on Congress to hike the minimum wage to $10.10, would in a few weeks sign an executive order mandating that federal contractors pay their workers that hourly rate instead of the $7.25 current minimum wage.

“The executive order is a start, but it’s not a finish,” Perez said. “And it’s meant to really make sure we practice what we preach … we’re demonstrating you can do it.”

The executive order would cover dishwashers, janitors and other low-wage federal contractors.

Marc Freedman, executive director of labor policy for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, which is opposed to a wage hike, told The Jersey Journal that it would affect small businesses that are already struggling to figure out how they will be impacted by the Affordable Care Act.

“Increasing their labor costs will be yet another burden that will impede their ability to hire more people or keep providing the same level of hours they are currently providing,” Freedman said. But for Booker, a Democrat, raising the minimum wage would allow the United States to “be the kind of nation we say we are.”

“We know we have families that work full time but still find themselves below the poverty line,” he said.

Consuelo Evans, 57, of Jersey City, was one of the low-wage workers who appeared on Monday’s panel. Evans said she makes about $20,000 total at two jobs in the healthcare industry.

That’s enough to pay her rent and a few bills but not enough for her to obtain medical insurance, she said.

“After I pay expenses, I have $80 left,” Evans said. “It’s really devastating.”

Perez also praised Jersey City for being the first in New Jersey to mandate that most private businesses provide paid sick leave to their workers.

“Jersey City’s ahead of the country in that regard,” he said, adding that the issue will be “front and center” at a working families summit Obama will attend later this year.