Lease rates announced for Roosevelt Park Apartments

Keith Burden, vice president of Burden Inc., looks out from floor-to-ceiling windows that face Main Street from a fourth-floor corner unit inside Roosevelt Park Apartments last week. (Matthew Jonas/Times-Call) ( Matthew Jonas )

Looking west from an apartment on the fourth floor of Roosevelt Park Apartments there are views overlooking the park and, beyond, Longs Peak and Mount Meeker. (Matthew Jonas/Times-Call) ( Matthew Jonas )

Roosevelt Park Apartments Location: On Longs Peak Avenue between Main and Coffman streets in downtown Longmont Size: About 1.75 acres Number of units: 115 studio, one- and two-bedroom Parking garage: 219 spaces (about one-third public ) Retail/restaurant space: About 10,150 square feet (Longs Peak Pub & Taphouse (Mountain Sun) and Inspire Salon & Spa have already committed) Lease rates: Studios starting at $845/month; one bedroom/one bath starting at $965; two bedroom/two bath starting at $1,275 Pre-leasing begins: Nov. 19 (office inside Roosevelt Place building) Projected move-in: Beginning of February Website: liveatrooseveltpark.com

LONGMONT -- Thirteen months after the tearing down of the old began, the shell of the new four-story Roosevelt Park Apartments is almost fully realized. The construction phase is entering the home stretch.

Pre-leasing on the 115-unit building begins Tuesday, with Alliance Residential Co., the apartment building's property management firm, setting up a temporary office inside the Roosevelt Place building directly across Longs Peak Avenue from the new mixed-use building. Niwot-based Burden Inc. built Roosevelt Place and is the developer for the apartment building, too.

Advertisement

Alliance just announced lease rates for the apartments: Rent will start at $845 a month for a studio apartment; $965 for a one-bedroom, one bath; and $1,275 for a two-bedroom, two bath.

"(Rent) depends on the length of the lease and the location within the (building)," said Laura Fenton, regional manager for Alliance, which operates 26 multi-family apartment complexes of varying sizes around Colorado. "The west side of the building facing Roosevelt Park and the mountain range will certainly have higher premiums than the units facing the courtyard."

Roosevelt Park Apartments is a horseshoe-shaped building that runs the full length of Longs Peak and then up about a half-block to the north on both the Main and Coffman street sides. In the middle of the horseshoe will be a courtyard with a swimming pool as its centerpiece. Apartments will be set back-to-back, meaning some will overlook the courtyard while others' view will face away from the building.

"I think you're going to get some dog people in some of those first-floor units facing Coffman, because they're walk-up entrances," said Keith Burden, vice president of Burden Inc.

The main lobby entrance will be the middle of the building off Longs Peak and will divide the east and west portions of the building.

"Right now we're trying to phase it so we'll be able to deliver everything from the lobby west" by the end of January, he said.

The upper floors command views available in few other buildings of any type in Longmont. To the west is Roosevelt Park itself and the Continental Divide. The floor-to-ceiling windows on the east side overlook Main Street for a more urban view.

In setting the lease rates, Fenton said her company looked at "comps" -- similar properties elsewhere on the Front Range. That meant examining rates at apartment complexes from Loveland down to Broomfield and Westminster.

Ceiling heights are a minimum nine feet inside Roosevelt Park Apartments. Some, as in this apartment, are higher. (Matthew Jonas/Times-Call) ( Matthew Jonas )

Each of the 115 units will have some common features, she said, including granite countertops; faux wood flooring; stainless steel appliances; its own heating and air conditioning unit; and its own washer and dryer. Ceiling heights will be a minimum 9 feet and some will be higher than that, and almost every unit will have a walk-out balcony, she said.

JHL Constructors is the general contractor on the project, and general superintendent Jason Atkinson said the job hasn't been without its challenges. Heavy snows last spring delayed construction by several weeks, and although the flood in September didn't directly affect the property, the heavy rains did, twice filling up the swimming pool, which caused some water damage that needed to be repaired.

Then there was the matter of dealing with utility pipes underground that dated back to the early part of past century.

"This is one of your more difficult types of projects to build," said Atkinson, who says he's been in multi-family construction for more than 20 years.

Commercial spaces will occupy the ground floor of the building on the southwest and southeast corners. Boulder-based microbrewer Mountain Sun has committed to putting in the 5,000-square-foot Longs Peak Pub & Taphouse on the southeast corner, and then to the north of it, fronting to Main Street, will be Inspire Salon & Spa and its 2,000-square-foot facility. To the north of Inspire will be artists' studios, which the Longmont Downtown Development Authority will take ownership of.

Burden said he's gotten a lot of interest on the southwest corner but is still pursuing what his company sees as the right fit for that space.

A parking garage will occupy the northeast portion of the building, along Main Street, and about a third of the 219 spaces will be public spaces.

The LDDA, seeing the multi-use apartment building as a catalyst project for the downtown, contributed about $3.5 million to Roosevelt Park Apartments. The city put in another $1.4 million, about half of that in waived permit fees.

Burden said that as of a couple weeks ago, about 450 people had signed up to receive emailed information about the building's progress.

According to the Colorado Division of Housing, vacancy rates for apartment units are at or near historic lows dating back more than a decade.

Tony Kindelspire can be reached at 303-684-5291 or at tkindelspire@times-call.com.