HEALTH CARE: Big money for medical-records system Share Pin It More Galleries Riverside County officials want to spend as much as $53.1 million over three years to implement a new electronic medical records system at Riverside County Regional Medical Center. DAVID BAUMAN, STAFF PHOTO Related article »

Riverside County officials want to spend as much as $53.1 million over the next three years on a new electronic records system for the county hospital, a move they say will improve patient care through better coordination with other Inland medical centers.

The county Board of Supervisors on Tuesday, June 2, will be asked to approve a preliminary budget and an agreement with Loma Linda University Health to share Loma Linda’s Epic medical records system. Epic, which has corporate headquarters in Wisconsin, provides records software for hospitals nationwide.

A patient’s x-rays, lab tests and other data would be shareable between Riverside County Regional Medical Center in Moreno Valley and other hospitals or health care providers that use Epic.

A shared network is meant to provide more efficient care, in part by eliminating the need for duplicate tests. Right now, someone who gets an MRI in Moreno Valley would need the same test at Loma Linda, said county hospital CEO Zareh Sarrafian.

“If you have one record, they’d be able to pull those results and only do the necessary services,” saving money in the process, he said.

By piggybacking on Loma Linda’s system, officials say the county is getting Epic at a fraction of the normal price. It would cost the county $80 million to $100 million to develop a stand-alone Epic system, said Sarrafian, a former Loma Linda executive.

Epic is crucial to the concept of a integrated health care network that arose out of a September meeting between supervisors from Riverside and San Bernardino counties, Sarrafian said. Supervisors envision the network as a way to improve public health.

Most of the expense associated with Epic is the cost of training employees to use the system, Sarrafian said. The hospital has $24 million already lined up to fund the first year of the three-year Epic process.

Fifty-three million is the high-end estimate for what it will cost to install Epic and train staff, Sarrafian said. While it’s possible the county could get grants to help pay for Epic, additional county support might be needed, he said.

Epic would initially apply to outpatient uses in the county’s health care system, which consists of the hospital and a network of countywide clinics. It would then be available for inpatient hospital use and eventually extended to health care partners in Riverside and San Bernardino counties.

Epic is the latest investment in a county hospital that’s been the source of considerable heartburn for supervisors. In the past few years, the 362-bed hospital experienced budget shortfalls approaching $50 million.

Supervisors replaced the hospital’s management team and brought in an interim CEO whose expertise is turning around troubled medical centers. They also spent $26 million on Huron HealthCare, a Chicago-based consulting firm that sent experts in to develop a long-care plan to cut costs and raise revenue.

Today, the hospital has a positive cash balance. In response to the Affordable Care Act, officials hope to turn the hospital from a pure safety-net facility for the indigent to a hospital that competes for health care business.

To that end, the hospital is negotiating with unnamed insurance companies about becoming a preferred destination to bring in new revenue. The hospital eventually will be renamed and marketed as Riverside University Medical Center to reflect the universities -- Loma Linda University, UC Riverside and Pomona’s Western University of Health Sciences -- that train medical students there.

Officials also want to work with the private sector to develop 32 acres of vacant land next to the hospital into a mix of doctor’s offices and other health care facilities. The idea is to create a one-stop shop for medical services that boosts the hospital’s appeal.

Contact the writer: 951-368-9547 or jhorseman@pe.com