Bridgewater resident Ayanna Martin’s fashion collection is featured on the website Nineteenth Amendment, an online marketplace for fresh, independent fashion.

Bridgewater fashion designer, Ayanna Martin. (Photo: Photo courtesy of Ayanna Martin) Story Highlights Martin’s label , Ayanna Marie Design is now available online

Collection is made up of soft knit fabric garments that are both comfortable and versatile

Bridgewater resident Ayanna Martin’s fashion collection is featured on the website Nineteenth Amendment, an online marketplace for fresh, independent fashion.

“Being a part of Nineteenth Amendment is helping me reach customers that I may not have been able to reach otherwise,” said the 26-year-old Martin, whose label is called Ayanna Marie Design. “In the beginning, when building my business, I felt as if I needed to do everything on my own. Having this connection with Nineteenth Amendment is great because by working together we are helping each other to grow.”

Martin studied fashion design at Drexel University in Philadelphia and went on to work in the fashion industry in New York.

“Art has always been a big part of my life. Growing up, I loved being creative and took as many art classes as possible,” she said. “I knew that I wanted to have a career that would allow me to be creative and when I learned how to sew, I realized that I could have the kind of career that I desired by becoming a fashion designer.”

Martin said her label marks the woman who values a classic look but also likes to keep up with current contemporary trends. Prices are from $130.

“I design contemporary women’s ready to wear,” Martin said. “My clothing reflects my personality. I love to look good but I am also very low maintenance. To me, the best garments are ones that are those that are easily able to integrate into an existing wardrobe but also make a statement on their own. I also prefer clothing that is comfortable to wear. My collection is made up of soft knit fabric garments that are both comfortable and versatile.”

It has been less than two years since she decided to start her own brand.

“There are so many talented independent designers out there who struggle with manufacturing, or financing, or brand awareness and aren’t able to grow their business. That’s why I partnered with Nineteenth Amendment,” she said. “They give independent designers the tools to manufacture in the US and sell to fashion conscious customers around the world.”

Visit http://nineteenthamendment.com/ or http://www.nineteenthamendment.com/ayanna-marie-design/amd-springsummer-2014/ to learn more or purchase selections from Martin’s collection.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1IgWMAp