Children’s Hospital Colorado is seeing high numbers of respiratory illnesses. 9-year-old patient Jayden Broadway of Denver is being treated at the hospital on Monday, September 8, 2014 for the enterovirus 68. Broadway’s mother Melissa Lewis gives him a kiss after a coughing fit. Broadway’s asthma has made the illness more difficult to fight. A third of visits to the hospital’s emergency department have been for respiratory illnesses. (Denver Post Photo by Cyrus McCrimmon)

Every year, about two to four weeks after school start, a big spike in asthma-related hospital visits occurs among children with asthma that experts say is largely avoidable.

This year, the usual September spike in visits to emergency departments and hospital units by children in respiratory distress was up to 15 percent higher because of an outbreak of viral cases, Children’s Hospital Colorado physicians say.

Physicians don’t know why for certain, said Dr. Monica Federico, pediatric lung specialist and director of Children’s asthma program. They do think that many emergency or urgent cases could be avoided each year if asthma patients were more consistent in taking asthma-controlling medications.

“People who have asthma — sometimes you feel terrible and sometimes you feel fine. People, in the summer, feel so good they stop taking their meds,” Federico said. “There is data they don’t fill their medications.”

The presumption is that children reunited with their classmates in close quarters in classrooms are exposed to more germs and colds, which can trigger asthma attacks. Late-summer allergens, such as ragweed, might trigger asthma attacks, as about 80 percent to 90 percent of pediatric asthma is triggered by allergies, Federico said.

And, going back to school means parents aren’t around to keep a watchful eye on children’s use of their puffers – the dose-metered inhalers used to take asthma medicine, the corticosteroids that reduce the inflammation of airways.

Whatever the September triggers are, Federico said, more consistent use of controller medications could help families avoid many attacks, which are caused by inflammation, bronchospasms and excessive mucous in airways.

In late August and early September of this year, an outbreak of an uncommon virus, enterovirus 68, has caused hundreds of Denver-area children with asthma to experience an abrupt and severe onset of respiratory illness. Symptom severity has led children to seek hospital treatment, experience stays of several days and, in the most severe cases, use ventilators to help them breathe.

“If parents are worried, they should call the doctor right away,” Federico said. “They shouldn’t wait until their kids are really sick and go to the ER.”

Roughly 25 million Americans have asthma – including 7 million children, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. While 8 percent of U.S. adults suffer from the disease, more than 9 percent of children suffer from the chronic illness. Some just “outgrow it,” Federico said. For some, it’s a lifelong condition. In any case, physicians believe it is a combination of genetic and environmental factors, such as cigarette smoke and allergens.

High altitude doesn’t increase prevalence of the disease, Federico said, but when children and adults need help getting oxygen because of an asthma attack, they need more help getting oxygen at higher elevations.

When an attack of wheezing and difficulty breathing occurs, sufferers use a puffer or nebulizer (which makes a mist) with so-called rescue medication. Though known by many brand names, the rescue medication for attacks is albuterol, Federico said. Albuterol is a bronchodilator – meaning it opens airways – by relaxing these passages when they are in spasm. It provides quick, but short-lived relief, usually about four hours.

Federico said children should visit their primary care physicians in July or August, use their controller medications consistently and, through their parents, have an asthma action plan on file with their school’s nurse.

Asthma is more common among children in inner city areas. Denver Public Schools, which has some schools reporting asthma prevalence as high as 22 percent, has an asthma program called Step Up.

By schools supporting children’s consistent corticosteroid use, health officials reported, by 2012, the incidence of children’s attacks, visits to ERs or urgent care centers, hospitalization and school absenteeism became roughly half of the 2010 baseline-year statistics.

Families shouldn’t worry about regular use of controller medications, Federico said, because the side effects of inhaled steroids for children are not serious. She said studies 20 to 25 years in length have show the long-term side effect of inhaled steroids is a loss in a child’s height 0.6-1 centimeter, or about a quarter of an inch to just under half an inch.

“The medicine is not addictive,” Federico said. “You don’t have to wean off it when you no longer need it.”