This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

what will Republicans do with the Supreme Court strikes down Obamacare subsidies ... American Action Forum President Doug Holtz Eakin is on the line from Washington that ... there are a lot of ideas being thrown around out there what is your favorite one ... well I think I like the ones that didn't push by the Senate aam divers a combined piece by a surge in Iraq so that's Alexander ... that they made the case that doing nothing ... I was really not acceptable and be ... up policy the state some flexibility in their response and since ... we've seen a dramatic difference across the States and how they've approached Obamacare as it makes sense to tailor the response of the state level ... the survey covers are called that ... Oklahoma Governor Mary fallin wrote a piece aren't basically asking the Congress to let the states deal with this in their in their own way ... the center Ben Sasse also had an op ed in our paper you've proposed expanding Cobra ... but to see the HICP yet when you're out of work ... a deal like that the proposals out ... well it's pretty interesting it's not something I had thought about Cobra is uniquely associated with the coverage from our employer sponsored insurance I'm not a buy back the put in the category of teaching put for exchange insurance so ... ah but it's a continuation subsidies and ... up I think what's really important in more than that that the particulars is that we have a lot of proposals we have ... I been Sasse out we have on Sen Kasey from Louisiana ... to set up the piece from the guys in the house Brian Upton and ... aam Klein bought these are all of ... these is that basically say the wants of the half to happen number two it can't be the president's aam approach when you we get out of Obamacare this is the first that ... that's really the important that that Ace is called King v Burwell for those who don't know it done ... I when this case is decided ... we had seventy people who might lose coverage immediately ... so is important the Republicans come up with one planned ... but not just this mishmash of plans that they've been shocking enough ... I have always ... argued that the Democrats so on a single health care reform when they act when that when you know ... the formal care Act was on the floor and out of Scott Brown won the mass chooses they ought to rally around that was that ... Republicans are very similar they're going to settle on one thing when they have to ... and so I think it's good that they have the ideas are as the decision date nears I think they're going to ... start to coalesce around ... a narrower set of options ... and if the core rules in favor of King and overturns the subsidies ... it's quite likely that they'll stay the implementation that decision ... for say thirty sixty ninety days ... in our window Republicans half that there's no question about it ... and they will be forced by events to settle on one balls ... Republicans will be forced to act it's can be fascinating to watch ... American Action Forum President Doug Holtz Eakin ... thanks for joining us ... thanks for