Bloomberg News Japanese Finance Minister Taro Aso

While Japan is set to allow private fund managers to look after a small portion of its extremely-cautiously managed official foreign reserves starting next April, the jury is still out over where the project is heading.

The government passed a bill in November to allow private fund managers to manage some of the $1.267 trillion it holds in reserves–the world’s second largest after China.

But on the day the Finance Ministry announced it has begun recruiting financial consultants to help the ministry choose potential fund managers, Finance Minister Taro Aso said that the ministry hasn’t reached a consensus over how actually to move forward.

“Even within the government, there are still diverse views on this issue,” Mr. Aso said at a news conference Friday.

The government is grappling with a relatively straightforward dilemma: how to make the most of the mountain of money that it is passively holding on to without opening itself up to the type of risks that essentially come hand-in-hand with investing.

The ministry said Friday that it will recruit investment consultants and asset managers. It said it will first recruit consultant firms that can best identify companies interested in being registered as managers of Japan’s foreign exchange reserves.

The registered fund managers selected will then advise the government on what types of investments are most prudent.

In the fiscal year ended in March 2013, Japan’s annual return on its investment in its foreign exchange reserves was a modest 2.5%. But this doesn’t reflect changes to the value of the reserves brought on by the changes in the FX rates. In that fiscal year, the dollar appreciated more than 10% against the yen, giving an extra boost to the value of its holdings.

But FX rates don’t always move in Japan’s favor.

In the preceding four years, for instance, the yen rose more than 30% versus the dollar, wiping out any coupon income earned on its FX investments at the time. Japan’s investments are believed to have yielded very little over the years once the impact of foreign exchange is taken into account, prompting calls that its strategy on reserve management be revamped.