Topics: Broadway, Drugs, musical, Substance.com, Entertainment News

This piece originally appeared on Substance.com

We’ve come to expect films, TV, literature and songs to tackle drug and alcohol use and addiction. But musicals, with their prescribed jollity and often underage audience members, are an improbable medium to tackle such heavy content. Also, the inebriated generally don’t dance a good soft shoe. But as the subject of addiction is no longer taboo—and therefore easier to approach with a little levity—a growing number of intrepid lyricists and directors are going where very few had previously dared. With New York City’s self-promotional “Broadway Week” upon us (September 1 to 14), it seems apt to give props to our 10 favorite substance use musicals.

1. Rent

Jonathan Larson’s groundbreaking 1996 musical followed a group of East Village bohemians as they made art, dealt with AIDS, scored dope and scraped by. The most notable addict is Mimi, an exotic dancer and heroin user who sings about her lost bag in the now-famous number “Light My Candle”: “I’m illin’/I had it when I walked in the door/it was pure!” Mimi fares better than some other cast members, however; in a particularly syrupy finale, she is revived from a nearly comatose state by the sweet crooning of her ex-boyfriend (a former heroin addict). Rent developed an enormous cult following its debut, and is still staged widely, including in a somewhat censored version for schoolchildren to raise their awareness of AIDS and drug use.

2. Hair

What would a musical romp through the ‘60s counterculture be without featuring illicit drug use? In this landmark 1967 musical subtitled “The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical,” hippies take center stage, educating the audience about the new Age of Aquarius value system and the many substances that facilitate it. One of the first numbers, “Hashish,” is essentially a list of drugs from Thorazine to opium. Most of the second act is the staging of an acid trip, during which a monk self-immolates and Abraham Lincoln dances a minuet with Clark Gable and Colonel Custer. While it’s easy to see Hair, with its Be-In finale and occasionally goofy lyrics (“S-E-X Y-O-U W-O-W!), as dated and laughable, its nudity, explicit sex and drug language, a man-on-man kiss and, most notably, its racially integrated cast were groundbreaking at the time.

3. Next to Normal

This 2009 musical by Brian Yorkey and Tom Kitt sets all the pitfalls of suburban life to music. The story revolves around the Goodmans: bipolar wife Diana, depressive but stable husband Dan and overachieving but secretly despairing daughter Natalie. Oh, and there’s also the son, who––spoiler alert!––just happens to be giving the mom medication advice…except, in a Sixth Sense-style twist, he’s dead. Inevitably, psychiatric medications play a big role in this show—they even a round of electroconvulsive therapy is set to music—but illegal substances also make an appearance. In the song “Wish I Were Here,” Natalie greets the specter of her mother with a cheery, “I’m Robotripping!” Next to Normal won 11 Tony Award nominations and snagged the Pulitzer Prize for drama in 2010, one of only 10 musicals to ever do so.

4. Reefer Madness: The Musical

Kevin Murphy is best known for producing and writing the TV drama Desperate Housewives, but in 1998 he and writing partner Dan Studney penned the book for Reefer Madness: The Musical, a song-laden satire of the 1936 cult film of the same name. The play is a mock after-school special about a group of all-American kids who end up selling their babies, committing murder and becoming psychotic due to their dangerous “addiction” to Demon Weed. The oddest song-and-dance number may be “The Orgy,” featuring a half-man, half-goat and a jungle drum intro. (The protagonist calls it a “salacious carpet ride.”) Last April 20 (420), National Weed Day, a benefit concert version was staged in Los Angeles starring Alan Cumming and Andrea McArdle; proceeds went to BabyQuest, a foundation that helps women dealing with infertility.

5. Anna Nicole

However unlikely at first glance, the troubled life of model Anna Nicole Smith proves to have all the hallmarks required for opera: a hopeful beginning followed by a fatal love affair and a tragic end for the protagonist. The opera premiered in 2011 in Britain to rave reviews, then made its way across the Atlantic to the Brooklyn Academy of Music, where it was panned and soon closed. I know, I know—you thought you’d never see the day when a big-busted soprano dressed in pink taffeta sang an aria called “Partay!” but that day has arrived. “I’m dressed up to get messed up!” sings an intoxicated Smith, who was famously addicted to pills, alcohol and binge eating. Though most of the show is (not always intentionally) hilarious, the conclusion examines the vicious way American society treats celebrities and the deadly would-be panaceas those in the public eye often turn to.