LITTLE ROCK — U.S. Sen. John Boozman, R-Ark., drew a primary challenge Monday from businessman Curtis Coleman of Little Rock, who unsuccessfully sought the GOP nominations for Senate in 2010 and governor in 2014.

Boozman, of Rogers, and Coleman both filed candidate papers at the state Capitol on the final day of the week-long filing period for state, federal and nonpartisan judicial offices. Next year’s primary election will be March 1.

Democrat Conner Eldridge of Fayetteville, a former U.S. district attorney for the Western District of Arkansas, and Libertarian Frank Gilbert of Tull filed last week to run for Boozman’s Senate seat.

Coleman, the retired founding president and CEO of Safe Foods of North Little Rock, recently founded an Internet television station called AR1.TV. He told reporters Arkansas needs a more conservative vote than Boozman’s in the Senate.

“The seven votes to raise the debt ceiling, for which John voted, increased the nation’s indebtedness by $6.3 trillion. That’s not a conservative Republican vote in the Senate,” he said.

Coleman said supporters encouraged him to run and donated enough money to cover his $20,000 filing fee. He also said his decision was influenced by a University of Arkansas poll that found 38 percent of respondents said they approve of Boozman’s job performance. Among very likely voters, Boozman’s approval rating was 44 percent.

Boozman’s disapproval rating was 18 percent among both groups. Forty-four percent of respondents, and 38 percent of very likely voters, did not know or declined to answer.

“What really struck me is that 44 percent of Arkansans didn’t know enough about him to have an opinion, which I thought was remarkable given the fact that he’s been in Congress for 14 years and almost half the state doesn’t recognize John Boozman or know enough to have an opinion,” Coleman said.

Coleman also mentioned a report last week by CNN that Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., has had a talk with Boozman about his fundraising and that the National Republican Senatorial Committee has told Boozman it will not bail him out financially if he gets in trouble. Boozman’s third-quarter fundraising was outstripped by that of Eldridge, who raised funds for only 21 days during the quarter.

“I think it shows not only a lack of support from Arkansans, but it shows a significant concern with John’s performance from the Republican National Committee that I think is indicative of an overall dissatisfaction with John’s performance,” Coleman said.

Boozman, a former optometrist who served in the U.S. House for 10 years before being elected to the Senate in 2010, filed earlier Monday. He told reporters his approval rating among very likely voters “is very, very good, considering my low disapproval numbers.”

Regarding the meeting with McConnell, Boozman said, “What Mitch McConnell said was, ‘How are you doing with your fundraising?’ and I said, ‘Not as well as I’d like,’ because until then I really didn’t have an opponent. I’d just acquired an opponent. It’s difficult when everybody feels like you’re in great shape in Arkansas, and everybody feels like you’re in great shape in Washington. Arkansas has turned very red, and so as a result … the feeling is you don’t have a problem.”

Boozman said he will raise enough money to get his message to voters.

“I’ve always been out-raised in my races. I’m not concerned about that,” he said.

Boozman said that if elected to a second Senate term, he will work to repeal the Affordable Care Act, ease regulations on businesses and create an environment in which employers want to hire more workers. He said his voting record “matches up very, very well with the people of Arkansas.”

Vincent Insalaco, chairman of the state Democratic Party, said in a statement Monday that the state Republican Party “is more divided today than ever before.”

“Senator John Boozman will face a primary opponent because he is part of the ‘insider Congress’ that gets nothing done for the people of Arkansas,” Insalaco said. “During his 15 years in Congress, John Boozman has voted to shut down the government and remains in lockstep with Washington special interests. Arkansans want change. Arkansans deserve a new voice in Washington, which is why Conner Eldridge has so much momentum right out of the gate.”