It's almost June, which means that it's almost time for the release of the highly anticipated Supreme Court decision in the King v. Burwell case, which the court heard in March.

At issue is the legality of the subsidies provided for the purchase of health insurance in the federal health care exchanges established under the Affordable Care Act. If the Court decides the subsidies are illegal, the disruption to the health insurance market is expected to be significant. Given their majorities in both chambers, all eyes are on congressional Republicans. – it will be up to them to act quickly to help mitigate the effects of a Court ruling against the subsidies.

But according to Politico, House and Senate Republicans have yet to line up behind a single plan for action. Further, several of the legislative fixes they're considering have the potential to cause further damage to what would be an already fragile health insurance market.



[READ: Obamacare's Tax Surprise Could Be Avoided]

According to the report, Senate Republicans may be slowly rallying around a plan introduced by Wisconsin GOP Sen. Ron Johnson that would extend the subsidies for a short period of time while also eliminating the Affordable Care Act's individual and employer mandates for health insurance. Another proposed Senate plan would seem to keep the current Affordable Care Act structure in place for 18 months, but decrease the amount of subsidies provided over time.

In the House, the plans are also varied, although many of them center on the provision of tax credits, instead of subsides, to help consumers buy health insurance. The plan proposed by Ways and Means Chairman Paul Ryan of Wisconsin, Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Fred Upton of Michigan and Education and Workforce Chairman John Kline of Minnesota combines tax credits with repeal of the individual mandate. More plans appear to be forthcoming.

The different approaches to dealing with a potential court ruling likely reflect divisions in the party over the controversial health care law. As much as some Republican members of Congress understand the political and practical need to provide immediate relief to Americans who may lose health insurance subsidies they currently depend on, others are hewing closely to their belief that the only fix for the Affordable Care Act is a complete replacement.



[READ: When Health Care Cost Studies Get the Facts Wrong]

However, some of the proposals to "fix" the health care law have the potential to cause more harm. Eliminating the individual mandate to buy health insurance would undermine the critical health insurance market reforms passed by the Affordable Care Act – like elimination of the pre-existing conditions exclusion – that have helped to bring the previously uninsured some of the most relief. The market reforms cannot exist without the large risk pool that the individual mandate creates. Proposals that don't address the linkage between these aspects of the Affordable Care Act could throw the market into even more upheaval than a Supreme Court ruling against the subsidies. According to The Hill, the American Academy of Actuaries agrees and has spoken to the damage that could result from this policy in a new report. They also point out that a temporary extension of the subsidies only puts off the inevitable fallout from an adverse Supreme Court decision – it doesn't provide an actual resolution. It's unclear what the impact would be of the tax credit provisions contained in various House proposals. Although the tax credits may be structured differently, ultimately they may end up being similar to the subsidies that are being used now. As Louisiana GOP Rep. John Fleming told Politico, "Whether you continue subsidies or you use tax credits, they're all tax credit programs one way or another."

[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Republican Party]

If the Court rules against the Affordable Care Act's health insurance subsidies, Congressional Republicans should simply fix the legislative error that caused this mess in the first place. Congressional Republicans need to minimize disruption to individuals' health care and put themselves in the best position for 2016, and that's the best way to do it. None of the plans they've proposed so far will help them accomplish these goals. Further, acquiescing on this one fix could provide the party with the leverage it needs to obtain other fixes to the law – repeal of the Medicare Independent Payment Advisory Board, for example, or repeal of the medical device tax – that the party has been seeking for years.

As the party in charge of Congress, Republicans will be held liable for their inability to agree on an effective fix for the law. Acting quickly and decisively is their best course of action.