Tea party favorite and potential presidential candidate Dr. Ben Carson is wading into the debate on government mandated vaccinations with a surprise defense of President Obama’s view that immunizations are a matter of public safety.

"Certain communicable diseases have been largely eradicated by immunization policies in this country and we should not allow those diseases to return by foregoing safe immunization programs, for philosophical, religious, or other reasons when we have the means to eradicate them," he said in a statement to The Hill.

Carson, a former pediatric neurosurgeon who has gained favor among tea party supporters, sided with the government on the issue — a rare move for him. Carson famously blasted the government overreach of Obamacare in the presence of President Obama during his keynote speech at the 2013 National Prayer Breakfast.

His statement on Monday came just as his likely Republican foes in the 2016 race, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul, signaled their support for parents who opt out of immunizing their children.

Christie, who is on a trade mission to Britain, said “parents need to have some measure of choice" in the decision to vaccinate children, as he toured a biologics company that makes vaccines in Cambridge.

The comment gained traction in the press and prompted Christie’s office to release a statement clarifying the remark. "The Governor believes vaccines are an important public health protection...at the same time different states require different degrees of vaccination, which is why he was calling for balance in which ones government should mandate,” the statement said.

Paul, an opthamologist and bold libertarian, went further than Christie to support parental choice in the decision to vaccinate.

"The state doesn't own your children. Parents own the children, and it is an issue of freedom and public health,” he said Monday on CNBC.

Presumed presidential contenders are weighing in on the anti-vaccine movement as the U.S. deals with an increase of measles in communities where parents oppose government mandated vaccines.

Obama urged parents on Sunday to heed medical advice. “There is every reason to get vaccinated, but there aren't reasons to not," he told NBC News.

"You should get your kids vaccinated. It's good for them, but we should be able to get back to the point where measles effectively is not existing in this country,” he added.