The number one fear for US residents is the corruption of government officials.

It beats fear of war, reptiles, cyber terrorism, and gun control – all of which appeared in the top 20 fears held by Americans.

This is according to a survey of 1,541 adults who were asked to rate how much they were scared of 88 different topics.

Scroll down for video

The survey asked respondents about 88 fears across a broad range of categories including fears about the government, crime, the environment, the future, technology, aging, sickness and health. Pictured are the top ten fears of 2015 across the US, with corruption of government officials topping the list

The survey data is organised into five basic categories: personal fears, acting out of fear, natural disasters, paranormal fears, and domains of fear.

Other concerns in the top 20 include bio-warfare, Obamacare, economic collapse, tornado and running out of money.

'The 2015 survey data shows us the top fears are heavily based in economic and 'big brother' type issues.' said Dr Christopher Bader, who led the team effort.

'People often fear what they cannot control,' continued Dr Bader, 'and technology and the future of our economy are two aspects of life that Americans find very unpredictable at the moment.

There were 10 major 'domains' of fear addressed by the survey, including crime, government, man-made disasters, natural disasters and personal anxieties

TOP TWENTY FEARS IN THE US Corruption of government officials (58.0 per cent) Cyber-terrorism (44.8 per cent) Corporate tracking of personal information (44.6 per cent) Terrorist attacks (44.4 per cent) Government tracking of personal information (41.4 per cent) Bio-warfare (40.9 per cent) Identity theft (39.6 per cent) Economic collapse (39.2 per cent) Running out of money in the future (37.4 per cent) Credit card fraud (36.9 per cent) Gun control (36.5 per cent) War (35.8 per cent) Obamacare (35.7 per cent) Illness (34.4 per cent) Pandemic (34.3 per cent) Nuclear Attack (33.6 per cent) Reptiles (33 per cent) Meltdown (32.3 per cent) Civil Unrest (32 per cent) Tornado (31.4 per cent)

The survey, by Champan University in California, also looked at how people act out of fear.

The researchers asked respondents if they had engaged in particular actions because of their fears.

What they learned is nearly a fourth of Americans report having voted for a particular candidate due to their fears; and more than 10 percent have purchased as a result of fear.

Other behaviours driven by fear are sending kids to private schools and purchasing a home alarm system.

'Fear of the government had the strongest relationship with buying a gun because of fear,' said L. Edward Day, lead researcher on this portion of the survey.

'People who have purchased a gun because of fear also have high levels of fear of technology and crime.'

More than half of all Americans fear they will experience a natural or manmade disaster.

And 86 per cent believe an emergency kit would improve their chances of surviving a disaster, although 72 per cent say they have made no effort to put together such a kit.

'We found a major disconnect between people's expectations of what would happen in a disaster and the reality of a disaster's aftermath,' said Dr Ann Gordon, lead researcher on the disaster portion of the survey.

'The number one excuse given by Americans for not having an emergency kit is that they expect first responders to come to their aid immediately - this is an unrealistic belief in the wake of a natural disaster.'

Red Cross suggests that people have their own food, water, prescription medication and other supplies for at least 72 hours following a disaster, as local officials may not be able to reach everyone immediately.

The researchers asked respondents if they had engaged in particular actions because of their fears. What they learned is nearly a fourth of Americans report having voted for a particular candidate due to their fears; and more than 10 percent have purchased as a result of fear

The Chapman University 2015 Survey of American Fears included items on paranormal beliefs ranging from Bigfoot and psychic powers to haunted houses and the power of dreams.

COMMON TRAITS OF PEOPLE WHO BELIEVE IN THE PARANORMAL - Low levels of church attendance - Non-white - Catholic - No college degree - Female - Unmarried - Living in the Northeast of the US

The data shows more than 40 per cent of Americans believe that places can be haunted by spirits; and more than a fourth believe that the living and the dead can communicate with each other.

Twenty percent of Americans believe both that aliens visited Earth in the ancient past, and that dreams can foretell the future.

'Overall, the survey showed that half of Americans believe in something paranormal,' said Dr Bader.

'But that also means half of Americans do not believe in anything paranormal.'

The survey also shed light on certain characteristics of people who believe in the paranormal.

People with the highest levels of paranormal beliefs have the following traits have low levels of church attendance, no college degree, are often female, live in the northeast and are unmarried.

On average, Americans' fears lay highest in the domains of man-made disasters, such as terrorist attacks, followed by technology and then the government, the survey found.