Investigators are looking for answers after a man was killed in his own front yard in Lehigh Acres early Saturday morning.

Friends say they saw the victim alive just moments before he was killed.

Blood stains the grass outside a Wyoming Road home in Lehigh Acres. It's what remains after neighbors say a late night fight turned deadly.

"I seen him stretched out," said the victim's friend, "I was in shock. I mean, I'm still in shock. It ain't sank in."

As daybreak arrived, a gruesome crime scene was revealed.

28-year-old Dana Thomas Stump was brutally killed in his own front yard early Saturday morning.

A friend says he saw Stump outside his house moment before he was killed.

"I drove by and seen some people arguing," said the victim's friend.

Deputies received a 911 call just after midnight for a disturbance at Stump's home.

When they arrived, Stump was found dead in the front yard.

Witnesses say another person was kneeling down in the driveway, then taken away in an ambulance.

"Like I said, he was an all right dude. He had a daughter. I know he loved her," said the victim's friend.

A friend says Stump had a lot of pent up anger due to issues over not being able to see his daughter.

"I think that's what drug him to drinking and he was getting out of control," said the victim's friend, "God forbid. I didn't think this would happen."

Deputies are not giving specifics on how Stump died, but say he did suffer traumatic injuries.

Neighbors say the two people fighting used broken beer bottles to stab each other.

"I saw a dude out there wrestling with him and a girl in the truck," said a witness.

That white truck was towed away from the crime scene hours after the deadly brawl.

We discovered Stump had been in and out of jail that last four years.

Neighbors also say despite his troubled past – Stump was a nice guy.

"He came over and offered to mow our grass a couple of times," said a neighbor.

Investigators are still trying to determine what caused the situation to escalate.

An autopsy is being conducted.

According to the Lee County Sheriff's Office, the other person involved in the incident is in the hospital with serious injuries.

There is no word yet on how the deadly fight started or who initiated it.