For Venezuelans living in Tampa and across Florida, the news from home is painful to hear this Christmas season, with a growing economic crisis, a popular uprising and a harsh government crackdown.

Feb. 12 will mark the one-year anniversary of civil unrest in Caracas, Venezuela’s capital, against the regime of President Nicolas Maduro. The violence of the past 10 months has left more than 1,400 dead and thousands behind bars or injured.

Much of the anger on the streets arises from Maduro’s inability to restart a failing economy.

Citizens face shortages of basic necessities such as bread, toilet paper and milk. Inflation has risen to 63 percent, and many believe — with Venezuela’s economy heavily dependent on oil prices that now are in a tailspin — the country will enter a period of hyperinflation in the next few months.

❖ ❖ ❖

“It is expected that the situation will worsen because the administration has not been able to show any improvement in any area, but especially in economic management,” said Carlos Escalante, director of the Inter-American Center for Political Management, an analysis group in Miami.

In terms of governance, Escalante said, Maduro has been unable to come up a formula for turning around the shortage of essential goods or dealing with what has become the world’s highest inflation rate.

What’s more, other analysts say, his government opposes one measure that might turn the problem around.

“A massive devaluation would perhaps be the only solution, but they are against that,” said Jorge Salazar Carrillo, professor of economics at Florida International University in Miami. “They are handling the economy as if they were in kindergarten.”

Growing criticism of the Maduro regime has brought repression to Venezuela’s streets. The handpicked successor of former President Hugo Chavez, whose death in March 2013 marked the beginning of Venezuela’s economic downturn, Maduro launched his crackdown with the arrest in February of opposition leader Leopoldo Lopez. Lopez remains in jail. Additionally, opposition lawmaker Maria Corina Machado was removed from the National Assembly and charged on Dec. 3 with conspiracy to assassinate Maduro — a crime that carries a penalty of up to 16 years in prison.

The move against Maduro drew immediate criticism from the U.S.

“We are deeply concerned by what appears to be the Venezuelan government’s continuing effort to intimidate its political opponents through abuse of the legal process,” the State Department said last week. “The charges against Machado raise concerns once again about Venezuela’s arbitrary use of prosecutorial power to silence and punish government critics.”

❖ ❖ ❖

Congress this week passed sanctions against senior Venezuelan officials to freeze their U.S. assets and deny them visas. President Barack Obama, who balked at the measures during the height of the Maduro crackdown, now has signaled he will sign them.

“We have gone to Washington to raise our voices against the Venezuelan government,” said Norma Camero Reno, president of the Tampa-based Organized Movement of Venezuelan People Abroad.

Camero, a lawyer, helped spark the successful campaign for sanctions by rallying the local Venezuelan community. She said her group will continue to “fight for democracy.”

The Census Bureau’s 2010 American Community Survey says nearly 6,000 Venezuelans live in the Tampa Bay area, Hillsborough, Pinellas and Pasco counties. That’s the third largest South American population group locally, behind Colombia and Peru. Statewide, Venezuelans number 102,116, second only to Colombians among South Americans.

The sanctions measure was sponsored by Sen. Robert Menendez, a New Jersey Democrat, and co-sponsored by both of Florida’s senators, Republican Marco Rubio and Democrat Bill Nelson. It is a beefed-up version of similar legislation penned by Rep. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, a Miami Republican, and Rep. Debbie Wasserman-Schultz, of Weston, head of the Democratic National Committee.

In an email to Tampa Media Group, Rubio praised the action by Congress and said, “The U.S. stands with the Venezuelan people and against their oppressors in the regime of Nicolas Maduro. This is a long overdue but important step to demonstrate America’s commitment to the human rights and democratic aspirations of the Venezuelan people in both words and actions.”

Still, many seem to think the sanctions will do little more than stoke the flames between Caracas and Washington. The countries have had limited diplomatic relations since pulling their respective ambassadors in 2010.

Others, though, think passing the sanctions will help revive the opposition in Venezuela.

José Toledo, a Tampa lawyer who traveled to Venezuela in February, said the movement is growing.

“I saw very brave students protesting despite the violence,” Toledo said. “I spoke to different types of people. The voices of change are a reality.”

jchavez@centrotampa.com

(813) 259-8478