Once again, former Karl Rove self-actualization guru Ron Fournier has taken to the pages of the National Journal --Motto: There's A Reader Out There Somewhere-- to explain that the president misapprehended the results of the 2012 election, and that he has been operating under the illusion that, because he got the most votes, he got to be president again. To elucidate this for the dimmer people among us, Ron shows how brilliant he was in the immediate aftermath of said election, and employs the useful tool of Historical Parallelism, which he applies repeatedly and vigorously to his own forehead.

Bush and Obama made the same mistake. Both men convinced themselves that they were reelected because of their agendas, rather than because of negative campaign strategies that essentially disqualified their rivals-Democrat John Kerry and Republican Mitt Romney. In fact, many of the issues claimed as presidential mandates in 2005 and 2013 actually received relatively little attention from the candidates and from the media in 2004 and 2012.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

You see. The president didn't win. Willard Romney lost. But not because of what he believed, and the policies he proposed, and because he was the living embodiment of the forces that nearly blew up the entire world, but because he ran a bad campaign that failed to convince average Americans that Willard Romney was one o' the boys.

On the night of Obama's election, I wrote: Barack Obama won a second term but no mandate. Thanks in part to his own small-bore and brutish campaign, victory guarantees the president nothing more than the headache of building consensus in a gridlocked capital on behalf of a polarized public. If the president begins his second term under any delusion that voters rubber-stamped his agenda on Tuesday night, he is doomed to fail. Mandates are rarely won on election night. They are earned after Inauguration Day by leaders who spend their political capital wisely, taking advantage of events without overreaching. Obama's advisers mocked the column and others like it, a sign of ...

Most Popular

They laugh at my mighty sword. Why must they laugh at my mighty sword?

2. Institutional arrogance and overreach.Early in his second term, Bush brushed aside questions about Bernard Kerik's background and nominated the former New York police commissioner to head the Homeland Security Department. Baker concluded the move "demonstrated that a president at the peak of his power and influence thought he could dismiss such issues and the rest of Washington would go along." A short time later, Bush awarded Presidential Medals of Freedom to George Tenet, Jerry Bremer, and Tommy Franks, three architects of the Iraq War. "It was the act of a president fresh off reelection feeling empowered and a little defiant," Baker wrote.

But not uppity. That's the next guy.

Shortly after his reelection, at the height of his powers, Obama faced a choice in the 2012 lame-duck session of Congress: Lead with humility and seek compromise with the GOP on a long-term budget deal, or rub Republican faces in defeat. Obama forced his rivals to accept higher taxes on the wealthy. It was his prerogative; he won the election. And he set the tone for a harsh and humiliating 2013.

Yeah, that GOP was just itching to compromise, and the president's failure to "lead" them - possibly through the use of powerful psychotropic drugs covertly administered to the Capitol's water supply - is exactly like hanging medals on the architects of an illegal war based on deceit.

The increasingly unpopular Iraq war Was an issue in 2004, even after Saddam Hussein's capture, but Bush had managed to finesse it for reelection. Obama's white whale was the Affordable Care Act. In both cases, luck ran out after Election Day. The death toll rose in Iraq during Bush's fifth year. For Obama, the federal health insurance website didn't work, and millions of Americans lost their insurance policies despite his promises to the contrary.

And sitting in the rubble of his home, a lone Iraqi child surveys the wreckage of his entire village, and his 15 dead uncles, and says to himself, "Damn glad I'm not some guy in Idaho who lost his crappy health-insurance policy."

As I wrote last week (Ed. Note: why must they laugh at my mighty sword?), the presidents also shared an allergy to firing people. Their reluctance may have something to do with the fact that they ...5. Dragged their feet in response to crises.In his chapter on Hurricane Katrina, Baker wrote, "Now deep in the fight year of a presidency already marked by one crisis after another, Bush was slow to recognize the scale of the disaster." By the time he did, it was too late. Steve Schmidt, the vice president's counselor, wrote in an email to a colleague, "This is the end of the presidency." Despite warnings that the health care website wasn't ready, the White House went ahead with the rollout and then minimized the extent of the problems, even internally, for weeks.

You may recall the thousands of unfortunate people who drowned while attempting to access healthcare.gov.

6. An opposition party that took partisanship to new levels.Writing of Bush's ill-fated effort to overhaul the Social Security system, Baker said, "Democrats had seized on the issue to attack Bush, calculating it was a way of weakening a newly reelected president." The Obama White House and its apologists seem to forget the zero-sum game tactics of Bush-era Democrats when they criticize congressional Republicans (accurately) for making presidential destruction a singular goal.

There is no possible response to this passage except to mutter, "What an idiot," over and over again. After the extended unpleasantness in Florida, which left us with a president who'd lost the popular vote by over 500,000 votes, the Democrats lined up behind him and gave him his stupid tax cuts. Ted Kennedy worked with Bush on education reform. In the immediate aftermath of the 9/11 attacks, the Democrats took a complete dive on the "war on terror." In 2002, they helped give him his fking war despite 150,000 people in the streets. The night of this president's inauguration, the Republican leadership went to dinner and decided on a campaign of massive resistance to anything he wanted to do. They largely have carried this out.

7. Pressure from the base.Bush got beat up by fellow Republicans over his choice of Harriet Miers to serve on the Supreme Court. Conservatives believed she was professionally and ideologically unsuited. "He was mad at his aides, aggravated that they had let this happen," Baker wrote of the Miers nomination, which was withdrawn. "But he realized he was the one who had put his friend in the situation and it was time to find a way out." Opposition from liberals didn't stop Obama from proposing entitlement reform in public, but the protests had the intended effect in private. The president felt hemmed in by the Left during budget negotiations, according to White House officials involved in the talks.

Apples to andirons. Jesus, in place of Miers, Bush got Strip Search Sammy Alito. (Four Democrats voted for him, Ron.) And we got Citizens United and Shelby County. An exact parallel would have been if this president had failed to get entitlement "reform," and, instead, four Republicans helped him pass a single-payer health-care system.

For Bush, it was the investigation of a leak the led to exposure of an undercover CIA agent. The inquiry divided the White House staff and cast a pall over the administration. For Obama, it was the IRS's review of political organizations, the Justice Department's seizure of Associated Press telephone records, and widespread surveillance by the National Security Agency. The controversies, along with the 2012 attack in Benghazi, Libya, were exacerbated by the way the White House handled them-with shifting explanations and, in some cases, outright distortions.

Valerie Plame actually was outed, and there was an actual crime, and someone actually was convicted. The IRS dumbassery was just that. The NSA surveillance started under Bush - with considerably more Democratic support in the Congress, Ron, than this president has gotten from Republicans on anything - and Benghazi, Benghazi!, BENGHAZI! remains a hoax. I'm afraid we are past the point where an intervention would help. Better just fire off the stun gun and pry the tool of Historical Parallels out of his hand.