President Obama speaks to the media about Ebola before leaving the White House en route to Wisconsin on Tuesday. (AP Photo/Jacquelyn Martin)

Voters will not see "Barack Obama" on the ballot on Tuesday, and the president might count himself lucky. A record low 44 percent of Americans report a favorable impression of him in a new Washington Post-ABC News poll.

President Obama's image is considerably weaker than during the past two election cycles, along of course with his job approval ratings. Half the public now see Obama unfavorably, two points shy of his record high from last November amid the botched Healthcare.gov rollout. Today's six-point unfavorable-favorable margin matches the worst since Obama rose to the national stage.

Tuesday's electorate is likely to be even less fond of the president: 53 percent of likely voters see Obama unfavorably, while 43 percent give him favorable marks. The poll finds those with strongly held views of Obama are most likely to turn out to vote. Strongly unfavorable ratings for Obama outnumber strongly favorable by 36 percent to 24 percent. Roughly three-quarters of those who have strong impressions of the president -- positive or negative -- say they are certain to vote, compared with half of those who have "somewhat" favorable or unfavorable views of the president.

The poll finds Obama with lukewarm ratings across four personal attributes. Forty-five percent say he is a good manager, 46 percent call him a strong leader, and 46 percent say he "understands the problems of people like you."

Obama receives a slightly better score on crisis-management. About half -- 49 percent -- say he can be trusted in a crisis, while 47 percent say he cannot. Positive marks on this question match Obama's 49 percent approval rating for managing the federal response to the Ebola outbreak.

Obama's reputation has stayed strong among some groups who overwhelmingly supported his reelection, but it has weakened among others. Fully 78 percent of fellow Democrats have favorable views of Obama -- including 85 percent of liberal Democrats. An identical 85 percent of African Americans have a favorable impression of Obama.

But among Hispanics, Obama receives a 50 percent favorable rating, which is significantly lower than in past years, and far shy of his 71 percent support among Hispanic voters in the 2012 election, according to exit polling. Americans with no religious affiliation also rate Obama positively, by 55 to 37 percent -- though this also marks a drop.

Obama's unpopularity among Republicans – at 84 percent -- exceeds his popularity among Democrats. Independents tilt negative by a 55-38 margin.

SEE FULL POLL QUESTIONS, RESULTS AND BREAKDOWNS BY GROUP AND METHODOLOGY.

The Post-ABC poll was conducted by telephone Oct. 23-26 among a random national sample of 1,204 adults, including interviews on conventional and cellular phones. The overall margin of sampling error is three percentage points.