UPDATE 3/12/16 8:34 a.m.

Florida Highway Patrol (FHP) officials are still investigating a fatal crash that occurred at the intersection of Highway 231 and Jonny Lane Friday.

According to officials Zachary Mann,16, was driving northbound on U.S. 231, and FHP says Mann began driving into the median and lost control of the vehicle.

Mann's trailblazer began to overturn into the southbound lanes. Two other vehicles struck Mann's trailblazer as it entered the southbound lanes.

Mann and his two passengers, Wayne Ray Johnson, 20, and Diamond Leann Brake,14, were all ejected from the vehicle. Brake died from her injuries. FHP says no one in the trailblazer was wearing a seatbelt.

The drivers and passengers in the two other vehicles sustained minor injuries. FHP says they are investigating if this was alcohol related.

--------------------------------------

UPDATE 3/12/16 1:10 a.m.

The Florida Highway Patrol confirms one person was killed in a crash near the intersection of Highway 231 and Jonny Lane.

According to officials, a Chevy Trailblazer was heading north on Highway 231 when, for unknown reasons, it crossed the median into the southbound lane where it rolled.

Three people, two males and a female, were ejected from the car and the female was killed. Officials told NewsChannel 7 that none of them were wearing their seat belts. They don't know which of the three was driving, but do know they were from Bradenton, Fl. The three have yet to be identified. Officials said the two males were taken to Bay Medical and described as being "incapacitated," but speaking with deputies.

When it crossed into the median, the Trailblazer hit two other SUVs. There were no injuries to the drivers or passengers.

While working the scene, Bay County Sheriff's Deputies and Florida Highway Patrol officers closed a portion of the southbound lane. They worked to split the northbound lane for traffic, and told drivers to slow to 20 miles per hour and use their hazard lights.

Officials are still investigating to learn more.

---

The Florida Highway Patrol says a fatal crash on Highway 231 near Jonny Lane in Bay County closed part of the highway Friday.

FHP is reporting that there is at least one person dead at this accident.

They say it happened around 10 p.m.

We will update you on air and online as we learn more.