What a difference four years made. It's not hard to spot the devolution of The New Republic from think pieces to clickbait for morons.

The liberal media is rapidly being divided into two categories. Prestige publications subsidized by a billionaire and clickbait.

On the one hand you have the Washington/Amazon Post. On the other Buzzfeed. But the problem with being a billionaire liberal's toy is that he may just decide that he wants value for his money. That's what happened to the New Republic.

Just after celebrating its 100th anniversary, The New Republic has lost its top two editors, as Frank Foer and Leon Wieseltier resigned their posts, in the face of pressure from owner Chris Hughes to dramatically revamp the magazine. Gabriel Snyder, formerly of Gawker, Bloomberg and The Atlantic Wire, will be the new editor, as TNR looks to become, in Hughes’s phrase, “a digital media company.”

Snyder was Gawker's managing editor which tells you all need to know. If you don't know what Gawker is, imagine a nastier version of the Huffington Post.

It's a long way down from being the prestige publication of liberalism. But this happened to Slate too when Bill Gates got tired of subsidizing a former New Republic editor's experiment. These days Slate occasionally runs journalistic pieces, but mostly goes with lefty clickbait and its most popular feature is a made up advice column that is little more than an edgier Dear Abby.

The usual eulogies are being written with little to no honesty in the mix. What killed the New Republic is that there was no marketplace for its offerings. The audience on the left most valued by advertisers is not looking for deep thoughts, it wants sheer raw hate.

That's what sites like Gawker or the Huffington Post deliver really well.

It wants memes, snide remarks about how stupid Republicans are and how all of America's problems can be fixed with 3D printers and a TED talk.

Even before the resignations, The New Republic had already begun turning into Slate or New York Magazine. Its leading stories have Buzzfeedy and Slate titles like "This Radiohead Song Perfectly Explains John Boehner's Immigration Problem" and "Russia's Maternity Leave for Expectant Mothers Puts America's to Shame".

There's an ad that's indistinguishable from a news story. The front page is clotted with worthless viral content pandering to a dimmer class of progressives who want their ideas pre-chewed and vomited into their mouths. Call it the Chris Hughes demo.

The New Republic is already indistinguishable from Slate, Salon and a host of similar sites. It's brain dead, but so is liberalism.