SAN JOSE, CALIF. — Calvin Pickard won’t be earning the NHL’s first star of the week honors any time soon, but he held his own in place of Semyon Varlamov on Monday, helping the Avalanche grab their ninth win in the month of December.

Pickard, who was making his first start of the season to give last week’s first star a breather, made 35 saves in the understudy role leading the Avalanche to a 6-3 win over the San Jose Sharks at the SAP Center.

The 23-year-old goalie, who’s currently serving as Varlamov’s backup while Reto Berra recovers from an ankle injury, entered the contest having surrendered four goals on 25 shots in two appearances with the Avalanche this season.

“We have a lot of confidence in him,” head coach Patrick Roy said. “Last year, he played really well for us. I was very confident he’d offer a good performance and that’s exactly what he did. He’s a fighter out there, he battles hard and he never quits.”

Pickard earned his first win of the season in part because the Avalanche capitalized on six Sharks penalties, scoring four power play goals, the most they’ve tallied with the man advantage in one game this season. Nathan MacKinnon earned his second career hat trick in the win.

“You can’t expect that every night,” Pickard said, referring to his six goals of support. “But to get that in my first start this year is greatly appreciated.”

MacKinnon opened the scoring by converting a 3-on-2 on the power play at 8:46 of the first period, snapping his 14-game goalless drought. The goal also marked the 10th consecutive game in which the Avalanche have scored the game’s first goal.

“Tough slump, obviously, it was 14 games,” MacKinnon said. “They come in bunches sometimes and, obviously, it’s nice to get on the board and get the win.”

After Patrick Marleau tied the game less than two minutes later, the Avalanche went to work on the power play again at 14:28 of the opening frame. This time, Carl Soderberg deflected a point shot from Francois Beauchemin. He also collected two assists in the game for a three-point night.

“I thought Soderberg, it was probably his best game since he joined the team,” Roy said. “He was phenomenal, sharp on the power play, made good plays.”

The Avalanche notched two more power play tallies in the third period after Matt Duchene and Melker Karlsson swapped goals in the second.

First, Blake Comeau redirected a shot from Erik Jonhson to stretch the Avalanche’s lead to 4-2, and after Tomas Hertl made it a one-goal game, MacKinnon recorded his second of the game by putting the puck into the roof.

The Avalanche’s explosion with the man advantage was particularly impressive considering the Sharks had killed off 21 straight penalties prior to MacKinnon’s first period goal.

“We have so many different options [on the power play],” MacKinnon said. “All of our goals were from a different variety — a tip, off the rush, backdoor. It’s good to get on it.”

MacKinnon eventually completed his hat trick at 18:32 in the third period scoring an empty-net goal.

The win was the Avalanche’s first at the Shark Tank in 13 games dating back to Feb. 6, 2008.