Compared to Connecticut as a whole, New London County has higher rates of heart disease and cancer, more emergency department visits for asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and infections, and high rates of childhood obesity, a recently released, first-of-its-kind report has found.



These and other findings are included in the New London County Community Health Needs Assessment 2014. It was prepared with a three-year, $252,000 federal grant by the region's two largest public health agencies, the Ledge Light Health District and the Uncas Health District, in conjunction with the ACHIEVE New London coalition, a group of 35 schools, health care providers, social service programs, employers and community leaders.



Cindy Barry, senior program coordinator at Ledge Light, said this is the first comprehensive look at the countywide level of health and factors that could be changed to improve overall health. The 81-page report includes recommendations, combines health data with information from community interviews, surveys and focus groups, and analyzes the data to identify disparities based on race, income, gender and other factors.



"What stood out is that the community seems to be lagging behind," said Barry.



While statewide rates of death from heart disease and cancer are lower, compared to the nation, New London County rates for both diseases are closer to the national rates. The report also looks at heart disease indicators by town, finding that Stonington has "a troubling mortality profile" for cardiovascular illness, and that hospitalization rates for heart disease are highest "by a substantial margin" in Sprague, followed by Norwich, Bozrah, New London and Voluntown.



In addition to data related to illnesses, the report also looks at health indicators tied to risk for obesity, heart disease and other conditions. For physical fitness levels in schools, the report found that Bozrah had the highest percentage of students passing the state's annual fitness test, while Norwich had the lowest. The study found that New London County had a slightly higher obesity rate than the state as a whole, and that while the rate was highest among those aged 65 and older, some communities also had high rates of childhood obesity. These include 59 percent of fourth-grade girls in New London public schools, and 41 percent of sixth-graders in Norwich.



Barry said several projects have been launched in response to the report's findings. To reduce smoking rates, for example, Ledge Light has provided tool kits to communities about how to enact tobacco-free park ordinances and policies. Currently, nine communities have anti-tobacco ordinances or policies for parks, while 10 do not.



The report has also spawned the creation of vegetable gardens at six schools, farm-to-school initiatives and weight management programs for middle school students at five middle schools, run by school-based health centers, the University of Connecticut Health Center and the Ocean Community YMCA, Barry said.



Another project encourages community groups to offer healthier, more nutritious foods at events.



"What we kept hearing from them was that they always served pizza and soda because that's what they could afford," Barry said. "We helped them select foods that are healthy and affordable, like lean meat sandwiches on whole-grain bread with fruit and water. And we've told them that if the meeting is under two hours or doesn't coincide with a meal, providing food isn't necessary."



Russell Melmed, epidemiologist at Ledge Light, said the report's value is as a guide to help leaders adopt policies and projects to build healthier communities.



"What the data in this report suggest is that we need to do a better job providing opportunities for people in New London County to be healthy," he said in a news release. "This isn't about simply telling people what they should do to be healthy, but rather about making the road to optimal health easier for everyone."



Thus far the report has been presented to the Southeastern Connecticut Council of Governments, the boards of directors of Uncas and Ledge Light health districts, and the United Way, Barry said. More presentations are planned.



j.benson@theday.com



Twitter: @BensonJudy



UBOX:



Health indicators in New London County vs. Connecticut:



Emergency department visits per 100,000 residents for:



• Asthma:



New London County: 883



Connecticut: 663



• Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:



New London County: 1,583



Connecticut: 984



• Infectious and parasitic diseases:



New London County: 1,476



Connecticut: 1,037



Hospitalizations per 100,000:



• Coronary heart disease:



New London County: 492



Connecticut: 407



Major cardiovascular disease:



New London County: 1,519



Connecticut: 1,402



• Deaths from cancer per 100,000:



New London County: 175



Connecticut: 160



• Deaths from major cardiovascular diseases per 100,000:



New London County: 230



Connecticut: 215



Towns with highest rates of death from major heart disease per 100,000 residents:



• Stonington



• Griswold



• Preston



• Salem



• North Stonington



Towns with highest numbers of cardiovascular deaths:



• Stonington`



• Norwich



• Groton