Maricopa Medical Center as shown in a Feb. 12, 2014, photo. (Photo: Nick Oza /The Republic) Story Highlights The publicly-funded health system that includes Maricopa Medical Center faces financial trouble.

Loss of a key funding source and effects of a new federal health-insurance law are blamed for woes.

Low-impact programs might be on the chopping block, and some assets sold, to rectify the problems.

A former board member says the publicly-funded health organization that includes Maricopa Medical Center is on the path to financial trouble and should make significant changes to stem mounting losses.

William Bruno, who served on the elected board of Maricopa Integrated Health System for two terms but lost a bid for a third term in 2012, pinned the blame on the board's three newest members, whom he says have led the organization "from fiscal stability to the precipice of financial disaster."

Bruno cited MIHS' dwindling cash reserves, a loss of $24.8 million during fiscal 2014 and an even larger loss through the first seven months of fiscal 2015. He also claimed that the board fumbled away a potential partnership with the University of Arizona Health Network, and hasn't properly scrutinized executive bonuses and compensation packages.

"There are two things — they are losing a lot of money on paper and their cash is falling fast," said Bruno, who also spelled out his concerns in a guest column submitted to The Arizona Republic and Arizona Capitol Times. "I just want to get some discussion out there."

The system, which largely caters to indigent or low-income patients, is partly funded by Maricopa County residents through a property-tax assessment.

Officials at MIHS acknowledge that the health system faces financial challenges following the loss of a key funding source and a tighter fiscal environment for public and academic hospitals.

Still, they say that Bruno's analysis is misleading and incomplete. They also question whether his critique is driven by a desire to still serve on the board.

"His bottom line is correct that we have serious financial issues," said Susan Gerard, an MIHS board member. "On the cause of (financial losses), he is totally wrong."

Gerard is one of five members who sit on the Maricopa County Special Health Care District Board of Directors, an elected board that that oversees MIHS. Other board members include Chairman Terence McMahon, Mark Dewane, Mary Harden and Elbert Bicknell.

Harden and Bicknell referred questions about Bruno's remarks to an MIHS public information officer. Dewane said he was disappointed in Bruno's remarks but said the board is tackling the problems head on.

"The urgency is there right now," Dewane said. "We can get this thing turned around."

MIHS includes Maricopa Medical Center, the public hospital at 24th and Roosevelt streets, and 11 community-based health centers across Maricopa County. The health system has a large share of patients who can't afford to pay their health-care bills, so the hospital serves as the region's safety net for residents who may have limited or no other options for care.

Last November, voters approved a $935 million bond authorization to replace the aging Maricopa Medical Center and its signature burn center. Proposition 480 also would finance a new behavioral-health hospital, outpatient health facilities and clinics.

Even though MIHS received a green light from voters to float bonds and begin the big-ticket construction projects, MIHS officials contend they won't seek the money until they take steps to improve the health system's deteriorating finances.

Prior to the ballot measure, MIHS said the average homeowner would pay $13.74 more a year per $100,000 of a home's assessed valuation to finance the bonds.

MIHS officials said that property owners won't see their tax bills rise for hospital-related construction costs until the year after the health system borrows money. For now, the health system cannot say when that will be.

"We are not going to move forward with that until we have our financial house in order," Gerard said.

MIHS officials said a key financial problem has been the expiration of Arizona's safety-net care pool, which distributed funds to hospitals that serve the uninsured and low-income residents. MIHS was the state's largest recipient of safety-net funds, collecting $147 million from July 2011 through January 2014.

That fund expired in 2014 as the Affordable Care Act ramped up health-insurance coverage, both through an expanded Medicaid program and a marketplace that offered consumers subsidized health insurance. More than a half-million Arizonans gained health insurance coverage through the sweeping federal health-care overhaul, but MIHS officials said that hasn't translated to an improved bottom line.

Steve Purves, chief executive officer of MIHS, said about 60 percent of MIHS patients are eligible for Medicaid and another 30 percent have no insurance coverage or ability to pay. The health system attempts to collect money based on an individual's ability to pay.

"We had expected the passage of the ACA would provide more of a financial relief for us," Purves said. "That really hasn't happened."

Although more Arizonans have gained health-insurance coverage, many of those consumers now have more options in where they can get health care. That means uninsured residents who used Maricopa Medical Center as a safety net before the health-care law's expanded coverage may be using their new insurance cards to seek care at other hospitals.

"All of a sudden you have people who could go elsewhere and might choose to go elsewhere," Gerard said. "The Medicaid expansion gave people more options. We have not benefited as much as a lot of other hospitals have."

With the absence of the safety-net fund dampening the amount of revenue the hospital has been able to collect, Purves said the health system has focused on finding ways to save money.

Since 2013, MIHS has cut about $31 million in expenses through improved productivity, lower supply costs and improved revenue collection, Purves said.

But he added that such savings have not closed the gap created by the elimination of the safety-net funding.

That lack of external funding has affected the health system's bottom line. MIHS lost nearly $25 million during the fiscal year that ended June 30, 2014. During the seven months that followed, the health system's loss widened to $35.2 million.

As the system lost more money, its cash reserves dwindled, too. MIHS had $122.5 million in cash at the end of 2012, but that amount dropped to $81.5 million as of January.

Cash balances can swing from month to month based on tax collections from property owners, government payments for medical education, and insurer payments made on behalf of patients who require costly care, such as burn victims. Treating a patient with severe burns can be an expensive endeavor, but Maricopa's burn unit attracts patients from across the Southwest.

That is part of the balancing act for a public hospital such as Maricopa Medical Center — to provide the type of medical service that other community hospitals may not be willing to provide and to serve the patients that other hospitals typically don't.

But MIHS officials said the health system will need to take a harder look at many things to improve the hospital's financial standing. That could mean forging partnerships with other hospitals, improving collections from patients and potentially examining the types of health services it will offer.

One example: MIHS shares the costs of a medical residency program for obstetrics with St. Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center. The hospital may seek other similar academic medical partnerships to save money, Gerard said.

"There may be programs that have to go if you don't have big enough volume," Gerard said. "We might not look exactly like we do today in order to make changes and stay viable in the community."

The health system also will explore other ways to raise cash, including selling assets that will not affect hospital or outpatient operations, Gerard said. She declined to say what MIHS may be able to sell to raise cash, but she said it won't sell Maricopa Medical Center.

Hospital analysts say the ACA has been a mixed bag for both public and academic hospitals that support medical-training programs for student doctors and recent graduates of medical school, called medical residents.

While such academic hospitals in the past could command higher reimbursement rates for specialized services, both government insurers such as Medicare and Medicaid and private insurers are scrutinizing reimbursement rates as the health-care industry analyzes costs.

Arizona hospitals and health-care providers face the prospect of deeper cuts to the state's Medicaid program, called the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System. The new state budget calls for a 5 percent cut to Medicaid payment rates to doctors and hospitals, though AHCCCS administrators will have flexibility to determine how to enact these cuts.

These financial pressures were key factors in prompting the University of Arizona Health Network to seek a merger partner. Phoenix-based Banner Health recently took control of the UA Health Network, a merger that creates the state's largest private employer.

Two years ago, Bruno said MIHS viewed a partnership with the UA Health Network as a key way to expand Maricopa Medical Center and increase the organization's prestige.

"That is what we built our strategy around for years and years and years," said Bruno, who served lengthy terms on the health system's board.

Gerard agreed that the UA partnership "was a good plan if it had worked.".

Scott Cain, a Scottsdale-based health-industry consultant, said more safety-net hospitals could face financial struggles in 2016 when Medicaid cuts disproportionate-share funding, which reimburses hospitals that serve a large share of uninsured, low-income patients.

The idea is that this funding source won't be needed as the ACA extends coverage to more people. But Cain said both public and private insurers are paying less for health services, which could squeeze hospitals.

"It doesn't look good for public hospitals unless there is some relief that comes from somewhere," Cain said.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1GtZm1d