Columbia Pictures/Courtesy Everett

This week at the multiplex, we’ve got 007 (“Spectre,” starring Daniel Craig and Léa Seydoux) and Snoopy (the animated feature “The Peanuts Movie”). What do the critics have to say? Find out what the critics have to say on Rotten Tomatoes.

“Spectre”

In 2006′s “Casino Royale,” Daniel Craig helped redefine James Bond for the modern era, eschewing the increasingly silly elements of previous Bond films for a more visceral, vulnerable interpretation of the character. “Spectre,” Craig’s fourth outing as the British superspy (and 24th film in the franchise overall), hews closer to the 007 formula of old, and critics say it’s mostly effective, even if it suffers from comparison to its predecessor. This time out, Bond squares off with a shadowy criminal organization with ties to his past, all while he and M (Ralph Fiennes) push back against the imminent cancellation of the double-0 program. “Spectre” is currently at 61 percent on Rotten Tomatoes’ Tomatometer; check out some of the reviews here:

Fresh: “A slick, beautifully photographed, action-packed, international thriller with a number of wonderfully, ludicrously entertaining set pieces, a sprinkling of dry wit, myriad gorgeous women and a classic psycho-villain.” — Richard Roeper, Chicago Sun-Times

Fresh: “It’s business as usual, even if that business is pulled off with brilliant precision, ingeniously choreographed action, and an itinerary boasting some of the most photogenic spots on Earth.” — Steven Rea, Philadelphia Inquirer

Rotten: “‘Spectre’ is full of not-good things, and some oppressively bad things that may come to feel like drill bits twirling in your skull.” — Joe Morgenstern, Wall Street Journal

Rotten: “In the end, ‘Spectre’ is just too much of a good thing. Though each scene is carefully wrought, there’s little grace, majesty, or romance in the way the pieces are connected.” — Stephanie Zacharek, Village Voice

“The Peanuts Movie”

It’s been 65 years since Charles Schulz published the first Peanuts strip, and 35 years since the gang’s last big screen appearance with 1980′s “Bon Voyage, Charlie Brown (and Don’t Come Back!!).” That latter fact is being rectified with the release of “The Peanuts Movie,” and critics say this warm, deeply-felt feature will appeal to longtime fans and a new audience that wasn’t even alive the last time a new Peanuts strip was published. In this movie, lovable loser Charlie Brown goes into panic mode when the Little Red-Haired Girl, his perennial crush, moves across the street, setting off an adventure that crosses path with all the classic characters. “The Peanuts Movie” is currently at 86 percent on the Tomatometer; here are a few of the reviews:

Fresh: “An entertaining combination of humor and tenderness, ‘The Peanuts Movie’ isn’t just an all-ages crowd-pleaser. It’s the perfect first feature film for a preschooler.” — Sandie Angulo Chen, Washington Post

Fresh: “Theirs is a world where kids can’t wait to go outside and play on a snow day, and there aren’t any parents policing the park for hurt feelings and peanut butter. And it’s a lo-fi delight.” — Katharine Pushkar, New York Daily News

Fresh: “It’s a gentle, simple movie with Charlie Brown, Snoopy and the gang that the late Charles Schulz would be proud to call his own.” — Laura DeMarco, Cleveland Plain Dealer

Rotten: “It’s disappointing and actually kind of cynical in its unwillingness to try anything even vaguely innovative with these beloved characters.” — Christy Lemire, RogerEbert.com

For more movie reviews, trailers, and pictures, check out Rottentomatoes.com.