On Friday’s program, radio host Rush Limbaugh put the Obamacare rollout fiasco into historical perspective, declaring that in many ways, the current scandal is worse than Watergate.

“Folks,” Limbaugh told his audience, “Richard Nixon resigned over a lie that was much less damaging in scope than this one.”

“The bottom line,” he said, “is that Obama, the regime, knew that 93 million Americans would be unable to keep their health care plans under Obamacare. … I mean, this is an abject, purposeful lie to the American people for the express purpose of passing legislation.”

The other aim of Obamacare, Limbaugh insisted, was to undermine the private insurance business itself.

He pointed to an “obscure report buried in a June 2010 edition of the Federal Register,” in which White House officials matter-of-factly predicted that Obamacare would create “massive disruption of the private insurance market because that’s what was intended.”

Limbaugh replayed an audio montage of Obama’s repeated promises that Americans who were satisfied with their existing health insurance could keep their plans following the passage of the Affordable Care Act.

Limbaugh called these promises “a total fraud.”

The Affordable Care Act, Limbaugh continued, “is a purposeful, deceitful, fraudulent law.”

“I think Obama’s lie about keeping your insurance may be the biggest lie ever told by a sitting president. This is not an error. It was not a mistake. This was a calculated, purposeful lie.”

Limbaugh added the mainstream media to his list of offenders. He called their biased pro-Obamacare coverage “media malpractice” and “one of the worst examples of modern day journalism in my lifetime.”

For all intents and purposes, Rush said, the media is “just the PR firm of the Democratic Party.”

Along with Nixon, Limbaugh compared Obama to his Democratic predecessor Lyndon Baines Johnson.

With the revelations of outright deception that reach as high as the White House itself, Limbaugh remarked, “You’re getting close to LBJ territory.”

“They were lying through their teeth about Vietnam and other things.”

Limbaugh agreed with a caller who said facetiously that Obama is no longer the president as such, but the “official spokesman for Obamacare,” rather like a paid pitchman.

The Watergate scandal that led to President Nixon’s resignation is widely considered one of the most traumatic national events in 20th century American history. It greatly increased the public’s cynicism regarding the political system. Press revelations of Nixon’s “dirty tricks,” such a botched break in at Democratic National Committee headquarters in the Washington, D.C., Watergate building, were compounded by Nixon’s repeated insistence that he had done nothing wrong. Rather than face impeachment, a disgraced Nixon resigned as president Aug. 9, 1974.