University of Arizona President Ann Weaver Hart has appointed a diversity task force to address campus inclusion.

The creation of this task force comes after the Marginalized Students at the U of A (MSUA) presented 20 page list of demands for Hart.



"This is just the beginning of what I hope will be a comprehensive response to the concerns that our students have expressed," Hart said in a news release. "My goal is to unify UA to work together to become a more inclusive, diverse and safe community."

There is a general list of demands along with specific demands from each of the student groups, which include, the Adalberto & Ana Guerrero Center, African American Student Affairs, Asian Pacific Student Affairs, The LGBTQ Resource Center, Native American Student Affairs, and the Women's Resource Center.

The demands include gender inclusive restrooms, more scholarships for marginalized students, an end to any partnership with the US Customs and Border Patrol, a more culturally diverse faculty, additional funding for the student groups and diversity initiatives , as well as a cultural competency curriculum for everyone on campus.



In the letter, they said "we feel that the University of Arizona has failed to appropriately acknowledge and address the lived experiences of marginalized groups on our campus."

They state, they were "disappointed in the lack of concrete steps towards institutional changes that value the needs and requests of marginalized student demographics," following a faculty senate tour of the student centers.

Bryan Carter, associate professor of Africana studies and member of the task force, said the ultimate goal is to take a look and address the larger issues surround campus inclusion.

"They all fall up under.. Underneath larger umbrella issues. So these points that the students brought up, I think we as a task force will have to address the much larger issues that have inspired these small ones the students have addressed," Carter said.



"I think it's not unreasonable for them to have a list of demands. If they want to see changes. If they're not feeling at home at this university then that's a problem because that's what we're all here to do. And I feel at home so if other people aren't, I would want them to be comfortable," said Alex Gibson, a UA student.

"It's a good idea to bring that to the forefront and have a discussion about it," said Sid Patanwala, an associate professor at the UA.

Some students say some of the demands could be met with compromise.

"I know that we have to take a diversity emphasis gen ed already. It's already hard enough to graduate in four years so I feel like maybe the diversity emphasis courses can have some added to cover more aspects of social justice," said Erica Rao, a student.

The task force is chaired by Javier Duran, professor and director of the UA Confluence Center, Bryan Carter, associate professor of Africana Studies and Tannya Gaxiola, UA assistant vice president for community relations and chair of the UA Diversity Coordinating Committee.

The task force will also include alumni associations and clubs, the disability resource office, religious groups, Associated Students of ther UA, graduate and professional student association and student cultural groups.

View the list of demands here.

Copyright 2016 Tucson News Now. All Rights Reserved