Welcome to Wonkbook, Wonkblog’s morning policy news primer by Puneet Kollipara (@pkollipara). To subscribe by e-mail, click here. Send comments, criticism or ideas to Wonkbook at Washpost dot com. To read more by the Wonkblog team, click here. Follow us on Twitter and Facebook.



(AP Photo/Matthias Schrader)

Wonkbook’s Number of the Day: 78.8. That's the life expectancy for a baby born in the U.S. in 2012, according to new figures, up 0.1 from the previous year.

Wonkbook’s Chart of the Day: This chart shows how the drop in oil prices is magnifying the economic pain Russia is feeling from sanctions.

Wonkbook's Top 5 Stories: (1) Financial risks and the global economy; (2) look to the lower courts on gay marriage; (3) new Ebola response measures take flight; (4) oil boom, price drop — the consequences; and (5) Walmart's Obamacare announcement.

1. Top story: Is the world economy entering the 'new mediocre'?

The outlook isn't that great, except in the US... "The I.M.F. brought its estimate for global growth this year down to 3.3 percent from 3.7 percent and reduced its forecast for 2015 to 3.8 percent. The fund pointed to weaker growth in China, Europe, Japan and Latin America — Brazil in particular — as the main culprits....Its estimate for United States growth in 2015, 3.1 percent, outpaces all major industrialized countries....The assessment reflected a broad acceptance by global investors that, at least for the near future, the United States economy was set to advance ahead of many large economies, not just in terms of growth but also in corporate profitability and international competitiveness. As a result, large investors and central banks have become aggressive purchasers of the dollar." Landon Thomas Jr. and Liz Alderman in The New York Times.

Related: Recently IMF chief Christine Lagarde suggested that the global economy was entering a new era called "the new mediocre." Sandrine Rastello and Andrew Mayeda in Bloomberg.

...and the news could get worse. "Its current projections assume sensibly accommodative fiscal and monetary policy, as well as a decline in geopolitical tensions. That is disconcerting. The growth slowdown since 2010 is already one of the most dramatic of the last 40 years, comparable to the swoons that accompanied the Latin American crises of the late 1980s and the Asian crisis of the late 1990s (though not as large as the drop in 2008-9). Officials in Washington, gathered for the autumn meetings of the World Bank and IMF, will be hoping the outlook shocks governments into decisive action to support global growth. Unfortunately, policy makers seem to be growing inured to bad economic news." The Economist.

IMF also worries about threat of financial-market overheating to global economy. "The International Monetary Fund...warned about the risks of rising geopolitical tensions and a financial-market correction as stocks reach 'frothy' levels....According to the report, a sustained period of policy interest rates near zero in advanced economies has raised the risk that some financial markets may be overheating....The fund said it is concerned some investors may be 'underpricing risk' and 'not fully internalizing the uncertainties surrounding the macroeconomic outlook and their implications for the pace of withdrawal of monetary stimulus in some major advanced economies.' The IMF’s ability to spot coming crises such as potential asset bubbles is the subject of debate." Andrew Mayeda in Bloomberg.

Why does the IMF keep overestimating growth? "Average forecast errors for emerging economies — which accounted for 80% of global growth since 2011 — were twice as large as for advanced economies, the report finds. In particular, Brazil, China, India and Russia accounted for around half of the IMF’s overall forecast error in the past three years....Most of the remaining gap between the IMF’s forecasts and actual economic growth was accounted for by catastrophes of various sorts....The IMF says its forecasting errors for all of the BRICs are the result of shifting longer-term expectations for these four economies." Raymond Zhong in The Wall Street Journal.

Banks in awkward position: Needed reforms could hamper growth. "To boost profits, banks need to raise prices in certain business lines, pull out of others altogether, and put their money where it yielded more, the Fund said. 'The transition to new business models could ... potentially (create) a headwind against the recovery,' the IMF said....After the devastating 2007-09 financial crisis, regulators across the world have forced banks to raise more shareholder equity as a buffer against losses, and to pull out of the riskiest investments and loans. But the industry had been slow in finding new ways to make money....An overhaul would not be easy, however, the IMF said, and it pleaded for ailing banks to be shut down." Douwe Miedema in Reuters.

Banks: Look at us, we're doing something. "The world’s biggest banks have agreed to tear up the rule book on derivatives to make it easier to resolve a future failing institution like Lehman Brothers....Several months of complex talks involved regulators and asset managers but were led by dealers under the umbrella of the International Swaps and Derivatives Association. US regulators, who have previously condemned the industry’s crisis planning as inadequate, had demanded banks come up with a plan to stop their counterparties terminating derivatives contracts in the event of a crisis. The banks portrayed the success of the talks as a rare positive example of industry collaboration." Tom Braithwaite and Tracy Alloway in The Financial Times.

US looking to bring charges against firms over forex rigging, against individuals soon after. "The Justice Department may seek guilty pleas from several firms, including at least one in the U.S., said one of the people....While federal prosecutors have wrested convictions from foreign banks this year for wrongdoing, they’ve yet to win a guilty plea from a U.S. lender in that push, and they’re preparing for strong resistance if they attempt to do so. Justice Department officials have vowed to hold more institutions and individuals accountable for criminal conduct amid public frustration over the lack of prosecutions against top Wall Street executives for the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression." Tom Schoenberg, Greg Farrell and David McLaughlin in Bloomberg.

How 'harsh' was the AIG bailout? Question surfaces at trial. "It’s the key to a lawsuit brought by AIG shareholders who are seeking $40 billion in damages and the focus of questioning at a trial that began last week in Washington. Paulson and other officials in testimony have had no problem conceding the terms of AIG’s bailout were tougher than those received by other failing financial firms — even if it’s the story the shareholders’ lawyers are trying to tell. They argue it was better than bankruptcy, was needed to save the financial system and was the result of the chaotic atmosphere in which they had to operate....They also pushed back against the idea there were better alternatives." Zachary Warmbrodt and MJ Lee in Politico.

Geithner had a rough day of testimony. At least he got in a plug for his book. "So often did parts of his book, 'Stress Test,' come up during Mr. Geithner’s testimony...that at one point Justice Department lawyers suggested the entire book should be submitted as evidence. And it was. Mr. Greenberg’s side believes that much of what Mr. Geithner has said in his book....helps the shareholders’ case, according to people briefed on the legal strategy. Mr. Greenberg’s lawyers also obtained transcripts of the unpublished interviews....While Mr. Geithner mostly concurred with his previous statements, he also struggled at times to explain his own words — seemingly boxed in by judgments he uttered as part of his book." Aaron Kessler in The New York Times.

Quotable: "Do you have a copy for court, or should I visit Barnes & Noble?" — Judge Thomas C. Wheeler of the United States Court of Claims. Aaron Kessler in The New York Times.

The Fed's 'doomsday book' has its day in court, too — sort of. "Three separate versions of a secretive Federal Reserve Bank of New York manual known as the 'Doomsday Book' were entered into court evidence under seal Tuesday as part of a class-action lawsuit by shareholders of American International Group Inc. The 'Doomsday Book' is essentially a private compilation of emergency measures that the Federal Reserve could take in the event of a financial crisis or other market-destabilizing event. The book has never been made public. It’s existence of the book isn’t secret: Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner references it in...'Stress Test,' calling it a catalog of 'our actual firefighting equipment.'" Damian Paletta in The Wall Street Journal.

Other economic/financial reads:

Fed's labor-market dashboard dampens some enthusiasm from strong jobs report. Peter Coy in Bloomberg Businessweek.

US consumer credit posts smallest gain since November. Jason Lange in Reuters.

SUMMERS: Invest in infrastructure that pays for itself. "In its flagship publication, the IMF advocates substantially increased public infrastructure investment, and not just in the United States but in much of the world....Stated boldly: Public infrastructure investments can pay for themselves....What is crucial everywhere is the recognition that in a time of economic shortfall and inadequate public investment, there is a free lunch to be had — a way that government can strengthen the economy and its own financial position. The IMF, a bastion of 'tough love' austerity, has come to this important realization. Countries with the wisdom to follow its lead will benefit." Lawrence Summers in The Washington Post.

EL-ERIAN: A to-do list for IMF, World Bank. "There may be a way, however, to make the 2014 meeting less challenging and more productive: by employing a technique that econometricians have found useful called 'the reduced form equation.' The objective is to identify a handful of factors that, while not explaining the entire problem, speak to a critical mass to make the outcome relevant and actionable. Such an approach would address five themes that substantially aggravate the 'host of local ailments.'" Mohamed A. El-Erian in Bloomberg View.

Top opinion

O'BRIEN: Austerity has been an even bigger disaster than we thought. "That's not quite a free lunch, but, economically-speaking, it's a free mid-morning snack. This leaves us in an upside-down world where smaller deficits might actually make our debt problems worse. When interest rates are zero, spending cuts can cripple the economy so much that GDP falls more than the government saves. And that means the debt-to-GDP ratio might increase even though government spending is decreasing — like it has in Greece. That's why the IMF thinks infrastructure spending would almost pay for itself right now, and why Larry Summers and Brad DeLong have been saying the same for years now. We can't afford austerity right now." Matt O'Brien in The Washington Post.

LACKER AND WEINBERG: The Fed's mortgage favoritism. "We were skeptical of the need for the purchase of mortgage assets, even in 2009, believing that the Fed could achieve its goals through the purchase of Treasury securities alone. Now, as the Fed looks to raise the federal-funds rate and other short-term interest rates to more normal levels, that normalization should include a plan to sell these assets at a predictable pace, so that we can minimize our distortion of credit markets. The Federal Open Market Committee’s recent statement of normalization principles did not include such a plan. For this reason, the first author, an FOMC participant, was unwilling to support the principles." Jeffrey M. Lacker and John A. Weinberg in The Wall Street Journal.

GALSTON: Stoking the middle-class comeback. "The Great Recession accelerated the decline: The majority of the jobs that unemployed workers have found thus far pay significantly less than the ones they lost during the crash. Government can mitigate these trends but cannot halt them....In the longer run, wealthy democracies will have to invest more in basic research that boosts innovation and education that raises skills while tearing down barriers to business formation and entrepreneurially minded immigrants. But that is the work of a generation. We need a plan to get from here to there." William A. Galston in The Wall Street Journal.

STRAIN: On balance, a little inflation is better than a lot of unemployment. "A little inflation above the Fed’s preferred rate isn’t the end of the world — it’s a manageable problem, and may even be desirable. Letting millions of workers sit on the sidelines of the labor market is a bigger problem. The fundamental logic of monetary policy is the same as it’s been for years now: Prices aren’t rising as rapidly as the Fed would like them to, and the labor market isn’t using workers to their fullest extent. The Fed is still missing on both sides of its ' dual mandate.' Prudence thus dictates a patient return to normal monetary policy. And the unemployment rate falling below 6 percent shouldn’t fundamentally change anything." Michael R. Strain in The Washington Post.

PORTER: Why aid for college is missing the mark. "In 1987, when he was Ronald Reagan’s education secretary, the conservative culture warrior William J. Bennett wrote a famous essay denouncing federal aid for higher education because it allowed colleges 'blithely to raise their tuitions,' at little benefit to students. Nearly two decades later, it seems, he was broadly right. Indeed, he didn’t know the half of it. It’s not just that many colleges and universities are bleeding taxpayers. The government’s overall strategy to subsidize higher education is failing at its core task: providing less privileged Americans with a real shot at a college degree. Alarmingly, it is burdening low-income students with risks they cannot bear and steering them into low-quality educations." Eduardo Porter in The New York Times.

HOYT: Ebola is bad. But the flu is worse. "Ebola is no joke: The Centers for Disease Control project 1.4 million cases of the disease worldwide by January in a worst-case scenario. But by comparison, the 1918 pandemic killed an estimated 50 to 100 million worldwide. The United States simply cannot afford to be complacent about flu preparedness. Getting ready for the flu is a complex endeavor, relying on surveillance, detection, communication and detailed response plans. The United States has been fine-tuning its response plans since it first released a national flu pandemic strategy in 2005. The linchpin of the strategy is timely access to an effective flu vaccine. And that’s where the trouble lies." Kendall Hoyt in Politico Magazine.

Animal antics interlude: A kangaroo street fight breaks out in suburbia.

2. In gay-marriage fight, attention turns to the lower courts

Lower courts take the spotlight in same-sex marriage fight. "The 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in San Francisco invalidated bans in Idaho and Nevada, and the ruling might well extend to three other states in the 9th Circuit that do not permit same-sex couples to marry: Alaska, Arizona and Montana....There are four other federal appeals courts in the Midwest and South that have a more conservative makeup and have yet to rule on same-sex marriage. The justices may find it harder to stay out of the gay marriage issue if a federal appeals court upholds same-sex marriage bans and parts company with the other appellate courts that have ruled so far." Mark Sherman in the Associated Press.

Quotable: "We seriously doubt that allowing committed same-sex couples to settle down in legally recognized marriages will drive opposite-sex couples to sex, drugs, and rock-and-roll." — Judge Stephen Reinhardt. Sahil Kapur in Talking Points Memo.

Neighboring states weigh whether SCOTUS ruling opens their doors to same-sex marriage. "Following the Supreme Court’s decision Monday that allowed some states to begin issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples, six neighboring states are considering whether that opens the doors for same-sex marriage in their states. Colorado, Kansas, North Carolina, South Carolina, West Virginia and Wyoming are all under the jurisdiction of courts that upheld rulings striking down marriage bans in nearby states that then appealed the rulings that the Supreme Court declined to hear this week. In Colorado, Gov. John Hickenlooper (D) said that decision meant marriages would soon proceed there. Other governors disagreed." Hunter Schwarz in The Washington Post.

Explainers:

An overview of how various states are handling the evolving gay-marriage landscape. Bill Chappell in NPR.

An overview of where the 50 states now stand. Associated Press.

Chart: A majority of Americans live in states that allow same-sex marriage. Philip Bump in The Washington Post.

All eyes turn now to Cincinnati. "Again, we don’t know precisely why the court on Monday decided to punt on the same-sex marriage issue. But commentators suspect, based partly on comments made by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg in September, that a lack of a 'circuit split'...is largely to blame for the reluctance. The Sixth Circuit could provide that circuit split at any moment. In August, a three-judge panel of the Sixth Circuit heard arguments on challenges to same-sex marriage bans in Michigan and Kentucky, in addition to arguments in more narrowly focused cases out of Tennessee and Ohio. The panel, made up of two George W. Bush appointees and one Bill Clinton appointee, asked probing questions of each side." Ashby Jones in The Wall Street Journal.

Chart: How does the rest of the world view homosexuality? Zack Beauchamp in Vox.

Gay marriage poses a dilemma for many Republican 2016 candidates. "The GOP presidential candidates face a particularly delicate dance in early primary states such as Iowa and South Carolina: They must appease the conservative foot soldiers who control those early contests while not alienating middle-of-the-road and younger voters key to their general election hopes...There was no evidence that conservative groups were backing away from the fight, even if few candidates in November's closely contested races and beyond were looking to jump into the middle of it. Leaders...insisted that the decision would serve as a rallying cry for conservatives in November." Maeve Reston in the Los Angeles Times.

In other courtroom news, FBI's secret surveillance program about to go on trial. "A federal appeals court this week will review whether the government can secretly conduct electronic surveillance on Americans without first obtaining a warrant. The case...could have sweeping digital-privacy implications, and it represents one of the most direct challenges to the legal authority for government spying in the post-Snowden era. Many observers expect the case to ultimately reach the Supreme Court. At issue is whether the FBI can use so-called national security letters, or NSLs, to compel companies to hand over communications data or financial records of certain users for the purposes of a national security investigation." Dustin Volz in National Journal.

Voting-rules decisions sow confusion in state races. "Just weeks before elections that will decide control of the Senate and crucial governors’ races, a cascade of court rulings about voting rules, issued by judges with an increasingly partisan edge, are sowing confusion and changing voting procedures with the potential to affect outcomes in some states. Last week, a day before voting was scheduled to begin in Ohio, the United States Supreme Court split, 5 to 4, to uphold a cut in early voting in the state by one week....Cases from North Carolina and Wisconsin are also before the court, with decisions expected shortly, while others are proceeding in Texas and Arkansas." Trip Gabriel in The New York Times.

This I learned today interlude: How astronauts vote from space.

3. Additional US Ebola-response measures take flight

What airport screening methods might the CDC use? "Tom Frieden, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said new steps, which could include checking temperatures and asking about travel to outbreak countries of Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea, would be announced 'in the coming days.'...For lack of direct flights from West Africa, Frieden said health officials would work with Customs and Border Protection to identify travelers on connecting flights....Flight attendants are calling for more extensive screening by arguing that health officials are relying too heavily on voluntary disclosure through questionnaires in West Africa." Bart Jansen in USA Today.

These methods are far from a panacea. "These plans could theoretically prevent some people who are infected with the Ebola virus from entering the country. They also cannot possibly stop every person with Ebola who may arrive in the country. This is because of the simple realities of the disease ravaging West Africa, whose symptoms take time to manifest, as well as the nature of air travel in the 21st century. Public health officials are realistic about this point, openly stating that the danger of additional Ebola cases in the United States will remain real as long as the outbreak is raging in West Africa, where the disease has killed more than 3,400 people and infected double that number." Mark Berman in The Washington Post.

How customs agents would handle screening. "Obama’s promise of stepped-up screening for Ebola at U.S. airports that handle international flights will fall on the shoulders of the Customs and Border Protection officers who greet passengers arriving from abroad. Though they often seem preoccupied with scrutinizing passports and luggage, customs officers are trained to detect signs of illness, and they routinely do just that, officials said....In addition to visual observations, CBP officers question passengers about their health and are instructed to alert the CDC if a passenger appears to be seriously ill. If a person is thought to have 'a possible communicable disease,' they are isolated while the CDC and local authorities conduct the evaluation." Mark Berman in The Washington Post.

Health workers in US worry about protective gear. "Calls have been pouring into the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention from doctors and nurses wanting help in protecting themselves and their employees from the disease. Associations of infection specialists, hospital care managers and other health providers are also calling....Many want training on protection strategies, so the agency has scheduled two nationwide conference calls....But despite some calls for provision in the United States of the 'moon suits' Ebola workers in Africa wear, the C.D.C. has not changed its recommendations on what gear health care workers should use." Pam Belluck in The New York Times.

Quarantine powers: Coming soon to a state near you (or already there). "Connecticut Gov. Dannel Malloy (D) signed an order Tuesday allowing the state health commissioner to order quarantines for individuals who may have been exposed to the Ebola virus, a step he said would help fight any possible outbreak. The order [pdf] gives Jewel Mullen, commissioner of the state Department of Public Health, authority to order isolation or quarantine for anyone believed to be exposed to or infected with the deadly virus....Most other states have some law on the books offering varying degrees of quarantine power." Reid Wilson in The Washington Post.

Explainer: A brief history of quarantines in the U.S. Josh Hicks in The Washington Post.

Hospitals secretly send in actors to fake symptoms, test staff. "Public hospitals in New York City are concerned enough about Ebola that they've secretly been sending actors with mock symptoms into emergency rooms to test how well the triage staffs identify and isolate possible cases. A small hospital in the Ohio countryside has hung up signs imploring patients to let nurses know immediately if they have traveled recently to West Africa. And across the U.S., one of the nation's largest ambulance companies has put together step-by-step instructions on how to wrap the interior of a rig with plastic sheeting while transporting a patient." David B. Caruso in the Associated Press.

Abroad, troops to test samples for Ebola. "A few dozen U.S. troops will have exposure to laboratory samples from potential Ebola patients by running testing facilities in Liberia, the head of U.S. Africa Command said. While most of the 4,000 troops authorized to deploy to the west African country won’t have direct exposure to the virus — as Pentagon officials have previously emphasized — three or four specially trained personnel will run each of as many as seven testing labs, Army General David Rodriguez said today....In a statement after the news conference, Rodriguez said he had erroneously indicated that the military personnel would have direct contact with potential Ebola patients." David Lerman in Bloomberg.

Ebola vaccine trials may give placebo to those at risk. "As global health officials rush to begin human trials of two promising Ebola vaccines in West African medical workers, a daunting question remains unanswered: Who gets the placebo injection? If all workers get the vaccines, doctors may never know how well they work. That’s because the results might also be affected by other factors best measured with the use of a placebo shot in some participants. Yet giving some medical workers a placebo means they will face close exposure to one of the world’s deadliest diseases with no more protection than before the trial began. The dilemma, unique in vaccine development, is generating furious debate between infectious disease experts." Simeon Bennett in Bloomberg.

The US enterovirus outbreak may be on the wane, though first virus-caused death reported. "In every measure counted by Flu Near You, an online tracking site run by Boston Children's Hospital and Skoll Global Threats Fund, children's symptoms have declined compared with a peak three weeks ago. Fevers are down, coughs and breathlessness have been cut by more than half, and the number of children going to the doctor with multiple symptoms has fallen from 4.5% to 2%, according to data from associate professor John Brownstein, who is on the team that runs the website." Karen Weintraub in USA Today.

Animal paradise interlude: Puppies make everything better, as this man discovered.

4. As the shale boom expands, oil prices have been falling

Falling oil prices could threaten future drilling. "The U.S. shale boom is producing record amounts of new oil as demand weakens, pushing prices down toward levels that threaten to reduce future drilling. Domestic fields will add an unprecedented 1.1 million barrels a day of output this year and another 963,000 in 2015, raising production to the most since 1970, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. The Energy Department’s statistical arm forecasts consumption will shrink 0.2 percent to 18.9 million barrels a day this year, the lowest since 2012....'If prices go to $80 or lower, which I think is possible, then we are going to see a reduction in drilling activity,' Ralph Eads, vice chairman and global head of energy investment banking at Jefferies LLC...said....'It will be uncharted territory.'" Isaac Arnsdorf in Bloomberg.

Why else falling oil prices matter. "Why is this happening? Partly because the United States keeps producing more and more oil, but also partly because some conflict-ridden countries are starting to pick up production....All that new crude is flooding the market, causing global prices to dip. If oil prices keep falling, that could have lots of far-reaching effects. OPEC is already fighting bitterly over how to respond. Russia, a major oil producer, could see its economy kneecapped if prices decline....And lower gas prices could bolster the US economy (though it would also curtail the recent drive for energy-efficient vehicles)." Brad Plumer in Vox.

Oil's comeback gives U.S. leverage. "It has become fashionable to note a decline of American global power and influence, but don’t tell that to the energy experts. Many see increased domestic production of oil and gas as driving more muscular United States energy diplomacy, power that exists in curious tandem with the Obama administration’s efforts to wean the world off fossil fuels....Carlos Pascual, a former senior American diplomat, agrees. Increased energy production 'strengthens our hand.' he said. 'China, when it talks to us about global energy supplies, it sees us as a supplier,' he said." David Wallis in The New York Times.

The flow of oil is reversing. "The 400,000 barrels the tanker carried represented the first unrestricted export of American oil to a country outside of North America in nearly four decades. The Obama administration insisted there was no change in energy trade policy, perhaps concerned about the reaction from environmentalists and liberal members of Congress with midterm elections coming. But many energy experts viewed the launch as the curtain raiser for the United States’ inevitable emergence as a major world oil exporter, an improbable return to a status that helped make the country a great power in the first half of the 20th century." Clifford Krauss in The New York Times.

A future of natural-gas exports awaits us. "New methods of producing natural gas are expected to turn the United States from an importer into a large exporter in less than a decade, assuming that the gas can be exported in sufficient quantities cheaply enough to compete on world markets. That is likely to happen, industry authorities say, because the technology for liquefying gas — essential for taking it across oceans — also continues to improve, making the process more economically efficient and environmentally safer. With exports virtually nil now, the Energy Department forecasts shipments abroad of liquefied natural gas equivalent to two trillion cubic feet by 2020, roughly 7 percent of expected domestic production." Conrad de Aenlle in The New York Times.

Other environmental/energy reads:

Long read: Keystone XL be darned, Canada finds oil route around Obama. Rebecca Penty, Hugo Miller, Andrew Mayeda and Edward Greenspon in Bloomberg.

Energy likely to be cheaper this winter. Clifford Krauss in The New York Times.

Study: Renewables as green as you'd expect. Bobby Magill in Climate Central.

Life's ponderables interlude: Why clouds stay up.

5. Walmart's canceling health care for 30,000 workers.

30,000 part-timers at Walmart to lose their coverage. "Walmart will no longer offer insurance to employees working less than an average of 30 hours a week....In scaling back coverage for part-time employees, Walmart joins retailers including Home Depot, Target and Trader Joe’s, which have dropped benefits in response to the Affordable Care Act, the health care overhaul enacted by the Obama administration. In 2011, Walmart eliminated health insurance for employees working fewer than 24 hours a week. The company said that the health law’s introduction had prompted larger-than-expected numbers of employees to enroll in its health plans, driving up expenses." Hiroko Tabuchi in The New York Times.

Why this trend isn't as bad as it seems. "For low-wage workers, Obamacare has introduced a new and big drawback to the employer insurance. Namely, anybody who gets access to affordable coverage at work is barred from getting subsidies through the new exchanges....That financial help can be a big deal for those with lower incomes....For a worker like that, losing health insurance at work doesn't actually look like a bad deal. Instead, its a pretty good deal: it gives part-time employees the chance to qualify for way more generous financial help than Walmart would ever offer. This is how Trader Joes' explained its decision to similarly cut benefits for part-time workers last year." Sarah Kliff in Vox.

HealthCare.gov's transparency problem: Do consumers know what they're getting? "The site still won’t have any tools to allow consumers to see which doctors and hospitals are covered by individual insurance plans. Mr. Counihan told Mr. Wayne that HealthCare.gov would not change to allow consumers to comparison shop on insurance plan networks. Plans that limit patients’ choices of doctors and hospitals have turned out to be the signature product of the Affordable Care Act marketplaces. That may be a welcome development for cost-conscious consumers, but only if they know what they’re buying. The proliferation of these plans is not a surprise." Margot Sanger-Katz in The New York Times.

For many, claiming health-law waivers won't be easy come Tax Day. "Community groups are concerned about a convoluted process for waivers from the law's tax penalty on people who remain uninsured. Not everyone is complaining, however: Tax preparation companies are flagging it as a business opportunity. The law's requirement that Americans carry health insurance remains contentious. Waivers were designed to ease the impact. But while some exemptions seem simple, others will require math calculations. Some involve sending in the application — by mail — and supporting documents...even news articles. Consumers will have to dig up the documentation — it's not like filing the W-2s they get from employers." Ricardo Alonso-Zaldivar in the Associated Press.

Other health care reads:

Health law drug plans are given a check-up. Katie Thomas in The New York Times.

Officials question the rising costs of generic drugs. Elisabeth Rosenthal in The New York Times.

Antibiotic use for U.S. hospital patients questioned. Michelle Fay Cortez in Bloomberg.

Animals interlude: Dear kitten: Regarding the dog...

Wonkblog roundup

Timothy Geithner is in the hot seat once again over AIG. Max Ehrenfreund.

Conservative states are more likely to search for sex and porn online. Christopher Ingraham.

Why do so many Americans work nights and weekends? Blame inequality. Matt O'Brien.

Does John Boehner’s jobs plan fit in a tweet? Christopher Ingraham.

Why Africa will remain an economic powerhouse despite the Ebola virus. Ylan Q. Mui.

Mapped: How public transit changes your job prospects. Emily Badger.

Here’s why the Treasury secretary thinks the budget wars are over. Colby Itkowitz.

When people go to school more, they go to church less.Christopher Ingraham.

The billion-dollar battle heading to the Supreme Court: When does a day’s work end? Drew Harwell.

Why the South is the worst place to live in the U.S. — in 10 charts. Roberto A. Ferdman.

Five charts that show why the global economic recovery is so very disappointing. Ylan Q. Mui.

How high-cost housing conquered D.C. in a single decade. Emily Badger.

Austerity has been an even bigger disaster than we thought. Matt O'Brien.

Et Cetera

The changing profile of student borrowers. Richard Fry in Pew Research Center.

IRS warns of tax-filing season delays if Congress stalls on extenders. Richard Rubin in Bloomberg.

Most migrants make their court date. Miriam Jordan in The Wall Street Journal.

Google, tech firms say ungag us on U.S. spy orders. Karen Gullo in Bloomberg.

Voters will get their say on GMO labeling in Oregon, Colorado. Luke Runyon in NPR.

U.S. to delay enforcing minimum-wage, overtime-protections rule for home-care workers. Tom Raum in Associated Press.

Court strikes down Virginia's congressional map as unconstitutional. Rachel Weiner, Matt Zapotosky and Laura Vozzella in The Washington Post.

Got tips, additions, or comments? E-mail us.

Wonkbook is produced with help from Michelle Williams and Ryan McCarthy.