There is no doubt that different sets of people can often see the same thing differently. Examples abound in today’s headlines. Efforts to firm up immigration law are viewed as heroic or xenophobic. Obamacare is viewed as a scourge or a blessing.

These are understandable differences through varying political lenses. Sometimes the perceptual differences are racial, cultural or born of different life experience. And sometimes they are a combination, as in the unfortunate flap over University of North Texas journalism dean Dorothy Bland’s moment of interaction with Corinth police as they advised her to walk in safer manner.

Before I ever saw the video of the encounter, I was told it was an example of a “racial Rorschach,” a handy term meant to make viewers believe their reactions are purely a product of pigment.

So I opened my eyes widely for the slightest sign of police misbehavior. I tried to look through the most suspicious squint I could muster.

There is simply nothing there.

Watch Dorothy Bland's encounter with Corinth police

Some qualifiers:

In the video of the April shooting of Walter Scott in North Charleston, South Carolina, I see a cop needlessly shooting a fleeing man.

In the infamous Ferguson shooting of Michael Brown by Officer Darren Wilson, I was thoroughly open to any possibility, until grand jury evidence pointed to a cop protecting himself from an attacker.

As the wheels of justice turn in the case of Baltimore’s Freddie Gray, I have the same willingness to reach a conclusion based on actual evidence.

So as I played and replayed the Corinth stop of Ms. Bland, I looked for the tiniest molecule of a valid complaint. Was she detained for no reason? Were the cops less than courteous at any point? Is it wildly suspicious for them to run an ID check?

No, no and no. And that answer does not come from my whiteness. It comes from objectivity.

Ms. Bland views herself as a victim of “walking while black,” a derivation of “driving while black,” the phenomenon of disproportionate police attention to black drivers of nice cars, based on the racist presumption that the vehicle must be stolen.

Ms. Bland and some viewers of her video might think she was suspected of wrongdoing because of her race. But without a shred of evidence, that is an exercise in mind-reading.

I can’t discern those cops’ inner thoughts, either. But without evidence to the contrary, I give them benefit of the doubt. Such basic consideration is a bludgeoned concept here in the days of Black Lives Matter, a group whose very name and hateful narrative suggests that evil racist cops are out to kill African-Americans for sport.

In such a poisoned atmosphere, goodwill is impossible. So here’s the goodwill owed to those decrying walking or driving or anything else “while black:” the admission that it happens.

It absolutely happens. I’ve done entire talk shows on it, and there is never a short supply of black callers with stories of seemingly needless stops. If even a small percentage of those are valid, it is an issue every police department should address honestly and ambitiously.

But the acknowledgment of such racially curious stops does not mean that every black citizen stopped is somehow a victim. Ms. Bland seemed quite bothered at having her walk interrupted, and might have lapsed into an explanation fed by today’s widespread slander of police.

Count me in the corner with proud African-American Democrat Ron Kirk, the former Dallas mayor — prepared to be as vigilant as necessary against real racism but saddened by what appears in this case to be shallow racial opportunism.

The Mark Davis Show airs from 7 to 10 a.m. weekdays on KSKY-AM (660). Davis can be reached at markdavisshow@gmail. com

Read More on Dorothy Bland

(Corinth Police Department)

Opinion

Dom DiFurio: Reactions calling Dorothy Bland a liar so strong she’s landed on Snopes

Leona Allen: UNT dean "walking while black" is the reason it's hard to repair police and community race relations

Samra Bufkins: Another perspective on ‘walking while different’

Tod Robberson: Walking while black, sitting while white, and questions of appropriate use of force

Q&A: Former Dallas mayor criticizes race claims in Dorothy Bland case

Dorothy Bland: I was caught ‘walking while black.’ Police chief: No, officers were doing their jobs.