Loveland siblings Christian Chase, 8, left, Alexis Chase, 9, and Issac Chase, 11, and Ezzi Murtin, 4, of Boulder, look at an R3T2 Star Wars character at the Mountain States Droid Builders booth during the NoCo Mini Make Faire on Saturday at the Rocky Mountain Center for Innovation and Technology. Visit www.msr2droids.com for more information on the droid group. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

The nameless Resurrection Robot, manually operated from inside the cavity of its chest and made of recycled airplane parts, greeted guests of the second-annual NoCo Mini Maker Faire as they entered one of the parking lots of the Rocky Mountain Center for Innovation & Technology, 815 SW 14th St. after visiting the booths inside.

"We mash buttons. It's mostly buttons and switches," said Denver resident Rachel Cain, who operated the robot with Chris Potts, also of Denver. "You have to understand how the mechanics work together, so you don't break it."

If you go What: NoCo Mini Maker Faire. When: 10 a.m.-3 p.m. Sunday, Oct. 5. Where: Rocky Mountain Center for Innovation & Technology, 815 SW 14th St. Cost: $12, adults; $8, students and children. More info: Visit makerfairenoco.com for details.

The 30-foot robot leans its head back and blows out fire and starts huffing out more flames Saturday afternoon as it stands on a platform, attracting attention.

Shane Evans of Denver spent eight months building the robot, using 1,000 pounds of steel for the structure and aluminum for everything else. He received a creative grant from Apogaea, plus crowdfunding and donations, to build the robot, which he shows at fairs and events to demonstrate how people have become robotic in a disposable society.

Advertisement

"This is what we have become," Evans said. "We are the robots."

The robot's movements and flame throwing from its mouth and hands come from a combination of pneumatics, electric motors and solenoids, an electrically actuated valve that opens to allow the gas to flow, Evans said.

"That's what gives it the flame effect," Evans said.

Evans's robot is one of more than 110 maker booths and activity stations inside and outside the Center for Innovation and Technology that is part of the weekend-long festival bringing together do-it-yourself inventors, creators, artists and scientists from the Northern Colorado. The festival — with the tagline, "Imagine it. Built it. Share it." — showcases science, art, crafts, engineering and music in a noisy, colorful public forum meant to inspire creativity and innovation.

"It's really cool, because there are a lot of things to do. You can look at all the stuff," said Ben Tollison, 13, of Fort Collins. "There are a lot of robotics and stuff."

The things to do ranged from making cardboard creations in the Cardboard Challenge, hanging out in the Sound Puddle that illuminates noise with light, building sculptures out of scraps in the Sculpture Games, making and racing miniature cars in Nerdy Derby and checking out the displays in the Loveland BrickBuilder Expo.

Loveland resident and business owner John Metcalf built a miniature representation of Loveland out of Legos, picking out the iconic landmarks and his personal favorites, such as his house.

"I picked out what was the most significant architectural elements that represented the buildings," Metcalf said.

Metcalf built in colorful, blocky miniature the Rialto Theater Center, the Pulliam Building, Dairy Delight and Benson Park Sculpture Garden, among other buildings and tourist destinations.

Over at the Cardboard Challenge, host Omar-Pierre Soubra built a pirate ship with his son, Lucas, 11, to inspire children and their families to cut, tape and build buildings, vehicles, a dragon and whatever else they imagined out of scrap cardboard.

"It creates some engineering skills because you need to assemble the parts together," Soubra said. "There is a connection happening here with (your) hands."

Alyssa Bendele, 7, and her younger sister, Mikayla, 4, built a house and then decided to add a car and a garage for the car.

"It's a lot of fun, because you actually get to climb in it," the Westminster girl said.

Boulder resident Ben Burdette displayed his invented cyclophone at the booth space for Boulder Hackerspace where makers share tools. A cyclophone combines a synthesizer and keyboard on a circular platform with keys radiating out from a focal point.

"It's a keyboard for a bunch of people to use at once," Burdette said. "It's a collaborative instrument you could say."

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Shelley Widhalm at 970-669-5050 or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her at twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.