A 22-year-old EMT was killed as a result of the collision.

Buy Photo A Spotswood Emergency Medical Services ambulance with its lights and sirens activated was struck by a township woman, resulting in a three-vehicle crash. (Photo: File Photo)Buy Photo

EAST BRUNSWICK — Hinal Patel dedicated her life to helping others.

Patel, 22, of Piscataway, an emergency medical technician and recent Rutgers University graduate, was doing just that when she was killed in a three-vehicle crash while aboard an ambulance rushing to the scene of an accident in East Brunswick Saturday morning.

The Spotswood Emergency Medical Services ambulance, with its lights and sirens activated, was struck by a township woman, resulting in a three-vehicle crash at 8 a.m. at Ryders Lane and Cranbury Road, East Brunswick police said.

“Hinal was a very smart, dedicated member of our family and she will be greatly missed. She had many close friends at North Stelton,” read a statement posted by the North Stelton Volunteer Fire Company on Facebook Saturday afternoon. “The members of the North Stelton Volunteer Fire Company are devastated by her loss and extend our deepest condolences to her family, friends and coworkers.”

According to the statement, Patel was a Piscataway High School graduate who earned a bachelor’s degree in cell biology and neuroscience from Rutgers in May. She was planning to attend a master’s program at the Rutgers Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences in the fall, and hoped to become a doctor or physician’s assistant.

She joined the North Stelton company in April 2012 and completed EMT training in September of that year, serving as a volunteer EMT in the Emergency Medical Services division, the statement said. She also served as an EMT in Spotswood. She was a volunteer at Saint Peter’s University Hospital in New Brunswick for five years before becoming an EMT.

Mark C. Seube, 24, of Hamilton, an EMT with Spotswood EMS, was driving the Spotswood ambulance with Hinal Patel, of Piscataway, a 22-year-old EMT, who was as the front seat passenger.

The EMTs were responding to assist the East Brunswick Rescue Squad as mutual aid at a motor vehicle crash with injuries in the township. Initial investigation showed that the ambulance, a 2008 Ford van, was traveling west on Ryders Lane at the intersection of Cranbury Road.

The ambulance proceeded through the intersection and was struck by a 2013 Toyota Prius traveling south on Cranbury Road driven by 58-year-old Kathleen Meade of East Brunswick. The ambulance overturned and slid into a 2011 Subaru Legacy, driven by 43-year-old Kristen Fahrman of East Brunswick, which was stopped on Ryders Lane in the eastbound lanes.

Patel was killed as a result of the collision.

Seube and Meade were taken to Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick with nonlife-threatening injuries. Fahrman was not injured.

Several emergency service agencies responded to assist at the scene, including the East Brunswick Fire Department District 2, Milltown EMS, Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital Basic Life Support and the Advanced Life Support Units.

The crash is under investigation by the East Brunswick Police Department Special Operations Section. Anyone with information regarding the crash is asked to contact Patrolman John Bird or Patrolman Glenn Tabasko at 732-390-6969.

Contributing: Staff Writer Ilana Keller

Staff Writer Jenna Intersimone: 908-801-4863; JIntersimone@MyCentralJersey.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1S1CTTc