Several bills have been introduced in the current Legislature to impose state government regulation on the Oklahoma Secondary School Activities Association, commonly referred to as the OSSAA.

These bills are not aimed, as their proponents claim, at improving "transparency" and "accountability." If approved, this legislation will impose substantial regulatory expenses and delays on OSSAA without any added benefits.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

The proponents want to impose the Administrative Procedures Act on OSSAA. The APA is applied to agencies created by state government and imposes numerous requirements, including preparing "impact statements" on the effects of proposed rule changes and submitting proposed rule changes to the governor and the Legislature for approval. Any person claiming to be affected by a state agency's rule change also can file a lawsuit challenging the rule.

OSSAA rules necessarily are amended annually because they cover numerous details such as the dates of playoff championship events. Advisory committees for each activity recommend updates to contest and playoff rules every year. If the APA is imposed on OSSAA, these annual changes could all be delayed while "impact statements" are prepared, and the proposals are debated in the Legislature and the courts. Rule changes then would not be effective until published in writing by the state, at the public's expense.

The proponents of these bills also want to impose the Open Meetings Act on OSSAA. But OSSAA's Constitution already provides that the meetings of its governing board are subject to the Open Meetings laws. OSSAA's rules are published and can be viewed on our public website, at www.ossaa.com

The meetings of our elected Board of Directors are open to the public, and the agendas for those meetings are posted in advance. OSSAA's books and financial records are open for review by the public and are independently audited each year, and our financial operations are summarized in a published bulletin each fall.

Our 481 member schools each have a voice in OSSAA's operations. Each fall, OSSAA conducts area meetings with its member schools across the state, to talk about their proposals and any concerns they have about OSSAA rules and how those rules are being interpreted. Changes to general rules are voted on by the membership, while activity-specific rule changes are voted on by the Board, in public meetings.

Much of the controversy over OSSAA has been driven by dissatisfaction with a particular rule or a particular rule interpretation. In deciding on these rules, many different interests and educational objectives have to be considered and balanced, including our goal to provide equitable opportunities for all students — not just the few who are the most talented — to participate in extracurricular activities.

One group or another is likely to be unhappy, whatever the decision. But OSSAA already has procedures in place that allow for member schools and interested groups to propose changes. Those proposed changes already are considered and debated in area meetings and in open public meetings of OSSAA's governing board. Having the governor and the Legislature decide these rules will not mean that everyone will be satisfied with the final results, and the delays and expense from additional regulation are likely to increase dissatisfaction overall.

I am proud of the hard work put in by our staff, our board members, our member school administrators and coaches, and our volunteers in each of our activities. I believe that the member schools as a whole remain open-minded to respectful debate and willing to consider proposals for improvements.

I dispute anyone who contends that OSSAA is trying to operate in secret. Legislation imposing additional and unnecessary regulations is not the right solution.