The filing period for a place in the Texas U.S. House District 19 race began last Saturday, and alongside the candidates who have already announced are a few new faces.

Jason Corley of Lynn County, Samuel Mehaffey of Abilene and Don Parrish of Plains joined the list of candidates running for the seat being vacated by U.S. Rep. Randy Neugebauer, R-Lubbock, in 2016. By Monday, eight candidates had filed for a spot on the March 2016 primary ballot.

The three join former Texas Tech Vice Chancellor Jodey Arrington, Lubbock banker and realtor Greg Garrett, retired surgeon Donald May, Lubbock Mayor Glen Robertson and Col. Michael Bob Starr, who all hosted campaign kickoff events prior to the filing period.

Corley is a 32-year-old farmer, the owner of an online retailer and an oil field consultant. He grew up near Lubbock and went to Lubbock-Cooper High School, graduated from West Texas A&M University and now lives in Lynn County with his wife and two children.

Corley described himself as a tea party candidate, and said he’s running for Congress because he’s tired of not seeing any change in the federal government.

“I’m watching how the federal government is directly affecting my pocket book,” he said. “I’m not a millionaire or a senior citizen, which is typically who runs. We need to have some change. I have a stake in the future of this country.”

As a farmer, he said, his crop insurance went up 300 percent from 2014-15 because of the Farm Bill. As an online business owner, he said he’s spending about $800 a month on a family of four because of the Affordable Care Act. And as someone who does work in the oil field, he said he’s seen jobs lost that he said could be fixed if leaders lift a ban on oil exports.

“I’d want somebody in there that would actually represent me, that’s actually in the same boat as me,” he said. “We need to elect someone that represents us. Would you rather elect a guy that has two kids, a mortgage that costs less than his healthcare premium, that’s hoping social security will still be around and is worried about the future because he’s raising his two kids in it, or some bank owner?”

Corley discussed some of his priorities if elected, which include repealing the Affordable Care Act, fixing the Farm Bill, passing a balanced budget, returning as much power to the states as possible and protecting religious rights.

He also said he’d support all pro-life legislation, work to secure the borders, set term limits for all members of Congress and lift the ban on oil exports from the U.S.

Corley said he’ll start hitting the campaign trail after Thanksgiving, during which he’ll set up meet-and-greets with voters over coffee.

A-J Media reached out to Mehaffey and Parrish for comments but did not receive a response.

Filing for the Congressional District 19 race continues until Dec. 14.

matt.dotray@lubbockonline.com

● 766-8744

Follow Matt on Twitter

@mdotrayAJ