Topics: Citizenship, Comprehensive Immigration Reform, DACA, Dream Act, Immigration, Immigration Reform, John Boehner, Nativism, pathway to citizenship, Rand Paul, Sean Hannity, Politics News

If you were to ask me for Rand Paul’s position on immigration reform, my honest answer would be that I don’t know. The Kentucky Republican and libertarian-ish senator is among the people considered most likely to seek the GOP nomination for the presidency in 2016, and during his brief time in office he’s held a variety of positions related to immigration, lurching from extreme nativism to measured support for moderate reforms. Last week, while on a trip to Guatemala to perform pro-bono cataract surgery, Paul tossed another policy position onto the pile: support for a bill passed by House Republicans to end President Obama’s Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program, which shields certain young undocumented immigrants from deportation.

So, in the spirit of trying to figure out just what the hell is going on here, let’s track the evolution of and changes to Sen. Rand Paul’s stance on immigration.

One of the very first things Rand Paul did upon his entry into the U.S. Senate was to join Sen. David Vitter in proposing a constitutional amendment to end birthright citizenship – one of the foundations of U.S. citizenship law that has been in place since Reconstruction. His impetus for doing so was the threat posed by so-called “anchor babies.” According to conservative mythology, pregnant immigrant women would cross the border into the U.S. immediately prior to giving birth so that their child would have U.S. citizenship. Then the immigrant parents would wait 21 years until their citizen child could sponsor them for residency.

As you’ve probably surmised, it’s not the most effective plan for circumventing immigration laws, which is probably why – all the nativist hype notwithstanding – it wasn’t actually happening to any large degree. But newly ensconced Sen. Paul wanted to change the Constitution to end the “anchor baby” threat. “Citizenship is a privilege, and only those who respect our immigration laws should be allowed to enjoy its benefits,” Paul said at the time.

That was a hardline position for Paul to take, but not entirely unexpected. During his 2010 campaign, Paul was an outspoken opponent of immigration reform bills being put forward by President Obama and the Democratic Congress. The DREAM Act, which would have created a path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants brought into the country as children, was killed by Republican filibusters in 2010. On the campaign trail, Paul lashed out at the legislation. “Washington liberals are trying to push through the so-called DREAM Act, which creates an official path to Democrat voter registration for 2 million college-age illegal immigrants,” Paul said at the time, calling it a “roundabout way of giving amnesty to illegal immigrant students and undermining the rule of law.”

In 2012, Paul came around to a more measured, less antagonistic attitude on immigration. Shortly after President Obama crushed Mitt Romney among Latino voters, Paul began talking about the need for Republicans to deal with undocumented immigration. In an interview with Politico, Paul laid out a plan for “an eventual path” to citizenship for the undocumented immigrants currently in the country, paired with a plan to bar “any new legal immigrants while we’re assimilating the ones who are here.”