New Practices, Dental Support Organizations and Pent up Demand From the Recession Led to a Growing Emphasis on Ergonomics and Spending on Technologically Advanced Equipment, Which Will Continue to Drive Growth in the Dental Treatment Center Market

VANCOUVER, BC--(Marketwired - October 27, 2015) - According to a new report on the U.S. market for dental operatory equipment by iData Research (www.idataresearch.com), dental chairs dominated the treatment center segment with nearly 50% of the market in 2015 valued at roughly $310 million. Increasing market value in this segment is being driven by increases both in average selling price (ASP) and in units sold. Price increases are attributable to rising raw material costs and increasing costs related to the lagged effect of new government regulations such as the Affordable Care Act. However, despite higher input costs and increased government regulations in the form of the Medical Device Excise Tax, the Sunshine Act and the Safe Water Drinking Act, shifting consumer preferences towards lower end, less expensive units and bulk buying from the Dental Support Organizations (DSOs) has and will continue to suppress price growth over the forecast period.

The market for delivery units, similar to the market for patient chairs, has experienced an increase since the end of 2012. However, growth in this market is being suppressed by a preference for technology spending over traditional equipment spending. As a result, unit sales will continue to remain relatively stable over the forecast period. This is primarily due to the cost of dental chairs relative to the cost of delivery units and operating lights, as these three items are normally sold in a bundled package.

The growth in operatory lights can be attributed to an expected gradual increase in its ASP, which is fueled by technological advancements such as LED lighting. On average, LED lights are 30% more expensive than halogen lights. Therefore, the ASP is anticipated to continue to increase, closely following the rate of conversion from halogen to LED lighting. Growth in the ASP is expected to stabilize towards the end of the forecast period due to a commoditization of the LED market and increased competition in this segment from Chinese imports.

The dental treatment center market is divided into high-end, well-designed products and discount product lines. "Shifting demographics in the dental profession is causing an increase in the preference for premium and aesthetically pleasing equipment," explains Dr. Kamran Zamanian, CEO of iData. "This represents an opportunity for manufacturers to capture this emerging market." Despite limited capital budgets, dentists are opting to purchase more technologically advanced equipment with a quicker return on investment over more traditional equipment. This trend will continue to grow and speed up the replacement rate of older equipment.

Currently, A-dec leads the dental treatment center market in the U.S. with a total market share of nearly 35%. As one of the most recognized dental equipment companies in the industry, A-dec offers a wide range of products, from cost-effective, economical equipment to a line of high-end furniture. Patterson Dental has long been the primary distributor of A-dec's product line. But as of June 2015, A-dec has also begun to sell through the distributor Henry Schein. This will help maintain its market lead in the near future. Other leading competitors in the dental treatment center market include Pelton & Crane, Midmark, Takara Belmont and Brewer Company among others.

For Further Information

More on the dental treatment center market in the US can be found in a reports published by iData entitled the US Market for Dental Operatory Equipment. The market segments covered in this report includes dental treatment centers, dental cabinetry, dental handpieces, curing lights, ultrasonic scalers, intraoral cameras, dental autoclaves, suction systems, dental air compressors, dental management software, caries detection devices, and dental microscopes.

Full reports also provide a comprehensive analysis including units sold, procedure numbers, market value, forecasts, as well as detailed competitive market shares and analysis of major players' success strategies in each market and segment.

To find out more about dental operatory equipment market data or procedure data, register online or email us at info@idataresearch.net for a US Market for Dental Operatory Equipment report series brochure and synopsis.

About iData Research

iData Research (www.idataresearch.com) is an international market research and consulting group focused on providing market intelligence for medical device and pharmaceutical companies. iData covers research in: Dental Implants, Dental Bone Graft Substitutes, Dental CAD/CAM, Dental Crowns & Bridges, Dental Cements, Dental Materials, Dental Prosthetics, Dental Operatory Equipment, Dental Overdentures, Dental Imaging, Dental Lasers, Spinal Implants and VCF, Spinal MIS, Orthopedic Soft Tissue Repair and Regeneration, Orthopedic Trauma, Large & Small Joints, Anesthesiology, Wound Management, Orthopedics, Cardiovascular, Ophthalmics, Endoscopy, Gynecology, Urology, and more.