Urgent:

Should Obamacare be Repealed? Vote Here Now

Urgent:

Will Obamacare Hurt Your Wallet? Vote Here Now

At the 2013 Emmy Awards on Sunday, "Breaking Bad" broke through; "House of Cards" made history; "Modern Family" was a big winner of the night, and Jeff Daniels' win surprised television experts.AMC's "Breaking Bad," which is in its sixth and final season this year, won Outstanding Drama Series for its fifth season."Holy crap. I didn't see this coming," Director Vince Gilligan said. Backstage, Gilligan said it was the online support from outlets like Netflix that allowed the show to survive on basic cable, according to CNN. "Netflix kept us on the air. The show would not have lasted beyond Season 2 if not for streaming on demand," he said.Anna Gunn, who plays Skyler White on "Breaking Bad," won Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama."Modern Family" dominated the comedy category as the popular show has the last few years, taking home its fourth straight Emmy for Outstanding Comedy Series.Probably the biggest surprise of the show was Jeff Daniels’ win for Outstanding Performance in a Drama Series, playing the self-absorbed anchor Will McAvoy in HBO's "The Newsroom."Most experts predicted the award would go to Bryan Cranston for his role as Walter White in "Breaking Bad," or to Kevin Spacey, for his part as a win-at-all-costs congressman in "House of Cards.""I didn't expect this," Daniels said while accepting the award. "I usually don't win anything. The last thing I won was for 'The Squid and the Whale,' best actor over 50 from the AARP. With all due respect to the AARP, this is better." The Netflix series "House of Cards" managed to make history as the first non-TV network show to capture an award , with David Fincher walking away with the best directing Emmy. A week earlier, the show won Emmys for casting and cinematography at the Creative Arts Emmy ceremony,"The Colbert Report" broke the "The Daily Show with Jon Stewart’s" 10-year win streak in the outstanding variety series category.