Buy Photo A Metro Ride bus stops at the Wausau depot on Oct. 9, 2015. (Photo: Nora G. Hertel/Daily Herald Media)Buy Photo

As a volunteer working with community transit issues the past several years, I have seen how crucial it is for people to be able to get around their community. I have come to know many individuals who rely on public transportation to meet their basic needs, and am aware of the problems that come when that help is not there. I have seen how the dignity of people is affected when they can’t participate in community life. Personally, I am grateful to have been able to ride the bus when other means of transportation have not been available.

Marathon County has unfortunately not kept up with national trends, which show transit systems are growing in many communities. While our community has actually taken steps backwards in the last few years, I am heartened by events of the recent months, which indicate there is increased interest in expanding access to public transportation.

The Wausau Region Chamber of Commerce and other local leaders continue to talk about the need to attract young people to our community and keep them here. Our economic development depends on that. To accomplish that, we need to acknowledge what millennials are looking for in places to live. Local information is consistent with surveys across the country — young people want to live in communities where they can get around without a car. Millennials also say that being able to connect to other people is a key factor in deciding where they want to put down roots. A reliable public transportation system is crucial to making these preferences a reality.

At the other end of the age spectrum is the growing number of baby boomers. The most recent Marathon County United Way LIFE Report predicts higher numbers of seniors than ever before and points to the increased need for transportation options so aging adults can remain in their homes and stay active members of their community.

The United Way report also lists education, income and health as top priorities. The presence of a reliable public transportation system is directly tied to how successfully we address these priorities.

Local businesses in towns without current bus service, such as Rib Mountain, are also speaking up. They tell us that transit service is needed so job applicants can get to interviews and so current employees can get to work.

In addition, municipalities that previously had bus service but no longer do are realizing the impact of its loss. The Rothschild Village President recently reported that residents are moving out of Rothschild due to the lack of bus service.

County-wide interest in public transportation is growing as well. Marathon County's Executive Committee recently gave support to the development of a comprehensive transportation plan. Officials expressed hope that the process will include all municipalities at the table, with $10,000 committed toward developing the plan.

The Metro Transit Commission, along with the Metro Ride Director, continue to put forth proposals to expand public transportation beyond where it is now, which according to one commission member is in a “death spiral.” The Commission’s actions, though they did not create any changes for the coming year, have resulted in keeping the public transportation issue alive and getting more and more people to talk about it.

Local municipalities continue to show they care about making important things accessible to their citizens and are finding creative ways of funding such endeavors. Weston recently announced one of several kayak launches so people can have easier access to the Eau Claire River. Funding (first launch will cost $175,000) will come from room tax dollars and grants from “various organizations.” Perhaps a similar commitment could be made to help citizens get to jobs and health care appointments?

Public transportation is an essential service. A reliable system that gets people where they want to go helps make Marathon County a place that people of all ages want to call home.

Let’s keep community interest in public transportation moving forward. As one local official put it, “If everybody does a little bit, we can do this.”

All of us — local leaders and citizens alike — need to work together to provide a community-wide transportation system that serves our entire region.

Anne S. Jefferson lives in Wausau.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1XLfBP1