Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick, D-Ariz., already has locked up many key Democratic endorsements in her 2016 Senate campaign. But it's possible another Democratic candidate, such as Rep. Kyrsten Sinema, still could get in the race. (Photo: Tom Williams/CQ-Roll Call, Inc.)

Since entering Arizona's U.S. Senate race, U.S. Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick has been methodically collecting endorsements even while she remains the only major Democratic candidate in her primary.

Since her surprise May 26 announcement, Kirkpatrick has been officially endorsed by former three-term U.S. Sen. Dennis Deconcini, the last Arizona Democrat to hold the office; former U.S. Reps. Ed Pastor, Harry Mitchell and Ron Barber; veteran PimaCounty Sheriff Clarence Dupnik; and numerous other past and present state and county elected officials.

"The outpouring of support in the early days of this campaign has been overwhelming," Kirkpatrick said Friday in a written statement.

Kirkpatrick, a Flagstaff Democrat, may wind up having an uncontested primary, but U.S. Rep. Kyrsten Sinema, D-Ariz., has yet to publicly close the door on a Senate run. Sinema's future prospects may come into sharper focus on Monday, when the U.S. Supreme Court hands down its eagerly awaited decision in Arizona's redistricting case.

If the high court returns congressional redistricting authority to the Republican-controlled Arizona Legislature from the state's voter-created independent commission, Sinema, a Phoenix Democrat, may prefer to take her chances in a Senate race than risk seeing her district redrawn in a way that tips the advantage to the GOP. Incumbent U.S. Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., announced in April that he is running for re-election.

Monday is the final day of the Supreme Court's term.

"The reality of the situation is that a chunk of the Arizona political landscape is on hold until Monday and we get a decision on redistricting and see how that impacts sitting member and their electoral futures," said Nathan Gonzales, a political analyst who edits and publishes the non-partisan Rothenberg & Gonzales Political Report. "I don't think we can rule out Sinema running until we have a better idea of what the districts are going to look like.

"Kirkpatrick got out there early and wants to make her nomination seem inevitable, but I think we're only in the first couple of chapters of a much longer story about this race."

DeConcini, who served in the Senate from 1977 to 1995, told The Arizona Republic that he's still not expecting Sinema to get into the race.

"It's still kind of early, but I don't think Sinema will run," DeConcini said. "She has indicated in the past that she wasn't going to do it, but she's kind of on the fence now, but I don't think she'll do that. I think Kirkpatrick would be a good candidate, yes, but whether or not she'll be the only one, time will tell."

The Democratic primary field actually got smaller on Friday when Richard Sherzan of Mesa ended his short-lived Senate campaign. Sherzan, who served in the Iowa Legislature but was unknown in Arizona, announced his candidacy in December but didn't get any traction even before Kirkpatrick entered the race.

In other developments

GOP needles Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee

While Kirkpatrick has been securing plenty of Democratic support in Arizona, national Republicans have been needling the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee for not formally endorsing her. The speculation is that the DSCC is holding off to see if Sinema gets in the race.

"Given that national Democrats endorsed (Senate candidate) Richard Carmona in 2012, it speaks volumes that they haven't treated Ann Kirkpatrick in the same manner," said Jahan Wilcox, a National Republican Senatorial Committee spokesman. "The DSCC's refusal to endorse Kirkpatrick is proof that they don't believe the she can mount a credible challenge to Arizona's John McCain."

In an e-mail to The Republic, DSCC spokesman Justin Barasky did not answer when asked whether the organization had endorsed Kirkpatrick but said they consider her "a fantastic candidate."

Ward says she wasn't comparing 'Obamacare,' slavery

State Sen. Kelli Ward, the Lake Havasu City Republican who is exploring a primary challenge against McCain, got a reaction on Twitter after a tweet about the Supreme Court's latest health-care decision seemed to imply she was comparing the Affordable Care Act with slavery.

She tweeted: "At one point prohibition & slavery were the law of the land too - they were wrong & so is #Obamacare#StopJudicialActivism#ChangeDC."

In follow-up tweets, Ward elaborated that she wasn't comparing "Obamacare" to slavery.

"just because something is the 'law of the land' and 'settled' according to president doesn't make it right - all are wrong," she said in another message.

Ward explains visit to rancher Cliven Bundy

It wasn't the first time Ward has used historical events to to make a point about contemporary developments. At an appearance earlier this month in Payson, she brought up the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre while explaining why she went to Nevada during rancher Cliven Bundy's 2014 standoff with the U.S. Bureau of Land Management over grazing fees and cattle.

"I went there to support our Constitution. I support our First Amendment right to free speech — that's why it's so great to be in the United States," she said, according to an account published by the Payson Roundup. "Look at what happened in China in Tiananmen Square. So I went up there to do just that."

Nowicki is The Republic's national political reporter. Follow him on Twitter at @dannowicki and on his official Facebook page.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1IkTBGV