GOGO's Inspire Initiative funding projects meant to break down barriers to outdoor play

Projects in Lafayette and five other Colorado communities from Leadville to Lamar have been tapped to pilot Great Outdoors Colorado's new $25 million Inspire Initiative grant program, which hopes to draw kids away from screens and into nature.

Each project will receive as much as $100,000 to help refine their plans, which could lead to $1 million to $5 million in funding for parks, trails and programs aiming to get underprivileged kids off the couch and into their wooded backyards and, eventually, into the backcountry.

A collaboration of 30 Boulder County organizations promoting environmental education for Lafayette's low-income families received $99,834 to devise a plan under the project name Nature Kids/Jovenes de la Naturaleza Lafayette.

Keith Desrosiers, executive director of Thorne Nature Experience who submitted the grant application, called the project "a game changer," especially for families around Alicia Sanchez Elementary School.

"Sanchez doesn't have adequate sidewalks or walkways. There's no park in the neighborhood that has nature in it," Desrosiers said. "These kids and families are disconnected from the rest of the community and from nature."

Plans for the project include an outdoor play space at Sanchez, expanded walking and biking trails that provide safe access to nature for kids across the city and environmental education programs for students and adults.

Advertisement

"Teaching kids about the environment allows them to connect with it on their terms," Desrosiers said. "What kids need is an opportunity to throw some dirt around. That's focal point of this project."

The group has 10 months to design a proposal that will be submitted to GOCO with a request for an additional $3 million to $5 million to implement the project, Desrosiers said.

GOCO in June announced an ambitious five-year plan to direct $25 million — plus at least that much in matching donations — toward 20 Colorado communities that can push more kids onto trails and into parks by developing more outdoor spaces and programs.

The idea is for those neighborhoods to work together to increase access to nature and tear down age-old barriers that prevent kids from vital play in the woods.

"This will give our youth opportunities to learn how to camp, fish, bicycle and get outside safely. These are things that low-income people currently don't have access to," said Fany Mendez, a leader of southwest Denver's Westwood Unidos community group, speaking through a translator.

Westwood, one of the poorest neighborhoods in Denver, hopes to use GOCO funds to develop parks, trails, safe bike routes through dangerous alleys and a "My Outdoor Colorado" program similar to the "My Denver" model that will deliver low-cost outdoor learning, adventure and recreation opportunities.

On Friday, GOCO named the first six communities in line for that money and 13 more communities that show potential but need extra time to shape their plans. There were 34 applicants to the program.

"We knew there were would be demand but ... we never imagined we would have this many people ready to go and this excited," GOCO executive director Lise Aangeenbrug said.

The six towns and cities that rose to the top of the list had very strong partnerships with underserved residents in their communities, Aangeenbrug said. Many were able to dovetail existing plans for trails and outdoor programs with the Inspire Initiative.

Lamar and Westwood, for example, are two of three communities selected in 2013 to participate in the Colorado Health Foundation's Healthy Places Initiative, which aims to promote a healthy lifestyle with better parks, trails and outdoor activities.

"This really allows us to continue the momentum in our community to bring people together and dream about a better community, a healthy community. And not just dream, but act," said Emily Nieschburg with Lamar's High Plains Community Health Center, which is galvanizing locals to help connect the town with its surrounding recreational resources.

Jackie Miller, GOCO's director of youth initiatives, has spent the past few months touring the state, visiting with communities eager to vie for the GOCO Inspire grants. In Lamar, she met with dozens of kids who were part of a focus group.

More than half of the kids in the room had never been to John Martin Reservoir State Park," she said. "That's only 12 miles away from town."

(Several grant applications by the coalitions included compelling videos of kids who were asked if they had a magic wand and could transform the outdoors in their own neighborhoods, what would it look like? The answers revealed kids eager for more trails and trees.)

The idea behind the Inspire project is to make romping outside easier and more appealing than watching screens inside. Those barriers can be access or cost, or sometimes just a lack of information. It's not that kids like Netflix more than playing outside, it's just that playing in parks and trails isn't always as easy as hitting the "play" button.

"We want them to go out and enjoy the outdoors every day, so how do we go out and create that excitement for them to get outside in their own local parks and our own backcountry," said Nieschburg, who has enlisted hundreds of Lamar residents to help sculpt the GOCO Initiative plan.

The six pilot grant proposals are more concept than concrete. All of them discuss critical connectors that link neighborhoods with outdoor spaces and how groups can work together to overcome obstacles hindering outdoor play. But there are few specifics. That's by design, Aangeenbrug said.

GOCO didn't want fully-polished proposals for the first round. The group wanted solid ideas, but the detailed plans for places and programs need intense public input before GOCO awards the big money in October next year.

"We are saying we know there's not a one-size-fits-all approach and we want you to really engage the people you are trying to serve," Aangeenbrug said. "Because if you build it, we want to know they are going to come instead of build it and hope they come."

Staff writer Whitney Bryen contributed to this article.