About a third of midstate hospitals face possible penalties under a new program focused on preventable problems that arise during hospital stays, such as infections, blood clots and broken hips resulting from falls after surgery.

They include two of the region's elite hospitals: Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center and Geisinger Health System's main hospital in Danville.

HOW DOES YOUR LOCAL HOSPITAL RATE?

The new program is part of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare. It assigns hospitals a score from one to ten, with higher numbers reflecting more problems. The figures recently released by the federal government are preliminary and could change.

Penn State Hershey has a preliminary score of 8.05. Geisinger has a preliminary score of 7.725. York Memorial Hospital, with a nine, has the highest preliminary score in the midstate.

Under the program, hospitals with scores in the bottom 25 percent will be penalized one percent of their Medicare payments. Based on preliminary scores, hospitals with scores higher than seven would face the penalty.

The other midstate hospitals with preliminary scores in the penalty range are Chambersburg Hospital, St. Joseph Medical Center in Reading and Ephrata Community Hospital.

York Memorial and Penn State Hershey, who were contacted by PennLive last week, hadn't provided a response to their scores as of 6 p.m. Monday.

Based on preliminary scores, the Hospital & Healthsystem Association of Pennsylvania estimates 38 of about 170 Pennsylvania hospitals will be penalized, costing them a total of $19 million.

The program is officially called the "Hospital-Acquired Condition Program." It's one of several federal programs that have begun to, or soon will, penalize hospitals that perform poorly according to various measures. The programs are also intended to make the public aware of the shortcomings so they can make better-informed decisions about where to seek care.

Two-thirds of a hospital's score is based on two measures: frequency of central line associated bloodstream infections, and infections related to urinary catheters.

The rest is based on frequency of these eight complications: collapsed lung resulting from treatment; blood clots in the lungs or a large vein after surgery; a wound that opens after surgery; accidental cuts or tears; bed sores; central-line associated blood stream infections; broken hips from falls after surgery; and blood stream infections after surgery.

"We knew this was coming," said Dr. John Bulger, chief quality officer for Geisinger Health System. He noted the score of 7.725 applies to Geisinger's main hospital in Danville, but not to its other hospitals, which had preliminary scores that would keep them clear of penalties.

Bulger said Geisinger became aware of some of the problems that contributed to the high score through its own quality control efforts and has been addressing them. For example, he said the rate of central line associated infections has been cut in half since 2012.

Geisinger Medical Center bills Medicare for about $100 million annually, thus stands to lose $1 million.

The preliminary scores are based on incidents that took place during a one-year period from mid-2012 through mid-2013. Final scores, to be ready this fall, will cover all of 2012 and 2013. That means it's possible a hospital with a preliminary score above seven could end up with a better score and avoid penalty.

Still, Bulger doubts Geisinger Medical Center's final score will fall out of the penalty range. That's because he expects other hospitals have also addressed problems, and therefore the bottom 25 percent will stay about the same.

He said, "The goal is to try to be the best at getting better."

Kaiser Health News commissioned an analysis of the preliminary scores and found that academic medical centers — a category that includes Penn State-Hershey and Geisinger — tended to have poorer scores. It found that 54 percent, based on their preliminary scores, faced penalties. Kaiser said the reasons are the subject of debate, and cited an expert who said it could result from competing priorities including teaching doctors and research.

Kaiser also found that large hospitals and those which treat higher proportions of poor patients are more likely to face penalties.

However, the government says it risk adjusts to take into account the varying levels and complexity of illnesses of patients at a given hospital.

Geisinger's Bulger said Geisinger welcomes transparency and is supportive of the new program. However, he said it relies on metrics which are new and probably in need of tweaking. "There are going to be some growing pains ... generally you won't get things perfect the first time," he said.

He further pointed out that Geisinger ranks high on various other publicly-available rankings, and said consumers should consider a variety of measures and sources, and talk to their doctor, when evaluating a hospital.

Martin Ciccocioppo of the Hospital & Health System Association of Pennsylvania said the hospital acquired condition scores are based on some measures that are part of existing federal programs which impose penalties. Therefore, hospitals are being penalized more than once for the same thing.

Since hospitals already have financial reasons to focus on the items, he questions the benefit of the additional penalty. "This is just another financial hit that CMS is essentially extracting from the hospital community ... and, arguably, they are taking it from the hospitals that perhaps need it the most to improve their quality," said Ciccocioppo, HAP's vice president for research.

He also faulted the government's intent to continue fining the bottom 25 percent of hospitals in subsequent years, regardless of how much they improve.

One of the related Affordable Care Act penalty programs that has already kicked in is one that penalizes hospitals for high rates of patients that have to be readmitted within 30 days.

The federal government plans to expand the hospital-acquired condition reduction program. In 2015 it will include surgical site infections. In 2016 will include C. diff, which is an intestinal infection, and MRSA, which involves a strain of bacteria that is resistant to antibiotics.

Note: this article was revised to reflect that Geisinger is also considered an academic medical center and to clarify that the payment reductions pertain to Medicare.