Topics: From the Wires, News

CARACAS, Venezuela (AP) — In a major show of force, hundreds of National Guardsmen in riot gear and armored vehicles prevented an “empty pots march” from reaching Venezuela’s Food Ministry on Saturday to protest shortages of staple items.

President Nicolas Maduro’s socialist government, meanwhile, celebrated as a diplomatic victory an Organization of American States declaration supporting its professed efforts to bring a peaceful solution to the country’s worst political violence in years. The United States, Canada and Panama were the only nations to oppose the declaration.

On Saturday, more than 5,000 protesters banged pots, blew horns and whistles and carried banners in the capital to decry crippling inflation and now-chronic shortages of basics including flour, milk and toilet paper. Similar protests were held in at least five other cities.

All over Venezuela, people spend hours every week queuing up at supermarkets, often before dawn, without even knowing what may arrive.

“There’s nothing to buy. You can only buy what the government lets enter the country because everything is imported. There’s no beef. There’s no chicken,” said Zoraida Carrillo, a 50-year-old marcher in Caracas.

The capital’s government-allied mayor had refused the marchers a permit to hold the rally, leading opposition leader Henrique Capriles to accuse authorities of trying to “criminalize” peaceful protests.

“Nicolas (Maduro) is afraid of the empty pots of our people. He mobilizes hundreds of soldiers against empty pots,” he said of the man who defeated him by a razor-thin margin in April presidential elections.

Capriles also reiterated opposition complaints that the government is sending “functionaries and groups of paramilitaries — which they have armed — to put down protests.”

Maduro has faced several weeks of daily student-led protests across the nation that he claims are an attempt by far-right provocateurs to overthrow him. They have been joined by mostly middle-class Venezuelans fed up with inflation that reached 56 percent last year and one of the highest murder rates in the world.