Pelosi: Of course I stand by my “we have to pass it so you can find out what’s in it” remark

posted at 8:41 am on November 18, 2013 by Erika Johnsen

If President Obama’s very clearly last-minute, politically desperate, and virtually unworkable faux-“fix” announced last Thursday wasn’t enough to get House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi to strike a less defiant tone on her infamously idiotic “we have to pass the bill so that you can find out what’s in it” remark back in 2010, then nothing ever will be, my friends — but kudos to David Gregory for at least asking, I suppose. Isn’t that whole “we have to pass it” mentality, he asks, and the subsequent big rush job to do so on which zero Republicans voted yes, kind of the whole problem behind this gigantic mess right now? And now as a result, the administration and Democrats are running around trying to deal with the consequences, many of which were foreseen by Republicans?

I’m not sure I even understand her answer, but shorter Pelosi: No way.

What I was saying there is we are House and the Senate. We get a bill. We go to conference or we ping-pong it, and then you see what the final product is. However, I stand by what I said there. When people see what is in the bill, they will like it. And they will. And so, while there’s a lot of hoop-di-doo and ado about what’s happening now — very appropriate. I’m not criticizing. I’m saying it took a great deal for us to pass this bill. I said if we go up to the gate and the gate is locked, we’ll unlock the gate. If we can’t do that, we’ll climb the fence. If the fence is too high, we’ll pole vault in. If we can’t do that, we’ll helicopter in, but we’ll get it done. We had to pass the test of the courts, and we did. The first rollout in the first part of the first year of the implementation went very smoothly. The website did not work; that has caused problems complicating people transitioning from those policies to the other. But, again, this is never thought to be easy. And the fact is, it doesn’t matter what we’re saying here: What matters? What happens at the kitchen table of the American people.

Related Posts: