Photo

WASHINGTON — A Senate hearing on Tuesday set the stage for a coming debate over whether the federal government should continue financing a popular health insurance program for lower-income children who are now eligible for new coverage options under the Affordable Care Act.

The Children’s Health Insurance Program, known as CHIP, has helped cut in half the uninsured rate for children, to about 7 percent in 2013 from 14 percent in 1997, when it was enacted. It provides coverage for about eight million children in families that earn too much to qualify for Medicaid, the government health care program for the poor, but cannot afford private coverage.

The federal government gives matching funds to states to provide the coverage, but that funding is set to end in September 2015, on the assumption that most beneficiaries will be able to get subsidized private coverage through the insurance exchanges created under the health care law. The federal government pays most of the $13 billion annual cost for CHIP.

But advocacy groups are warning that exchange plans will prove unaffordable for many households with children, partly because a quirk in the law prevents families from getting subsidies if a parent is offered “affordable” coverage at work. The law considers premiums on employer-based plans unaffordable if they exceed 9.5 percent of household income, but in what has become known as the “family glitch,” that standard applies only to premium costs for individual plans — not to family plans.

Another concern is that families will face more out-of-pocket costs for exchange plans, and that such plans will offer a narrower set of benefits for children. A recent analysis by the Wakely Consulting Group found that many families would need to spend substantially more out of pocket to get the same care through an exchange plan that they get through CHIP.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

So far, only 6 percent of enrollees in the new exchanges are younger than 18, according to the Health Policy Center at the Urban Institute. Far more children are enrolled in Medicaid than either CHIP or the exchange plans, including many who became newly eligible for Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.

Senator Jay Rockefeller, Democrat of West Virginia, and Representative Henry A. Waxman, Democrat of California, have introduced bills that would extend federal funding for the program through 2019. But the Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission, an advisory group, has recommended only a two-year extension, saying that would be long enough to address problems like the law’s family glitch.

CHIP has generally had strong bipartisan support, and at Tuesday’s hearing, held by the Senate Finance Committee’s subcommittee on health care, both Democrats and Republicans praised it. But Douglas Holtz-Eakin, a conservative economist and former head of the Congressional Budget Office, pointed out in testimony that the program “now resides in an insurance landscape that is very different than the one it was created in.”

For this reason, he said that “a straight reauthorization is not the best decision” and that “redundancies in coverage should be considered when making funding decisions.”

Mr. Holtz-Eakin added that Congress would have to come up with new resources to pay for an extension of the program, saying, “That’s a problem.”

Senator Michael B. Enzi, Republican of Wyoming, suggested that CHIP at least needed to be whittled down, saying, “We need to focus our efforts here on identifying the core mission of the program.”

Mr. Rockefeller, one of the original architects of the program, who is retiring at the end of this year, said he worried that even with broad support, the program could get caught up in a political fight.

“You can’t always count on something that has been bipartisan to continue to be bipartisan,” he said during the hearing.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Cathy Caldwell, the director of Alabama’s Children’s Health Insurance Program, testified that her state was “already dealing with issues related to the uncertainty of CHIP funding” as it prepared a budget for the 2016 fiscal year.

“We have families already getting stressed,” she said. “They may find coverage through an employer plan or a marketplace plan, but it is my belief that many will not, and they will go back to being uninsured.”

Ronald Pollack, the executive director of Families USA, a liberal-leaning consumer group, said that while he saw “encouraging signs” that the program’s funding would be extended, he worried it could be thwarted by congressional gridlock.

“It’s very possible that it could get caught up in controversial matters extraneous to CHIP,” Mr. Pollack said. “It’s too soon to say.”