As Hollywood red carpets go, the Emmys are never as much a fashion parade as the Oscars, and Sunday’s show continued that trend. If you just wanted to ogle your favorite TV star, the show offered that.

Actresses tended to go one of two ways — pale and elegant, or bold and beautiful.

Even when the went light in color, actresses made sure their gowns were rich and textured. Julie Bowen’s Zac Posen dress had all kinds of action, from the bows on the shoulders to the sculpted bodice and body to the tiered petal-like show at the bottom. “I’m not a girly-girl,” she said, but her frothy confection said the opposite.

January Jones sauntered onto the red carpet in a strapless Givenchy gown with a lace skirt, her hair gracefully sideswept. Julia Louis-Dreyfus’ sparkled in an ivory Monique Lhuillier gown, while Juliana Margulies’ strapless ivory dress had a black vine trailing down one side. Kerry Washington’s gown featured floral appliques in white and gold.

Elisabeth Moss wore one of her prettiest red carpet looks to date: a color-blocked style with a black strapless top and full white skirt.

Note to Claire Danes and her stylist: don’t put a woman with a boyish figure in a gown with a plunging neck.

For all the pale beauties, those wearing vivid color stood out, and blue was the top color of the evening. Tina Fey, Edie Falco, Jane Krakowski and Allison Williams were among the actresses who chose to make a cool splash. What made their looks impressive was how well they were tailored. Fey’s halter-neck Narciso Rodriguez dress fit her like second skin. Her sleek hairstyle perfectly complemented the dress.

Sofia Vegara is an actress who always goes her own way when it comes to fashion, and the Emmys were no exception. Her plunge-neck red gown from Vera Wang followed her curves and the Lorraine Schwartz jumbo drop earrings added to the bold statement.

Even the guys got into the spirit of mixing it up for the Emmys. Host Neil Patrick Harris wore a wine-colored jacket, as did Derek Hough. Jon Hamm wore a white jacket and black tie. Will Arnett sported the currently chic silvery gray jacket with black lapels, as did red carpet interviewer Ryan Secrest.

See all the looks from the red carpet here.