Theatre

Music

Opera

Threat: Belvoir's artistic director Ralph Myers says increasing numbers of arts companies are led by "people who are not just dressed like managers – they are managers". Photo: Nic Walker

Australia's cultural life is under threat from arts leaders who are not practising artists and boards packed with businessmen, according to Belvoir's outgoing artistic director.

Ralph Myers will say increasing numbers of arts companies are led by "people who are not just dressed like managers – they are managers" when he delivers the 2014 Philip Parsons Memorial Lecture at Belvoir Street Theatre on November 30.

"We are implicitly signalling that the role is managerial, not artistic, that the role is corporate and generic, not cultural and specific," Myers says in his provocative speech The Artistic Director: on the way to extinction?.

"That we want our [artistic directors] to be moderate, and produce digestible and middle-of-the road work. This is a grave mistake."

Advertisement

Myers, a practising set and costume designer, is also critical of foreigners given leadership roles of cultural institutions over local talent.

"Let's cancel the visas of all of the fly-in-fly-out conductors of our orchestras for five years and see what happens," he says.

Myers is keen to emphasise his criticisms are aimed at the structure of arts companies and how appointments are made, and not about individuals and their artistic choices.

He says major festivals "are now dominated by imported artistic directors who have notably failed to excite enthusiasm by presenting generic, cookie-cutter programs of moderate, balanced, largely imported work, that's usually pretty dated by the time it gets here".

The Sydney Festival, which is led by Belgian Lieven Bertels, declined to comment. The Adelaide Festival of the Arts and Perth International Arts Festival are both led by artistic directors from England.

Myers also refers to a "merry go round of festival directors". Brett Sheehy, whose background is arts administration, led the Sydney, Adelaide and Melbourne Festivals and is now the artistic director of the Melbourne Theatre Company.

"We see the same faces doing the rounds of the major festivals," Myers says.

Speaking hypothetically, Myers says reappointing Andrew Upton as artistic director of the Sydney Theatre Company in 2012, after he had resigned, was the act of a board unwilling to risk a younger theatremaker.

"I think the STC board missed an opportunity to appoint a bold artist like Simon Stone, Leticia Caceres or Matthew Lutton in 2012," he told Fairfax Media.

The STC and MTC were approached, but did not respond by deadline.

Myers says boards, including Belvoir's, are loaded with businesspeople and token artist representation.

"A cursory look at the boards of the 28 major performing arts companies reveals a shocking lack of diversity," he says. "Wealthy white men overwhelmingly dominate, followed at some distance by wealthy white women."

But Myers also attacks the timidity of his fellow artistic directors, including himself, who do not want "to make waves for fear of upsetting our government and corporate paymasters".

"Broadly speaking there is a nation-wide cultural queasiness with artistic leadership, of people being passionate, saying difficult things and making us think about ourselves," he says.

More artists should sit on boards and replace the "fat cats" who have underperformed and not donated money.

He also says a panel of experts, not boards, could appoint artistic directors with short tenures to encourage diversity and mitigate risk.

Myers issues a clarion call to save festivals and arts companies from market forces.

"We can't let the businesspeople and their managers take charge," he says. "They've got their hands on pretty much everything else in our lives, but we must fight to keep the dreamers in charge of the arts."