Long ER Waits: Half Of State Hospitals Over National Average Of 28 Minutes

The average wait can stretch to an hour or more at Rockville General, Manchester Memorial, Bridgeport, Waterbury and Hartford hospitals, according to a C-HIT review of federal data. The statewide average waiting time is 30 minutes.

In more than half of Connecticut's emergency rooms, the waiting time to see a health-care provider exceeds the national average of 28 minutes.

The longest wait time is at Hartford Hospital, where patients were not seen for 82 minutes, on average; the shortest wait of 14 minutes is at Windham Hospital, the data compiled by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) through 2012 show. Officials at Hartford and Bridgeport hospitals claim shorter wait times than the federal data.

Hospitals have taken some steps to improve their wait times, at a time when emergency departments have seen an increase in patients. But, experts say that the task is only going to get tougher, as the Affordable Care Act (ACA) will expand the pool of eligible Medicaid recipients seeking care by at least 15 million nationally.

With a shortage of primary care physicians or those who won't accept new patients, ER visits are bound to increase in Connecticut when the ACA takes effect in 2014, said Dr. Gregory Shangold, medical director of Windham's emergency department.

"Insurance does not equal access to care,'' he said. "The emergency department is society's safety net."

Some health experts have told the Courant that it's possible that longer waits would occur only in places that are expected to have a high rate of newly insured people, such as New Haven or Hartford.

"A lot of these types of arguments are predicated on certain types of assumptions -- that there's massive, pent-up demand. We don't know if that's true or not," said Jason Madrak, chief marketing officer for Access Health CT, the state's new online marketplace.

Efforts To Reduce Waiting Times

Officials at several hospitals say they are streamlining their ER operations to shorten waits for walk-in patients. They note that patients who arrive by ambulances or with life-threatening conditions are seen right away. Some hospitals post their waiting times on their websites, so people will know what to expect.

At Hartford Hospital – where officials say the median door-to-provider time of 37 minutes is a better measure of its wait time than CMS' calculation – a "quick track'' room frees up ER beds while patients wait for lab results. Bridgeport Hospital, with an average ER wait time of 71 minutes, recently added two physicians to handle its 81,000 annual ER visits.

"The seven-hour wait went out with the tide,'' said Dr. Rockman Ferrigno, chairman of emergency medicine at Bridgeport Hospital. "We're all challenged by the same thing: how to provide quick, quality, compassionate care."

The focus on ER waiting times comes as use is rising in Connecticut and around the country.

From 1997 to 2007, ER visits increased nationally by 23 percent, the Journal of the American Medical Association reports. The National Center for Health Statistics reports that mean ER waits also climbed - from 46.5 minutes in 2003 to 58.1 minutes in 2009.