— In their heyday, The Fabulous Rockers were in such demand that high schools scheduled proms around the Tampa band’s calendar.

In the 1950s and ’60s, they performed alongside The Four Seasons, Jerry Lee Lewis, Ray Stevens, Conway Twitty, Roy Orbison and Frankie Avalon.

They headlined at New York City’s Peppermint Lounge, a hangout for celebrities such as Marilyn Monroe and Frank Sinatra.

The band never appeared on the must-see TV of the time, “American Bandstand,” but their songs did.

Still, they never made it to Havana, the Las Vegas of the Caribbean, among the most desired tour stops for musicians in the 1950s.

By the time The Fabulous Rockers hit their peak, Fidel Castro had brought Communism to Cuba and the U.S. severed relations with the island nation, closing Cuba’s window of opportunity.

Now, the window has opened again.

As the U.S. moves toward normalizing relations with Cuba, The Fabulous Rockers are scheduled to travel there to headline a concert at the National Hotel of Cuba on May 15.

Havana may no longer be the hot spot it once was, but that hasn’t dimmed the band’s excitement.

“This has to be considered among the highlights of our band’s history,” said Dennis Pupello, 75, pianist and leader. “To be able to continue to have new experiences together at our age is special.”

❖ ❖ ❖

They’ll be sharing the experiences with 60 loyal fans from Tampa who are making the trip with them.

“What more do you need to know about their fan base other than they are going with them to another country,” said Tampa filmmaker Lynn Marvin Dingfelder. “Talk about dedication. That’s how much this band means to them.”

Dingfelder will be in Cuba, too, capturing the experience on camera.

She is following up her Emmy Award-winning documentary “JFK in Tampa: The 50th Anniversary” with one on the history of The Fabulous Rockers.

“For many from that generation who grew up in Tampa, The Rockers resonate with them as much as JFK,” Dingfelder said. “The Rockers were an important part of their youth. You didn’t grow up in Tampa in that era and not know The Rockers.”

Dingfelder is collecting people’s memories of the band via email, lynn@rockersdoc.com.

The Havana concert is part of an ongoing cultural exchange program between Tampa and Cuba promoted by Mike Mauricio, Joe Capitano Sr., Manuel Fernandez and Alan Kahana.

The four operate Ybor City’s Habana Art Travel, which brings U.S. citizens to Cuba to learn about its arts scene while importing and selling art created by Cubans. Their gallery is at 1923 E. 7th Ave.

Last November, Habana Art Travel flew the Cuban band Sol y Son to Tampa to headline a concert at the Ritz Theatre in Ybor City attended by more than 600 people.

The opening act was The Fabulous Rockers.

In May, Sol y Son will return the favor for The Fabulous Rockers in Havana.

“Sol y Son will help bring the crowd and then The Rockers will wow them,” Mauricio said. “They realize, as we all do, that they are not getting any younger so wanted to finally play that one big concert in Havana.”

The Fabulous Rockers were formed in 1957, but only after some members quit and were replaced the next year did a version form that resonated with Tampa — pianist Pupello, vocalists Donna Lynn Caruso Baccarella and Artie Alvarez, trumpeter Onelio Ochoa, bass guitarist Wes Young, saxophonists Manuel “The Joker” Gutierrez and Roger Menendez, drummer Anthony Lopez and guitarist Chuck Borris.

A mix of Jefferson and Hillsborough high school students, the band performed weekly Saturday shows at the Letter Carrier’s Hall in front of 1,000 teenagers dancing the night away to popular cover songs such as “I Feel Good,” “Twist and Shout” and “La Bamba,” as well as original tunes, chiefly the slow “Would I Still Be Loving You” that leader Pupello recalls bringing “romance to the dance floor.”

❖ ❖ ❖

The band played at almost every prom in the Tampa area, said Tony Zappone of Tampa, a fan of the band since back then.

“The schools would coordinate their prom dates just to make sure they all had the chance to use The Rockers,” said Zappone. “You didn’t want to risk two proms in one night and one school not getting them. Students would have been so disappointed if The Rockers weren’t there.”

Their local popularity, said saxophonist Manuel Guitierrez, 75, had as much to do with their shtick as with their musical talent.

They wore loud plaid suits — unusual in that conservative era — and mixed comedy skits in their show.

“We were known for tossing some pies around,” Guitierrez said.

They were the first local band to ditch the chairs and sheet music stands for a free-flowing show on stage.

“Before us, bands were statues,” Guitierrez said. “We liked to move around and have fun. The audience enjoyed that.”

Trip promoters Mauricio and Capitano were among their fans.

“The shows were full of life,” Mauricio said. “They were the coolest band in the city, by far. No one came close to them.”

Capitano booked them for his wedding in 1959.

“If you wanted people to have fun, you got The Rockers,” Capitano said. “They were it. There was no other band.”

National acts touring Florida took notice of the band’s talent and hired them to open for them at concerts throughout the state then remain on stage as the backup band.

“That was because of our versatility,” leader Pupello said. “We had brass and horns, and that makes a difference. When you only have a guitar and a bass, you are limited to what you can play. We had no limitations.”

Ray Stevens and Roy Orbison were the most talented performers they played with, Pupello said.

They kept Jerry Lee Lewis, known for breaking pianos on stage or lighting them on fire, from damaging their instruments by threatening to break his legs.

The band’s success culminated in two bookings at the Peppermint Lounge — once for a few weeks and again for a full month.

Then in 1964, The Fabulous Rockers came to an end.

Life took the members in different directions.

Pupello went to medical school and later became chief of cardiac surgery at St. Joseph’s Hospital in Tampa.

Vocalist Baccarella turned to a career as a lawyer.

Drummer Lopez was a photojournalist for local newspapers.

The band scattered throughout Florida but kept in touch and in 1994, agreed to one last show — a reunion concert.

❖ ❖ ❖

Then when more than 6,000 of their fans showed up to the Tampa Convention Center, they agreed to make their reunion permanent.

They added six musicians to the roster — Basil Rodriguez on trumpet, Al Picallo on sax, Roger Priede on congas, Tony Raiano and Roy Garcia on guitar and Dave Jordan on drums.

A few members get together for performances throughout the year, as “The Ybor City Rockers.”

“If we cannot have everyone there it isn’t right to call ourselves The Fabulous Rockers,” Pupello said. “It would be false advertisement.”

Every May the full band performs a concert at either The Coliseum in St. Petersburg or the Indian Cultural Center in Tampa. Thousands attend.

This May, the full reunion concert will be in Havana.

Pupello’s dream to play in Cuba dates back 10 years and was inspired by the film, “Buena Vista Social Club.”

The Academy Award-nominated documentary follows an ensemble of legendary Cuban musicians, some in their 90s, who perform at Carnegie Hall in New York City. For most of the band members, the concert was their first and only time in the United States because of the decades of tension between the two countries.

After watching the film, Pupello was reminded of how politics kept away The Fabulous Rockers, too.

Planning for the Cuba trip began after the Sol y Son concert they played.

“Cuban nationals love that old rock ’n’ roll,” said Pupello, who visited Havana a month ago for the first time to finalize arrangements for the concert. “I was shocked at how popular songs like ‘Hotel California’ still are. So we’ll play some covers and some of our originals.”

“I personally cannot wait to see the look on the faces of the Cubans when they see these 70-year-old fans from Tampa hit the dance floor,” filmmaker Dingfelder said.

As part of her documentary on the band, Dingfelder recorded a recent concert at Carmine’s in Ybor City.

Before the band took the stage, she said, many in the audience needed walkers to get in place.

“Then the music started and the walkers were tossed aside and they were jitterbugging like teens,” she said with a laugh.

“The Rockers take these men and women back to a time when they were young and carefree. Their music is the fountain of youth.”

pguzzo@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7606