Topics: From the Wires, News

SAN BERNARDINO, Calif. (AP) — Ten sheriff’s deputies in Southern California have been put on leave after several of them were shown on video kicking and punching a man following a 2½-hour chase involving a stolen horse.

San Bernardino County Sheriff John McMahon said Friday that the video “disturbed and troubled” him and appeared to show an excessive use of force.

McMahon announced the action after 30-year-old Francis Pusok was arrested Thursday by deputies in a violent encounter filmed by a KNBC-TV helicopter (http://bit.ly/1H8UC3D). Pusok fled by car and then on the horse, traveling several miles while deputies chased him on foot after trying to serve a search warrant in an identity-theft investigation.

The video shows Pusok, dressed in bright red clothing, falling from the horse as a deputy ran up and fired a Taser. McMahon said the Taser was believed to be ineffective because of Pusok’s loose clothing.

As pursuing deputies reached him, Pusok was face down with his arms and legs outstretched and hands behind his back. One deputy kicked him in the head or shoulder area and punched him, and another kicked him in the crotch. Other deputies arrived moments later.

McMahon said internal and criminal investigations are under way. The FBI announced Friday it was starting a civil rights investigation.

“I’m asking for some patience while we complete a thorough and fair investigation,” McMahon said. “I am disturbed and troubled by what I see in the video. It does not appear to be in line with our policies and procedures.

“I assure you, if there is criminal doing on the part of any of our deputy sheriffs or any policy violations, we will take action.”

McMahon said the department received multiple threats after the video was aired. He said names of the deputies, including a sergeant and a detective, won’t be released until the threats are checked out. The deputies were place on paid administrative leave.

Attorneys for Pusok told KNBC-TV Friday as they left the jail that their client has a badly swollen eye, marks from the beating over his face and body, and is in pain.