Boulder County flood recovery manager: 'We want their voice to be heard'

Michelle Grainger with her husband, Steve LeGoff, on Gold Run Road on Sept. 19, after they barely survived a mudslide caused by the flooding. ( Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera )

The flood of 2013 left in its wake countless stories of escape, survival and heroism.

One of the more memorable came in the mountain enclave of Salina, where Steve LeGoff and a friend rescued LeGoff's wife, Michelle Grainger, from an overwhelming sea of mud that had cascaded into a neighbor's home where they sought shelter during the storm.

Their own home, in the tiny community of roughly 60 people at the junction of Fourmile Canyon and Gold Run Road, actually came through the flood relatively unscathed. They and their four pets were all back home within a month of the storm.

But Grainger voiced concern that Salina might have slipped off some people's radar as the county's comeback from September's disaster continues, six months later.

"The big thing for Salina is we're kind of the forgotten community," Grainger said, "because we are not incorporated. We don't have a mayor; we don't have a spokesperson.

How to help Those looking to volunteer or provide other assistance can contact the Long-Term Flood Recovery Group of Boulder County, which is dedicated to meeting all the needs in Boulder County as a result of the September floods. The group can be reached at bocofloodrecovery.org or 303-895-3429, or on Facebook. Advertisement

"We are a tight-knit community. We have to do things on our own. People are trying to salvage their property and get back to a normal lifestyle."

The distance still to go, Grainger said, is considerable.

"We're maybe a third of the way into it," she said. "It'd be nice to look around and say you're halfway there. We know we're not halfway there. We've got the county telling us they're going to move the road in different directions, they are going to try to redirect the creek in a lot of different ways ... ."

Doug Burger and his wife, Kay Cook, lived for about three years at a rental property in Salina owned by Anne Brady, proprietor of the Salina Cafe. The cafe was heavily damaged when Gold Run flooded, and the rental property was destroyed.

"We lost the place we were living. We lost two cars and all the furniture. We lost everything except, thank heavens, a couple of laptop computers," Burger said.

But they are still in Salina — in another rental property, on higher ground, on the other side of Gold Run Road from where they lived before the storm changed everything. They have been there since Thanksgiving, and they have no intention of leaving the community behind.

"We miss some people who were up here, but the people who are still remaining we have gotten much closer to," Burger said. "We feel much more determined to stay up here and make things work.

"It already was a real community. We had community film nights every other week. We had dinners that Anne Brady made for the community. But it seems like we're even tighter now. ... It is still really a viable community. We, of course, wish it would be cleaned up a little more, but that takes a long time."

Too 'heart-wrenching' to return home

Brady, in addition to witnessing the destruction of the Salina Cafe which she ran, has lost the revenue of her attached rental property and was forced to bulldoze her ruined Salina home.

Flood debris sits on the side of Fourmile Creek next to a destroyed garage Wednesday in Salina, nearly six months after the devastating rains. (Jeremy Papasso / DAILY CAMERA)

She has lived since the flood with her significant other in Denver and is at her wits' end in trying to win some consideration from Wells Fargo, which holds the mortgage on the property.

"I have applied for every possible grant situation that I have heard of, I have talked to politicians, and at the end of the day, all has come to naught. I am looking at a strong possibility of foreclosure and losing everything."

Brady said she obtained a market analysis on her property's current value — $90,000, about one-third of its pre-flood value — and has tried offering that to the bank in a bid to settle the mortgage. Seven weeks after doing so, she has heard nothing back.

She now doesn't visit Salina very often, she said, because it has become too "heart-wrenching."

"But when I do go up there, I run into other residents, and they say, 'We need to have the cafe more than ever. We need a gathering place, and we sorely miss'" its presence.

Brady said she has recently started applying for a few jobs here and there, but that at nearly 67, she understands she might not be a hot commodity on the job market.

And she is not at all certain she'll be able to return to Salina and the property she purchased in 1980, which was a Boulder County historical landmark dating back to 1886.

"I'm sadly looking at that as a possibility," Brady said. " If I go into bankruptcy, I run the risk not only of losing my property but everything I have."

'It's not even a creek'

Grainger voiced some frustration at hearing people from outside Salina suggest that people in foothills communities should not express surprise when their rugged environment turns on them as it did six months ago.

"It's easy for people to say, 'You chose to live on a river.' But we don't live on a river. We never did live on a river," she said. "It's not even a creek. It's a run. And our community has been here for 140 years. It's not like we built a bunch of new houses here."

At a community meeting Feb. 24, county officials laid out the four options being considered for repair to the intersection of Four Mile Canyon Drive and Gold Run Road. Much of it was washed out by the flood, and a 48-inch metal culvert was collapsed.

Boulder County Flood Recovery Manager Garry Sanfacon, in a subsequent message to residents, stated, "We are making this junction one of the highest priorities in the county."

In an interview Friday, Sanfacon said he understood the concerns voiced in Salina and other unincorporated areas crippled by the flood.

"I think it's a countywide phenomenon; any community after a disaster, especially after this amount of time, most of the people get on with their lives. And if you drive around Boulder and the flatlands, there isn't a lot of evidence of the flooding anymore. So their mentality is the flood was a scary event, but it's in the past.

"But if you go into the mountains, they are still very much in the throes of the recovery, and it is going to take years for them to recover."

Sanfacon said the county has now conducted more than 25 neighborhood meetings to facilitate flood recovery throughout the county. They have been attended by more than 750 people.

"I would empathize with Salina because they are one of the hardest hit communities" and it lacks its own governmental structure to represent residents' interests, he said. "So it is a challenge."

Sanfacon added, "I think the message is we know that community was particularly hard hit. We have been working with them particularly closely. ... We want their voice to be heard and to shape the future improvements of their community."

Still a long way to go

Fourmile Canyon resident Grace Miller, who serves as the area's resource coordinator/community advocate, said the county's expressed interest in its recovery appears sincere.

"It seems like their intentions are well-meaning," she said. At the February meeting, "It seemed like they really wanted to find out what people wanted and get their input.

"They're spending money on that junction. I'm sure they don't want to have another flood there and have any more trauma to that community," Miller added. "The people that I talk to (in county government) seem to really care about the folks up there."

But there is a recognition by area residents that progress, now, is most likely to come step-by-step, not by leaps and bounds.

Grainger said, "It would be really nice to say ... all we need are a bunch of trees and a paved road. But that's not the case. The case is that there is a long way to go, and the community needs a lot of help. And it needs recognition."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Charlie Brennan at 303-473-1327 or brennanc@dailycamera.com.