By 2020, the Ingham County Health Services Millage will bring in $3.4 million.

Chair of the Ingham County Health Services Committe, Commissioner Todd Tennis, explained, "The health millage is a countywide thing that helps fund services for low income individuals in Ingham County; it is not just the Ingham Health Plan."

But, that's where the majority of the previous millage went. And, that large number might not be necessary anymore.

"Before the Affordable Care Act kicked in on April 1st last year, they had over 13,000 enrollees. And, at some points in the last several years, they've had even higher than that," Commissioner Tennis. "Now, we're down to about 900, or so, county residents who still fall through the cracks."

Now, the Ingham County Health Services Committee has to decide if they'll allocate the same amount to the Ingham Health Plan, put more money towards other community health services like constructing the new health center or decrease the millage rate.

"We may decide that three million is more than we need," Commissioner Tennis said. ".I don't believe that they will receive as much as they received in the past. How much of a cut, I don't know."

But, you'll know by this fall if your property tax will decrease.

"Sometime in November, is when we have to essentially notify townships to what the levies are for all of our millages. And so, we'll be making that decision before then," Commissioner Todd explained.

But, the IHP might need that extra money because Obamacare has also caused other funds for the plan to disappear.

Commissioner Tennis explained, "The Ingham Health Plan had received a lot of money through disproportionate share payments and local hospitals and kind of a partnership with the county, the state and hospitals. And, that money is kind of going away, so they're already gonna receive a lot less revenue just if we do nothing."

The Health Services Committee will meet with directors of the Ingham Health Plan on Monday. We'll be tracking this story and will let you know what happens.