— The presidents of two of the region’s largest hospitals on Wednesday called on members of a health care and hospital panel formed by Gov. Rick Scott to work with lawmakers and create an alternative to the sunsetting federal program that supported charity care.

“We have to find an alternative, and we have to work together to find an alternative,” Jim Burkhart, president and chief executive at Tampa General Hospital, told members of Scott’s Commission on Health Care and Hospital Funding. “We need to form a group to actually start the work now on looking for a new way to come up with a funding model. The issue won’t go away.”

The Obama administration has announced that the Low Income Pool, or LIP program, would be gradually eliminated as the Affordable Care Act covered more Americans and states expanded their Medicaid programs. But Florida is among a handful of states that has refused to expand Medicaid, and when that LIP funding dries up, it could put hospitals that treat the uninsured in financial straits.

Florida received about $2 billion annually from the LIP program; that amount was cut in half this year, but lawmakers plugged the gap with state tax money and related federal drawdowns.

The injection of state dollars prompted Scott to form the health care and hospital committee. Wednesday’s meeting at the University of South Florida was the first of a three-stop “Spotlight Transparency Tour” intended to focus on how Florida tax dollars support state hospitals and what results are provided. Burkhart and Kristopher Hoce, president and chief operating officer at Morton Plant Hospital in Clearwater, were invited to speak.

“The Obama administration’s decision to end the Low income Pool program left our state with major decisions to make about how to support hospitals that are financially dependent on these federal funds,” Scott said in a statement on the Wednesday meeting. “We absolutely must ensure that taxpayer money going to hospitals has a high return on investment for the people of Florida. The more information the commission gathers from hospitals about their outcomes for patients, the better we can target state taxpayer money to get the highest quality from the hospitals their tax dollars support.”

Tampa General and Morton Plant provided patient data to the panel, such as their potentially preventable readmission rate (6.14 percent for Tampa General and 5.25 percent for Morton Plant) and serious complications rate (0.98 for Morton Plant, 1.65 percent for Tampa General.)

The governor’s call last month for hospital data raised hackles in the health care community. Many state hospitals didn’t cooperate or essentially told the administration to look up the information from already submitted state records.

But Wednesday’s meeting was cordial. “We respect their objective,” said Hoce in an interview after the meeting. “We certainly applaud the initiatives they’re taking. Our approach is, how can we work together to fulfill your objective and help get our story told? That’s been our approach, and hopefully we did that today.”

Panelists and about 30 health care industry representatives and lobbyists also heard from Marty Makary, a surgeon at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore and author of “Unaccountable: What Hospitals Won’t Tell You And How Transparency Can Revolutionize Health Care.”

He said the two most significant circumstances in health care that consumers don’t factor in are doctor’s mistakes -- which kill an estimated 210,000 to 400,000 patients a year in U.S. hospitals, behind only cancer and heart disease -- and unnecessary medications, tests and procedures.

He told the audience of a survey asking whether a doctor would perform an unnecessary procedure purely for financial motive. While 52 percent of the public thought the doctor would, 23 percent of medical students said yes, and 73 percent of doctors said yes.

“People are hungry for honesty and transparency and metrics that we understand,” Makary said.

jstockfisch@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7834