Not all healthcare treatments are created equal, but you’d never know it by looking at the marketing of today’s wound care products.

The wound care marketplace in healthcare has exploded in importance as the number of Americans with diabetes continues to grow. According to a recent study published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, nearly one-half of Americans today live with diabetes or pre-diabetic conditions, which put them at risk for dangerous and difficult-to-heal wounds known as diabetic foot ulcers (DFUs).

ADVERTISEMENT

Left untreated, these wounds can lead to serious health issues. For years, these complex wounds often resulted in limb amputations because we lacked the tools to treat them. Today, a host of wound care products exist – some more scientifically intricate and rigorously manufactured and tested than others.

On the high end of the care spectrum are Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved, bioactive wound-healing products made from living cells. These living cell-based therapies have proven remarkably effective at closing previously non-healing chronic wounds, reducing the risk of amputation as well as the patient trauma, health complications and financial consequences that come with losing a limb.

At the other end of the wound care product spectrum are allograft products – manufactured by a rapidly growing number of companies entering the market – that use less expensive and less sophisticated technology. While these products have their place on the chronic wound care spectrum as a first line of defense, they are not FDA approved for wound healing indications and often have little or no rigorous clinical data to back up their wound-healing claims.

Although the safety and efficacy of most allograft products have never been reviewed by the FDA, their distributors claim that they are equivalent or sometimes superior to FDA-approved, bioactive wound-healing products. With the promise of equivalent outcomes at a lower cost, some clinicians use these products for the most hard-to-heal chronic wounds, not knowing that the product’s wound-healing claims have never been proven by the FDA.

This is a gamble that patients simply cannot afford.

How is it possible that these untested products have been able to flood the market so easily – bypassing years of careful research, hundreds of millions of dollars in investment, and regulatory authorizations necessary to be legally marketed?

The answer lies in a longstanding legal and regulatory process that permits companies to self-designate their products as either human cell and tissue products (“HCT/Ps”) that require FDA premarket approval or those that do not (referred to as “Section 361 HCT/Ps”). By self-designating “Section 361” status for products that do not, in fact, qualify as such, allograft distributors have gained an unfair competitive advantage over companies that have made substantial investments in obtaining FDA approvals.

Section 361 HCT/Ps have proven neither safety nor efficacy in healing chronic wounds. Equally troubling, there is no formal adverse event reporting requirement that would capture negative outcomes other than infection.

It simply does not make sense, and is certainly not in our patients’ best interests.

As a physician who has spent more than a decade treating patients suffering from complex diabetic wounds, I am deeply concerned. My patients have no time to lose; they face the very real risk of infection and amputation without timely and effective treatments. When unproven or clinically inferior products are used, patients lose healing time, infection can worsen, and the risk of amputation becomes greater.

I have a responsibility to protect these vulnerable patients and make sure they are provided the most appropriate, safe, efficacious product to treat their condition. But our government has a big responsibility as well. Congress has the opportunity – and the responsibility – to address these safety concerns in its 21st Century Cures legislation. Specifically, they should institute a notification process requiring manufacturers to prove their products meet existing regulatory requirements for Section 361 HCT/Ps, authorize FDA to crack down on Section 361 HCT/P products that misbrand themselves, and expand FDA's adverse event reporting requirements for Section 361 HCT/Ps.

FDA also has the opportunity to close the regulatory loopholes by finalizing industry guidance that will clarify what qualifies as a true Section 361 HCT/P.

While it is easy to get lost in the minutiae of FDA regulations, there is only one question policymakers should consider: Will this policy ensure patients receive the most clinically appropriate care? When it comes to chronic wound care, the answer is a resounding “yes.”

Carpenter, MD, FAPWCA, CWSP, is the chief executive officer of MedCentris.