Buy Photo Tina Bundtrock, a certified application counselor at the City County Health Department, discusses the Affordable Care Act in her office Tuesday. (Photo: TRIBUNE PHOTO/RION SANDERS )Buy Photo

Montana has put a dent in the number of its residents who lack health insurance following the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, but it still lags the rest of the nation.

A June study by the Kaiser Family Foundation health care information organization puts the Treasure State in 34th place for health coverage.

This is despite the 30,018 people an analysis by the state Commissioner of Securities and Insurance counts as now covered who didn’t have insurance before ACA coverage first became available Jan. 1.

Those newly covered individuals reduced the previous number of uninsured, estimated at 195,000, by 15.4 percent. That dropped the percentage of uninsured in Montana from about 20 percent to 16.9 percent, according to CSI’s analysis.

A large majority of the newly insured found coverage through the Marketplace, with smaller numbers receiving Medicaid or finding policies through the private insurance sector, CSI estimated.

Kaiser puts Montana’s uninsured post ACA-implementation level at 17.6.

Tina Bundtrock said she worked with about 1,600 people on how to access ACA during the Oct. 1 to March 31 open enrollment and got 836 people signed up.

Since then, the certified application counselor has been working with about 10 people a month interested in enrolling with ACA, in her office at Cascade City-County Health Department.

Special enrollment period

That’s through a little-known feature of the health-insurance law called a Special Enrollment Period that allows people to sign up anytime in the Health Insurance Marketplace with certain qualifying life events.

Of course a major factor is having lost health coverage within the last 60 days, or expecting to lose it within 60 days, but not voluntarily ending coverage.

Or within the last 60 days:

• Lost coverage due to divorce.

• Policy or plan year ended for policy you bought yourself.

• COBRA coverage expired.

• Turned 26 and aged off a parent’s health plan.

• Lost eligibility for Medicaid or CHIP.

• Got married

• Had a baby, adopted a child or had a child placed with you for foster care.

• Got divorced and lost health insurance.

• Death of household policyholder.

Other special circumstances:

• Moved outside health plan’s coverage area.

• Had a change in income.

• Gained citizenship or lawful presence in the U.S.

• Released from incarceration (prison or detention).

Members of federally recognized tribes, or Alaska Native corporation shareholders can sign up throughout the year.

Rhiannon Simon, who worked as an ACA navigator at Planned Parenthood in Great Falls during the term of a grant that ended Aug. 15, said that, outside the established sign-up period, “enrollment requires more guidance. A lot of people are not aware” of the special enrollment period.

Amanda Roccabruna Eby, CSI project administrator said the agency isn’t doing proactive outreach to make people aware of special-enrollment opportunities. However, the agency provides updated ACA information at its website montanahealthanswers.com.

‘People are confused’

“We’re always trying be a resource for consumers,” she said. “A lot of education continues to happen for folks.” She said consumers also may call CSI at 800-332-6148 to connect with someone who can provide information on ACA.

One of the biggest misconceptions she finds is that “some people are confused, but (ACA) is insurance,” Simon said. “It’s not a ‘public option’ and it’s not Medicaid.”

During the legislative process leading to the passage of the ACA, public option was a concept that would have created a government-run health-insurance agency that would compete with private insurance companies. Medicaid is the joint state-federal health coverage for low-income people.

While ACA in general “is not meant to encourage people to leave their jobs” knowing they could still get some coverage, it could, among other things, enable middle-aged workers who want to stop working one — or a few — years short of Medicare eligibility to “now be better-prepared to retire and figure out if they want to accept COBRA,” the system that enables them to continue their employers’ coverage for up to 18 months by paying the full premium, Simon said.

Fitzgerald Clark, lead educator at Planned Parenthood in Billings, said there are “still a lot of misunderstandings,” about ACA. “There are a lot of different groups and people who did not support the law and spread a lot of misinformation about what it was and how it could help people.”

He said “a couple of big misunderstandings are that the government is providing insurance and taking over” the health care system.

In reality, “it’s utilization of private market subsidies” in order to enable people to better afford insurance.” The law also established rules so “insurance companies could not deny coverage for pre-existing conditions or drop people if they became sick.”

A lot of people didn’t understand they could get subsidies to help pay for their premiums if they qualified.

Basing premiums

He said the coverages and premiums they see when they apply through the website are based on income and life circumstance. “Tax credits are applied automatically,” he said, and some people may qualify for assistance in paying for out-of-pocket costs, such as deductibles and co-pays.

The concept is based on Advanced Premium Tax Credits, based on what’s reported on the applicant’s income-tax return. If the premium for a certain policy is “normally $500 a month, (tax credit) could lower the cost out of pocket (for premium) to maybe $300.”

Rates are based on what enrollees estimate their income will be in the application.

The ACA assisters are unanimous in emphasizing that applicants should be very careful when estimating their income because if they end up reporting much more income on their next tax return they could owe a much bigger tax payment. That’s because, as a tax credit, the ACA subsidies are directly related to the bottom line on their tax return.

Conversely applicants whose incomes drop lower than what they estimated would pay less on their return — or get a bigger refund — on their tax returns. “I try to break it down to my folks to avoid sticker shock,” Bundtrock said.

For the same reasons, the assisters advise reporting, on the Marketplace website or by phone, significant changes in income as they occur during the year.

Simon said ACA eligibility is based solely on income. Assets are not considered when qualifying for subsidies in the Marketplace. Medicaid eligibility does consider financial resources other than income, though.

Federal Marketplace

The ACA Marketplace in Montana is the federal Health Insurance Marketplace at healthcare.gov

Three organizations in Montana received grants to provide navigators for the 2014 enrollment period and continue assistance through the summer:

• Montana Health Network.

• Montana Primary Care Association Inc.

• Planned Parenthood of Montana Inc.

There are three categories of people trained to help with ACA:

• Navigators are public advisers who help individuals and small employers compare the health insurance options in the new Marketplace website. Navigators have taken federal and state training. They have been fingerprinted and have undergone a Montana background check.

• Certified Application Counselors are health care provider staff who have been trained to help people understand, apply for and enroll in insurance coverage through the Marketplace.

• Certified Exchange Producers are registered Montana Insurance Agents who have taken special training to understand the Marketplace.

In addition to their additional training, navigators perform outreach duties, providing educational opportunities to the public to help people understand the law. Navigators also can be expected to have a strong understanding of Medicaid, for which some clients may qualify, and the general health-insurance market in their states.

There are 27 navigators in Montana, including two in Great Falls, and 120 CACs, including nine in Great Falls.

Clark said “we had a (Department of Health and Human Services) grant to provide navigation services” from Aug. 15, 2013, to Aug. 14, 2014.

The gap is coming because signup for 2014 started in October, while signup for 2015 runs Nov. 15 until Feb. 15. The navigator grants are “to provide education and assistance to consumers and educate them to navigate the site and enroll in the Marketplace for insurance.” The deadline to apply for navigator grants was in July.

Clark said “all three 2013 recipients resubmitted. … There may be others.” Applicants are supposed to be notified Sept. 8.

Bundtrock is able to continue offering assistance because her CAC position at the Cascade City-County Health Department is funded by additional money added to the agency’s base grant from the Health Resources and Services Administration that helps support the center’s operation.

The grant requires CCHD to “keep pulse on outreach and enrollment” in ACA.

The CAC function “originally was one-time-funded and with the success we’ve had,” she said the Affordable Care counseling program should “stay in place and continue.”

CSI trains, certifies and regulates navigators and CACs, Roccabruna Eby said, and “we’re going to work with navigator organizations to make sure they have all the resources in place to help consumers get enrolled.”

Many still uninsured

The Kaiser Family Foundation estimates 178,000 people are uninsured in Montana. Of those:

• 43,000 are ineligible for assistance. Includes those whose income is too high to be eligible for tax credits, who have affordable employer coverage available, or who are undocumented immigrants.

• 67,000 tax-credit eligible. Incomes 100 percent to 400 percent of the poverty level who are eligible to buy coverage on Marketplace and do not have other affordable coverage available.

• 40,000 fall in the coverage gap with no financial assistance — adults not eligible for Medicaid who do not qualify Marketplace subsidies.

• 28,000 are eligible for Medicaid or CHIP, but are not now enrolled.

Medicaid gap

In Montana, a family of four — two adults and two children — would be covered by Medicaid or the Children’s Health Insurance Program with a family income of $0 to $62,643. Above that higher income, they then receive a tax credit for coverage in the marketplace up to a family income of $94,200.

The parents also would qualify for Medicaid up to a family income of $12,169, and would receive the tax credit for family income of $23,550 to 94,200. But the parents fall in the no-benefit Medicaid gap between $12,169 and $23,550 annual incomes.

They can still enroll

An analysis of Census data by Enroll America projects that almost 10,000 people can enroll in ACA under the Special Enrollment Period allowed for certain circumstances.

The group also estimates the largest number of Montanans, 35,000 to 100,000 people, aged 0-64. resides in Northwestern Montana. Northcentral Montana, the Billings area and the Missoula area are in the second tier with each region numbering 25,000 to 35,000. The rest of the state, comprising counties around Helena, counties around Bozeman and all of Eastern Montana outside Yellowstone County, number 15,000 to 25,000 in each of the three areas.

So what does it cost?

In the Marketplace, three companies provide plans for Montanans.

• Montana Health Cooperative.

• Blue Cross Blue Shield of Montana.

• PacificSource Health Plans.

Depending upon age and income, about two or three dozen plans may be available. Some examples:

A young couple, 27 and 25, with an annual income of $20,000, could find a Bronze policy with a deductible as low as $3,950 per year per person and out of pocket maximum of $6,350 per person at no cost.

The Platinum plan for that young couple has a $350 deductible and out-of-pocket maximum of $1,200 for $126 per month.

A couple just short of qualifying for Medicare, ages 64 and 62, with a $20,000 income can get the same plans for no cost and $299 per month, respectively.

Households with higher incomes pay progressively higher prices and a two-person household with income above $62,040 loses all subsidies.

The younger couple would pay $319 a month for the Bronze plan and $495 for the Platinum plan in the Marketplace, if they made too much to qualify for a subsidy.

The older couple’s premiums would be $911 and $1,417, respectively.

Rates vary by company and coverage terms and may include different amounts of co-payment and prescription coverage, as well as different networks. Some networks may only cover certain providers in the subscriber’s region; some may cover many providers, nationwide. Smokers pay higher premiums.

Jennifer McKee, CSI communications director, said Montana rates on the exchange are going up an average of 1.35 percent for 2015 coverage, significantly below national cost increases. In a Wednesday news release, she stated Montana “health insurance rate hikes, for the five years prior to 2014 (increased) 13 percent to 18 percent in the individual market and 8.4 percent to 15.3 percent in the small group market.”

Read or Share this story: http://www.greatfallstribune.com/story/news/local/2014/08/27/montana-uninsured-rate-still-high/14711953/