Democrats in Congress have introduced legislation that would amend federal law to clarify that while religious freedom is critical to civil life, it cannot be used to infringe the civil rights of others.

When the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) was passed and signed into law in 1993, the aim was to ensure ”that interests in religious freedom are protected.” While this federal legislation now has a complicated relationship with the courts, it was only intended to be a simple restatement of basic religious freedoms already guaranteed under the Constitution.

However, more recently, state level RFRAs have taken on a disturbing new twist. States like Indiana, Arkansas and Mississippi have successively broadened their RFRAs to the point that they now could allow discrimination against protected groups, including women and LGBT people.

In addition, the Supreme Court of the United States ruled in the 2014 Hobby Lobby case that the federal RFRA could be used, enabling employers to refuse to provide birth control coverage otherwise guaranteed by federal law.

These issues have sparked national protest and even international condemnation. Now, Democratic Representatives Joe Kennedy (Mass.) and Bobby Scott (Va.) have authored a bill to try to remedy the situation.

As introduced in the House, the Do No Harm Act would amend the RFRA to “protect civil rights and otherwise prevent meaningful harm to third parties, and for other purposes.”

The text of the bill makes clear that the RFRA can only be invoked in cases where the federal government itself is involved. Furthermore, the legislation states that the RFRA cannot be used as an “exemption that permits discrimination against other persons, including persons who do not belong to the religion or adhere to the other beliefs of those to whom the exemption is given.”

Essentially, this legislation would emphasize that the RFRA is not permission to discriminate against LGBT people, women or other groups. Nor does the RFRA grant broad exemptions to avoid nondiscrimination legislation on the basis of so-called “religious objections.”

Legal groups like the ACLU are backing this legislation as a necessary limit to the scope of the RFRA.

“Religious freedom gives us the right to our beliefs, but not to harm others,” Louise Melling, deputy legal director of the ACLU explained. “The Do No Harm Act would place much needed limitations on RFRA so that it can be used as a shield for religious exercise but not as a sword. With the Do No Harm Act, RFRA could no longer be invoked to justify discrimination, denial of health care, or other harms. We at the ACLU are proud to stand in support of this legislation.”

While the initial effect of this legislation would be subtle, its implications could be very important.

States that have enacted their own RFRAs have cited the federal act and claimed that they are only enshrining in state law what has been protected by federal law.

In many recent cases, such bills have used slightly different language than the federal RFRA. Analysts say these minor modifications have opened up the possibility of broader discrimination. For example, RFRAs are being used as justification to refuse to recognize and provide services for same-gender marriages, despite civil rights laws and the Supreme Court asserting that LGBT people deserve the same rights and dignity as straight couples.

While the Do No Harm Act would not repeal those state level bills, it would show how grossly exaggerated the religious exemptions being claimed have become — and make clear that they do not have a basis in federal law.

Uncertainty over the RFRA has had significant consequences for the courts, too. This month the Supreme Court found itself in a 4-4 deadlock over a case known as Zubik v. Burwell. The case centers on the contraception mandate in the Affordable Care Act, as several religious parties argue that providing contraception as part of their insurance violates their religious beliefs.

As Lambda Legal argues in its support for the Do No Harm Act, this case should have been a simple one for the Supreme Court, especially because a number of appeals courts had already ruled against the religious right to refuse the contraception mandate.

However, the Supreme Court punted the case back to the lower courts and, thus, refused to take up the central religious exemptions question. Congress needs to clarify the law, and the Do No Harm Act would do so in a way that keeps with the original intent behind the RFRA.

Unfortunately, it’s widely expected that the Republican-controlled Congress will do nothing with this legislation. Indeed, Republicans in the House have recently passed an amendment to a federal spending bill which would undermine President Obama’s executive order protecting LGBT rights for businesses that contract with the government.

Nevertheless, the Do No Harm Act is a necessary step in scaling back the rampant misuse of religion as a weapon against women and minority groups.

Photo credit: Thinkstock.