SALT LAKE CITY, Utah- (ABC 4 Utah) – Expect to pay more for healthcare in 2015, that's the word from the Utah Insurance Department.



Utah consumers can expect premiums to go up 5.7% in the individual market and 2.9% in the small business market.



"They tend to follow increases in healthcare costs and so they will then in turn have an increase their insurance premiums," said Assistant Insurance Commissioner, Tanji Northrup.



She gave us a peak at the projections while briefing the Health Reform Task Force on Capitol Hill.



Even though we will be paying more out of pocket in Utah, it's less than the national average of 7%.



Also, we are coming off a stretch of double digit annual increases.



"Overall it's good news. Low, single digit increases and I think that's great for Utahns," said Representative Jim Dunnigan, (R) Taylorsville.



That trend may not last long.



The insurance department warns of a change in the near future when some of the subsidies expire for the individual market.



"There won't be any artificial subsidies for the individual market for 2017 forward and so we do expect to see a higher increase in those premiums at that time," said Northrup.



Dunnigan, who co-chairs the task force, says when that happens premiums will have to go up to cover about $60,000,000.



He says in the long run there is nothing affordable about it.



"The Affordable Care Act is pulling about $900,000,000 a year out of Utah in taxes and fees. We're getting some of that back in subsides and stuff. It's a huge array of taxes built into it," said Dunnigan.



This year the federal government chose to auto renew all the policies on the individual market.



You may receive a letter explaining that, but the insurance department says that's not wise.



They suggest bypassing auto renew and shopping your plan against others in the market.



You may find a better and even cheaper plan that way.



Open enrollment begins November 15, 2014.





Copyright 2016 Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.