Buy Photo Harvest Hope Food Bank, with 80,000 square feet of storage space, is one way this community meets the needs of the poor. Recent data from the U.S. Census Bureau reveal that 35 percent of South Carolinians live in high-poverty areas. (Photo: MYKAL McELDOWNEY, Staff)Buy Photo

South Carolina has had one of the largest increases in the percentage of people living in high-poverty areas, according to a report just released by the United States Census Bureau. Only five states had a greater change in the percentage of people living in such areas. The report is cause for concern in a state that struggles with poverty, but often resists addressing the problem head on despite the fact that the burdens of poverty weigh on a significant number of residents.

In 2010, 35.2 percent of state residents, or 1.58 million people, lived in census tracts that are considered to be poverty areas. In 2000, that percentage was 20.8 percent. A census tract in which 20 percent of residents are below the federal poverty line is considered to be a poverty area. Nationally, 25.7 percent of people live in poor neighborhoods. Although only a range was given on the county level, the report showed that the percentage of Greenville County residents living in poor areas is between 25 percent and 49.9 percent, in line with the state average, if only roughly.

An obvious reason for the dramatic increase is that the Great Recession has put many families in a financial bind. As unemployment rates increased and people went without work or worked lower paying jobs, families struggled financially and relocated to poorer areas. South Carolina saw evidence of these effects as demands for services from food banks and food pantries increased in the years immediately following the recession.

A recent report in the newspaper also suggested those agencies still are feeling a pinch and need more help from the community. At a recent news conference urging people to help it meet food needs during the summer when poor children are not in school, Harvest Hope Food Bank said that it has seen a 47 percent drop in the number of donors to its Greenville branch. That makes it difficult for the organization, which continues to see heavy demand, to meet residents’ needs.

Recent Greenville News reports on homelessness in the Upstate also reveal evidence of the area’s struggles with poverty.

Beth Lindsay Templeton, who operates a poverty awareness program in the city, suggested the Great Recession could be to blame, and also suggested that people moving into the area, perhaps immigrants, could cause the percentage of people in poor areas to increase. That certainly could explain the increased concentration of poverty.

It is important information because, as the report says, problems associated with living in high-poverty areas include high crime rates, poor housing conditions and fewer job opportunities. Those problems are made worse when poor families are clustered together, and that puts a greater burden on community resources.

While all this is going on, the state stubbornly refuses to take actions that can help improve the safety net for the poor in South Carolina. The most obvious example of the latter has been South Carolina’s refusal to opt in to a Medicaid expansion that would have improved access to health care for the state’s poorest residents.

The solutions to poverty are not simple. The state seems to be taking strides forward with a recent string of jobs announcements. However, South Carolina needs to ensure its residents are trained to take the jobs that are coming here. That means helping students graduate from high school on time and seeing that they are offered training that is tailored to the needs of employers. The state also needs to ensure that employers that come here pay sustainable wages that can help families escape poverty.

Second, residents who have more resources need to continue to reach out to the community. There is no shortage of generosity in the Upstate. That is shown time and again when food banks say they need help, during annual charitable outreaches such as the United Way campaign, and in the response that people had to The Greenville News’ recent reporting on homelessness. That generosity can go a long way toward easing the burden on the region’s poorest residents.

Finally, state lawmakers need to govern in a way the demonstrates compassion for those who are poor, many through no fault of their own. It should start with opting in to the federal Affordable Care Act’s expansion of Medicaid. It is obvious that many South Carolinians still are facing financial struggles, ensuring they have easy access to adequate health care can at least alleviate one burden.

This is just one set of data, but it presents a troubling picture. It is a warning that South Carolinians need to be vigilant about addressing the impact of poverty. That vigilance demands that reports like this are taken seriously and then are used to help refocus our efforts to meet these needs in our communities.

Read or Share this story: http://grnol.co/1m9INk3