AFP Urges Christie to Reverse Course on Medicaid Expansion

Governor must act to spare NJ families from substandard care, exploding costs

Trenton, N.J – Americans for Prosperity, the state’s leading advocate for health care freedom, is calling on Gov. Chris Christie to stop Medicaid expansion in order to spare New Jersey families from substandard care and avoid exploding costs which will exacerbate the state’s budgetary woes.

Gov. Christie, who opted to include the expansion “on budget” three years ago, thus making it an annual budget decision, has an opportunity to reverse the decision by removing it from the FY 2017 budget. The governor will unveil his budget proposal during an address before a joint session of the Legislature scheduled for next Tuesday, February 16.

“If we really care about delivering higher quality care to New Jersey families, adding thousands to the Medicaid rolls and effectively creating two classes of healthcare is not the answer,” stated AFP state director Erica Jedynak.

“It’s important to remember that the ObamaCare Medicaid expansion means adding thousands of able-bodied, childless, working-age adults to the rolls. This only further strains the system, making it more difficult for the elderly and those in poverty to receive care, especially in a state like New Jersey where some sixty-percent of doctors are refusing new Medicaid patients.”

“Health outcomes for Medicaid recipients are already poor. Alarmingly, research has shown that surgical patients on Medicaid are more likely to die than the uninsured and privately insured, while cancer patients on Medicaid are actually 2-3 times more likely to lose their fight than other patients,” pointed out Jedynak.

“By adding to the Medicaid rolls, we are only making an acceptable situation even worse instead of undertaking the necessary reforms which will ensure that the least fortunate among us have access to the kind of health care they deserve.”

Americans for Prosperity is also warning that the state is not in a position to absorb the rising costs of Medicaid expansion. According to The Heritage Foundation, Medicaid expansion costs will begin to rise rapidly in FY 2017, with the total cost to New Jersey anticipated to be at least $1.2 billion total through Fiscal Year 2022. However, since the expansion took effect, New Jersey has added over 400,000 to the Medicaid rolls, well in excess of the 234,000 estimated by a Rutgers study. Other states which have underestimated the number of new enrollees have seen the cost of expansion double or even triple the amount anticipated.

“If expansion is allowed to continue, New Jersey’s budget will become even more strapped for cash than it already is. This will mean less money for pensions and transportation, and crowding out funding for other essential services,” explained Jedynak. “It’s imperative for the governor to reverse his decision on expanding Medicaid now before further damage is done.”

Americans for Prosperity, which has successfully blocked Medicaid expansion in states including Florida, Utah, Oklahoma and Wisconsin, is urging citizens to sign an online petition letter urging the governor to reverse course and keep Medicaid expansion out of the budget for next year.

The free-market group also continues to advocate for reforms, such as block granting Medicaid dollars to the states in order to save taxpayer dollars and allow states to find ways to innovate and deliver higher quality care to the least fortunate.

Americans for Prosperity welcomes media inquiries. Please direct any requests to Communications Director Mike Proto at 201-400-3666 or mproto@afphq.org.

Americans for Prosperity (AFP) is a nationwide organization of citizen-leaders committed to advancing every individual’s right to economic freedom and opportunity. AFP believes reducing the size and intrusiveness of government is the best way to promote individual productivity and prosperity for all Americans. For more information, visit www.americansforprosperity.org state and taxpayers

###