Amari Furqan, 3, pushed out a screen window in his family’s split-level, sand-colored public housing home Saturday morning before waddling off in the direction of a nearby playground, family said.

From there, he slipped through a gap in a chain-link fence surrounding the swings, monkey bars and slides and headed towards the western bank of the South Platte River. Amari walked across a bike path and off a rocky cliff before falling into the water below. He was found there by emergency responders, lying face down in the river.

“He just took off,” Angelina Vallejos, a 25-year-old cousin of the toddler, said Sunday. “He wanted to play.”

Family and friends of the young boy gathered Sunday afternoon on the river’s edge around a makeshift memorial. Planted in the mud at the base of a small tree — in the shadows of Interstate 25 and downtown Denver — were tiny toy cars, stuffed animals and countless candles.

Dozens of children climbed on the rocks above where Amari was found, their happy screams muted by the hush of the nearby interstate.

Amari’s parents called police Saturday about 11:20 a.m. to report the boy missing from his home in the area of West 9th Avenue and Alcott Way. He was found unresponsive and rushed to the hospital where he was pronounced dead.

Police said they are not assuming the family did anything wrong, though they are investigating the incident.

Neighbors told The Denver Post hours after Amari’s death that they saw a boy in diapers wandering the area just before the 911 call was made. One man said that a gate from the playground the river had been left open by crews working on the Platte River Trail.

Family said Amari was an outgoing youngster whose smile was contagious and lit up a room. The boy was one of four children living in the family’s Denver Housing Authority apartment.

The family posted a message on the door of their home asking for privacy Sunday and thanking the community for their “prayers and good thoughts.”

“She’s just really hurt right now,” Vallejos said of the boy’s mother. “She’s in shock right now. She just doesn’t know what to do.”

Jesse Paul: 303-954-1733, jpaul@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jesseapaul