Dylan Wood, 10, hauls luggage up the walkway to his new home on the Roseburg Veterans Affairs Medical Center campus in Roseburg, Ore. Wood, his parents and his four siblings moved into one of the housing project's 54 units after being homeless for six months. Nicholas Johnson / The News-Review / AP

For the fourth year running, the number of former U.S. servicemen and women living on the street this Veterans Day is down. Nonetheless, tens of thousands of Americans who served in the Armed Forces will be sleeping rough tonight, prompting homelessness activists to urge for “aggressive” measures to defeat the persistent scourge.

Figures from the Department of Housing and Urban Development show a 33 percent drop in 2010 and 2014, down from 74,770 at the turn of the decade to 49,933 in January this year.

The decline — due in part to an uptick in spending on housing programs — has raised hope that a problem long associated with those leaving active service could one day be all-but eliminated.

Bringing the figure down to zero is unrealistic, but making homelessness among veterans “rare, brief and non-recurring” by the end of 2015 is a reachable goal, according to said Laura Zeilinger, the executive director of the United States Interagency Council on Homelessness (USICH).

“I think it’s within reach. It’s going to take a lot of intense focus and aggressive and extraordinary efforts, but we believe that it’s achievable.”

Year-on-year drops in the rate of homelessness among veterans have occurred since 2010, and the overall drop is outpacing that of the wider homeless population.

The drop is thought to be largely down to the Opening Doors initiative, which President Barack Obama announced four years ago in a bid to eliminate chronic and veteran homelessness and decrease risks of homelessness by 2015.

Since 2011, 66 communities across the country have already decreased veteran homelessness by more than 50 percent, according to the National Alliance to End Homelessness based on data submitted yearly to HUD by communities across the country.

The decrease in homelessness has also followed an increase in spending in housing programs. Veterans Administration (VA) efforts in the area have increased home-buying by 25 percent from 2010 to 2014 in order to meet goals set by the Opening Doors initiative.