Brentford, SD

Most South Dakota farmers will probably tell you their career preparation involved a lot of working side by side with their parents. That's true of a 30-year-old farmer in Spink County, but time in New York City also had a big impact on the way Scott Anderson runs his operation.

Anderson wants that experience to impact the way other farmers operate as well.

"You've got young guys like me coming in with under 10 years of experience and under 10 years of management trying to figure out how to do this," Anderson said.

Anderson grew up in agriculture but spent time in New York City after college. He interned on Wall Street but then the recession hit. His opportunity didn't turn into a full-time job. Anderson eventually moved back to South Dakota to join the family farm.

"When I moved back my dad's like, 'well, I want to know what every bushel of corn costs to produce, so I started building spreadsheets," Anderson said.

That is what he did while interning on Wall Street. The spreadsheet kept growing until it reached 17 pages. Anderson was able to enter detailed expense information for each field and use that information to determine which fields were making money and which weren't.

"The end goal is to manage your farm like Warren Buffet manages his portfolio of investments to make sure that each field is producing for you as a farmer," Anderson said.

The information Anderson gathered led to his family moving some fields from production because they weren't economical. The information also helped determine what price, based on hard data, the farm would need to get when selling grain.

He'd share the spreadsheet with others, but 17 pages filled with formulas and algorithms can be overwhelming, considering plenty of people don't even know what an algorithm is.

"It was really complicated, that spreadsheet so I knew I had to take that spreadsheet and condense it into a usable program that any farmer could use, even if he's not comfortable working with a computer," Anderson said.

Anderson went to a competition at the University of Minnesota and presented his idea. It was one of the finalists chosen in the competition so he was able to build a team and turn his spreadsheet into a program called CashCowFarmer.

The program launched in December, had a slow start its first few weeks but is starting to gain more attention. It has 25 customers signed up in the Dakotas and Minnesota. Anderson is fielding questions about it from other states and Canada.

"Long-term plan - we intend to partner with more advisors, people who help the farmer pick prices, understand what's going on in the commodity markets," Anderson said.

The program costs anywhere from $750 to $1,500 per year, Anderson said. The company recently hired its first sales and service representative. The program is simple enough, Anderson says, that he can quickly train and expand staff if orders pick up rapidly.

Anderson looks forward to moving beyond the product's beginning stages.

"The challenge for me is I've got a large farming operation that I manage as well,” Anderson said. “I've got a great team on the farm right now that's helped me focus more on CashCow stuff, but we all look to the day where we wear the main hat of being the CEO rather than 10 hats of being the marketing, the sales, the service, the tech guy, customer support - all those things."

So far the company's customer base is a mix of older and younger farmers. Regardless of their ages, all farmers need to decide how much of their grain to sell, when and at what price. Anderson hopes more look to CashCowFarmer to help make those decisions and others.

Featured Stories

Eye on KELOLAND {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.