Topics: aol_on, Colorado Shooting, Editor's Picks, Planned Parenthood, Religious Right, right wing, Life News, News

“The pro-life movement is praying for the safety of all involved,” said the Rev. Pat Mahoney of the Christian Defense Coalition as the violence at the Planned Parenthood Clinic in Colorado Springs unfolded on Friday. “And as a movement we have always unequivocally condemned all forms of violence at abortion clinics.”

Mahoney is not quite accurate when he claims the pro-life movement, which is fueled primarily by religious activists, has always condemned violence, since some extremists who still work for anti-choice groups have not only condoned violence but practiced it. But even leaving aside such unpleasant details, another unsettling truth lingers for religious conservatives opposing abortion rights: the chain of causation between the Christian right and antiabortion violence, even if unintended, is undeniable.

As we’ll see, the historical record demonstrates that violence directed at abortion providers correlates strongly not to the legalization of abortion, but to the later rise of religious antiabortion activism. This fact, when considered together with the harsh rhetoric and tactics of the religious right’s abortion-related activism, leaves little doubt about the causal relationship.

The Supreme Court’s Roe v. Wade ruling, which legalized abortion across the country, understandably gets much attention in abortion discussions, but by the time Roe was decided in 1973 abortion was already legal in 17 states. Ironically, it was Ronald Reagan, as governor of California, who signed a law loosening abortion restrictions in that state in 1967, and many other states joined the trend around the same time.

There were very few reports of even minor incidents of violence as abortion laws were liberalized in the ’60s and early ’70s, because abortion was not a major controversy. It wasn’t until the mobilization of the Christian right in the late ’70s that violence started becoming a fact of life for doctors and clinics, as abortion suddenly became a highly charged moral, political and religious issue.

The timeline shows that the rise of antiabortion violence correlates almost exactly with the rise of the modern religious right. The formation of the so-called Moral Majority in the late ’70s is often cited as the launching point of the modern religious right, and it’s noteworthy that the group’s leader, Jerry Falwell, used passionate rhetoric and dark imagery in discussing abortion, casting it as horrific, a form of mass murder, a product of true evil. Falwell portrayed abortion, and by implication anyone connected with it, as grotesque and inhumane, using detailed descriptions of mutilated body parts in his pitch to followers.

Americans have grown accustomed to sensationalism from abortion opponents, but such alarmist language was generally absent from earlier public discussions of the topic. After signing the above-mentioned California abortion bill, for example, Reagan said abortion was “a subject I’d never given much thought to.” Nor did many other politicians, on the left or right. The word “abortion” does not appear in any GOP national platform until 1976, and even then only to say that the party was divided on the issue. By 1980 the influence of the newly formed Moral Majority was apparent, with the GOP platform taking a stance supporting a constitutional amendment banning abortion.