A jury’s $12 million verdict in favor of a boy severely injured by OHSU surgeons should stand despite the hospital's arguments to reduce the award to a $3 million liability cap established by state law, a Multnomah County Circuit judge ruled Friday.

Judge Jerry Hodson said capping the award at a level so far below what the jury determined to be appropriate would be “constitutionally inadequate.”

But the story is far from over for the family of Tyson Horton, now 4, who nearly died and was forced to have an emergency liver transplant after OHSU surgeons cut the wrong blood vessels in a 2009 operation. Hodson acknowledged he is just “a way station” for the case as it likely heads to the Oregon Supreme Court over the legality of the Oregon Tort Claims Act limits for OHSU and other public bodies.

Hodson’s decision came immediately after opposing lawyers offered arguments that examined past Oregon Supreme Court decisions.

Many of the arguments focused on what legal claims people could have pursued before the adoption of the Oregon Constitution in 1857. The Oregon Supreme Court has long leaned on what was recognized under common law -- legal precedent when the state Constitution was established -- in determining the Legislature's latitude to cap damages or modify claims.

OHSU lawyers argued that common law would not have allowed the negligence claim against Harrison, the surgeon, because government employees and officials were granted immunity for “discretionary acts,” including actions that “require any exercise of judgment.”

Maureen Leonard, arguing for the Hortons, disputed the idea that Harrison’s admitted negligence – cutting vessels to the wrong side of the liver – could be considered a discretionary act. Discretion, she said, suggests doctors were analyzing the situation and weighing choices in light of a desired outcome.

That did not square with OHSU’s admission in court documents that “vessels were inadvertently transected,” she said.

Hodson agreed, saying, “He did not exercise discretion. He cut the wrong vessel inadvertently.”

OHSU also argued the award should be reduced because it included money for Horton’s future medical needs, which, attorney Roy Pulvers contended, would be covered under the Affordable Care Act. Pulvers brushed aside the family’s concerns over potential changes and uncertainties, saying “the fact is the law is the law.”

But Hodson turned aside OHSU’s arguments to reduce the award, finding that such a steep discount from the $12 million would fall short of the constitutional clause that entitles plaintiffs to a remedy for injuries suffered personally, to their property or to their reputation.

David Miller, an attorney for the Hortons, questioned why OHSU continues to fight the verdict, noting that the hospital’s $35 million malpractice insurance policy “is there to cover exactly this kind of occurrence.”

OHSU has paid the $3 million to the Hortons, but the family still faces another $2.6 million in bills to Stanford University’s Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital for the transplant, Miller said. The money also will not cover the lifetime of medication, monitoring and the potential transplant he may need in the future, Miller said.

In an emailed statement, OHSU said, "We deeply regret that a surgical error caused them harm." The hospital said it anticipates the case will go directly to the Oregon Supreme Court, and the hospital will await its decision.

The hospital reiterated an earlier statement that the Legislature chose the $3 million cap as "an appropriate balance between the need for public institutions like OHSU and its practitioners to provide public services within the confines of limited budgets, while at the same time, ensuring that those who seek to obtain damages are treated fairly."

-- Helen Jung