Riders enjoy the downhill stretches of Carter Lake on Sunday as they pursue either the 37-mile route of 62-mile route of the McKee Classic Bike Tour. Around 1,020 riders participated on Sunday. ( Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

It's on a ride like the McKee Classic Bike Tour that residents of Northern Colorado can truly appreciate where they live.

At least, this is after they have struggled up the switchbacks of the south side of Carter Lake and are enjoying peanut butter and jelly sandwiches and sections of banana and oranges at the aid station while enjoying the view of the lake.

Riders seem to agree that the beauty and well-planned routes of the McKee Classic Bike Tour make for a good Sunday morning ride and a nice start to the summer biking season.

"This one is the most well-organized I've been to (of one-day tours)," said Mary Shortsleeve, from Lockbuie, near Brighton. Shortsleeve does a circuit of three to four rides for causes during the summer.

An estimated 1,100 riders participated in the four routes of the bike tour on Sunday, which started from McKee Medical Center.

The event raised $75,000 and had the support of over 200 volunteers. The event benefited the Heart Safe Community Initiative.

The 37-miler that took bicyclists up the steep grade of Carter Lake on the south side and down the other side to the north, and the 62-mile ride took many resolute riders toward Fort Collins and the Horsetooth Reservoir dams.

"It was easier than last year," said Merve Davies of Greeley about the steep Carter Lake climb. "I think it was because I knew what I was in for. I got to the top and thought, 'Huh. That wasn't as bad as I remember from last year.'"

Advertisement

This is Davies' second year doing the ride and he said it's fun and has a great meal at the end.

Dale Lehman has ridden in the McKee Classic over 10 years and likes it because of the free goodies and the support.

His brother Dan Lehman, and Dan's wife, Amy, of Longmont also come along "because Dale does it," Dan said with a grin.

"I think it's a beautiful route. I don't ride a lot so I feel really comfortable out there. I don't worry about traffic," Amy said.

A.J. Ball enjoys riding the Kaiser Permanente "Blender Bike" after a ride at the McKee Classic Bike Tour on Sunday. The bike blends fruit into a smoothie when someone pedals. (Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"It's been great," said Julie Haffner, executive director of the McKee Medical Center Foundation, at 10 a.m. Sunday. "Everybody's been really happy about the weather and they love the course. People are just so happy to have this as the first ride of the season."

Rachel and Scott Sundheim enjoyed the breakfast of cinnamon buckwheat pancakes, eggs, sausage, juice and yogurt after the 10-mile ride with their three children. The ride takes bicyclists on the recreation path around Boyd Lake. They started bicycling in the ride together around eight years ago when their youngest child was just a baby.

"The baby was in his car seat with the little pup tent-like trailer," Rachel said. Now their son and two daughters ride with them on the family ride.

"Next year we might graduate to the 30-mile one," Scott said, over the protestations of his children.

"They totally can do it," Rachel said.

Haffner said the bike tour next year is scheduled for May 15, 2016.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.