TOP STORIES

Affymetrix put off its vote on a takeover bid by Thermo Fisher Scientific after Origin Technologies upped its offer to $17 per share from the previously rejected $16.10. Thermo Fisher still is confident it will prevail — Bloomberg, Business Wire

The Supreme Court seemed divided during oral arguments Thursday in Zubik v. Burwell, a case that is challenging the contraception coverage mandate in the Affordable Care Act. Remember, there are only eight justices at the moment, and a 4-4 vote means the decisions of lower courts stand. In this case, however, other courts had differing rulings. — Modern Healthcare

LIFE SCIENCES

Billionaire Paul Allen has put $100 million into high-risk, high-reward research in biotech. — STAT

Bristol-Myers Squibb will acquire Padlock Therapeutics in a deal that could be worth as much as $600 million. — Business Wire

Respironics, the CPAP division of Philips, has settled a federal kickbacks case for $34.8 million. — Reuters

The FDA has sent a warning letter to Terumo about manufacturing and quality control of Destination Guiding vascular sheaths. — MassDevice

Corvus Pharmaceuticals raised $70.5 million in its IPO on Wednesday after lowering the offering price. — MarketWatch, FierceBiotech

Biotech research firm Quantirex has closed a $46 million Series D financing round. — Business Wire

PAYERS-PROVIDERS

Two Prime Healthcare hospitals in California have been hit by ransomware attacks. — Healthcare IT News

Physicians at Boston Children’s Hospital are testing a new method of repairing ACL tears. — The New York Times

Nemours Children’s Hospital in Orlando, Florida, is expanding its interventional radiology department, a big source of medical tourism dollars. — Orlando Business Journal

UNC Health Care is in exclusive negotiations to take over management of Lenoir Memorial Hospital in Kinston, North Carolina. — Triangle Business Journal

TECHNOLOGY

McKesson may be exiting the ambulatory EHR market, but it’s beefing up other health IT, now with a new line of disaster recovery services for hospitals. — Business Wire

Digital health startup MedAware Solutions has raised more than $2.2. million from various private investors. — St. Louis Business Journal

Stimwave, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, has gained FDA clearance to market a wireless, full-body peripheral nerve stimulator. — Business Wire

POLITICS

Ah, Congress. Our esteemed representatives on Capitol Hill went on spring break without voting on emergency funding for research and preparedness for the Zika virus. The reasons were partisan, natch. — STAT

Wait, Congress did do something: A bipartisan group in the House introduced a bill to protect the health of babies born to mothers hooked on heroin and other opiods. — Reuters

A House panel also heard from The Who lead singer Roger Daltrey, an advocate for teenage cancer treatments. Daltrey urged Congress to move the 21st Century Cures legislation forward. — STAT

Kaiser Permanente executive Donna Lynne has been nominated to be the next lieutenant governor of Colorado. — The Denver Post

A LITTLE BIT EXTRA

Putting this here for the headline alone: “Could Germ From Cat Poop Trigger Rage Disorder in People?” — Drugs.com

Photo: Flickr user Karola Riegler