SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — In a split-squad game across town in Goodyear against the Cleveland Indians Saturday afternoon, the Rockies held their breath when third baseman Nolan Arenado left the game against the Indians in the sixth inning. The 2013 National League Gold Glove winner was hit on the left hand by a pitch from Cleveland right-hander Corey Kluber.

It turns out that Arenado suffered a bone bruise and X-rays were negative, meaning he did not break a bone.

Arenado, who hit a double in his first two at-bats against Cleveland, was hit by Kluber’s pitch with no outs and two runners on base in the top of the sixth inning. After talking with Rockies head trainer Keith Dugger, Arenado left the game and was replaced by pinch-runner Angelys Nina.

In the Rockies’ 4-3 win over the Mariners at Salt River Fields, new Rockies lefty starter Brett Anderson had a black cloud, silver-lining kind of start.

He allowed 12 hits, including a homer and four doubles against the Mariners. Anderson, using his sinker and slider to get groundball outs, was able to limit the damage to just three runs in his six innings of work.

“It was a bittersweet outing,” Anderson said. “I never like to give up that many hits. It was probably the worst put-away breaking ball I’ve had in God knows how long. But the good part about it was in those situations I was able to get out of it for the most part and I ended up having a quality start.

“Anytime you give up 12 hits and have tons of baserunners and get out of it with a quality start, I guess I’ll take it.”

The Rockies won the game in the ninth on double off the wall be outfielder Jason Pridie to score Charlie Culberson from first base.

Regarding Anderson, manager Walt Weiss said: “Bend but don’t break, he was the epitome of that this afternoon. That guy knows how to pitch. I saw (former Brave) Tommy Glavin do that, first hand, for three years. You think you have him in trouble a few times, then you look up in the seventh inning and you have two runs. That’s what it reminded me of watching Anderson today. That’s just an affirmation to me that this guy knows what he’s doing, knows how to pitch.”

Right-handed reliever Chad Bettis pitched the top of the ninth and got the victory, punching out two. With every outing he appears to cement his spot on the 25-man roster. He has not been scored upon this spring.

“Chad has put himself in a great position,” Weiss said. “He’s thrown the ball as well as we could hope. That right-handed power that he brings is very valuable.”

Back in Goodyear, right-hander Jordan Lyles, competing with Franklin Morales for the fifth spot in the rotation, started off strong, then buckled a bit in the fifth inning. Over 4 2/3 innings, he gave up five runs (two earned) on five hits. He walked three and struck out three. His spring ERA sits at 3.18.

The Rockies beat the Indians 14-6, pounding out a spring-high 22 hits.

Jordan Pacheco hit his first home run of the spring, a two-run shot, and outfielder Tim Wheeler continued his terrific spring with a three-run shot. It was his fourth homer of the Cactus League season.

Hits: Catcher Wilin Rosario hit a two-run bomb in the fourth inning to drive in Brandon Barnes in the win over the Mariners. It was Rosario’s second homer. … Against the Indians, Jordan Pacheco hit his first home run of the spring, a two-run shot, and outfielder Tim Wheeler continued his terrific spring with a three-run shot. It was his fourth homer of the Cactus League season.

Misses: Rockies center fielder Charlie Blackmon, competing for a spot on the roster, struck out in his first three at bats vs. Mariners rookie lefty Roenis Elias.

Up next: The Rockies host the White Sox Sunday at Salt Rivers Fields in a 1:10 p.m. game (2:10 p.m. MDT). Right-hander Tyler Chatwood starts for the Rockies opposite Lefty Chris Sale. Relievers Matt Belisle, Wilton Lopez and Adam Ottavino are lined up to throw for the Rockies.