Discussion needed on keeping public safe from risky breeds.

Pit bull (Photo: Ildar Sagdejev/Wikimedia Commons)

No one should have to go through what Cindy Ryder went through one month ago.

On June 19, Ryder was simply walking her dog on the sidewalk of a Wausau neighborhood when a vicious dog attacked and killed her pet, a tiny teacup Chihuahua, and injured Ryder.

The dog that attacked Ryder was a pit bull, the breed most notorious at the moment for attacks, for viciousness, for being bred for violence and used by some owners more as signifiers of personal power than as pets of any kind. Ryder is, quite justifiably given her horrific experience, asking the city to ban the breed.

It can be done. A new Daily Herald Media report finds that several smaller cities in Wisconsin have already passed pit bull bans — and at least one, our neighbors in Antigo, apparently have had real success in enforcing it.

Story:Pit-bull bans controversial, but they work

Column: Don't blame pit bulls. Blame the owners

Pit bulls are overwhelmingly responsible for dog attacks, according to a report by Merritt Clifton, editor of the website Animal People, that compiled press accounts of dog attacks from the U.S. and Canada during the last 31 years. Pit bulls were responsible for 2,792 incidents, 263 of which resulted in deaths, according to the report.

The next most dangerous breeds were not even close: They were Rottweilers, with 514 incidents of bodily harm (12 percent of observed cases), and mastiffs, with 105 incidents, or 2 percent. Pit bulls, which are 6 percent of the dog population, were responsible for 68 percent of dog attacks.

These statistics should be considered skeptically. No doubt there are cases where an attacking dog is wrongly classified as a pit bull by police or news media or both. In other cases, breed might go unreported in a media account, especially if the breed is less well-known or less infamous than a pit bull.

Still, the sheer lopsidedness of the numbers seems to demand attention. All of those cases cannot be false positives.

As with any animal, a dog's behavior, its personality, is not shaped only by its biology but also by the way it is raised and treated. There are, we know, pit bulls who are well-loved and well-behaved.

But it should not be taboo to consider the ways that biology — breeding — also shapes a dog's behavior, and for many generations now pit bulls have been bred to fight. They may genuinely be, at least right now, inherently riskier animals than other breeds.

Letter:I witnessed dog attack in Wausau

Is a flat ban on pit bulls in Wausau the answer? We're not sure, but the subject deserves discussion.

Another potential approach would be to require pit bull owners to meet a higher standard for pet ownership; for example, they might be required to take dog-owners' education classes or own insurance policies. There are probably other policy approaches we have not thought of, and it's time to have an open and public discussion, informed by facts and research, about how we can best protect the public from risky breeds.

Let's hear from veterinarians and breeders, researchers and advocates, from dog owners who love pit bulls and residents who cross the street when they see one.

This is a real issue. What happened to Cindy Ryder and her dog should not happen to anyone, and Wausau should make a serious effort to keep it from happening again.

Read or Share this story: http://www.wausaudailyherald.com/story/opinion/2014/07/20/pit-bull-ban-worth-considering/12851577/