Too many patients still acquire infections and other potentially deadly yet avoidable complications, the government’s latest review of quality-control efforts at hospitals across the country shows.

The problem plagues hospitals large and small, including prestigious medical centers with a reputation for top-flight care. For example, Scripps Green Hospital in La Jolla and UC San Diego Medical Center’s campuses in Hillcrest and La Jolla have infection scores that put them in the worst 5 percent of hospitals nationwide.

Infections and other hospital-acquired conditions are hardly a new challenge. But they are getting greater attention as part of health reforms rolled out with the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

They are also part of a push by regulators to compel hospitals to scrutinize every aspect of their operations, including the most mundane tasks, so patients recover faster, get discharged promptly and receive proper follow-up treatment so they do not have to be readmitted.

Health officials and an assortment of independent ratings groups look at whether doctors and nurses are following nationally recommended standards of treatment. They assess whether hospitals are doing enough training and enforcement to minimize medication errors, preventable falls, bedsores, surgical mix-ups and the like. They also evaluate the continuum of care between a hospital and its affiliated physician groups.

Leading the charge is an agency with a powerful incentive for hospitals to comply.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services penalizes under-performing hospitals. In the case of the acquired-conditions program that includes infections, it docks Medicare reimbursements by 1 percent for hospitals whose rankings are in the worst 25 percent nationally. The fine continues annually unless a hospital improves enough to exit the dreaded bracket, a task that is increasingly difficult because the agency’s benchmark gets tougher each year.

Nearly 4,000 hospitals were reviewed in Medicare’s most recent report, which was issued this month.

Six hospitals in San Diego County were among the 758 nationwide that suffered the 1 percent Medicare reimbursement cut. Besides Scripps Green and UC San Diego, the others were Scripps Mercy in Hillcrest, Scripps Memorial in Encinitas, Sharp Coronado and Tri-City Medical Center in Oceanside.

Many of these providers were also fined the previous year, when the acquired-conditions penalty program began.

That means millions of people still face preventable harm when they’re hospitalized, said Dr. Arjun Srinivasan, associate director for Healthcare-Associated Infection Prevention Programs at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

“It is true that today, some types of infection are not preventable, but the vast majority are,” he said.

There has been progress made nationally and locally.

The latest Medicare report estimates that there were 3.9 million hospital-acquired conditions last year, down from 4.7 million in 2010.

Sharp Memorial Hospital in Serra Mesa, Palomar Medical Center in Escondido and Pomerado Hospital in Poway saw their rates improve enough that they were able to resume getting their full Medicare reimbursements.

Extensive communication and teamwork have been essential factors in Sharp’s performance.

Five days a week at 9:30 a.m., managers at Sharp Memorial Hospital gather. They discuss what happened in their departments during the past 24 hours. They share deviations from the normal routine — good, bad or just strange. If a door’s security keypad isn’t working, they bring it up. If patients got an infection during their stay or received a wrong medication dose, those incidents are shared around the room.

The idea of these huddles is to shrink the number of preventable problems occurring at Sharp Memorial by making everyone more aware of what is going on outside of their own departments, said Pamela Wells, the hospital’s chief nursing officer.