With just one week left in the legislative session, these bills appear to be dead: Guns in schools and on college campuses, allowing adoption agencies the right to turn away gay couples, limiting which bathrooms transgenders can use.

The Florida Senate killed all of them – and is moving forward with a Medicaid expansion plan that is detested in the House, where any such plan, even a free-market-driven one like the Senate's, smells like Obamacare.

The Senate is as overwhelmingly Republican as the Florida House, and yet it has become the place where conservative bills go to die. The Senate has been a moderating influence on the House for several years now, but as Democrats lose power in both bodies, the Senate's role is accelerating.

"Only in recent years have the Democrats become so marginalized that they're not relevant to the legislative process. Because of that, you're seeing some of the more moderate Republicans step in and become the opposition," said Kevin Wagner, a Florida Atlantic University political science professor who specializes in Florida politics.

The situation is not just the result of Republicans outnumbering Democrats in the House by 81 to 39 and in the Senate by 26 to 14. It is compounded by partisan legislative districts and term limits.

"The leadership in the House and the Senate is particularly powerful, especially since we've term limited people so that no one has a great deal of seniority, which means no one to offer an alternative to leadership's priorities," Wagner said. "And senators have a larger, more diverse population they have to appeal to. House districts are particularly partisan, so representatives don't have that problem."

The result has been a battle of wills between the two chambers.

As the Senate strikes down conservative priorities, the House has given scant support to the Senate's more moderate plans. Senate President Andy Gardiner's greatest priority was a package of half a dozen bills meant to give developmentally disabled children a pathway to independence. The Senate passed all six bills; the House only two. The rest have sat without a vote.

But perhaps no Senate priority has caused a greater rift than its Medicaid expansion plan, which has caused a $4 billion gulf between the House and Senate budgets that the legislature cannot seem to bridge. And the intransigence only adds to the problem.

"The inability of the House to bend at all on that means the Senate will be less accommodating on the House's priorities," said Wagner, the FAU political expert. "Neither side wants to be the one that caves."

The result: House bills that made it to the floor have never even passed through their first committee meeting in the Senate. Bills need to pass both houses to become law.

Rep. Frank Artiles, R-Miami, filed a bill that would have made it illegal to use the public bathroom of the opposite sex. He said it was to protect bathroom users from perverts, but transgender men and women protested the bill at every committee hearing. It passed through its first two committees in the House but never made it out of its first committee in the Senate.

"We just ran out of time," explained Sen. Greg Evers, R-Baker, chair of the criminal justice committee.

"I don't think that was a mistake," said Carlos Smith, who lobbies in Tallahassee for Equality Florida, the state's largest gay-rights organization. "I think what we saw this session was a sea change, a fundamental shift in how the Florida Senate was going to handle LGBT issues."

Evers is far from a liberal. He presides over Criminal Justice with good ol' boy wisecracking and a deep Southern drawl.

He even sponsored a guns-in-schools bill, which cleared his committee. But that's as far as it went. The bill next had to go through the Senate's K-12 Education committee, where it did not have the votes.

Neither did a bill that would allow permit holders to carry firearms on college and university campuses.

The two losses are frustrating for Marion Hammer, a former National Rifle Association president who lobbies for the gun-rights organization in Tallahassee.

"The Senate made it clear they weren't going to move the bills," said Hammer, who has lobbied in Tallahassee for more than four decades. "It's clear there are a significant number of members of the Florida Senate who have Rs after their names who are neither true conservatives nor true Republicans."

The Florida Senate has also dealt blows to social conservatives, who saw not only the bathroom bill die, but also a bill that would allow adoption agencies to refuse an adoption based on moral or religious convictions.

The Senate's Rules Committee postponed that bill at its final meeting last Monday. The only chance it now has is if it's added as an amendment to another bill – but that would risk killing the original bill.

One ray of light for social conservatives is a 24-hour waiting period for abortions, a bill that seems likely to become law, having passed the House and the Senate. The original House version, sponsored by Rep. Jennifer Sullivan, R-Mount Dora, offered no exceptions to the rule, which would require women to see an abortion provider for a consultation, then return at least 24 hours later to have the procedure.

But Sullivan was forced to add exceptions for survivors of rape, incest, domestic violence or human trafficking. She had to do that because the Senate added them first, and both versions had to match for the bill to become law.

"I think a lot of these [conservative] losses caught many of the sponsors of the legislation off guard. They thought they could push some of this through quietly," said Smith, the Equality Florida lobbyist. "I'm proud that Floridians really stepped up and came out to make their voices heard this session – and thank God for the Florida Senate."

dsweeney@tribpub.com, 954-356-4605 or Twitter @Daniel_Sweeney