Sentinel and Enterprise staff photos can be ordered by visiting our A customer emerges from one of Market Basket's three Lowell stores last week as a sign thanks customers who protested last summer's firing of CEO Arthur T. Demoulas. sENTINEL & ENTERPRISE / Ryan McBrideSentinel and Enterprise staff photos can be ordered by visiting our SmugMug site.

TEWKSABURY -- A loyal Market Basket shopper for more than 40 years, Lee Ouellette was proud to play a role in shutting down the supermarket chain last summer.

The CEO, Arthur T. Demoulas, was fired, and in order to get him back, employees walked off the job and customers started shopping at Market Basket's biggest competitors.

It wasn't just for the affordable groceries they were fighting for, the Lowell resident said. Her granddaughter works at one of the chain's three stores in the city, and she was familiar with how the Demoulas family's foundation has long benefited area organizations. All that was at risk, she said.

"We all felt the same," Ouellette said Friday, a day that marked a year after headquarters employees first walked out in protest when the company's new executives wouldn't agree to restore Demoulas after he was fired a few weeks prior.

"Mr. Demoulas is so good to the community," Ouellette said. "We all benefited from the company."

"I was happy to play a role in it," she added.

Ouellette was one of thousands of Market Basket shoppers who went elsewhere for groceries for six weeks last summer. It was partly out of necessity, because warehouse workers refused to ship to stores unless Demoulas was made CEO again. It was partly out of principle, shoppers not wanting to support a company looking to change the way things were done.

Advertisement

"I prayed that it was going to be the same company" after the boycott, said Mary Daigle, a decadeslong customer from Dracut.

It was a year ago this weekend that the Market Basket story went national, and from something that affected the company's 20,000 or so employees to one that affected Market Basket's 2 million shoppers and even anyone who bought groceries anywhere in the chain's core areas in Massachusetts and New Hampshire.

Last July 16, employees demanded the return of Demoulas "with full authority, non-negotiable," according to a letter they sent the company's new executives.

"A non-answer will be considered a no," the letter said. "We will not work for anyone but ATD," the employees wrote, referring to Demoulas.

July 17 was the deadline for a response, and employees got one -- but not the one they hoped for. Demoulas' replacements instead threatened to fire anyone who didn't perform their job duties.

"You will leave us no choice but to permanently replace you," the new co-CEOs, Jim Gooch and Felicia Thornton, said.

Many did abandon their job that Friday, July 18, as they said they would. It was the first rally in Tewksbury that summer, with more than 2,000 workers, customers and other supporters facing off against the new management.

For the first time, no delivery trucks came or went from the property, putting into motion a critical piece of the boycott: the absence of fresh produce in the chain's 70-plus stores, which took only several days to become noticeable to shoppers.

Even at that relatively early stage, one of the key figures of the 2014 rallies, Steve Paulenka, noted the significance of what was happening.

"This is a defining moment. All across this country, California, Illinois, Florida, folks have risen up as one many times -- it's nothing new," Paulenka said. "But it's always to get rid of somebody. It's never been to bring somebody back."

Two days later, on July 20, Paulenka was one of eight managers, all longtime employees and vocal Arthur T. supporters, who were fired by a courier who visited them at home on a Sunday. The following day, July 21, was the first of a series of rallies at the Market Basket at Tewksbury's Stadium Plaza providing images of sign-waving employees and shoppers often wearing homemade T-shirts displaying their loyalty.

Those images would soon go nationwide as media outlets picked up on a story that demonstrated how far workers and customers would go to bring back a beloved boss.

Many said they still cherish their role in keeping the Market Basket the way they loved it for so many years. But few take any credit. An employee will thank the customers, and customers will commend a low-cost, friendly company led by Demoulas.

"It's amazing what people can do when they work together," said Andy Heggarty, an employee of nearly 40 years and manager of one of the Lowell stores. Heggarty credited Demoulas and a board of directors that understands the company's often different way of doing business.

"We're the Main Street of America, we're not Wall Street," he said.

Ken Santos, the store's meat manager and a 38-year employee, thought back to what he called the "jubilation" of when Demoulas stopped by the store soon after he purchased the company.

"It was magical when he came in," he said, describing Demoulas circled by employees and customers who wanted to thank him.

Vendors got into the act, too, last summer. One of them, Joe Sturzo, stopped delivering Coca-Cola, at a time when virtually all other deliveries also halted.

"We stood firm with them," Sturzo, a former Market Basket worker himself, said of siding with employees. His paycheck doesn't say Market Basket, but he still feels like a part of the company, he said.

"I would serve their customers like it was my mother," he said.

On Friday, dozens of front-office and warehouse workers gathered to mark the anniversary of the day they first walked out on the job, with many wearing T-shirts showing a giraffe, the de-facto mascot representing how workers stuck their necks out for Demoulas.

Those in headquarters still hear from customers every day about their victory last summer, said Joe Schmidt, Market Basket's operations supervisor and one of those eight managers fired a year ago.

"They feel like they're a part of the company," he said. "It's amazing how much the associates of the company, the customers and the vendors and suppliers did to protect the culture of Market Basket."

Schmidt and Tom Trainor, a Market Basket district supervisor, spoke with WGBH for its television show "Greater Boston" earlier this month, when host Jim Braude called the pair "revolutionaries."

Trainor admitted there was no Plan B among workers refusing to work for anyone other than Demoulas.

"I didn't even pause to ask my wife if she was OK with this," he said.

"There was really no hesitation," Schmidt said.

Dave McLean, the company's assistant director of operations, said "the spirit" of last summer's rallies remains, but the company is not focused on looking backward.

"The focus when we wake up every morning is running the business and taking care of the customers," he said.

Schmidt was asked whether it's hard to believe that the workers' gamble in putting their jobs on the line paid off.

"Everybody felt like they needed to do to protect the company. Everyone was committed to seeing it through to fruition," he said. "We were very confident that it would turn out the right way."

Follow Grant Welker on Twitter and Tout @SunGrantWelker.