Billions of dollars in potentially wrong Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) claims are ignored annually because the IRS lacks the authority to correct the errors, according to a new report.

Without increased authority, the problem will continue, the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration (TIGTA) said in its report.

In an April 21 letter to TIGTA, IRS CFO Ursula Gillis said responsibility for the errors lies in the statutory design of the credit programs – not any internal-control weaknesses, financial management deficiencies, or financial reporting failures. TIGTA, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), and the US Government Accountability Office have acknowledged that, she wrote.

The IRS estimates that $15.6 billion (23.8 percent) of EITC payments were issued in error in fiscal year 2015.

TIGTA is required to audit the agency’s compliance with requirements to report improper payments in federal programs. EITC happens to rank as a high-risk program, and it’s the only IRS program that the OMB considers high priority with regard to improper payments.

The report indicates that federal requirements consider a program to have significant risk if its gross annual improper payments exceed both 1.5 percent of program outlays and $10 million of all program or activity payments, or exceed $100 million at any percent of program outlays.

Trending {{item['sft-title']}}

While the IRS did provide the necessary information, the agency failed to report an improper payment rate of less than 10 percent. Reporting of that failure rate is a federal requirement.

Here’s the catch-22: The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2016 gave the IRS more tools to reduce the improper payments, the report states. But it didn’t expand the agency’s authority to make the corrections.

“Without this authority, the IRS continues to be unable to address the majority of potentially erroneous EITC claims it identifies,” the report states.

But those errors aren’t the type the IRS has error-correction authority over when a tax return is processed. So, the agency could audit the claims, but that costs more than handling the claim with error-correction authority, and limited resources hamper how many audits can be done anyway. Besides, the agency has to allocate those limited resources “among the various segments of taxpayer noncompliance to provide a balanced tax enforcement program,” the report states.

The EITC claims, however, apparently aren’t the extent of the issue. According to the report, there are “numerous indicators” that improper payments may exist in other refundable tax credit programs.

In 2014, the OMB declared that all refundable credits are subject to federal requirements because they are funds paid out by the federal government. So, the US Treasury Department required the IRS to evaluate the risk of improper payments in the Additional Child Tax Credit (ACTC) and the American Opportunity Tax Credit (AOTC).

TIGTA did its own estimates of potential improper payments for both credits, arriving at $5.7 billion (24.2 percent) in ACTC improper payments and $1.8 billion (30.7 percent) in AOTC improper payments. TIGTA concluded that both credit programs exceed federal requirements for what constitutes significant risk.

But the IRS, despite its own data, still considers the risk of improper payments for the ACTC and AOTC as low, the report states. Though the agency is revamping its risk-assessment process for the ACTC, it’s not including a quantitative assessment for improper payment risk, TIGTA reports. Without that, “we believe that the IRS will be unable to effectively assess the improper payment risk for the ACTC and other refundable tax credits,” the report states.

In her April letter, Gillis said TIGTA’s math in calculating the AOTC and ACTC potential payment errors was correct, but the methodology used differs from the one used to calculate the EITC improper payment rate. The agency and Treasury are working with the OMB to devise “consistent compliance analytics” for the EITC and other credit programs, she said.

The agency is using every tax administration tool and technique available, and is “vigorously exploring additional data sources and partners to verify claim eligibility, deter overclaims, and reduce payment errors,” Gillis said.

In FY 2015, the OMB set up an interagency group to assess the improper payment risk in all payments from the Premium Tax Credit budget fund account. The Federally Funded Research and Development Center is helping the IRS develop a risk-assessment process aimed at interagency coordination and a comprehensive risk assessment that considers account activities by the Affordable Care Act insurance exchanges, the US Department of Health and Human Services, and the IRS. According to the IRS, an update of the status and preliminary results of the comprehensive risk assessment will be included in the FY 2016 Agency Financial Report.

A legislative proposal by the IRS and the Treasury’s assistant secretary for tax policy seeks more error authority, and the IRS requested that authority as part of its FY 2017 budget. The proposal would give the Treasury Department the authority to permit the IRS to correct errors in the following situations:

Taxpayer information doesn’t match government information, such as W-2 forms.

A taxpayer has maxed out the lifetime limit for claiming a deduction or credit.

A taxpayer fails to include required documentation.

As of February, the IRS hadn’t been given the additional error-correction authority, the report states.