Fresh from their overwhelming victory on Election Day, handing them control of the Senate over pro-abortion Democrats led by Harry Reid, Senate Republicans have unanimously elected pro-life Senator Mitch McConnell as their leader.

McConnell, hailing from Kentucky, has promised the Senate will vote on a House-passed bill that bans abortions after 5 months because scientific research shows unborn children can feel pain at that point in pregnancy.

The Pain Capable Unborn Child Protection Act: bans abortions after the 20th week of pregnancy and would save at least 18,000 lives a year. McConnell previously pledged that if his party won the majority, he would advance a vote on the Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act. The legislation is supported by the majority of Americans – women in higher numbers than men.

The federal version of the Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act is based on model legislation developed by National Right to Life and was first enacted in Nebraska in 2010. Since then, nine other states have enacted the law.

“No U.S. senator has done more for unborn children than Sen. Mitch McConnell,” said Carol Tobias, president of National Right to Life.

As reported by National Right to Life, “McConnell has been a key supporter of every major pro-life initiative to come before the U.S. Senate during his tenure, including current legislation to protect unborn children at 20 weeks, a point by which the unborn child is capable of experiencing great pain when being killed by dismemberment or other late abortion techniques.”

“Mitch McConnell is a stalwart defender of innocent human life and a tireless advocate for pro-life principles,” said Margie Montgomery, executive director of Kentucky Right to Life.

Click here to sign up for daily pro-life news alerts from LifeNews.com

“We are encouraged with the new pro-life Senate and look forward to a vote on our top legislative priority, the Pain Capable Unborn Child Protection Act. This compassionate, popular legislation will protect the lives of more than 18,000 unborn children per year,” SBA List president Marjorie Dannenfelser said. “Leader McConnell has a 100 percent pro-life voting record and has pledged to bring the Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act to the floor for a vote.”

Last month, McConnell said he would be willing to repeal Obamacare with a simple majority.

“Leader McConnell is and has always been committed to the full repeal of Obamacare, and he’ll continue to lead efforts to repeal and replace it with patient-centered reforms that enable greater choice at lower costs. He knows it won’t be easy, but he also believes that if Republicans are fortunate enough to take back the majority we’ll owe it to the American people to try through votes on full repeal, the bill’s most onerous provisions, and reconciliation,” McConnell spokesman Brian McGuire wrote in an emailed statement.

Obamacare. It’s the largest expansion of government-run health care in the history of the nation. It’s the largest expansion of funding for the abortion industry since Roe . Wade. It’s a health care scheme that has rationed health care by driving up costs for many Americans or causing them to lose their health insurance entirely.

The pro-life movement has been unanimous in its opposition to Obamacare because of these pro-life concern.