In recent years, a new business model has emerged in medical education. Spearheaded by foreign medical schools, many of them located in the Caribbean, the model has come to threaten American medical schools. In New York, one of the states at the center of the debate, medical school administrators have gone so far as to approach the New York State Education Department Board of Regents to shut down the practice before it becomes the industry norm.

What are they unhappy about? Foreign medical schools paying American hospitals for student clerkships.



Traditionally, a doctor receives his medical school training by devoting the first two years to classroom study followed by two years of clinical training, known as rotations. After finishing rotations and graduating from medical school, a doctor must pass a licensing exam and complete residency training before obtaining his license. A key step in a doctor’s education, then, is clinical rotations, which consist of clerkships that take place primarily in a hospital setting.

Historically, medical schools have not paid hospitals for clerkships. However, some foreign medical schools have started to pay teaching hospitals to provide them, in the range of $400 to $500 per week per student. The logic is simple. The hospital faculty is teaching the student, so the hospital should be paid for its services.

In 2008, St. George’s University in Grenada and Health and Hospitals Corp. in New York (now called NYC Health + Hospitals) entered into a 10-year deal worth $100 million whereby St. George’s students would be trained in clerkships in the city's 11 public medical facilities. In addition, American University of the Caribbean cut a decade-long deal with Nassau University Medical Center for $19 million, and Ross University in Dominica entered into agreements with a collection of New York hospitals. Obamacare has made it more difficult for medical facilities to receive adequate reimbursement for their services from insurance companies and Medicare and Medicaid, so these cash-hungry institutions have welcomed the monetary support.

There are advantages to foreign medical students—90% of whom are American—assuming clerkships in New York, since many of them will remain in the state to practice. Indeed, 40% of New York’s 87,000 doctors attended foreign medical schools. Moreover, because of the 16.4 million new patients added under Obamacare and because of an aging population, the U.S. is suffering from a doctors shortage, and New York is no exception. Doctors are especially needed in primary care, pediatrics, and family practice, fields entered into by the majority of foreign-trained medical students.

In addition, while an alarmingly low number of minority students attend medical school on the mainland—in 2011 only 6.1% of first-year medical students were African-American—Caribbean medical schools boast large minority student populations. At the American University in Antigua, just 26% of its students are white. African-Americans make up 15.5% of the student body, more than double the mainland national average.

Still, New York medical school administrators, concerned that foreign medical students whose schools pay for clerkships enjoy an unfair advantage over domestic students whose schools do not, have approached the Board of Regents to demand a ban on paid clerkships. Today, about half of the students holding clerkships in New York are from foreign medical schools, so this has become a major issue.

In an industry already hampered by regulations, new regulations are not needed; therefore, the Board of Regents should refuse the ban. As long as the issue is unresolved, a de facto moratorium exists on foreign students participating in domestic clerkships, which will only exacerbate the doctor shortage and reduce the number of minority doctors practicing in New York. The board should make a move sooner rather than later.

Until the Board of Regents reaches a decision, the future of medical education in New York hangs in the balance.

Paul Alexander has authored eight books and often writes about politics.

Get Crain's Daily Alert Sign up for our FREE daily email newsletter. A summary of the day's top business and political headlines from the newsroom of Crain's New York Business. More Newsletters ›

Comments