Ink Meets Paper co-owners Allison and Daniel Nadeau (at left) talk business with Michelle Jewell, owner of the Finkelstein’s Center toy company. The three entrepreneurs spent years working out of home offices before going in together on a renovated space on Spruill Avenue in North Charleston.

The idea of working from home had long since lost its charm when Allison and Daniel Nadeau, married co-owners of the North Charleston paper goods company Ink Meets Paper, moved their business into a former convenience store on Spruill Avenue in June.

Ink Meets Paper, which sells handmade greeting cards, stationery and other paper products in more than 300 stores worldwide, had swallowed up half of the Nadeaus’ Park Circle home in the course of five years. Between the printing supplies, antique letterpress and shipping materials, the Nadeaus had shifted many of their personal belongings into the attic. When guests spent the night, they slept on an air mattress in the office.

“It’s hard to focus on the business when there’s dishes to be done and laundry to be put away and a yard to mow,” said Daniel Nadeau, pausing for a midmorning coffee break at his bright, streamlined new office. “When you try to bring customers over, everything in the house needs to look as nice as possible, and when you’re running a business out of your house, that’s pretty tough.”

Ink Meets Paper shares its headquarters with another local business, handmade toy company Finkelstein’s Center. Like the Nadeaus, Finkelstein’s owner Michelle Jewell found that her business had outgrown her James Island home.

“We were both pining for a space not in our house,” Jewell said.

The space, which they’ve dubbed Fink + Ink, is a workshop, not a storefront — although Park Circle commuters could be fooled by the inviting picture windows and cozy sitting area lined with products. The interior features an open floor plan, exposed plywood, pegboards and massive work tables in a common area for the two companies. With giant plush characters propped up in chairs, the office reflects both the whimsy of Finkelstein’s hand-stitched dolls and the hip minimalism of Ink Meets Paper greeting cards.

“It’s a good, flexible space, whether we’re working on a huge order or we’re just doing custom work,” Nadeau said.

One advantage of the new location: No more meeting truck drivers in parking lots across town. Previously, when Ink Meets Paper ordered large shipments of supplies, truck drivers were often skittish about delivering among the winding streets and low-hanging trees of Park Circle.

“They do not like residential neighborhoods,” Allison Nadeau said.

For now, the company headquarters sits among vacant storefronts, gas stations and a check-cashing center. The view from the wide front windows is of a dilapidated and vacant auto garage.

But in the slow recovery from an economic recession, with home prices already on the rise in neighboring Park Circle, Jewell said she’s confident that change is coming soon to her stretch of Spruill.

“There’s a lot that’s going up for sale or lease, which wasn’t the case even three years ago when all of these were occupied,” Jewell said.

Back at home, Daniel Nadeau said he and Allison are still figuring out what to do with their suddenly vacant rooms, shifting their furniture and their personal lives back into the entire house.

“Being able to come home at the end of the day and it actually be home — a peaceful place where you’re not sitting amongst your work — is pretty wonderful,” he said.

Reach Paul Bowers at 843- 937-5546.