HARTFORD — More than 116,000 Connecticut residents signed up for Obamacare in the most recent quarter, marking the best three-month period the state has ever had, officials said Monday.

The total includes 20,000 new customers through Access Health CT, which is the state's exchange under the federal Affordable Care Act that was signed by President Barack Obama.

Lt. Gov. Nancy Wyman, who chairs the board of the exchange, said the numbers increased because state officials "did a great job of reaching out to Connecticut's uninsured and connecting with some of the hardest residents to reach."

Former Democratic state legislator Kathleen Tallarita, a spokeswoman for the exchange, said officials targeted certain ZIP codes in cities like Bridgeport, New Haven and Hartford in an attempt to find residents who had no health insurance. That effort involved meeting with community leaders and asking them to spread the word about how to sign up for coverage.

"In inner-city Hartford, some people may trust their pastor," Tallarita said Monday. "It's been a more concentrated level than just mass media."

Like plans in the private sector, the exchange has "open enrollment" periods during which residents can sign up for coverage. Between Nov. 1, 2015 and Jan. 31, 2016, more than 116,000 consumers signed up. Residents are required to renew their applications each year — or drop out if they obtain a job with a better health plan.

In addition, 258,000 Connecticut residents enrolled in Medicaid, the health care program that is jointly funded by the state and federal governments. Of those, 41,000 were new enrollees.

"Strong enrollment gains, better health outcomes and steady cost-effectiveness in Medicaid are major factors in Connecticut's national-leading implementation of the Affordable Care Act," said Roderick L. Bremby, commissioner of the state Department of Social Services, which oversees Medicaid.

Based on national statistics, Connecticut has been among the leaders in promoting health insurance. U.S. Census figures showed in October that only 3.8 percent of Connecticut residents were uninsured, which was a sharp improvement from 9.4 percent in 2013 and 6.9 percent in 2014.

As the first state to create a public exchange that was pushed by Republican Mitt Romney, Massachusetts had an uninsured rate of 3.3 percent in 2014 — the lowest rate in the nation. The other states that had lower uninsured rates than Connecticut were Vermont, Hawaii, Iowa and Minnesota.

With residents constantly moving in and out of the state, getting 100 percent of residents to have health insurance is almost impossible, Tallarita said.

"We never expect to be zero," she said. "We'd be happy to get to 2 percent. There's always that natural churn."

Nationally, health care has been a major political issue in the current presidential campaign. The major Republican presidential candidates, including Donald Trump of New York and Ted Cruz of Texas, have vowed to repeal Obamacare.

U.S. Sen. Chris Murphy, D-Conn., a strong supporter of Obamacare, said the increased numbers are important because residents will not be without insurance coverage and "one accident or illness away from total financial ruin."

"Access Health CT has been one of the most successful and well-run exchanges in the country and today's new enrollment numbers are proof of it," Murphy said Monday. "Close to 20,000 Connecticut residents gained new access to health coverage this year, and a record-high number of Connecticut families — regardless of their income level and medical histories — are now back in charge of their health care."