KANSAS CITY, Kan. — A rolling tire and a perplexing vibration prevented driver Martin Truex Jr. and Denver-based Furniture Row Racing from a top-10 result Sunday in the Hollywood Casino 400 at Kansas Speedway.

Truex, who is among 12 playoff drivers, finished 15th in the fifth NASCAR Chase for the Championship race — the postseason midpoint — and fell from third to eighth in the standings. However, Truex is only one point behind Kevin Harvick, Jeff Gordon and Brad Keselowski, who are tied for fifth.

“Not a good day,” Truex said on his radio while pulling off the track as Joey Logano drove to victory circle.

Later, Truex added: “This Chase format is tough, real tough. It will be a battle next week in Talladega.”

Sunday’s race in Talladega, Ala., will conclude the contender round, and four drivers will be cut.

Logano has won the last two races and is the only driver to have clinched a berth in the elite eight. But he won a controversial way Sunday, spinning out leader Matt Kenseth with four laps to go.

Logano, who drove into the back of Kenseth’s car, breezed to the green-white-checkered finish, and Kenseth, who led a race-high 153 laps, ended 14th and fell to 12th in the playoff standings.

“We just both went for the same real estate and made contact,” Logano said.

Kenseth saw it differently: “I was plenty clear, and he just decided to take us out.”

Kenseth’s crash benefited Truex, because the caution came out and Truex was the lucky dog — the first car a lap down who made up his lap. Truex started 14th on the green-white-checkered restart, but it was double-wide with lapped cars and he couldn’t make up any ground.

Truex started seventh and ran as high as second. But a troubling “chatter” — race-car vibration — zapped his confidence in turn entries and exits, particularly Turn 4.

He also was hindered by a drive-through penalty shortly after running 10th on Lap 200 of the scheduled 267-lapper. At the conclusion of his green-flag pit stop with 53 laps to go, the left rear tire got away from the tire changer and rolled outside the team’s pit stall.

Truex had to drive through pit lane at the 45 mph speed limit while the rest of the field was green. He fell to 20th and a lap down.

“We were in good shape before the penalty,” Truex said. “We fought hard on the car all day and got much better right when we got the penalty. We were fast at the end, but not enough time to get back up there.”