Forget about white supremacy. One Ku Klux Klan organizer really likes the group because he gets to “wear robes” and “have secret handshakes.”

John Abarr, a kleagle, or organizer, for the United Klans of America in Great Falls, Mont., met with Jimmy Simmons, president of Casper, Wyo., branch of the NAACP on Saturday last week. The meeting was extremely unprecedented and marked by heavy security for both groups, according to the Casper Star-Tribune. During the peaceful discussion, Abarr talked about why he likes the group.

“I like it because you wear robes, and get out and light crosses, and have secret handshakes,” he said. “I like being in the Klan — I sort of like it that people think I’m some sort of outlaw.”

Abarr also pointed out that he is a member of anti-racism groups such as American Civil Liberties Union and the Southern Poverty Law Center. And after his meeting with Simmons, he is also a member of the NAACP. He signed the paperwork and donated $20 on top of the $30 membership fee.

“Wow,” Simmons said. He gave the KKK member a receipt.

The two men and some of their associates were meeting following reports of assaults on black men in the town of Gillette, Wyo. Klan pamphlets had also been distributed in the area. Simmons reached out to the KKK to arrange the discussion, during which Abarr condemned the attacks. The kleagle argued that the hate crimes were committed by rogue groups not associated with the Klan, according to the Star-Tribune‘s account of the meeting. But the NAACP men weren’t buying it.

“It’s obvious you don’t know the history of your organization,” the NAACP’s Mel Hamilton told Abarr. “It’s obvious to me that you’re not going out and talking about the good — you’re not talking about inclusion, you’re talking about exclusion. And it’s obvious to me you don’t know what you are.”

But Abarr worried that he would be excluded from his own group following the meeting with the NAACP.

“People are going to call me names for coming down here,” he said. “You know, I might not even have a group when I get back.”