1. Freeload on the freeloader economy like VCs do.

Companies like WhatsApp (on the receiving end of last week's $16 billion check from Facebook) and Tumblr (acquired by Yahoo for $1.1 billion) fit into the "hot" category despite the fact making money is secondary to attracting users.

"They are examples of companies that have huge user engagements—even if they don't have a business model," Hartenbaum said. Snapchat, a photo-sharing site where 400 million photos are posted daily, turned down a $3 billion offer from Facebook last year—and a reported $4 billion bid from Google. The customer base is king with these companies.

2. Share in the wealth of the sharing economy.

Venture capitalists like products that make people work together, and technology is creating new kinds of collaboration. Uber changed the limousine business, and Airbnb transformed the sleepy bed-and-breakfast business. Paul Straub, a director at Claremont Creek Ventures in Oakland, Calif., which manages $300 million in two funds, joined Volvo in investing $3.2 million in RidePal, a San Francisco-based bus service that can alter its routes on the fly to accommodate demand.

"It's Google Bus for the rest of us," he said, referring to the private bus services for tech-company employees that have caused friction with longtime residents in the Bay Area. Hartenbaum's firm has invested in RelayRide, which lets you rent out your car when you're not using it (Getaround is another example of this concept). The car-sharing service is now in 1,600 U.S. locations, he said.

(Read more: Why Google is tech's darling, not Apple)

3. Make your investments "personal."

In the post-industrial age, mass production is passé. VCs like technologies that bring a level of personal service unimaginable a decade ago. More than half of IPOs in 2013 were in biotech and health care, according to the NVCA, a dramatic leap partly due to looser Food and Drug Administration regulations for innovative companies.

Claremont Creek is betting on computational genomics, which has dramatically reduced the cost of sequencing genomes and promises drug treatment tailored to the individual. One of the firm's investments is Assurex Health, a Cincinnati-based start-up that uses a cheek swab to determine which psychotropic drugs or pain medications are most likely to work for an individual. Another is Natera, which uses a simple blood test to detect birth defects that once required a riskier amniocentesis.

Outside health care, August Capital has put its money on Gigwalk, a company that asks consumers to perform small tasks for big companies. Some 350,000 people have downloaded the software, which assigns users to check prices or missing stock in retail stores, do marketing tasks or take pictures of products in store windows. Gigwalk will alert a user of an available task when he or she is near a client location. A Gigwalk assignment can pay $20 to $30 dollars. "You can now have a worker driving around doing tasks for several companies," Hartenbaum said. Gigwalk customers include Frito-Lay, Nokia and eBay.