Dear Carrie,

Our first child is due in six months. We’re excited, but also a little scared—especially about the costs. How can we make sure we’re financially prepared?

— A Reader

Dear Reader,

Congratulations! First on your baby—and second on your forward thinking. There’s no doubt that having a child is a huge financial responsibility. But being prepared isn’t just about having enough money tucked away. It’s also about planning and putting safeguards in place.

Here’s a checklist that can help you set your growing family on a path toward financial security:

1. Get a Social Security number for your child. You’ll need this to get your child’s health insurance, to open a bank account for him or her, or to apply for government benefits. It’s easiest to apply for a Social Security number when you apply for a birth certificate.

2. Make adequate health insurance a priority. If you have insurance through your work, make sure you have the best combination of deductibles and coverage. Then notify your employer as soon as your child is born. If you need to provide your own insurance, check out what’s available under the Affordable Care Act either through the federal exchange or your state’s exchange.

3. Build an emergency fund. This is even more important when you have a child. Try to keep enough cash in an easily accessible account to cover three-to-six months’ worth of necessary expenses. If you’re hit with an illness or job loss, it will help pay the bills until you get back on your feet.

4. Look into life insurance. A term life insurance policy is generally low-cost and easy to get. Think about having enough coverage to at least pay off your mortgage and debts, and cover your child’s education.

5. Create a will. If you have a lot of assets, a will or trust will help ensure they’re distributed according to your wishes. But even if you don’t, a will is essential to name a guardian for minor children. If you don’t put it in writing, the state could decide who would care for your child.

6. Complete an advance healthcare directive. This designates the type of care you want in a life-threatening situation, and also allows you to appoint someone to make medical decisions for you if you can’t speak for yourself. It can be your spouse or anyone you choose. Just be sure it’s someone you trust and who’s comfortable with the role. Protecting yourself with this safeguard ultimately protects your kids, as well.

7. Start saving for education. Everyone thinks about saving for college but what about a private elementary or high school? A college savings account such as a 529 plan should be a priority, but also think about an Education Savings Account, which can be used for elementary or secondary school, too.

8. Plan for the extras. While you’re focusing on savings, don’t forget about extras such as music lessons, gymnastics training, summer camps—even family vacations. Having savings to cover these things will help you make choices that don’t break your budget.

9. Start your kids’ financial education early. A trip to the store, handling an allowance, saving for something special—all of these provide opportunities to pass on your own values while teaching your kids the value of money.

10. Don’t neglect your retirement account. This is as important for your children as it is for you. (In fact, it should be your number one savings goal—even before education.) Contribute to a 401(k) to get the company match and open an IRA. Your kids will be financially independent one day. Make sure you’re equally independent.

You don’t have to do all this at once, or necessarily all yourself. Your employer might match a portion of your retirement savings, as well as offer tax-advantaged accounts that let you pay for health and child care expenses with before-tax dollars. Grandparents might be willing to chip in on education. The main thing is to plan ahead, so you can enjoy every precious moment with your new baby.

This column is no substitute for an individualized recommendation, tax, legal or personalized investment advice.

COPYRIGHT 2013 CHARLES SCHWAB & CO., INC. MEMBER SIPC. (1113-7627)