The Broncos got three gifts on Christmas Day, in the form of Wes Welker’s, Derek Wolfe’s and Kayvon Webster’s returns to practice.

Welker, a receiver, hasn’t practiced since he suffered a concussion in the team’s Dec. 8 game against the Titans, and he’s missed the past two games. Wolfe has been out since he fell ill on the team bus on Nov. 29, missing the past four games. Although the team hasn’t given specific details of what was wrong with the defensive end, coach John Fox said last week that he’s been looking better and better.

Webster, a rookie cornerback, broke his thumb in the team’s Dec. 12 loss to the Chargers. His return Wednesday didn’t come as much of a surprise; the team has hoped since the injury and his surgery the next day that he’d be able to return this week and play with a cast on his right hand.

Tight end Joel Dreessen and center Steve Vallos were both missing from the team’s Christmas Day practice Wednesday. Vallos suffered a concussion on Sunday, and Dreessen has battled knee problems all season. Wide receiver Eric Decker (thigh) and quarterback Peyton Manning (ankle) also were limited.

A modified Christmas schedule. The Broncos reported to practice three hours late Wednesday. Instead of arriving at 7:20 a.m., they were permitted to show up at 10:20 to the facility. Practice — which was in full pads — began at 2:10 p.m. instead of 11:10 a.m., allowing players with young children to be at home with them in the morning. The team also canceled afternoon meetings so that players could be home for dinner.

Linebacker Marshall on the 53-man roster. A day after being activated from the Broncos’ practice squad to fill Von Miller’s spot, linebacker Brandon Marshall spoke to the media. Marshall spent the first 16 weeks of the 2013 season on Denver’s practice squad, and he knows his role now that he has been moved to the active roster.

“Special teams come first,” Marshall said. “I’m not a first-round pick. I’m a guy that came in, so definitely special teams, and I’m happy to do that.”

Linebacker Nate Irving will likely absorb the bulk of Miller’s playing time.

Joan Niesen: jniesen@denverpost.com, twitter.com/joanniesen