By Brian Anderson, The Anniston Star, Ala. McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

March 09 -- The Calhoun County Board of Education anticipates it will pay about $280,000 more for substitute teachers throughout the upcoming school year. And it'll pay that after letting go of all its substitute employees.

Like many school systems in Alabama and across the country, Calhoun County has partnered with an outside contractor for hiring substitute teachers. That's to avoid penalties from the federal government under the Affordable Health Care Act, because any employee working more than 30 hours a week would have to be offered health insurance, or the employer would face a fine.

"Unfortunately, there's really no leeway," said Tina Parris , the chief financial officer for Calhoun County Schools . "And that's a really big burden to put on somebody's shoulders."

In February, the County Board of Education agreed to a contract with Kelly Educational Services . Under the agreement, Kelly is responsible for staffing schools with substitutes, paying the replacement teacher and also providing insurance for the subs. Parris said for the subs, the contract is ideal. It provides them with more opportunities to work and to be provided with insurance. For the school system, it removes the burden of tracking the hours its substitutes work.

Kelly has also contracted services with Anniston City Schools and Cleburne County Schools . Attempts this week to reach Kelly Services were unsuccessful.

Saks Middle School Principal Wendy England said Kelly Services will make her job, and the jobs of her teachers, a little easier as well. Under the previous system, substitute teachers could work only three days a week, meaning teachers on maternity leave or on long medical absence didn't have the benefit of a consistent classroom fill-in.

"And that's not fair to the kids," said England, who noted sometimes full-time teachers have to cover for each other when substitutes can't be found. "The subs don't just work here, they work for every school in the county."

Finding a spot to fill in is also the job of the sub, said Susan Clark , a Weaver resident who on Friday was subbing for a teacher at Saks Middle School . Although Clark was working her second day that week, she said she's gone as long as three weeks without work since joining the school system in October 2012 . She said under the current system, teachers who know when they're going to be absent post that notice on a schedule that substitutes are expected to check to learn when work is available. Clark said if Kelly can offer her more hours, she would welcome a chance to work for the service.

"I'm retired now, but you can always use a little extra money," Clark said. "I think all the teachers could use a little more money."

Win for the subs, win for the administrators, but not exactly a slam dunk for the school system. The contract with Kelly includes a 40 percent markup from current pay scales for sub salaries, Parris said. Certified substitute teachers make $75 per day with Calhoun County Schools . Based on the number of substitute hours from the last school year, Parris said the system is likely to pay around $280,000 more for sub services next year by hiring an outside contractor.

It's a move that hasn't gone over well for everyone on the Calhoun County Board of Education . Dale Harbin , who voted against the contract with Kelly, said it's the board's role to think outside of the box to save money for the system.

"I have nothing against Kelly Services , but it's the easy solution," Harbin said. "I would prefer us explore other alternatives before we just agree to parting with $280,000 ."

While $280,000 is a lot of money, it's better than forking over $2.4 million to the federal government, which is the penalty the school system would incur for not offering health insurance to substitute teachers working more than 30 hours a week, Parris said.

"That would absolutely cripple us," Parris said. "We wouldn't survive."

Staff Writer Brian Anderson : 256-235-3546. On Twitter @BAnderson_Star.

___

(c)2014 The Anniston Star (Anniston, Ala.)

Visit The Anniston Star (Anniston, Ala.) at www.annistonstar.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 682

[jetpack-related-posts]