Farmer Jason Griffith stands at the edge of the area that will be disturbed at Aspen Moon Farms on Thursday. Go to timescall.com for more photos. ( Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer )

For the owners of a biodynamic farm a half-mile west of Longmont city limits, organic farming and a natural gas pipeline don't mix.

Jason Griffith and his wife Erin Dreistadt own Aspen Moon Farms, 7927 Hygiene Road, where they grow everything from kale to watermelons and raise chickens and cows on 35 acres they lease from landowner John Shaffer.

Xcel, through its subsidiary company Public Services Company of Colorado, is installing a 16-inch high-pressure pipeline under a portion of the farm, using eminent domain to claim a right-of-way easement on the property.

Griffith is growing increasingly concerned that the pipeline construction will take a part of his farm out of commission for three to five years and damage his business.

Griffith has an organic certification from the U.S. Department of Agriculture, meaning he avoids using pesticides and antibiotics in his farming. In addition to the organic certification, the entire farm is certified as biodynamic, a more stringent philosophy that requires a farmer to view the farm as a carefully balanced ecosystem.

In biodynamic farming, the animals and crops work together and the farmer avoids any imported feeds or fertilizers, carefully cultivating the right nutrients in the soil.

Griffith's organic certification can be broken up so that he keeps it for the untouched portion of the 19 acres, but he's worried that the biodynamic certification will be all or nothing for the 19-acre affected parcel.

Advertisement

Griffith and Shaffer met with people representing Boulder County and Xcel Thursday to discuss ways for the construction can work around the organic farm.

Brian Brown, part of a team of contracted environmental overseers working with Boulder County, said they are working to make sure Xcel puts the top soil back as it was, to the correct compaction and grade.

Shannon Kulseth, an agricultural expert on the environmental overseer team, said she was going to work with Griffith to prevent him from losing his certifications.

"Some of the things we can do is have it demarcated out and we say 'no work is going to go on outside of this demarcation' and the equipment will be washed down before it gets to the parcel," Kulseth told Griffith.

Griffith is still skeptical he'll be able to farm on the land until he can get the nutrients in the soil back to normal, which he estimates will be three to five years after construction is complete.

Timeline

Another major issue that both Griffith and Shaffer are trying to work with Xcel's representatives on is when the construction will happen and how much notice the farmers will get beforehand.

Griffith said he and Shaffer met with Xcel representatives in March and were told the company had a window between August and mid-October for the two-week construction to begin. That window corresponds to the non-nesting period for a nearby federally protected species of eagle.

But the farther Xcel could push back construction, the better for Griffith's farm because he could harvest more crops and not have to take as big of a loss for 2015. Griffith said he had a verbal agreement that the company could start construction in mid-September, allowing him to harvest a good portion of the vegetables planted where the pipeline will go.

But this week Xcel sent out contracted locators to place stakes on the edges of the easement, stepping on Griffith's crops in the process.

"The guys that were sent out here to do the stakes stepped all over the beets because they didn't know what was a crop and what wasn't," Griffith said, pointing at stakes in the middle of rows of beets. "They were sent out here with no instruction at all."

The Thursday morning meeting of county and Xcel representatives grew silent as a truck of contracted utility locator workers slowly drove off of Hygiene Road and into a patch of alfalfa on Griffith's farm.

Griffith sighed heavily.

"See, I was hoping to use the alfalfa before you guys came," he said.

Shaffer said they were taking the locating work as a sign that construction was going to be started sooner rather than later. He said he was frustrated at the lack of communication.

"The decisions are made in a vacuum," Shaffer told the representatives. "These things could have been decided three or four months ago and they should have been."

'I'll be pretty grumpy'

Sarah Mastalir Kellner, an attorney who represents Xcel and specializes in eminent domain acquisition, said that the company's window for construction has not moved and is still set for sometime between August and mid-October, in line with what was communicated before.

But Griffith tried to impress upon the representatives that he needs at least two weeks notice before construct was going to begin so he could do work like restaking his tomato plants and moving his cows.

"There are things I want to break down," Griffith said. "I'll be pretty grumpy while I'm doing it, but I don't want other people doing it."

Mastalir Kellner took notes and said she would take them back to Xcel and inquire about getting Griffith compensation for his crops up-front, before his farm loans are due in mid-December.

"We can't give definite answers right now because we need to go back and take this back and hopefully we can have some definite answers because it's coming up," Mastalir Kellner said. "We are trying to communicate these concerns and work with you to mitigate the effects of construction."

Griffith and Shaffer said that has been one of the most frustrating parts of the whole eminent domain pipeline process — they had yet to talk to anyone at Xcel who can make a decision about any aspects of the construction.

"They send out the people, the suits and the lawyers and they talk to you and they talk to you and then they walk away and the construction people come anyway," Griffith said. "We're not talking to the people making the final decision."

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci