Last week, the Supreme Court gave a historic blow to the right wing conservatives by ruling that gay marriage is now legal in all 50 states. However, Fox News stars Bill O’Reilly and Sean Hannity made sure that their core conservative audience didn’t feel left out and that, in some ways, they still had a voice.

Earlier this week, Sean Hannity had Republican presidential candidate Ted Cruz on his show to discuss the Supreme Court decision. As expected, Cruz wasn’t happy.

“And then on Friday, the marriage decision was directly contrary to the Constitution. It was, as Justice Scalia observed, five unelected judges saying their liberal policy views trump the considered judgment of 320 million Americans. It was judicial activism at its worst!”

Cruz told Sean Hannity that he has introduced a constitutional amendment to preserve the authority of the states to define marriage as the union of one man and one woman. Hannity looked happy as he heard Cruz’s words.

Like Sean Hannity, Bill O’Reilly was not happy about the Supreme Court decision either. O’Reilly stated that he believes that people have a right to celebrate the gay marriage victory, but not rub off their views on others.

“Americans who sincerely believe that judges do have the authority to redefine marriage have a perfect right to celebrate their victory provided they are following their consciences. However, they do not have a right to demonize those who disagree based on the same principle, conscience.”

According to Real Clear Politics, O’Reilly believes the left is delirious with joy for one specific reason.

“After the Supreme Court legalized gay marriage last week, the far left was delirious with joy. Not so much because homosexuals can now tie the knot, but because the decision has anti-church ramifications.”

O’Reilly went on to note that the Supreme Court would never order clerics to marry gays. He believes, however, that the four liberal justices may lean in that direction if Hillary Clinton is elected president, especially if she elects another ultra-liberal judge.

Bill O’Reilly isn’t as anti-gay marriage as Sean Hannity, but he still thinks the decision was unconstitutional. O’Reilly also criticized the way the “activist judges” handled the ObamaCare case. O’Reilly believes our liberties are taking a huge hit due to the recent rulings.

While the gay marriage ruling may seem to be a hard blow to the generally conservative Fox News, it really isn’t. Fox News knows how to perfectly pander to its audience, who feels alienated by the way the country is changing. You can expect ratings for both Sean Hannity and Bill O’Reilly to increase in the coming months.

[Photos by Rob Kim and Desiree Navarro/Getty Images]