Fifty-one percent of pregnancies are unplanned and 95 percent of those pregnancies result from not using or misusing birth control, like forgetting to take the pill every day at the same time, according to The Guttmacher Institute.

For those who don’t know how this all works, every method of birth control comes with special instructions, unless otherwise stated by a medical physician. It’s very important to use birth control correctly or it could result in injury or worse, pregnancy.

Perhaps it’s time for women to reconsider the method of birth control they are using or will choose to use.

As many women hurriedly jump to use the pill, there are other options available, other methods just as, if not more, effective and with less maintenance.

A birth control method that works more than 99 percent of the time is making a comeback after disappearing from America in the 1980s and 1990s.

The intrauterine device, better known as the IUD, was the contraceptive of choice for 6.4 percent of American women aged 15-44 from 2011 to 2013, according to a report published Tuesday by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

The IUD is a small, T-shaped device implanted in the uterus. It’s not as popular as the other contraceptives offered for women such as the pill or condom, but it’s definitely returning as one of women’s top choices, increasing 83 percent, according to the aforementioned report.

IUD use is just easier.

There’s no certain time of day that it needs to be taken and it’s pain-free. With this contraceptive there’s virtually no maintenance, allowing women to forget about it and carry on with their daily routines.

The IUD gives women the protection they need during the time they probably need it most.

Those who are on the pill have to commit to taking it each day at the same time or they’ll compromise the protective agent in the pill.

It sucks having to remember to do this one little but extremely important thing each and every day. Women are bound to forget at least once and that’s not safe.

The Affordable Care Act’s requirement that health insurance cover all types of birth control at no cost is expected to accelerate adoption of IUDs.

The price for an IUD implantation is more than $1,000, which is a possible reason why many women opt out of using this method of birth control. But it’s worth every penny if it means preventing an unwanted pregnancy.

The IUD is almost as effective as sterilization, but it’s not permanent. After having the device implanted while in a physician’s office, a woman doesn’t have to take any further actions to prevent pregnancy throughout the 3-to-10-year lifespan of the IUD.

This is ideal because now the woman doesn’t have to worry about any complications and there is always the option of having it removed, if one chooses to do so.

The device fails less than one percent of the time, compared to nine percent for the pill, 18 percent for male condoms and 24 percent for the rhythm method, CDC data shows.

It’s time for ladies to think about their other options when it comes to birth control.

There is a better way to prevent pregnancy without committing to the pill every day.