WE have witnessed the rise of more Filipino artisans and entrepreneurs. Olive Puentespina is one of them. If the name is not familiar, Puentespina is the cheesemaker behind the Davao brand Malagos, which manufactures chocolate, milk, wine and cheese. Cheese used to be something we bought from delis or got as “pasalubong” from relatives traveling abroad. But now, it is available not only in Davao but in Metro Manila stores.

Olive, who studied at the University of the Philippines in Los Banos, married into the Puentespina family of Davao, which has interests in agriculture. Puentespina is a major producer of orchids, several varieties of cut flowers and cacao seedlings. It is also known for bird and ostrich breeding, ostrich meat and crafts-making using ostrich eggs and feathers, bignay berries and bignay wine, tablea processing and tablea cake.

The 12-hectare farm also produces virgin coconut oil, coconut soap, ornamental squash and gourds. The Puentespinas raise Bo-ang goats and produce goat meat and guinea fowl.

Malagos is the first property in the Philippines and the 39th in the world to be certified by the Audubon Cooperative Sanctuary Program. It is home to butterflies, indigenous birds and other wildlife species. It has the world’s only waling-waling forest, considered as one of the most important Philippine species.

Malagos Farmhouse Cheeses came about because of several goats, according to Olive. She and her husband Roberto Jr. decided to purchase several goats for the family’s farm. The 30 goats became 100 goats in three years so Olive thought of making feta and a kesong-puti-style fresh goat cheese from the excess milk of the female goats. She sought the help of people from UPLB when she first ventured into cheesemaking.

“I also sought the help of a Swiss cheese maker but some of his techniques were not really applicable for the Philippines, such as the temperatures for making cheese. So I took all the techniques that I learned and improvised. Improvised a lot, if I may say so,” recalls Olive.

Clean taste

She admits tweaking the cheeses for the Filipino palate. Her bestsellers include the Chevre (goat cheese) with mango or pineapple and Blush (which is used for pizza).

During our visit, Olive, a charming and articulate lady, laid out a generous cheese spread with crackers, dried fruit and wine. The sampling included Fresh Goat Cheese, Chevre, Queso Rustico and the Feta Tricolor.

“I am not the first cheesemaker in the Philippines,” says Olive. “But I take pride in the freshness of our cheese. The cheese tastes clean.”

Philippines Airlines was one of Malagos’ first clients. In 2008, the Chevre with mango became the exclusive cheese served on board Philippine Airlines’ business class. They needed to ask the airline if they could sell the cheese and PAL agreed.

It was also PAL that ordered a ton of Feta Cheese, which paved the way for the company to produce bulk orders. Olive cites Mandarin Oriental Manila for giving Malagos its biggest break. She also cites being named “Cheese of the Month” by The Cheese Club of the Philippines in September 2006 as one of the milestones for Malagos.

No advertising

“The product basically promoted itself. We had no advertising or PR. Malagos became known for good cheeses due to word-of-mouth. People started talking about it because they liked it. It was a novelty at first but buyers came back and ordered more,” says Olive.

Today, Malagos Farmhouse Cheeses has over 20 varieties.

Olive is very proud that Malagos Cheeses are now included in local and foreign tourists’ shopping lists whenever they visit Davao.

“I wanted to create a brand synonymous with the quality of food made from that place. Like the case of the French region Brie which is known for cheese,” says Olive.

All Malagos cheeses are 100 percent made in Davao using 100 percent locally produced milk fresh from its dairy farm utilizing pure-bred goats and hybrid cows including their own herbs and spices. Olive explains the use of local ingredients and techniques adapted particularly to Davao’s good climate gives a distinct flavor to the cheeses Malagos produces.

Olive says cheese-making is hard, back-breaking work and involves manual labor but she would not have it any other way. In the planning stage is a “cheese academy” so that Olive could teach young people how to make cheese.

“There is money in cheese-making, especially now that the Filipino’s palate has become more adventurous. Years ago, only the well-traveled ones would eat blue cheese. Now, people who come here always buy blue cheese. It’s not just a gourmet thing anymore. People actually love it and look for it,” says Olive.

Olive’s husband, who is a veterinarian and a UPLB graduate, is in charge of taking care of the goats and cows.

“We can’t use antibiotics and other medicines, since these might affect the milk,” says Puentespina. “A source of good and constant milk is primary; you can’t make good cheese from bad milk.”