By Logan Albright | Watchdog Opinion

Following the collapse of Colorado’s health care co-op, created under the Affordable Care Act, and a period of deep uncertainty for the insurance exchange established under the same law, the state appears to be throwing in the towel on the president’s signature legislative achievement. Unfortunately, however, the Centennial State is not interested in implementing free market reforms, but will instead vote on a ballot measure to establish a single-payer health care system within its borders. Coloradans collected more than 150,000 signatures to put the idea—going under the name of ColoradoCare—on the November, 2016 ballots as “Initiative 20.” The proposal would be funded by a new 10 percent payroll tax.

This should not be surprising to anyone who has been paying attention. The insurance exchanges seemed almost designed to fail, relying as they did on large and continuous taxpayer subsidies simply to function. Insurance companies can’t afford to cover the people they’re required to cover without being propped up with government dollars, and when they don’t get those dollars—as they recently learned they would not—they are forced to raise their premiums to compensate for the losses. The exchanges are already experiencing lower than expected enrollments, and higher premiums, creating the insurance death spiral that feeds on itself until the whole system collapses.

This outcome was so predictable, in fact, that some have speculated that it was intentional, a necessary stepping stone on the road to the true goal of a single-payer health care system. Whether or not this was the case is now largely irrelevant, but those hoping for a smooth transition to a health care system run completely by the government may actually have undermined their own goals by creating a system that is falling apart faster than even the most pessimistic analysts predicted.

A decade from now, ObamaCare would have been so firmly entrenched as part of the health care landscape that its failure would have looked organic, a market failure needing to be corrected by government. Today, though, the law is still new enough that people are able to make a direct causal connection from its passage to the problems we are now experiencing. Knowing this, one can’t help but wonder how eager voters will be to embrace an even more centralized system as an alternative.

Holding a vote on a single-payer health care system as early as next year means that Colorado will have to grapple with the still-fresh memory of Vermont’s abortive attempt to do the same thing. Green Mountain Care, as it was to be called, was supposed to provide free or nearly free medical services to every Vermont resident—at least until they discovered that the only way to pay for it was with massive tax increases that were literally unaffordable. At least the state deserves credit for abandoning a bad idea before it came into effect, which is more than can be said for the federal government.

Before states jump on the single-payer bandwagon, they should learn the lessons of Vermont, as well as the lessons of the Affordable Care Act. Trying to run something as complex as health care with a command and control system simply doesn’t work. It’s too difficult to account for incentives and human behavior, and as we have seen, the increased cost that comes from a lack of competition and overly generous benefits is not something that can be borne by the taxpayers. Before Coloradans go to vote next November, I hope they will remember why they are in such a mess to begin with, and turn to a model of increased freedom and choice instead of further centralization.