Buy Photo From left, Salvation Army Captains Steve and Telinda Wilson and Chair of the Advisory Board for Salvation Army Josh Ingram pose with a wood carving in the Salvation Army’s chapel. (Photo: Taima Kern/Action Reporter Media)Buy Photo

Cracking open the New Webster's Encyclopedic Dictionary, "salvation" is defined as "The act of saving; preservation from destruction, danger or great calamity…"

Now, destruction and danger, those we know about. But great calamity? Calamity is, according to the same book, "any great misfortune or cause of misery."

As many know, misfortune and misery come in a veritable rainbow of shades and varieties. For some, eviction and homelessness is the epitome of misfortune. For others, the inability to travel squelches chances to make money or care for one's self or family. In a Wisconsin winter, if the power bill isn't paid and the lines are cut off, the pressing cold is an immediate calamity.

Meanwhile, a lack of food is the most universal cause of misery.

For 125 years, the Salvation Army has been operating in Fond du Lac, performing what its vision statement classifies as "practical acts of kindness." It offers services to those at or below 130 percent of the poverty line in rental, energy, transportation and food assistance, otherwise known as Crisis Service Assistance Programs, among others.

Christmas at The Salvation Army of Fond du Lac. This photo and more are part of a display planned for the Open House unearthed from the few boxes of historical information that remain at the Salvation Army. The Salvation Army invites the community to help identify the photos and submit Salvation Army memories and photos to build the story of 125 years of service together. (Photo: Submitted Photo)

'Best that we can'

Many recognize the Salvation Army by the signature red kettles placed outside stores during the winter holidays.

"We are a year-round organization," said Connie Millard, Community Resource Development liaison for the Salvation Army. "We support both crisis situations and seasonal needs — and do the best we can with the resources we are given."

That "best that we can" is carried out by a team of five full-time employees at the Corps and two at its Thrift Store and an army of volunteers. This army distributes salvation in the form of turkeys on Thanksgiving; coats, food, toys and gifts at Christmas; 13,000 brown bag lunches in summer; back-to-school supply drives and new shoes for students in fall; affordable summer camps; community partnerships for enrichment and increased self-sufficiency; hygiene drives; the Pathway of Hope program; youth and family programming; spiritual services in its church and the afore mentioned crisis service assistance and prevention programs.

Help needed

The Salvation Army is always seeking volunteers and donations to help support its mission.

Assistance can be rendered in a variety of capacities, encompassing everything from donations of surplus produce from a garden to knitting hats and mittens, to a few hours of assistance staffing the food pantry.

Children can even get involved through the Pantry Pals program, where a canned good can be decorated to bring a personalized touch and a smile to the receiving family.

Though the Salvation Army assists many families in the Fond du Lac area, it is still unable to meet all of the needs that come to its doors.

According to a report from the Salvation Army, each month — on average — it receives approximately 50 requests for rental assistance. Resources allow it to assist approximately 20 of those requests, with an additional $54,000 needed to cover the gap for all of 2015. Examples of the gap are evident in each of the crisis service assistance programs.

The annual food pantry need for a year with an average 1,000 families per month visit tops out at nearly a quarter-million items. When personal hygiene items are added to that number, it rounds out at 300,000 items per year that need to filter through the pantry.

The Salvation Army recently surveyed some of the families that visited the pantry to see what services they used or would like to see available. Of 337 households that took part in the six-week survey, 358 marked that they used or needed assistance with affordable housing. Of 337, 221 sought assistance with parenting, 155 with health screening, 136 with home improvement, 165 with community organizations, 57 with aging resources, 67 with education, 70 with job searches, 69 with vehicle maintenance, 62 with disability service, and 29 with spiritual wellness.

How to help

The number that Millard found most remarkable was the 54 households who indicated their interest in volunteering and continuing to pay forward the services that they had been receiving.

"We asked what more there was that we could do to stay relevant, to find where that need was," Millard said. "I love the fact that 54 households … asked to do more. They want to find a way to give back and they want to know more about how to get involved with volunteering.

"How often do you hear the misconception that they are content just to come and receive aid? They want to take care of themselves, their vehicles, their families."

•For more information about events, programs or to get involved with the Salvation Army, call (920) 923-8220 or visit salvationarmywi.org/wum/fdl.

Salvation Army Captains return from trip to Israel



What's in a name?

Salvation Army staff members and volunteers reflect on what the organization's name means to them:

•"Responding with spiritual or material support while giving a sense of belonging to those in need." — Amber Arntz, caseworker.

•"Charity, giving, good people helping people in need." — Susan Myers, food pantry volunteer.

•"People helping people. It's always been that way." — Lil Liebert, soldier and volunteer.

•"When I think of Salvation I think of peace, and army makes and keeps peace." — Brandie Austin, pantry volunteer.

•"A place for hope." — Ron Jacobson, director of social services.

•"The words Salvation Army mean a helping hand for people in desperate situations. Also, bringing people together through their programs to create a family-like environment. The Salvation Army has an open door policy to everyone. They welcome you in regardless of your situation or status." — Danita Chapin, adminstrative assistant

Anniversary year events

•Easter Sunday Sunrise Service, 8:30 a.m. today, April 5, followed by breakfast and Easter egg hunt at 9 a.m. and a morning worship service at 10:45 a.m.

•Salvation Army Thrift Store Re-Grand Opening, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. April 11. Event will include giveaways, donuts and coffee at 10 a.m., brats, hot dogs and chips at 1 p.m. and artist Jean Gilbert will be on-site demonstrating upcycle art, using items from the thrift store.

•Salvation Army Open House, May 11, to tick off National Salvation Army Week. Tour the pantry, meet volunteers and hear their stories, view pantry pals created by the community, history on the 125 years of the Salvation Army, sign up for summer camps and volunteer opportunities.

•Civic Dinner, 5:30 to 6:30 p.m. May 11. Guest speaker is former officer Major Moore, performance by Salvation Army Brass Band, mock-tails served at 5:30 with dinner at 6 p.m.

Read or Share this story: http://fondul.ac/1D3XBc9