congress Republicans try end run around spending caps A similar strategy led to a government shutdown two years ago.

The great Achilles' heel in the House Republican budget Tuesday can be found in a blue-and-white chart, tucked away on Page 40 and mapping out a 10-year path for the annual appropriations bills that keep the government operating.

On the surface, it appears to keep faith with the spirit of the discretionary spending caps under the 2011 Budget Control Act, a major priority for many fiscal conservatives. But to get the votes of party defense hawks, the budget makes a sweeping end run around the caps by declaring an additional $94 billion as emergency spending for the war against terrorism.

Story Continued Below

As a practical matter, the GOP is adding $36 billion to President Barack Obama’s $58 billion 2016 request of emergency funds for Overseas Contingency Operations to pay not just for war costs but also for foreign aid. That’s a huge increase that Senate Republicans will not endorse in their budget plan. And it strains credibility given what the same House chart shows for the outyears.

Indeed, in fiscal 2017, the $94 billion in overseas contingency funds drops precipitously to $27 billion, suggesting the global threats in 2016 will suddenly have dissipated. And a second old budget strategy kicks into place: paying for defense by cutting still more from domestic appropriations.

In 2017, the budget assumes defense discretionary spending will be $574 billion, or $38 billion more than the BCA caps. At the same time, the resolution would reduce nondefense spending by $44 billion below the caps as an offset.

In real-life terms, that’s a cut of more than $30 billion from what Congress just approved for this year. And it flies in the face of bipartisan agreements that have tried to restore some order to the process and avert shutdowns since the collapse in 2013.

The same pattern repeats itself over the next 10 years to the point that the budget claims an extra $372 billion in deficit reduction while allowing defense to grow by $387 billion above the caps. Nondefense is the big loser, forced to absorb a further cut of $759 billion, or 14 percent below the path set by the BCA.

All this is necessary for the GOP to meet the party’s goal of nearly $5.5 trillion in deficit reduction by 2025. Between repealing the Affordable Care Act and cuts from Medicaid, the whole plan rests most heavily on nearly $3 trillion in reductions from health care. But to get over the finish line, it still needs those extra savings from appropriations.

Most Republicans admit privately that the chances of accomplishing this are very slim. And the chart tips the GOP’s hand, because all the domestic discretionary cuts are put off a year — when the budget is not binding.

To understand why, look back at the summer of 2013. Former House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) tried the same approach, and it ended in disaster for the GOP and led to the government shutdown that fall.

Following the across-the-board cuts ordered that spring under the BCA, Ryan proposed to restore defense spending at the expense of nondefense dollars. But Ryan did it in real terms, without just using OCO.

House Appropriations Committee Chairman Hal Rogers (R-Ky.) tried to keep the process afloat by moving the easier bills first. But in July 2013, he was forced to suddenly shut down after pulling an otherwise popular transportation and housing measure from the House floor.

That experience left real scars, and Rogers has warned his leadership privately that it would be a mistake to go down that path again. The new House Budget Committee chairman, Rep. Tom Price (R-Ga.), is now caught in the middle, trying to get to balance like Ryan but using emergency funds to forestall any discussion about adjusting the caps.

When Price’s staff was asked about the large OCO number by POLITICO, an aide quoted back comments by Gen. Raymond Odierno, the Army’s chief of staff.

“In my 38 years of service, I have never seen a more dynamic and rapidly changing security environment than the one we face now,” Odierno said. But that quote is from testimony before the Senate Armed Services Committee in January — a hearing less about OCO and more about adjusting the caps.