OKLAHOMA CITY — If Oklahoma continues to see a fiscal crisis at the Capitol, the state might not have enough money to support its Medicaid program, eliminating a program that provides health care to 1 million residents each year.

Nico Gomez, CEO of the Oklahoma Health Care Authority, said he doesn’t believe that the Medicaid program could end in the next two years, but past that, if state agencies continue to see deep budget cuts, the end of Oklahoma’s Medicaid program could be a reality.

“I’m not trying to set off a panic, but I can’t sit there and go a couple of years and then all of a sudden spring (the program ending) out,” Gomez said.

“If we continue down this road, that’s going to be a reality we’re going to have to deal with.”

Oklahoma’s Medicaid program, known as SoonerCare, provides health care services to 800,000 low-income Oklahomans, including 523,000 children. Thousands of Oklahomans with disabilities and serious medical conditions depend on the program.

Currently, all states participate in Medicaid. However, Medicaid is an optional program for states to offer, Gomez said.

To participate in the program, the federal government requires states to provide a certain level of services to specific populations.

If Oklahoma can’t afford to provide those services, the state wouldn’t receive federal money to administer the program, which pays for more than half of the Medicaid expenses in Oklahoma.

Fiscal crisis

That’s where the state’s current fiscal crisis comes in.

In the past five years, the Health Care Authority has had to cut almost $500 million from the program, through limiting services available to SoonerCare members and cutting the amount of money the agency pays health care providers to deliver care.

By the end of June, Gomez anticipates the agency cutting $64 million from the program. Because the Medicaid program receives matching federal money, that cut in state money will mean $164 million in state and federal money no longer available.

Additionally, Gomez anticipates his agency will need to cut at least $100 million from its budget in the 2017 state fiscal year, which begins July 1.

Plus, the state’s finances aren’t expected to improve, Gomez said.

“No one believes the 2017 fiscal year cut will be the last cut,” Gomez said. “And if we think we’re not going to be out of the woods by fiscal year 2018, we may be looking at more cut scenarios.”

Gomez said beyond providing federally mandated services, he’s also concerned Oklahoma won’t be able to pay health care providers enough money for the care they deliver to Medicaid members.

“If we don’t have appropriate access to care, then we shouldn’t be in the business of having a Medicaid program, and our rates are that driving factor,” Gomez said. “Are providers as businesses going to be able to afford to take our rates and serve our people?”

Facing a potential $100 million budget cut, Gomez said he anticipates recommending significant provider rate cuts — at least a 12.5 percent rate cut. This is the largest provider rate cut the agency has considered in recent years.

Presently, Medicaid pays physicians about 87 percent of what Medicare pays them to deliver care. With the 12.5 percent rate cut, physicians would be paid about 76 percent of what Medicare pays.

Gomez said he fears that if the agency must make that deep of a provider rate cut, providers will leave the program, unable to afford to give care to some of Oklahoma’s poorest residents.

Limited access

Wes Glinsmann, director of state legislative affairs at the Oklahoma State Medical Association, said a survey of 231 physicians in Oklahoma regarding Medicaid rates showed that many of the physicians surveyed would consider leaving the program if rate cuts above 10 percent were passed.

Physicians with independent practices often depend on Medicaid payments for their monthly bills because Medicaid pays physicians more promptly, often within seven to 10 days, versus private insurance companies that aren’t that quick to reimburse.

Without the Medicaid program’s payments, these physicians, especially in rural Oklahoma, would be left without an important piece of their business, Glinsmann said.

And without these physicians in the program, thousands of Oklahomans will left without many care options.

“You’re going to still see those people without access to care without physician care,” Glinsmann said. “They’re just going to end up in the emergency room, where your costs are going to be significantly higher on the back end.”

What’s being done?

Rep. Doug Cox, who works as an emergency department physician in Grove, said he presented a bill earlier this month that would remove 111,000 adults from the state’s Medicaid program.

Cox said he filed that legislation with the program’s future in mind. The legislation would save the state an estimated $130 million, but the federal government would have to approve the move, Cox said.

The proposed legislation wouldn’t affect low-income people who receive Medicaid benefits but are considered able-bodied, are not pregnant and are under 65 years old. Many in this group are single mothers.

Cox said the state Medicaid program is one of the largest expenses for the state, and it’s alarming to think the state could be at a place where it could no longer afford to participate in the federal program.

“That’s why I had suggested we ask the federal government for permission to eliminate services to the able-bodied adults,” Cox said. “That alone is a tough thing to say because a lot of those are low-income single moms, but in order to have enough money to continue to serve the most vulnerable populations — seniors, children and pregnant women — we may have to eliminate something else.”

Cox said he is even more concerned about the cuts to the Medicaid program because other state agencies that also serve low-income adults are cutting back, as well.

The state Health Department announced Tuesday that it would cut back funding for federally qualified health centers, which serve as safety net providers for thousands of Oklahomans. The agency no longer will pay these centers for the care they provide to uninsured Oklahomans who can’t afford to pay.

Additionally, the Health Department is considering closing five to seven health departments, which further limits medical care options for thousands of Oklahomans, Cox said.

Lawmakers have been talking about the budget shortfall for several weeks, but the human faces affected by the cuts are beginning to emerge, Cox said.

“I think reality is truly setting in this week,” Cox said.

Some health care advocates and Democratic leaders have argued that some of Oklahoma’s budget woes would be relieved if the state accepted federal money to expand its Medicaid program, a key provision of the Affordable Care Act.

Cox said he was originally a supporter of Medicaid expansion, which would provide coverage for thousands of low-income, uninsured adults.

However, Cox said he doesn’t think Medicaid expansion will happen in Oklahoma’s current political climate.

“And so I’m looking for other ways to help people have access to health care,” Cox said. “One of the popular programs that Oklahoma can take great pride in is our Insure Oklahoma program, and I’m looking for ways to allow more people to participate in that program.”

Gomez said he hopes lawmakers will take time to contemplate long-term solutions that could help ensure the Medicaid program remains a financially viable option for the thousands of residents who depend on it to manage, for example, chronic, serious diseases.

“I don’t believe anybody wants to just continue down this road to where we have to make a decision on whether or not we can even afford a Medicaid program,” Gomez said. “In my heart of hearts, I don’t believe that.”

Contributing: Rick M. Green, Capitol Bureau