Ranch Rodeo gives working ranchers a chance to strut their stuff while giving the crowd quite a show Friday in Westcliffe. ( Sally Seck/ Daily Record )

Ranch Rodeo offers Westcliffe-area locals the chance to show off their practical skills. Since the late 1800s, the area has enjoyed a rich tradition of hard-working ranchers, one that remains strong today.

On Friday night, ranchers kicked up dust and the auctioneer took bids from the crowd to start off the rodeo weekend with the popular Ranch Rodeo. Community members bought into teams for a chance at the jackpot for top winners in the competition, and teams competed for cash prizes and buckles for first place.

Teams raced the clock to complete four ranch tasks: penning, steer doctoring, calf branding and wild cow milking. Each task utilizes skills that a good rancher uses daily, with the added pressure of the clock and encouragement of the crowd.

"It's a lot different than the CPRA sanctioned competitions," said Katlyn Rusher, who competed on the team Lady and Some Sticks, explaining that you need a card to compete in the Stampede Rodeo events, which took place Saturday and Sunday.

The pros came in Saturday and brought crowd favorites, such as bull riding, bareback riding, and barrel racing, but Friday night was all about local ranchers doing what they love.

"I don't want to get a card to travel to other rodeos and compete on that level," Rusher explained. "I just want to do the Ranch Rodeo here in town. This is my second year competing."

Lady and Some Sticks was one of the crowd favorites, garnering competition for a high bid.

"We didn't place," said Rusher.

Advertisement

"But we had a lot of fun," she added, smiling. "It's always fun when you get to rope something.

Also fun was the play area set up for children with bounce houses behind the arena, the children's Mutton Bustin' competition and the rodeo clowns.

The Open Heart Cattle Company team took second place and first place prize and buckles went to the Oak Creek Cattle Company team.

The Ranch Rodeo and 69th annual Stampede Rodeo were part of a week-long bonanza for Westcliffe, also featuring the Custer County Fair's 4-H exhibitions, Stampede Rodeo Parade and dances with live music every night after the rodeo competitions.

The next local Ranch Rodeo will be Saturday in Pathfinder Park as part of the Fremont County Fair.