North Carolina's anti-transgender law HB2 is facing a slow but sure death. Here's why.

Change the conversation, change the world

Share this

Last week saw some of the most important moments in transgender legal history. The first was Attorney General Loretta Lynch declaring that the Dept. of Justice would be suing the State of North Carolina over HB2 for violating Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, Title XI, and the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA). During the announcement she made an impassioned speech on behalf of the transgender community. In doing so she went a step further than even the LGBT movement has been willing before in comparing HB2 to Jim Crow. This is doubly significant, given Attorney General Lynch grew up in North Carolina while integration was happening.

Another was the Dept. of Health And Human Services declaring that insurance policies which deny coverage or include exclusions of care for transgender individuals violate the Affordable Care Act (ACA, also known as Obamacare). Denial of coverage has been one of the biggest issues for transgender people given the expense, Byzantine nature of fighting insurance companies, and the shield ERISA provides against pursuing legal remedies. This means that soon every transgender American will be able to get transition related coverage through their health care plan, regardless of where they work, who sells the policy, or who they work for.

Finally, the White House and the Department of Education released new guidance on how transgender students should be treated, including direction that they should be allowed to use facilities in accordance with their gender identity. This is significant to the upcoming court cases, as well as whether states that are non-compliant will still be eligible for federal education funding.

Conservative reaction to this last one has been massive. North Carolina Governor Pat McCrory and Senate President Phil Berger both preemptively sued the federal government before Lynch even announced the DOJ suit. Anti-transgender hate groups like the Alliance Defending Freedom (ADF) have sued the federal government as well, alleging that it is unfair and stigmatizing to “normal” students to ask them to use an alternate facility if they don’t want to share a facility with a transgender person (but it is definitely ok to force transgender students to use those same facilities).

The ADF has also been going around the South to school board meetings, encouraging people to abuse and reject transgender children until they self deport back into the closet, “so they don't lead a life of heartbreak.” They have been encouraging the narrative that transgender people, and transgender youth, are sexual predators.

Conservative politicians have also cashed in on this. Eight states have signed on to an amicus brief appealing the 4th Circuit ruling on the case of transgender high school student Gavin Grimm. Governors in Mississippi, Texas, Kentucky, Arkansas, and others have refused to comply with the DOJ and WH directives even if the courts rule against them. In Texas, the Republican Party has adopted no less than three anti-transgender planks in their official platform, while considering secession over the matter.

RELATED: Breaking: In Huge LGBT Win, SCOTUS Refuses Case That Could Have Sabotaged Obama Transgender Policy

The clear take-away in this is that conservatives have found their issue to replace same-sex marriage as their go to anti-LGBT jihad of choice, and it is transgender people, and particularly students, in bathrooms. When one looks back at how long and brutal the marriage fight was, it seems like a source of despair. Social conservatives across the U.S. have made it clear that this is the latest hill they are willing to die on. However, there are actually a lot of reasons for optimism.

First and foremost is the composition of the courts most likely to decide upcoming cases. In the 4th Circuit, which includes North Carolina, 10 of the 15 judges were appointed by Presidents Clinton and Obama. This leaves only about a 9.5 percent chance a case would be heard by a panel with 2 or 3 conservative appointees. The Supreme Court currently sits at 4-4, meaning they would be unlikely to overturn a 4th Circuit ruling that is about 90 percent likely to be favorable anyway, and would likely be either 5-4 or 6-3 by the time a case asking whether laws against sex discrimination include transgender people.

Another favorable piece of this equation is actual recent rulings. The 4th Circuit already overturned and remanded a prior (unfavorable) decision, meaning that it is unlikely the Gavin Grimm case will be decided against the federal government. The lawsuits filed by North Carolina do not include any citations of cases ruling that discrimination is a form of sex discrimination decided after 2008, because they can’t. Every major ruling since 2008 (including Glenn, Macy, and Lusardi) has found in favor of transgender people being part of a protected class.

There is a circuit court split here, and it is likely only a matter of time before the Supreme Court decides the issue is “ripe” and takes it up. When they do, the overwhelming majority of rulings in the past decade have found that transgender people are a protected class under “sex,” and the composition of the Supreme Court will be favorable (so long as Clinton beats Trump). The question then will be if the court rules in favor of transgender people as a protected class, or on narrower grounds.

Even then, HB2 itself is probably doomed based on all the other precedents it seems to violate. Mark Joseph Stern, who covers LGBT law at Slate, points out that HB2 likely violates Romer v. Evans, Arlington Heights v. Metropolitan, and Reitman v. Mulkey, based on animus and disparate impact on a disfavored class of people. Given how the HB2, and its conservative backers are also trying to force a particular class of students to use facilities which are demonstrably inferior to those available to other students, it is also hard to see how this does not run afoul of Brown v. Board of Education either.

In short, the odds of surviving all of these challenges looks pretty slim.

The court fight over public accommodations differs in one key regard from the legal fight over marriage. In the marriage cases, social conservatives argued that there was no way to know what the long term societal effects of same sex marriage were. In this case, public accommodations laws for transgender people have been around since 1993, with absolutely no measurable negative impact.

In the end, this will likely be decided the same way marriage was. The courts will rule in favor of the LGBT community, social conservatives will throw a fit, state governments will acquiesce, and some self-styled Kim Davis wannabes will cite “freedom of religion” as an excuse to be horrible to people.

And then they’ll have to find something new to be inexplicably outraged over.

EARLIER:

WATCH: Director of Anti-LGBT Group Just Can't – or Won't – Say Which Restroom Trans Woman Should Use

Pat McCrory Hypocritically Slams Obama Transgender Directive as 'Massive Executive Branch Overreach'