SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Conservative bulldog and Hollywood actor James Woods called out Sen. Bernie Sanders as an “utter moron” Monday, after the self-described Democratic Socialist cited China’s paid maternity leave model as an argument for a proposed payroll tax.

Attempting to garner support for legislation to increase taxes on all U.S. citizens to fund paid maternity leave, Sanders wrote on Twitter Monday:

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

China – not exactly seen as a model when it comes to human rights – provides 14 weeks of paid maternity leave. The US provides zero. — Bernie Sanders (@SenSanders) October 19, 2015

Woods did not take kindly to Sanders’ touting of Chinese policy, and reminded the 74-year-old of one of the country’s most draconian human rights practices; the mass slaughter of female infants, both before and after birth.

“China has notoriously killed female infants for population control, you utter moron,” wrote Woods, using the tag #ChinaGendercide.

China has notoriously killed female infants for population control, you utter moron. #ChinaGendercide https://t.co/GBNSaNNJaC — James Woods (@RealJamesWoods) October 19, 2015

Gender selective abortions are rampant in China. Since 1979, when the country adopted a one child per family policy, China’s partiality toward males has kept millions of women lining up for abortions, whether forced or voluntary.

Due to Chinese gendercide, by the year 2020, there are expected to be 30 million more men than women of marriageable age in the country.

Speaking of paid leave to ABC’s George Stephanopoulos Sunday, Sen. Sanders said the United States is the “only major country on earth that doesn’t guarantee paid family and medical leave.”

Sanders supports Sen Kirsten Gillibrand’s FAMILY Act, a bill that would require taxing all American citizens to fund 12 weeks of paid maternity leave, not just the 1 percent.

[The payroll tax] would hit everyone –- yeah, it would,” Sanders admitted ABC.

He added: “But it would mean we would join the rest of the industrialized world and make sure that when a mom has a baby she can in fact stay home with that baby for three months, rather than going back to work at the end of one week.”