MANCHESTER, N.H., Nov. 19, 2013 /PRNewswire/ -- Frontline and nonclinical health care jobs like medical assistants and patient navigators are growing dramatically in number and complexity in the wake of the baby boom retirement, Affordable Care Act, and information technology advances, according to a new workforce strategy report released today by College for America, a national leader in competency-based higher education.

(Photo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20131119/CL20151-INFO-a)

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20131119/CL20151LOGO-b)

The report examines six fast-growing positions in detail — including the "Patient Navigator" function formalized by the new Affordable Care Act — and outlines their projected growth, critical competencies, typical candidate and education profiles, and more.

Two of the surging positions examined, "Medical Office Specialist" and "Medical Assistant," are expected to have the third and fourth largest increase in new jobs through 2020 among all jobs in all industries tracked by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Most importantly, the report explores the implications of this growth for healthcare employers by examining more than 250 Detailed Work Activities (DWAs) and identifying 55 that are common to most of these six fast-growing positions. The analysis uncovers a shift toward a more versatile set of skills than were required for these types of positions in the past, specifically those in technical communication and information technology fluency.

The 12 page report is available from College for America at: www.collegeforamerica.org/healthcarejobsreport.

About College for America's Workforce Strategy reports: College for America at Southern New Hampshire University is an innovative college degree program designed to solve the growing workforce skills gap plaguing American employers by pioneering a radically affordable and accessible college degree program designed specifically for adult, working students. Established in 2012 with support from an EDUCAUSE Next Generation Learning Challenge grant funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the national non-profit school developed the first "competency-based" degree to be approved by the United States Department of Education for federal student financial aid. The new program – available to students only through their employers – is already in place with many employers across the country, including Anthem Blue Cross, ConAgra, McDonald's, Delta Dental, and FedEx.

This research report is the work of Julian L. Alssid and Melissa Goldberg, who lead the school's workforce strategy team in matching curriculum developments with employer's workforce skill needs. Alssid and Goldberg previously managed the nonprofit Workforce Strategy Center, which merged with College for America earlier this year.

SOURCE College for America at Southern New Hampshire University