Landrieu: Hey, if you don’t like Obamacare, you can unelect me

posted at 2:31 pm on November 23, 2013 by Jazz Shaw

Those interested in seeing Senator Mary Landrieu (D-Louisiana) head off to a long overdue retirement may be interested in the, shall we say, less than optimal day she had on Thursday. The public slate of events seemed to kick off with a rather defiant statement

As a side note, I’ll just add that I found the very first response to that particular tweet pretty amusing.

maybe she has another job lined up already.

– Valarie Vivino

Some of the burgeoning confidence may have been a bit misplaced, though. It wasn’t long after that when the AP dropped some new numbers in her in basket which couldn’t have helped with digesting lunch.

Support for U.S. Sen. Mary Landrieu in Louisiana has dropped in a new poll amid the problem-plagued rollout of the federal health care overhaul, which could suggest trouble for the Democratic senator’s re-election bid next year. The third-term senator has regularly polled with approval ratings well above 50 percent, but a survey released Thursday by Southern Media and Opinion Research showed approval of Landrieu’s job performance had deteriorated to 46 percent. Nearly 51 percent said they thought she wasn’t doing a good job. In another possible blow, 54 percent of those polled said they’d be less likely to vote for the Democratic senator’s re-election next year because of her vote for President Barack Obama’s signature health law. Landrieu has maintained her strong support of the federal law.

The number of people supporting her reelection has dropped from above the critical 50% mark to 41% in barely a month, and you simply can’t discount the timing of the Obamacare roll-out with this as coincidence. The specifics in this latest round of polling get even worse for her.

– “Fifty-four percent of those polled said they’d be less likely to vote for the Democratic senator’s re-election next year because of her vote for President Barack Obama’s health law.” – Her “good” ratings dropped by 14 points (from 44-30%). Her negative job ratings went up 10 points with most being an increase in “poor” ratings (up 7 points). – Landrieu lost ground among male and female white Democrats. Her positive job ratings dropped 17 points among while male Democrats and 19 points among white female Democrats. – 70% of undecideds said they would be less likely to vote for Landrieu because she supported ObamaCare. – When voters were asked what was more important, Landrieu’s seniority or electing someone new, 56-37% said electing someone new.

If the voters are truly feeling that way, they may want to recall what Senator Landrieu said only last month.

“….We did not wake up one morning and declare this the law. The people of the United States declared this through us as their Representatives. If they do not like it, they can unelect us. Believe me, they will have a great chance because I am up for reelection right now. They will be able to do that. But that is the way you do it.”

Say… that’s some pretty solid thinking. I may not often agree with Landrieu, but I must admit that she may be on to something there.

Related Posts: