Topics: alias, Archie vs Predator, bitch planet, Comic Books, Comics, Editor's Picks, Jason Aaron, jessica jones, ms. marvel, Tom Scioli, Transformers vs. G.I. Joe, Entertainment News

This story has been corrected since it was originally published.

When the history of this period of comic books is written, we might have to reuse an old term. What could this be but a new Golden Age?

Half the reason for the current glory days is the bottomless hunger for comic book properties in movies and TV. Not only are comics — both corporate and creator-owned — desirable, but they’re finally getting some goddamn respect. While actors making the early X-Men movies had to hide their comic books, now actual comic book art is now appearing in adaptations: like Michael Allred’s pop art in “iZombie” and David Mack’s moody painting in “Jessica Jones.” The dweebs have finally inherited the earth.

Fortunately, comics themselves continue to be a diverse collection of stories and art unlike any other genre. Much of the best work is creator-owned, thanks to the ongoing renaissance at Image Comics, but you can find work that’s weird, personal, cosmic and extraordinary at just about any publisher. Here’s a look at some of the best comics that crossed my path this year. I just wish I had the telepathic powers of Professor X or Gorilla Grodd so I could already know about the ones I missed.

Best Writer: Jason Aaron

Jason Aaron’s year would be an impressive decade for most writers. He continued his creator-owned southern noir “Southern Bastards,” a strong challenger to “Saga” and “Sex Criminals” for overall best title. He complicated his classic run on “Thor” by introducing former love interest and current cancer patient Jane Foster as the newest hammer-holder, boosting sales and creating a fresh and heartbreaking story. He took on Dr. Strange, showing how fascinating and weird this oft-neglected character can be. His new creator-owned series, “The Goddamned,” is a vicious, black comedy Bible story that almost makes me sympathize with the Old Testament God. His run on “Weirdworld” was an unexpected delight and his “Star Wars” series was the best take on Lucas’ characters in decades. What more can one guy do?

Most Necessary Hero: Ms. Marvel

Since the Paris attacks have made Muslim-bashing OK again for Moron Americans, I can’t think of a hero more relevant to the current world than Kamala Khan, aka Ms. Marvel. This teen hero is squarely in the tradition of Peter Parker, while completely of the present. It’s refreshing to see Ms. Marvel join the Avengers and become a cornerstone of the Marvel Universe. Let’s hope Kamala makes the leap to the movies well before Marvel Studios begins Phase Bazillion. We need her.

Best Artist: Tom Scioli

What artist/writer Tom Scioli and writer John Barber have accomplished with the ongoing “Transformers vs. G.I. Joe” series is astounding in its creativity, and most of that creativity comes from Scioli’s art, which might require a whole new Scott McLeod volume to fully appreciate. In fact, this is the only comic that comes with a monthly “commentary track” by the creators — and it’s quite welcome, because there is more going on per page than in most anthologies. Scioli has always been heavily influenced by the great Jack Kirby, but in this series he’s gone beyond Kirby to a type of non-realistic, busy but not cluttered, psychedelic yet tightly choreographed style that’s among the most experimental in comics. The unrestrained exuberance of Scioli’s art is a great reminder that even the best adaptation in the world will never have more to offer than the comics page itself.

Best Piss-take on Superheroes: “All-Star Section 8”

“Preacher” co-creator Garth Ennis is one of the most prolific and successful comic book writers — and one of the few who not only avoids superheroes, but actively despises them. This hatred took sharp, satirical, often disturbing form in “The Boys” and “The Pro,” plus this year’s “All-Star Section 8.” The plot is simple: a group of drunken, deranged, degenerate losers try to recruit a real superhero — such as Batman, Wonder Woman, Green Lantern or Martian Manhunter — to their team. Thanks to John McCrea’s grotesque art and Ennis’ batshit script, the results show DC might have a sense of humor after all.

Best Single Issue by a Disappointing Company: Superman #39

In terms of sales and creativity, the past few years have been bleak for DC. Scott Snyder’s dreary, pretentious, overwritten Batman (no matter who wears the cowl) is horrific for anyone who’s read comics for more than a week, and most of the line (aside from bright spots like “Harley Quinn” and “Black Canary”) is depressing to longtime fans of the company that invented superheroes. But this issue by Geoff Johns, John Romita Jr. and Klaus Janson is a gem, showing that the true heroism of Superman has nothing to do with laser eye beams or bulletproof skin. This one-and-done story is wonderfully analyzed by Oliver Sava, and it’s worth tracking down for anyone who wants to see what Superman is really all about. Maybe we should send a copy to Zack Synder.

Best Publisher: Image Comics

When I asked comic book store workers for their favorite comics, I noticed a pattern: many had trouble naming great comics that were not from Image. Image has been ruling the roost for several years now, just by following a simple formula: letting talented creators own their work and do whatever the hell they want. At Image you can read about gods returning to life as pop stars (“The Wicked and the Divine”), Canada going to war with America (“We Stand On Guard”), a barbarian carrying around a talking witch’s head (“Head Lopper”), a Presidential candidate who has literally sold his soul to the devil (“Citizen Jack”), 12-year-old girls fighting aliens in the 1980s (“Paper Girls”), a dwarf seeking Tarantino-style revenge (“Big Man Plans”), a 40-year-old woman stuck in a child’s body and a Disney-ish hell world (“I Hate Fairyland”) and a Superman analogue with a touch of Forest Gump (“Huck”). If you’re missing out on Image, you’re missing out on life.

Two Marvel All-new All-different Titles That Actually Live Up to the Billing: “Karnak” and “The Vision”

Marvel’s latest branding initiative — All-new! All-different! — has mostly been the same old crap. But a few titles have brought the distinct vision (no pun intended) of creator-owned books to the Marvel Universe. “The Vision,” written by Tom King and illustrated by Gabriel Hernandez Walta, features everyone’s favorite android living in the suburbs with a family he literally built himself. It’s an oddball story that’s kind of like the Stepford Avengers. Then there’s “Karnak,” which is about an obscure member of the Inhumans who can spot the weakness in anything or anyone, much like your most evil relative. As always, writer Warren Ellis provides a deep, thoughtful look at a strange concept, while Gerardo Zaffino’s scratchy, kinetic art creates terrific tension and release. While Marvel has been a bit gimmicky with diversity lately (The new Hulk is Asian! The new Wolverine is female!) it’s nice to see them spotlight characters who are mentally diverse too.