When religious beliefs clash with another constitutional right, religion should prevail, Paxton believes.

A Ken Paxton Doctrine was forged by the gay marriage decision, and other issues seen as affronts on faith.

Until overshadowed by charges of felony securities fraud, Ken Paxton’s tenure as state attorney general was defined by his passionate defense of religion, particularly on issues important to his fellow conservative Christians.

If there has been a defining principle, a Paxton Doctrine, established in his first 7½ months in office, it was forged on same-sex marriage, contraceptives under “Obamacare,” Houston’s anti-discrimination ordinance and other legal controversies where Paxton rallied the power of his office to protect religious beliefs he says are under assault in America.

“Sadly,” he told a gathering of religious conservatives in April, “we live in a time where good, honest people are being vilified across this country for living their lives according to their religious belief.”

As state government’s top lawyer, Paxton is comfortable speaking publicly about matters of faith.

He attends the large, influential Prestonwood Baptist Church in Plano along with several leading conservative members of the Legislature, is a former board member for a church-run crisis pregnancy center in Richardson that seeks to steer women away from abortion and asked for prayers as the U.S. Supreme Court decision on gay marriage loomed.

After the Supreme Court defied those prayers with a June ruling that tossed out all state bans on gay marriage, Paxton blasted the ruling as “lawless” and said he feared it would inspire a backlash against those who follow the teachings of their religion.

He lamented that the marriage debate had devolved into “personal and economic aggression against people of faith.”

And he blamed progressives and sympathetic media outlets for using the issue to “mock, deride and intimidate devout individuals.”

Paxton’s solution was to assure county clerks that they could decline to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples if they had religious objections to the practice.

Critics said that Paxton gave clerks permission to discriminate along with legally dubious advice, but religious conservatives piled on the praise, including the American Family Association, which sent along a “Texas-sized thank you” and expressed the fervent hope that Paxton’s example would inspire other states to follow suit.

Creating a legacy

Every attorney general has a legacy.

John Cornyn, now a U.S. senator, promoted open government during his tenure as Texas attorney general from 1999 to 2002.

Greg Abbott, now governor, forged a national reputation as attorney general by repeatedly filing lawsuits to thwart President Barack Obama’s policies.

Paxton, a tea party-backed Republican who spent 10 years in the Texas House and two years in the Senate, has continued the practice of suing the Obama administration, particularly on environmental regulations and immigration policies. But his emphasis on protecting religious freedom is a recurring theme, whether in legal briefs, speeches or interviews on conservative talk radio, his preferred medium.

Paxton’s job as the state’s chief lawyer, however, took a sharp turn when Collin County grand jurors issued indictments, unsealed this month, alleging that Paxton violated state securities laws in investment deals he brokered before becoming attorney general.

On Aug. 3, he was arrested, fingerprinted and released on bond. (Two fraud charges were dismissed and replaced with new indictments last week to clarify the charges.)

Paxton, who isn’t required to step down while he fights the charges, returned to work as attorney general, a job that has broad authority. In addition to providing legal advice and representation to state officials, his office investigates deceptive trade practices, enforces open-government laws, collects child support and helps local prosecutors with criminal cases. Investigators pursue fraud, election violations, online child predators and parole violations. More than 740 lawyers handle appeals and civil and criminal cases.

It remains to be seen if the criminal case against Paxton will prove to be a distraction.

But one week after his mugshot was published far and wide, Paxton filed a legal brief urging the U.S. Supreme Court to accept a case involving Houston Baptist University, which is attempting to toss out a federal rule requiring religious nonprofits to provide employees with insurance coverage for “morning after pills” and related birth control.

“The continued assault on religious liberties in our nation threatens every single American and undermines the foundation of our Constitution,” Paxton said about the brief. “No government should impose costly fines on its citizens for living in accordance with their convictions.”

The brief followed a July letter urging Republican leaders in Congress to ensure that religious nonprofits cannot lose their tax-exempt status for acting on their opposition to gay marriage.

Also in July, Paxton praised a Texas Supreme Court ruling that repealed the Houston Equal Rights Ordinance, calling it a victory for the conservative Christian pastors who opposed the rule that bans discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity, as well as on age, national original, marital status and more.

Religion as trump card

The legal philosophy embraced by Paxton, who declined to be interviewed for this story, is based on an expansive view of the First Amendment, which says the government may not prohibit the free exercise of religion.

When religious beliefs clash with another constitutional right, such as gay marriage, or with a government rule or policy, religion holds the trump card, Paxton believes.

“Our guiding principle should be to protect people who want to live, work and raise their families in accordance with their religious faith,” he has said.

Fueled by the same-sex marriage ruling, religious liberty is an emerging theme in Republican politics. U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas has made it a centerpiece of his presidential campaign, courting Iowa’s dominant evangelical voters with a rally this month featuring those “victimized by government persecution.”

But the hard-line position isn’t shared by the nation’s legal system, which has long struggled with the intersection of religion and law — buffeted by a continuous churn of lawsuits and court rulings that produce ever-shifting legal ground.

Understanding the legal struggle begins with one premise: “From the beginning, we felt as a nation that religion was special and deserving of something extra,” said Mark Goldfeder, director of the Center for the Study of Law and Religion at Emory University’s Law School.

“It’s always been an American value to let people live according to the dictates of their conscience,” Goldfeder said. “The question is just how far do those accommodations go?”

There are no hard rules, but religious freedom typically reaches its limit at “the point where it harms another,” he said. When the courts dismantled racial segregation, for example, religious practice was rejected as an excuse for discrimination based on race.

How far religious accommodations go on same-sex marriage remains to be determined, but Goldfeder sees value in compromise — and the Texas attorney general’s office could offer a lesson on how to draw the line, he said.

Despite Paxton’s incendiary language on the Supreme Court’s decision, his agency found a more temperate middle ground, issuing a more measured legal opinion telling clerks that they could decline to serve same-sex couples only if somebody else was available to provide a marriage license.