That old adage “It’s not what you say, but how you say it,” is coming to a Customer Service Center near you.

An article in The New York Times reports that companies are well on their way to developing and utilizing software that goes way beyond “voice recognition” to figure out what you’re really trying to communicate behind your limited, ineffectual vocabulary.

According to the Times’ article, “speech analytics,” is now a $214 million market, and employs a sophisticated tool called “word spotting” to examine and analyze the meaning behind our words. For example, let’s say you spent the last 2 ½ weeks trying to enroll in the Affordable Care Act, and all you encountered were crashed websites and answering machines that put you endlessly on “hold.” By employing sophisticated software analysis to your voice mail message to detect subtle modulations in tenor and timbre that denote stress, and other moods, the software will be able to conclude that your shouting “HEY MORONS! ANSWER THE *&%^& PHONE!” indicates that you are dissatisfied with the service you’ve received thus far! Knowing this, knowledgeable supervisors will turn your file over to a specially trained agent who is taught to deal with high-strung, irascible, impossible customers like you, and promptly call you back in two months, when the kinks are worked out of the enrollment system.

Software developed by Beyond Verbal a company in Israel, claims it can detect 400 variations of different moods, including 25 completely heretofore undiscovered shades of gray! Unfortunately, the software still can’t recognize when someone expresses satisfaction, gratitude, happiness or a compliment, because the program is tailored for Customer Service Centers, and no one has ever called in to express a positive emotion.

But 400 shades of moods allows for a great deal of nuance, kind of like the way a wine snob describes a new pinot. “Your anger comes with a hint of melancholy, a full-bodied taste of nuttiness, a wisp of regret and a lingering schadenfreude.”

Dan Emodi, the marketing VP at Beyond Verbal, proclaimed that this tool will “allow machines for the first time to understand the emotional side of our communications.”

In response to a question from a female audience member, Emodi promised to work on a version that would enable men to do that, as well.

Experts say that one of the greatest benefits these mood analyzers will bring to Call Centers is being able to distinguish between frustrated customers who want to work out the problem and are therefore worth investing more time, and angry customers who just want to vent, and aren’t. Leaving the latter to fume even more that they were hung up on by a stupid service clerk, thereby compelling them to go home and pick up the family AK-47, head to the nearest mall, and have their complaint listened to very respectfully to by a hostage negotiator.

It’s easy to see where this is going. Once this technology gets a little more developed and accepted, it’ll be seized on by lawyers who will use it in all sorts of cases, including sexual harassment.

“Your Honor, it’s true that my client heard the plaintiff say ‘No,’ but using the Acme Voice Tonal Transmogrifier 2020X here, it was obvious to him that she really meant ‘Yes.’”

Or: “Your Honor. Really. If the plaintiff was really concerned about getting his money back when my client promised ‘Of course I’ll pay you back!’ then why didn’t he use a portable “speech analyti-cizer” which clearly would have shown the defendant was lying through his teeth?”

The irony of this whole speech analytics thing is that customers have been way-yyyy ahead of these call centers for years. Who among us has not been on hold, listening to a recorded message imploring “Your call is very important to us,” and not screamed into the phone, “You’re LYING, you &$%^! If it was IMPORTANT, you’d hire more people to field it, you &^%$ lying sack of ^%*$#.”

I’m just sayin’ that it looks like pretty soon there won’t be any such thing as “just sayin’.”

Related articles