Topics: black lives matter, Conservatives, Fox News, Lt. Joseph Gliniewicz, Police brutality, Shep Smith, Video, Media News, News, Politics News

Note: This piece originally attributed examples of Fox News personalities commenting on Glinewicz’s death to a piece from the Washington Post’s Radley Balko, although Balko compiled his examples from The Daily Beast’s Andrew Kirell. Salon deeply regrets the attribution error.

Fox News has declared war against the Black Lives Matter movement, spending hours to discredit and undermine activists‘ grievances against police brutality and deflecting to a tired trope of a “war on cops,” but now that one of their prime examples has completely fallen apart, the network’s tempered news anchor has been forced to admonish his colleagues for rushing to advance a baseless narrative.

After months of speculation and a massive, days long manhunt, officials announced this week that the death of Fox Lake, Illinois, police Lt. Joe Gliniewicz was not, in fact, a murder in the line of duty but “a carefully staged suicide.”

For Fox News and other conservative media outlets, Gliniewicz’s death was just but one of several anecdotal truths pointing to a deadly repercussion of the Black Lives Matter movement.

On his Thursday show, Fox News anchor Shepard Smith called out those conservative commentators who jumped to use the cop’s death as a tool to undermine the anti-police brutality movement.

“Think of the narrative that came out of that from so many, many places,’it’s the fault of the Black Lives Matter movement’ and all of this stuff that was just– it really turned up the rhetoric and it really was factually wrong,” Smith said, rebuking his colleagues’ rush to judgement.

“Don’t get ahead of the news,” Smith admonished. “It will run you over.”

According to the Washington Post’s Radley Balko’s partial list of pundits who used Gliniewicz’s staged death to prop up a so-called “war on cops” narrative, at least seven of Smith’s Fox News colleagues are guilty of getting ahead of the news — as Shep would say.