Buy Photo North Fond du Lac's Friendship Learning Center fourth-graders, Gracie Gopalan, Kiana Schraufnagel, and Ella Oie, tie a blue ribbon around a tree on the school's property Wednesday for Thank a Police Officer day, which was Saturday, Sept. 19. (Photo: Doug Raflik/Action Reporter Media)Buy Photo

This week in Fond du Lac, the spouses of police officers paid tribute to the bravery and commitment of law enforcement in our community.

We'd like to join them. We need no better reminder than the tragic death of Trooper Trevor Casper earlier this year of the dangers that they face and the heroism they display.

While these life-threatening moments are, it is hoped, few are far between, our police do so much more, not just to keep us safe, but to also prevent violence in the first place.

"I think you have to take a step back and you really have to think about what policemen do for us," Lori Gutzmann, wife of Captain Jon Gutzmann, told a reporter this week, "and then you can see how positive (what they do) is.

"I'm so hopeful that people will just put a symbol (up) to let (the law enforcement officials) know that they are noticed and supported and appreciated."

We in Fond du Lac generally have a good relationship with our police. A lot of that has to do with effective community policing strategies, which they have had in place for years. But over the last year, nationally, we've seen communities where trust has broken down between the police and the public. The killing of unarmed civilians has led to questions about the appropriate use of deadly force.

Here, the police have reached out to the community, encouraging people to take part in their Citizen's Academy to gain a better understanding of the challenges they face. The police work to build bridges in our community, and we, the public, can meet them halfway by finding out more about them, their work and their strategies.

Some communities have gone so far as to open up police training to key leaders to give them a flavor of the split-second decisions police face every day. We think, in light of national events, that such a program might be something worth considering by law enforcement officials in our state.

The best way to deal with problems in our community is by strengthening relationships, so that if there is conflict, police aren’t seen as outsiders. Policing depends on trust, and trust must be developed by the actions of both the police and local community members.

We applaud the police for doing their part, and we encourage you to get more involved in initiatives such as Citizen's Academy and to get to know your local police officers.

Read or Share this story: http://fondul.ac/1KoAawu