Heidi Flax (Photo: Submitted)

Social and electronic media can be powerful tools. They can connect people across the state, country and the world to make connections and discuss important issues.

But they can also foster misunderstanding, perpetuate stereotypes and dehumanize the individuals trying to engage in dialog.

Such was the case when two University of Wisconsin-Green Bay alumni had an unfortunate email exchange that wound up going viral on social media.

As faculty members at UW-Green Bay and the co-directors of our Center for Middle East Studies and Partnerships and the co-faculty advisers of the Muslim Student Association (MSA), we would like to take this opportunity to share our thoughts on this incident and engage in a much-needed community dialog about cultural diversity and the need for understanding.

Green Bay Alderman Chris Wery has stated to the media that he has had concerns for some time about Muslim Student Associations generally, which led him to question the MSA at UW-Green Bay.

If this is the case, it's unfortunate that Wery did not contact the university, the student org, or its faculty advisers. We would have been more than happy to answer his questions, meet with him and invite him to some of the many public events that are held on our campus.

Since then, we have reached out to him and he has graciously agreed to meet with us to discuss how we can move forward.

To set the record straight, though: The MSA is not a political organization and does not advocate for any political groups or policies. Like any official university group or organization, it does not condone any form of terrorism or violence against innocent people.

David Coury (Photo: Nicholas Collura)

The goal and mission of the MSA is "to increase the awareness of Islam on the UWGB campus as well as foster friendships between Muslims and non-Muslims and provide a gathering space for everyone."

The Mauthe Center, a private ecumenical center on the UW-Green Bay campus, serves as the host for many of its events including Islam Awareness Week. Over the past few years, our campus and our community have become more diverse with an increasing number of students and residents of the Muslim faith.

Since the tragedy of 9/11, student interest in as well as misconceptions about Islam have been on the increase. As a public, liberal arts institution, we feel it is our obligation to teach about these issues and engage in campus and community dialogs to foster greater understanding of our globalized world.

We are saddened that there continues to be suspicion of individuals based solely on their name or the types of events they attend.

To be sure, we must not overlook the fact that radicalized individuals have committed brutal and murderous acts and falsely attributed them to Islam. However we must also remember that this year's recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize, Malala Yousafzai, is a young Muslim woman fighting for education, women's rights and equality.

What does this tell us about Islam and the Muslim world? Everything and nothing.

Of the estimated 1.5 billion Muslims in the world, there are radicals, there are peace activists and everything in between. Just like with the rest of humanity. It is our hope that this unfortunate incident will be an opportunity for all of us to engage in a respectful dialog about our community, our university and our neighbors.

David Coury is professor of humanistic studies (German) and global studies and co-director of the Center for Middle East Studies and Partnerships at the University of Wisconsin-Green Bay. Heidi Sherman is associated professor of humanistic studies (history) and Global studies and co-director of the Center for Middle East Studies and Partnerships.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1tR0N6a