Reprinted from AIS's HEALTH REFORM WEEK , the nation’s leading publication on the business implications of the massive changes for the health industry mandated by reform.

Accountable care organizations received a huge boost from the 2010 health reforms, according to insurers and experts who say they expect to see more plan-sponsored ACOs on the insurance exchanges as part of carriers’ narrow-network strategies. While some observers project that up to two-thirds of the country could be covered by ACOs in the next five years, all agree the success of ACOs — on the exchange and elsewhere — will depend on their ability to bend the cost curve and not just improve quality.

WellPoint, Inc. unit Anthem Blue Cross in California and Cigna Corp. last month reported improved quality results through their ACOs, and Cigna also reported a lower medical cost trend.

Among the results, Anthem said its ACO partners in 2012 had a 35% increase in the number of mammograms performed and a 44% increase in the appropriate prescribing of antibiotics for bronchitis treatment. Cigna’s results for its Granite Healthcare Network ACO in New Hampshire included an 8% reduction in the emergency room cost trend, a 4% reduction in the use of the ER, a 4% reduction in the advanced imagining cost trend and a 7% reduction in the use of advanced imaging.

Cigna, like other insurers, is bullish on the model, which it calls “collaborative accountable care.”

“We have grown from one in 2008 to 86 arrangements now, and we expect to get to 100 sometime early in 2014,” says Cigna Medical Director Dick Salmon, M.D. “Those 100 arrangements will cover about 10% of our customers.”

Salmon says growth in ACOs has been stoked by the Medicare Shared Savings Program and the ACO Pioneer program, which were created under the 2010 Affordable Care Act (ACA). Since passage of the ACA, more than 360 provider groups have created Medicare ACOs, which now cover more than 5.3 million Medicare beneficiaries, CMS said last month. These ACOs share with Medicare any savings generated from lowering the cost growth when they meet certain quality standards of the entire population.

“That has been a major stimulus for more and more health care professional organizations to really strive to have the capabilities to be accountable for their population based care,” Salmon tells HRW. “The fact that Medicare is stimulating this has really helped to accelerate our growth as well” in the private sector.

ACOs: A Model for the Exchange?

Whether ACOs are a good fit for insurance exchanges depends on how they’re defined, Salmon says. CMS defines an ACO as a group of doctors, hospitals or other health care professionals who have come together voluntarily to provide coordinated, high-quality care, he notes. Salmon says this means an ACO is a portion of a network.

“So if you’re asking, is an ACO appropriate to be a part of a network that’s offered by a plan on a health exchange? Absolutely,” he adds. “Is it appropriate that it be the principal part of a network offered by a plan on a health exchange? Absolutely. That is because ACOs are typically a geographically aligned group of health care professionals.”

But he adds that any plan offered on an exchange will have to have a complementary network to deal with out-of-area care. “So in and of itself, an [ACO] is probably not sufficient,” he says as a free-standing option on the exchange.

David Muhlestein, Ph.D., director of research at consulting firm Leavitt Partners, LLC, says his organization heard from many ACOs expressing interest in participating on the exchange.

“But we’ve seen just a few examples of where they’re actually offering them,” he tells HRW. These include Aurora Health Care in Wisconsin, and a joint venture between Sentara Healthcare in Virginia and Mountain States Health Alliance in Tennessee.

They’re doing it in two ways. In one, they’ll actually create an insurance company and register with a department of insurance in a state, Muhlestein says. “But the more common way that we’ve seen — and expect going forward — is to partner with a plan with a very narrow network offering,” he adds. “So it will be within the ACO, but it could be Aetna or United that is offering the plan.”

This sentiment is echoed by Rich Lipeles, chief operating officer of Heritage Provider Network, which runs the nation’s largest Medicare Pioneer ACO. Lipeles said he doesn’t expect provider groups to leap into the exchanges. “Many providers have gotten into [Medicare ACOs] from a defensive posture — they didn’t want to miss the boat,” Lipeles told attendees at the National Accountable Care Congress in Los Angeles, sponsored by Global Health Care, LLC, this past fall. “We are going to be cautious,” Lipeles said, according to a January article in HRW sister publication ACO Business News.

ACOs Could Take Off Nationwide

Meanwhile, ACOs outside of the exchange are poised to take off, in part due to the 2010 health reforms, say insurance executives and observers.

Mark Bertolini, president and CEO of Aetna Inc., told financial analysts last month that the insurer had 30 ACOs at the end of 2013 and will have 60 by the end of 2014. “We have 550,000 members running through our ACO agreements now. That will grow to 850,000 next year [i.e., 2014],” he said.

The seeds for the most advanced ACOs were planted prior to the ACA, says Muhlestein.

“The ACA kind of acted as a billows that came out to that little flame that was there and really gave it some life,” he says. “It was a process that was already in place, but this accelerated it.”

Among other things, providers reacted to the Medicare Shared Savings Plan activity, he says.

“If there is one hospital in a city that becomes a Medicare Shared Savings ACO, their competitors view it as a competitive disadvantage not to also move down that path,” Muhlestein says. “So they’ll start to form Medicare and also private ACOs. It acts as a seed in some markets to create lots of activity and it enables those smaller organizations to participate.”

ACOs Could Cover Two-Thirds of Country

Muhlestein says under a best-case scenario, roughly two-thirds of the country would be covered by ACOs in the next five years. “A more realistic number would be putting it close to the 35% range,” he adds.

He also notes that it’s still early to declare success just yet. Even the results of CMS’s Pioneer ACOs, released last summer, showed a mixed picture. Of the 32 Pioneers, 13 generated savings to qualify for bonuses totaling $76 million; two shared losses totaling $4 million; and nine dropped out of the Pioneer program (HRW 8/5/13, p. 4).

“It was pretty consistently positive on the quality side,” Muhlestein says. “But the quality component is not what is going to be driving this. What is going to be driving this is the cost side. I would say it was generally positive, but nothing that is going to make someone jump into it right away.”

One metric to gauge the success of ACOs going forward, particularly on the commercial side, will be to see how many renew their contracts, Muhlestein says. “If they leave their contract, it’s a big indication they were not successful in saving money.”

Cigna’s Salmon says the ACO model has the potential to be a game changer.

“The momentum and acceleration feels terrific,” he says. “Those of us who really believe this is the key to transforming our health care system — and evolving towards a quality, affordable health care system — certainly hope this will continue to grow over the next three to five years, and we become a major way that care is delivered in the United States. We’re optimistic, but I think it’s still early.”

© 2014 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

For more timely news and business strategies on accountable care organizations, check out the monthly newsletter ACO Business News at the AIS Marketplace.