For women coming out of prison or rehab, Redeem-Her is there to lend a hand.

Buy Photo Jen Simon, manager of Second Chances Thrift Store in Neptune. Proceeds from the store benefit Redeem-Her, a charity that helps women coming out of prison or rehab. (Photo: Bob Bielk/Gannett)Buy Photo

NEPTUNE CITY - It’s located in a strip mall, next to a cellphone repair shop. Second Chances Thrift Boutique does repair work, too, but of a different kind.

It helps repair lives.

The store is an arm of Redeem-Her, a nonprofit support organization for women who are transitioning back into mainstream life after time in prison or substance abuse rehab. Redeem-Her has a house in Toms River where women can stay as they get back on their feet.

“Honestly, that house saved my life,” said Jen, a formerly incarcerated Brick resident who asked that her last name not be used. “When I came out, I had nowhere to go. I had burned all my bridges. I didn’t have money for an apartment. I had nothing but the clothes on my back.”

The house is funded in part by the thrift store, which also offers job opportunities to the residents.

“I had some work experience but not much,” said Redeem-Her house president Theresa Ortenzio, who is overcoming an addition to Xanax and painkillers. “So to give me an opportunity to put something other than ‘exotic dancer’ on a resume gave me a push to do other things.”

On Thursday, folks across America will count their blessings. But few of us know what it’s like to have nothing, to survive on life’s desperate edge. For Redeem-Her residents and alumni, giving thanks means much more than turkey and football.

Building a foundation

Redeem-Her was founded by Stacey Kindt, a former Brick resident who served 18 months in prison for a kidnapping that stemmed from a custody battle. It began offering transitional housing in 2007 and got a boost from Monmouth University, which opened the thrift store in 2008 to give students experience in nonprofit business.

The house accommodates eight women, who can stay as long as they need to, provided that they follow some basic rules.

Buy Photo Board members of Redeem-Her, a charity that helps women coming out of prison of rehab. Pictured left to right at Second Chances thrift store are Suellen Arecchi, Marilyn Rocky, and Prudy White. (Photo: Bob Bielk/Gannett)

“The biggest success that we can claim is when these women come out and have a place to live, it builds a foundation,” said Prudy White, chair of Redeem-Her’s board of trustees. “Finally having safe and sober housing, living with other women who have been down the same path, it gives them the opportunity to rebuild their life and to see a future.”

Ortenzio is doing just that. The Sayreville native checked in during the summer of 2014, after an extensive rehab stint following the loss of her 2-year-old son Luca to sudden infant death syndrome. She forged a bond with her housemates.

“I’ve been able to have real friends that are women who care about me and don’t want anything from me,” she said. “When you have addiction, it’s about what you have and what you can do for people. I’ve never been able to say I have true friends.”

The house is self-governing, and Ortenzio was elected president. She interviews applicants, pays the bills, makes sure residents attend their recovery meetings and enforces a 30-day curfew for newcomers.

“I have to be accountable not only for myself but for other women,” she said. “I feel like if I went back out (into substance abuse), I wouldn’t be letting just myself down but a lot of other people.”

Helping others succeed

Monmouth University continues to be a supportive partner for Redeem-Her. Eleanor Novek, a professor of communication, is planning several projects for her students. One is the recording and archiving of oral histories from house residents. Another is the redesign of Redeem-Her’s website and the ramping up of the organization’s social media presence.

“Our students are very career-focused, which is good, but I hope projects like this will show them that they can also use their skills to help others succeed,” Novek said.

This sign at Second Chances thrift store says it all. (Photo: Jerry Carino)

The Second Chances thrift store stands as a monument to the possible.

Ortenzio’s work at its former branch in Toms River enabled her to land a full-time job at a local bakery. Jen’s work in the Neptune City flagship led to a job as general manager of a nearby restaurant, though she still helps out at Second Chances twice a week.

“I don’t want to leave the store because it helps me in so many ways,” she said. “I want to give back and help other people.”

After six months in the Redeem-Her house, Jen moved home with her mom and 14-year-old son. She got her driver’s license back and has a car.

There’s a small sign on the wall of the thrift store. It bears a motto for Redeem-Her and a reminder for all those who take good fortune for granted.

“We believe in second chances.”

Second Chances accepts donated items at its location at 101 3rd Ave., Neptune. The store also seeks volunteers. Monetary donations to Redeem-Her may be sent to P.O. Box 1913, Toms River, NJ 08754. For more information on Redeem-Her’s services, call 732-547-2590 or visit www.redeem-her.org.

Carino's Corner appears each Monday in the Asbury Park Press. Contact Jerry Carino at jcarino@gannettnj.com.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1HhOrgB