Health care is changing, and it has created difficult times for small, rural hospitals, Margaret West told the Magnolia City Council on Monday.

West, chief executive officer of Magnolia Regional Medical Center, discussed those problems as they relate to the city-owned hospital during her annual report to the council.

“Since the Affordable Care Act came into being in 2010, we have had 69 rural hospitals close (in the United States). We don’t want to be one of those. We are working diligently to keep our hospital financially viable and to continue to provide the benefits,” West said.

The hospital had many achievements during the recent fiscal year that ended September 30, 2015.

The MASH program to encourage more young people to enter medical professions has gained popularity, West said. A hospitalist program was begun. A residency program was established. The hospital took over management of the Murphy Clinic. A new surgeon was hired.

“We have a lot of things going for us. We had one of our regular revenue-producing years. That particular year patient revenue was $49.7 million, and with other revenue was $50.2 million,” West said.

The hospital was set back by deductions from revenue. There “contractual allowances” are the differences between what the hospital charges Medicare, Medicaid, Blue Cross and other insurers to provide a service, and the amount those entities actually pay. The payments are usually far less than what the hospital charges, West said.

“Sometimes we can negotiate, but most of the time it is non-negotiable,” West said.

The difference is a “contractual write-off.” Write-offs in the past fiscal year were $25.7 million. Bad debt expense of $2 million was also written-off. The hospital is also required by law because of its not-for-profit status to provide a certain amount of free care, which was $601,000.

“So we had a total deduction out of our $50 million of $28.3 million. The remainder is what we have to operate off of,” West said.

The city-owned hospital paid its 229 full-time and part-time employees $11,719,987 last year, which with benefits totaled closer to $14 million, West said.

“Expenses exceeded that $25 million. But our depreciation expenses coming from the depreciation that we take on the new hospital is $2.6 million. When you take that off the amount less expenses, we actually had a negative $138,750. We felt that was a fairly good year,” West said.

The hospital was also impacted by “take backs” from the government.

“Our State Medicaid decided that the process we have used to bill and collect money in the labor and delivery area has been incorrect for past five years. We were asked to pay $1.5 million back last summer, so we paid $1.5 million back. We also had a new audit company that came on board and cleaned up the books and adjusted some of the payback for several years, and that amounted to another half-million,” West said.

The hospital is reducing capital expenditures, payroll and supplies “to get where we want to be by the end of the fiscal year” in September, West said.

A consulting group will help Magnolia Regional Medical Center develop a plan to “stay viable,” West said.

“We provide a lot of services to this community and we want to be here for many years to come,” West said.

Margaret West, chief executive officer of the Magnolia Regional Medical Center, reviews the past year at the city-owned hospital during her annual report to the Magnolia, Arkansas City Council, Monday, April 25, 2016. magnoliareporter.com video.