CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA—Let's begin at the very end, during the closing statements of Sunday night's Democratic presidential debate, because something happened that's really important to the substantive bedrock of the campaign. There are the shiny objects and there are the horse-race turning points and there are the big noisy issues that everyone gloms onto because said glomming will get you on the news the next day, or onto one of The Sunday Showz the following weekend.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

On Sunday night, the latter were represented by a couple of smackdowns between Hillary Rodham Clinton and Bernie Sanders on the issues of gun safety, healthcare reform, and cleaning up regulation of the financial sector. In truth, there wasn't much daylight between them on either of the last two, which is why HRC framed her attack on Sanders—over both the Affordable Care Act and the Dodd-Frank reform bill—as a defense of a president to whom, she said, Sanders had been less than loyal. She mentioned that Sanders had mused about finding a primary opponent in 2011. (Left unsaid, of course, is the fact that there was only one person on the stage who'd actually tried to keep Barack Obama from being president and, back in 2007-08, she wasn't exactly shy about why. Welcome to the Elision Fields.)

Most Popular

Meanwhile, Sanders kept trying to hang The Great Vampire Squid of Goldman Sachs around Clinton's neck. This latter prompted the best moment of the night from poor Martin O'Malley, who otherwise has been reduced virtually to panhandling the moderators to get any run at all. He said that both of the other two were in the satchel, one way or the other. This was the kind of thing that is going to get some people writing today about the "contrast" between the Democratic candidates on Sunday night and the Republican candidates this past Thursday, which is roughly the difference between a public policy seminar at the Kennedy School and the Apostle John, mad from thirst, raving about seven-headed beasts from his cave on Patmos.

But the really interesting part of the debate came right at the end, during HRC's closing statement, in which she said:

CLINTON: … Lester,I spent a lot of time last week being outraged by what's happening in Flint, Michigan, and I think every single American should be outraged. We've had a city in the United States of America where the population which is poor in many ways and majority African-American has been drinking and bathing in lead-contaminated water. And the governor of that state acted as though he didn't really care. He had request for help and he had basically stonewalled. I'll tell you what, if the kids in a rich suburb of Detroit had been drinking contaminated water and being bathed in it, there would've been action. So I sent my top campaign aide down there to talk to the mayor of Flint to see what I could to help. I issued a statement about what we needed to do and then I went on a T.V. show and I said, "It was outrageous that the governor hadn't acted and within two hours he had…I want to be a president who takes care of the big problems and the problems that are affecting the people of our country everyday.

SANDERS: Well, Secretary Clinton was right and what I did which I think is also right, is demanded the resignation of governor. A man who acts that irresponsibly should not stay in power.

Make no mistake. The appalling scandal regarding the poisoning by lead of the citizens of Flint, Michigan, and the lack of response from the deregulated government brought to Michigan by Governor Rick Snyder, is a percolating issue everywhere in America, especially in the African-American communities. We prayed for the citizens of Flint at Mother Emanuel on Sunday morning, and many of the politicians who gathered to spin for the various candidates barely could contain their outrage. It is an issue among the people who rarely get their issues heard. And they are extremely pissed.

"I was very happy it came up tonight," said Stephen Benjamin, the mayor of Columbia, South Carolina. "I spent most of the day on the phone with several of my colleagues in Michigan—both the mayor of Lansing and the mayor of Rochester Hills, speaking specifically about this issue. I knew Dayne Walling, the former mayor of Flint, I have not had a chance to speak to the new mayor of Flint yet. I will have a chance to meet her this week."I want to figure out how mayors can be more involved. We talk about issues about water quality and infrastructure. There's a separate issue about executive control, about mayors at the center of metropolitan economies can help shape the future. In Michigan, they just get removed, with no accountability for the emergency managers or the governor, and something has to be done about that."

The crisis has its roots in something fundamental to modern conservative government—the deregulated state. In 2011, under a controversial state law that he signed shortly after taking office, Governor Rick Snyder removed Walling, Benjamin's friend, and replaced him with an emergency manager. It was under this regime that the decision was made to change Flint's water supply from the Detroit water district to the Flint River, which required the water to go through the antiquated lead-lined pipes that have now poisoned a generation of the city's children. Everything else—including the alleged cover-up and the calls for Snyder's resignation that have come from everyone from Michael Moore to Bernie Sanders—has, well, flowed from that.

It is an actual issue affecting actual people, an issue that nonetheless has tributaries bleeding into all the vague conceptual issues that only get talked about. The crumbling infrastructure. The deplorable lack of a coherent national plan to revitalize our cities. The hundreds of environmental crises that sit like little Hiroshimas in the poor places all over the country. Deregulation in its many guises. Class. And, of course, race, even though this cannot be About Race because nothing in America ever is About Race. Issues like this bubble up from the bottom until, suddenly, they explode, and all the political pros scramble to catch up. That's what's happened with the heroin crisis, which wasn't even an issue when this campaign began, but is now central to everyone's campaign, especially in New Hampshire, and which may be the issue that finally turns the country around on its idiotic "war" on drugs. The Flint water crisis can be one of those issues. It is the collapse of a local government that was positively engineered to fail, because the people who engineered it figured that its victims were people the country didn't care about anyway.

"We have a governor who is a business exec, so he said he was going to run government like a business," said Congresswoman Brenda Lawrence, who represents Detroit. "This is a glaring example of decisions made on dollars and cents and on a budget and had a devastating effect on the people, especially the children, because the lead has a negative impact on the development of your brain. It's developmental. It's educational. Those children are going to need help for the next 15 years ... You cannot run a government without looking after the well-being of the people. On paper, he made a great decision, but look at the lives he impacted."

This was very much a debate over the value of government oversight and regulation—from the complicated financial instruments that nearly blew up the world economy to something as simple as tap water. Four years ago, nobody thought police violence would be a national issue. Six months ago, nobody thought the lead in Flint's water would be a national issue. Everybody, as is usually the case with these things, is wrong again.