Thursday night at the 44th National Right to Life Convention in Louisville, Ky., pro-life Drs. Randall K. O'Bannon and David N. O'Steen led a workshop entitled, "Planned Parenthood: Playing Politics, Selling Obamacare, But Abortion is Still the Bottom Line." After sitting through that presentation and speaking with a number of pro-life insiders throughout the three-day conference, I realized Thursday's workshop was aptly named. Here's why:

1. 11-12 percent of Planned Parenthood's clients have abortions.

Planned Parenthood likes to claim that abortion encompasses only 3 percent of its services, but Dr. O'Bannon, who serves as NRLC's director of education and research, labeled this number an "accounting gimmick." For instance, he told Townhall before his presentation, if a young woman comes in for an abortion and is offered a number of other services and treatment, only one of those services will count as abortion. They count every condom they give as one service, he further explained.

For a more accurate picture of the large role abortion plays, consider these statistics: 11-12 percent of Planned Parenthood's clients have abortions. That's about 1 in every 8 women.

2. Planned Parenthood is building mega clinics.

Many news outlets, including this one, have reported the astounding number of abortion clinic closings this year largely due to legislation that has enforced clinic regulations. However, less reported is the fact that Planned Parenthood has opened several clinics in the past few years, including mega clinics that expand over 10,000 square feet. The largest of these clinics resides in Houston. This towering building is six stories tall and 78,000 square feet. Dr. O'Bannon provided pictures of the luxurious and spacious waiting room.

Altogether, the project cost a cool $26 million to build. One representative from Louisiana Right to Life told me that Planned Parenthood is also opening one of these monstrous facilities in New Orleans.

3. Planned Parenthood does not give breast exams.

They only give referrals. In light of this, I'd like the organization to answer of one of Dr. O'Bannon's poignant questions: "Planned Parenthood spends money on abortion equipment, but can't afford mammogram machines?"

4. In 2010, Planned Parenthood established an abortion mandate for all of its affiliates.

Meaning, that each of its affiliates must have at least one clinic that performs abortions.

5. Some Planned Parenthoods hold "Sexy Tuesday" happy hours.

Don't believe me? O'Bannon says these happy hours are used as ploys to attract wealthy people in affluent neighborhoods.

6. Some Planned Parenthood clinics have designated spaces for phone banking.

It's no secret that Planned Parenthood has helped to elect pro-abortion politicians, including President Barack Obama. But, what most people don't know, is that the organization has designated stations in its clinics for such political activism, according to Dr. O'Bannon.

7. Most people don't know that Planned Parenthood's affiliates perform abortion.

NRLC executive director Dr. O'Steen provided a packetful of polling data from the polling company, inc. The company surveyed 1,003 people on behalf of NRLC and discovered that 56 percent of those surveyed did not know that Planned Parenthood's affiliates provide abortions. This ignorance proved to be especially unfortunate, considering that this same polling company found that most people would not support tax dollars going to organizations that perform abortions.

If only they knew...

8. Planned Parenthood offers webcam abortions.

I’ve reported on this shocking practice before, but this week I learned more of the unnerving specifics. At Planned Parenthood's discretion, young girls are allowed to take the abortion drug RU-486 hundreds of miles away from their abortionist via Skype. When he deems it appropriate, the abortionist on the other end of the computer screen simply pushes a button and out pop the pills from a drawer ready for the young woman to consume.

Sounds safe, right?

9. Planned Parenthood receives $1.2 billion a year.

The last eight points should make this number even more troubling. Yes, you the taxpayer are paying for all of the above.

10. The sky won't fall if Planned Parenthood is defunded.

No, I didn't need a conference to tell me that, but it was nice to hear people say it. Pro-choice feminists may like to claim women will be in dire and desperate need were Planned Parenthood to go out of business, but the truth is many businesses offer real health care for women. Pregnancy resource centers, for instance, often offer free counseling, parenting classes and more for mothers dealing with unplanned pregnancies.

I hope these truths convince you that Planned Parenthood is one big oxy moron.

As Dr. O'Bannon solemnly stated, "Abortion is one commitment they consider non-negotiable."