In the latest attempt to blend editorial content with commerce, Allure is working with MasterCard Inc. to allow readers to purchase products like lipstick and skin cream directly from its website and mobile app.

Starting this month, readers that click through product reviews and photos featured at Allure will be able to add items to a shopping cart instead of circling items or dog-earing pages with products they want and then searching for the items elsewhere on the Web.

Orders will be fulfilled by retailers including Wal-Mart Stores Inc. and Hudson’s Bay Co.’s Saks Fifth Avenue.

The lines between content and commerce have blurred in recent years as publishers searched for additional revenue streams to make up for the drop in traditional print advertising and retailers look for new ways to attract shoppers to their websites.

“Online retailers spend a lot of money and time trying to drive traffic and get eyeballs,” said Bryan Barley, president of online skincare company SkinCareRx.com that will sell its goods through Allure’s ShopThis program. “The idea is that Allure will bring us customers who are already highly engaged and have learned about our products.”

Allure said it currently doesn’t share revenue with retailers that fulfill its goods but that it will charge retailers and brands to create shoppable advertisements separate from the editorial pieces. The magazine said the retailers and brands won’t influence whether or how it reviews a product.

The efforts come as the average person age 15 and older spends just 19 minutes a day reading, compared to 45 minutes a day shopping, according to the Labor Department’s American Time Use Survey.

Better technology and easier payment services make it possible for online publications and video services to process payments and operate more like e-commerce companies.

Earlier this year, Conde Nast said it would merge its Lucky shopping magazine with online retailer BeachMint Inc. to allow readers to shop directly from the Lucky website by 2015. Meanwhile, luxury online retailer Net-A-Porter in February launched a glossy print fashion magazine after its research showed women preferred to read about fashion on glossy magazines even as they shop online.

Still, publishers have long struggled with how to achieve widespread adoption of shoppable magazines and videos.

Allure initially started refashioning its website into an e-commerce shop four years ago but “I think we were ahead of the technology,” said Editor in Chief Linda Wells.

The magazine partnered with beauty websites Soap.com and BeautyBar.com, which are owned by Amazon.com Inc., to allow readers to hit a shop button whenever products mentioned on Allure.com were available for purchase at its partner websites.

But the partnership only gave readers access to 40% of the products on Allure.com and required readers to leave Allure’s website and go through a number of steps to buy the product, raising the risk they might not navigate back to Allure, Ms. Wells said.

“We feel more confident this time, because Wal-Mart and Saks carry a much bigger assortment for both mass market and prestige brands, and the technology has caught up to make it an easier experience for shoppers,” she said.