With the primary election mere months away, Lauderdale County District 3 Supervisor Candidates are working diligently in hopes of gaining support from the community.

"It's nice to come out and meet the people and listen to them and talk to them one on one and find out what their concerns are," District 3 Supervisor candidate Otis D. Barrett said. "Also to get the platform out, what I'm running for and why I'm running."

That was District 3 Supervisor Candidate Otis D. Barrett who is running against Chris Hudnall and current District 3 Supervisor Josh Todd. All three men believe in the importance of understanding your community, but also running a clean campaign.

"I think it's good. I think it's good camaraderie," District 3 Supervisor candidate Chris Hudnall said. "You're friends with those candidates, I'm friends with the other District 3 candidates running for District 3 Supervisor. I've known these men quite a while and I think they are good people."

"You always have to remain friends," current District 3 Supervisor Josh Todd said. "You know after everything is said and done, you've got to remain friends. The people of District 3 are going to pick who is best for them."

Hudnall says every candidate in District 3 has their own agenda and it's that agenda that people will draw in the people who believe in you.

"The community should be informed about what the supervisors agendas are and what they are looking to vote on," Hudnall stated. "I think bringing it back to the community center is a good rapport."

But for each candidate maintaining a healthy campaign is of utmost importance when it comes to community support.

"When it boils down to politics, politics and community is intertwined," Barrett said. "We are all here for the same reason; that is to raise a family, provide for our kids, have good jobs, have good roads and we have to do that as a group and not an individual."

The candidates say they will continue down the campaign trail until the primary election on August 4th.