At this point last year, President Barack Obama had talked up Obamacare on “Leno.” He tweeted about it with Katy Perry, asked ministers to pitch it to their flocks and dispatched top officials and celebrities to spread the Obamacare word.

This year?

Story Continued Below

Silence.

That’s about to change.

The second year of Obamacare enrollment starts Saturday, and the administration is launching a much more precise strategy that uses targeted digital ads, aims at specific demographics and leverages social media, according to senior administration officials who briefed POLITICO.

Obamacare's new lingo The health-care law's advocates have dropped the wonky, jargon-jammed way they explained coverage last year in favor of an every-day vocabulary.

Affordable Care Act ⇒ Obamacare: Last fall, Jimmy Kimmel dispatched a camera crew to ask people strolling down Hollywood Boulevard whether they supported Obamacare or the Affordable Care Act. Among the overwhelmingly clueless, the ACA won. A year later, such confusion has largely dissipated, and Obamacare has lost some of its linguistic sting. But the label still plays badly among certain groups, particularly Republicans. It also reinforces the link between the law and an unpopular president, says George Lakoff, an expert on the language of political discourse. A few state-run exchanges figured out early how to minimize the name negatives. In fact, Kentucky’s kynect did such a good job of branding itself that even Sen. Mitch McConnell seemed to forget it was part of a law he detests. Repeal the ACA, McConnell said last month, but kynect can stay. “We made kynect about an individual and their family obtaining health insurance here in Kentucky,” Exchange Director Carrie Banahan said. And neither Obamacare nor ACA appears anywhere on kynect’s homepage. Qualifying life event ⇒ Getting hitched, turning 26 or graduating college: Last fall, many Americans struggled to grasp the sometimes complex specifics of “qualifying life event,” “special enrollment period” and other insurance terminology. A year later, the organization Young Invincibles has ditched that shoptalk. As it pushes enrollment among the under-35 crowd, Campaign Director Erin Hemlin says the group just asks people if they’ve recently graduated from college, turned 26, gotten married or moved. That’s a simple vernacular instead of a technical mouthful. Premium tax credits ⇒ Financial help: Last fall, many low- and moderate-income Americans had no idea that financial assistance was available to help them afford health insurance. Blame terms like “premium subsidies” and “tax credits.” (Premium’s a kind of ice cream or a really good cut of beef. It’s not readily equated with health insurance, said Jill Midkiff, communications director at Kentucky’s Cabinet for Health and Family Services.) A year later, experts like Mike Perry, a partner at the opinion research firm PerryUndem, recommend talking about “financial help” when trying to reach the target population. But that alone doesn’t cut it, he added. The message must include real numbers. A family of four earning $40,000, for example, needs to know that it’s eligible for about $7,000 toward premiums. “Low cost” also works, he noted. Plus it’s more definite than “affordable.” Navigators ⇒ In-person help: Last fall, consumers complained that it took them too long to learn about in-person assistance. Not only that, “navigators” was an unfamiliar term, at least in the context of health insurance. Did these people work for health plans, like some brokers? Did they charge a fee? Was their advice slanted? A year later, the message is simpler: Consumers can get free, unbiased, in-person help during enrollment season. “‘Help’ is a powerful word to use,” Perry said. Individual mandate ⇒ A fine: Last fall, Obamacare advocates shied away from talk about the detested individual mandate. Better to focus on things that people liked, they thought — like coverage for pre-existing conditions and young adults staying on a parent’s plan until age 26. A year later, Americans will hear more about the mandate. Research has found that it does motivate people to enroll. But the groups doing the outreach and messaging won’t necessarily use that legal term. They won’t say “penalty” either; that’s too harsh. Listen instead for talk about a “fee” or a “fine.” HealthCare.gov has already picked up on this. “If you can afford health insurance but choose not to buy it, you must pay a fee,” the website begins. Only then does it elaborate: “The fee is sometimes called the ‘penalty,’ ‘fine,’ ‘individual responsibility payment,’ or ‘individual mandate.’”

( CARTOONS: Matt Wuerker on Obamacare)

It’s a slower, quieter buildup for Obamacare sign-ups in year two, a reflection of a more cautious administration lowering expectations after last year’s disastrous HealthCare.gov rollout. But in year two, officials can be more focused on the mechanics of enrollment and spend less time introducing Americans to the law.

For example: The hashtag #bornin88 did well the first year in getting 26-year-olds to sign up; expect a #bornin89 successor, aimed at people who turn 26 and can’t stay on their parents’ health insurance. Officials now know that radio spots are better for reaching Latino audiences in need of sign-up assistance. Digital ads last year drove the creation of 4 million accounts, and they are less expensive than poorly targeted broadcast spots.

The administration is focusing less on the front end of the health care sign-up period and more on the back end, when procrastinators are likely to log in to HealthCare.gov.

Department of Health and Human Services officials aren’t saying how much they are spending this enrollment season on advertising, marketing or outreach or how that compares with last year. They never released a 2014 total of federal and state spending either. House Republicans complain they didn’t get full answers to questions about how many millions have been spent.

( Also on POLITICO: Ted Cruz out on a limb on Obamacare repeal)

The administration rolled out the message last fall in several stages. This fall, officials say the decision was made not to start a big push before the website opens on Saturday; there’s no sense priming people to sign up before they can get online to do so.

The revamped HealthCare.gov itself is in better though not perfect shape; millions did eventually use the website for 2014. Still, backers of the law are just as happy to see a quiet beginning, rather than a huge crush of people going online, either to get an early start on 2015 coverage or just because they are curious to see whether the site crashes all over again.

“Job one has been to make sure all the mechanisms work and are in place,” said Ron Pollack, executive director of Families USA, who isn’t bothered by the relatively subdued walk-up to open enrollment. If it melts down, “no hype will make up for that problem.”

Job two is getting 7 million people to re-enroll, 3 million to sign up and more to join the nearly 9 million who have gone on the Medicaid rolls.

( Also on POLITICO: Obamacare and the low expectations game)

Obama squeezed in a pep talk to health insurance enrollment helpers just before leaving on his Asia trip last week; Michelle Obama will address young adults on Friday, according to a copy of the invitation obtained by POLITICO. The White House hasn’t said when the president’s next appearance will be.

The themes this year, for the administration and its allies, are affordability and assistance, a more clearly defined zone than the general “go get yourself health insurance” message of the opening year.

Numerous polls and surveys have found that many people still don’t know they can get subsidies, in the form of tax credits, to buy a health plan on the Obamacare exchanges. That financial help is available on a sliding scale to people earning up to 400 percent of the federal poverty level — about $95,000 for a family of four in 2014. That point will be more explicit in the outreach this enrollment season.

Messaging will also explain how people can get hands-on help as they go through the daunting process of getting insured — which is particularly unnerving for people who haven’t had coverage for a while and don’t really understand deductibles, co-pays, networks or formularies.

( Also on POLITICO: The relaunch of HealthCare.gov)

But for all the new savvy, the administration still has to deal with an ambivalent public, a newly energized all-Republican Congress that’s hellbent on repealing the law and an uncertain legal future as yet another Obamacare challenge goes to the Supreme Court.

With those aspects partly out of Obama’s control, his staff is working on the retail politics of Obamacare. Labor Secretary Tom Perez headed to Cleveland Wednesday, Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack goes to Missouri Friday. New HHS Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell went to Philadelphia last weekend; on Thursday, she heads to Columbus, Ohio, and Cincinnati.

Using Obama himself sparingly at this point may not be a bad idea. Critics of the health care law “want this to be a war about ideology, left versus right, about the president,” said Drew Altman, president and CEO of the Kaiser Family Foundation, who tracks health politics closely. “A quiet focus on implementation” might do more to highlight the benefits people are getting.

Community and advocacy groups are also readying their ground game. They also hadn’t gone all out this fall but this weekend they kick in.

Enroll America, for instance, will hold more than 100 events. “It’s an important moment to make a splash,” said the outreach group’s president, Anne Filipic.

Young Invincibles, which has refined to an art how much food and entertainment to offer to get under-30s to pay attention to enrollment education events, just started hosting sessions. It will intensify efforts closer to the Feb. 15 deadline. “We know young people do procrastinate no matter how much we work to educate them at the start,” said Sarah Lovenheim, the communications director.

The insurance industry is focusing first on the 7 million who need to re-enroll. People who don’t take steps to re-enroll — or to specifically opt out — by Dec. 15 will get automatically re-enrolled. But they can often get a better deal — and a more accurate subsidy — if they update their information and shop around. Health plans have been mailing letters, sending emails and using social media to explain that.

“It’s a different marketing year than it was last year, “ said Clare Krusing, a spokeswoman for the lead health insurance trade group, America’s Health Insurance Plans.

A lot more insurers are taking part in the health insurance exchanges in 2015, about 25 percent more than this year. They see a chance to grow their business, and they’ll be trying to reach new customers through techniques ranging from social media campaigns to brick-and-mortar retail insurance shops.

States running their own exchanges are also stepping up. Covered California is doing a nine-day 21-city bus tour; the Minnesota exchange MNsure is beginning a multiplatform ad campaign — though not until the day after enrollment opens — with the slogan “95% of Minnesotans Now Have Health Insurance. 100% Need It.”

Natalie Villacorta and Rachana Pradhan contributed to this report.