Buy Photo The new north face of Lambeau Field with the new Packers Pro Shop entrance, left, the Miller Gate, top, and the stadium bowl, right. (Photo: Jim Matthews/Press-Gazette Media)Buy Photo

As Packers fans descend on Green Bay for the start of training camp, they undoubtedly will make Lambeau Field part of their visit.

Some of them will be there for the first time; many others will be returning. What they’ll find are renovations and changes to a stadium that has become a bucket list destination for many sports fans from Wisconsin as well as inside and outside the United States.

Fans this year will notice the renovated and improved entrance to the stadium and the expanded Packers Pro Shop. Parts of the Packers Hall of Fame are on loan to the Neville Public Museum in downtown Green Bay while a new hall is being built, but it’s a necessary part of a bigger plan.

That bigger plan is to make Lambeau Field a viable, money-making professional football stadium for years to come.

The Packers front office is to be congratulated for appearing to be close to realizing that.

The work of the last several years has been funded without taxpayer money, though, we should point out that the 2003 renovation that made today’s construction possible was partially funded through a Brown County 0.5 percent sales tax.

It has increased Lambeau Field’s capacity to 80,750 – the second largest in the National Football League. While a team like the Jacksonville Jaguars is removing 9,000 seats, the team in the smallest NFL market has the second largest stadium, a season-ticket waiting list of 112,000, ranks ninth in total revenue and seventh in operating profits, and has an economic impact of $13.5 million per home game.

The actual construction work at Lambeau has had an added economic impact. Of the $166 million spent on the expansion project, about half of it was spent in Brown County, 89 percent in Northeastern Wisconsin and 95 percent in Wisconsin. The $144 million South End Zone project resulted in 3,000 jobs and $130 million in wages.

The Packers have not only turned Lambeau Field into an ultimate game-day experience, but they have made it a year-round destination.

When the expansion project is complete, the Packers will be in a good position stadium-wise for the foreseeable future because of the wise decisions in the past – renovating Lambeau in 2003 – and the present – continued expansion and improvements.

The Packers and their fans are unique to the NFL, and maintaining a professional team in the smallest market of perhaps any professional sports league in the world is not easily duplicated.

It takes a storied tradition – which the Packers have, which the front office has nurtured over the years and which the team must continue to honor – and a devoted fan base.

The fans are integral to continued success. As they arrive in Green Bay over the next month to catch training camp, we believe they will be as impressed by the changes at Lambeau Field as we are with by their devotion.

WHEN THE DUST SETTLES ...

The Green Bay Packers will have added 7,000 seats to Lambeau Field, added new video boards and sound system, completed new players facilities and improved behind-the-scenes infrastructure, expanded the Oneida Nation Gate, added the American Family Insurance Gate on the east side, expanded the Pro Shop, renovated Harlan Plaza, expanded the Packers Hall of Fame, and relocated and re-conceptualized the restaurant.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1rHYZME