It has been a little over five years since the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act — better known as Obamacare — became law in the United States, and to say that things have not gone smoothly might be the understatement of the millennium. Yet amid vociferous and unshakable political opposition from the right, horror scenarios from private industry, and technical glitches that made its launch fodder for late-night talk-show comedians, America’s experiment in socialized medicine (which is more like a public-private partnership, really) has been having an impact, both on Main Street and Wall Street.

As contentious as Obamacare is, there is no doubt that more people are now insured south of the border. The number of American adults without medical insurance has dropped to 13 per cent from more than 20 per cent since passage of the law, meaning 16.4 million more people now have insured access to healthcare in the States. That means more people getting prescription medications, checking into hospitals, seeing specialists, and so on. The influx of demand translates into massive growth in expenditures on health services and drugs. Remember, per capita health care spending in the United States is more than US$9,100 a year — more than any other country except Norway and Switzerland.

This is good news for healthcare companies and their shareholders. The S&P 500 Health Care Index, which tracks 55 companies including Johnson & Johnson, Pfizer Inc. and Amgen Inc., is up more than 28% in the past year and more than 8.5 per cent year-to-date. Meanwhile, the Canadian sector’s returns have been even more stellar — although the 31 per cent return for the S&P/TSX Capped Health Care Index so far this year is skewed by the fact that there only five companies on the index. Soon, there will be only four, since Catamaran Corp. is being bought by a division of U.S.-based UnitedHealth Group Inc. for US$12.8 billion. Meanwhile, three other index constituents — Valeant Pharmaceuticals International Inc., ProMetic Life Sciences Inc., and Concordia Healthcare Corp. — have significant exposure to the U.S. market, and their shares are up 54 per cent, 32 per cent and 99 per cent, respectively.

Related

Not too shabby. The question is, of course, how long returns can remain, well, so healthy.

You could look at the impact of Obamacare as a one-off, but there are other factors suggesting the prognosis for health stocks is pretty good over the long term.

One is the continuing U.S. economic recovery. Health care stocks tend to do well in good times, and the generally good growth story in the States supports continued growth in health spending.

Another is the fact that Obamacare also expanded Medicaid, the publicly funded drug benefit program. A recent report by the IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics found that spending on prescription drugs in the United States – already the largest market in the world for medications – grew by 13.1 per cent last year, to US$374.9 billion. Even more promising for the long term, the IMS report found that much of the increased spending was on new drugs for conditions like hepatitis C and cancer, suggesting that the innovation pipeline is strong.

Meanwhile, M&A activity in healthcare has been on a tear, driven by the low cost of capital (thank you, central bankers).

And finally, there’s the old story — meaning, we’re all getting older, Americans included. As more and more health-conscious baby boomers enjoy their golden years, they’ll be spending more on healthcare.

The challenge for investors now is that health stocks are beginning to look expensive. The U.S. health care index trades at about 19 times earnings, substantially higher than the S&P 500’s P/E of 17.5. Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. trades at more than 38 times estimated 2015 earnings; Valeant trades at 20 times 2015 estimates.

The hefty valuations mean that investors will be closely watching quarterly results coming out this week from a host of healthcare heavyweights, including Bristol-Myers Squibb, Boston Scientific Corp. and Merck & Co., as well as Valeant. If they meet lofty earnings estimates, and if the guidance is positive, then it may mean the great healthcare revival still has some legs, meaning continued upside potential for investors.

Just don’t forget to thank Obama.