FRANK HOLMES: When it comes to portfolio allocation, the inclusion of gold in the mix, admittedly, isn’t always the first thing on many investors’ minds. Perhaps they are scared of its volatility or unsure of its benefits, but I believe that having a sensible amount of this precious metal in a portfolio is a smart investment decision for anyone.

For years, when asked when a good or bad time to buy gold was, or how much of it to buy or sell, I have always come back to the 10% rule, which says investors should have a 10% exposure to gold in their portfolio. Within that 10% weighting, 5% should be in gold bullion and 5% should be in gold stocks, rebalancing annually. The main reason for this is gold can act as a hedge for your portfolio, especially during volatile swings in the stock market.

Additionally, we continue to see demand for gold around the world. To make it simple, I like to separate demand into two main drivers, what I call “the fear trade” and “the love trade.” The fear trade is when investors buy gold coins or jewelry out of fear of the fallout that may result from governments’ rising debt levels and weakening currencies. We have seen prime examples of the fear trade dominate headlines in recent months, whether it be the news of the Swiss dropping its currency peg or the uncertainty surrounding the debt talks in Greece.

The other side of the coin, the love trade, is the buying of gold out of an enduring love for the metal, usually for religious celebrations or cultural holidays. India and China have a long relationship with gold intertwined in their culture, religion and economy. This year, mid-February marked the beginning of Chinese New Year, and the purchase of commemorative gold coins along with withdrawals from the Shanghai Gold Exchange only proved that the demand remains in full force. As more Chinese and Indian citizens move up the socioeconomic ladder, this trend is set to continue, strengthening the demand for gold.

As long as there is demand for gold and as long as people seek this commodity for safe-haven purposes, I will continue to advocate the 10% position in a portfolio. The key is to rebalance every year to take care of the volatility factors that the markets will inevitably hand out.

Frank Holmes is chief executive and chief investment officer of U.S. Global Investors Inc.

Read the latest Big Issues in Personal Finance Report.