Buy Photo Worden Dixon, Long Branch, admires his new home furnishings provided by the New Jersey Affordable Housing Management Association and Thomasville Home Furnishings. (Photo: Dan Radel/Staff Photo)Buy Photo

LONG BRANCH - From the second floor of his apartment in Washington Manor, 70-year old disabled veteran Worden Dixon has a view of the Altantic Ocean.

Until Monday, he just had no place to sit and admire it because his home lacked furniture. Dixon, who said his service in the U.S. Navy from 1963 to 1967 included a stint in Vietnam, was living in a boarding house in Asbury Park before getting his own apartment through Soldier On, a private nonprofit organization committed to ending homelessness among veterans.

"This is stellar. I'm still in awe," he said after seeing his apartment completely furnished for the first time. "I will be able to have my daughter over for Thanksgiving."

A maintenance worker had informed management at Washington Manor that Dixon was living with no furniture. William Eaton, executive director of Washington Manor, then applied to a program through the New Jersey Affordable Housing Management Association (JAHMA) called In Time of Need.

"I am ...thrilled that we were able to arrange for Worden Dixon to have the furniture he needed. We are aware of the need for affordable housing among seniors and disabled New Jerseyans and will continue our commitment to assisting our tenants," said Eaton.

In Time of Need provides meaningful assistance to needy residents at JAHMA-affiliated properties.

Washington Manor is subsidized by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for low-income seniors and disabled residents. After completing $3 million in renovations last May, Washington Manor instituted a veteran preference, which gives priority housing to those who served in the military.

Thomasville Home Furnishings donated a sofa, a sofa chair, two end tables, a large TV cabinet, a dining room table and two upholstered chairs for the table.

Worden Dixon, center, seen in a photo after recovering an anchor from the Adonis wreck. (Photo: Courtesy of Worden Dixon)

Dixon, a life-long resident of the Jersey Shore who was born in Ocean Township and raised at Fort Monmouth where his dad was stationed, received local notoriety about 20 years ago when he and other divers recovered an anchor that belonged to a 19th century Dutch merchant ship, the Adonis, that had shipwrecked off Long Branch in 1859.

There are 695 homeless veterans in New Jersey according to Monarch Housing Associates, a nonprofit that conducted a count of the state's homeless population called NJ Counts 2015. It was funded by the state's Housing and Mortgage Financing Agency.

Dan Radel: 732-643-4072; dradel@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1j5HJib