By Phil Anastasia

Tyree Mann-Barnes was so confident he would make the game-winning shot that he took it twice.

He missed his frist attempt with around 10 seconds remaining.

But Collingswood's Jordan Wallace grabbed the rebound and got the basketball back to Mann-Barnes, who buried a 25-footer at the buzzer to lift the Panthers to a 50-49 victory over West Deptford in a Colonial Liberty game on Saturday.

"I can't even describe it in words," Mann-Barnes said. "It's the great feeling in the world."

Mann-Barnes, a junior guard, led all scorers with 16 points. He hit four three-pointers, including two in the final 2:05.

"Shooters shoot," Collingswood coach Pat Dorney said of Mann-Barnes, the brother of former Colls star Tyrone Mann-Barnes, now a senior at the University of the Sciences.

Wallace added 10 points along with seven rebounds and three assists and Malik Muhammad bounced off the bench to score eight for Collingswood (4-0).

Justin Hansen scored 14 with five assists and five rebounds and Tyler Leonhardt scored 13 for West Deptford (4-1).

Hansen and Leonhardt led the way as West Deptford outscored Collingswood, 17-1, in the final seven minutes of the third quarter to take a 41-36 lead heading into the fourth.

The Eagles still led by five when Mann-Barnes hit a three-pointer from the corner to cut the deficit to 49-47 with 2:05 remaining in the game.

Both teams missed opportunities over the last two minutes. West Deptford missed the front end of a one-and-one with 0:16 on the clock.

Collingswood raced down court and Mann-Barnes missed a three-point attempt from the corner.

But Wallace corralled the rebound, took his time and shovelled a pass to Mann-Barnes, who rose up from deep behind the three-point line to the right of the key.

The shot hit nothing but net as the buzzer sounded and Collingswood students raced out of the stands and buried Mann-Barnes in the bottom of a dogpile at midcourt.

"I'll never forget that," Mann-Barnes said.

West Deptford 7 17 17 8 -- 49

Collingswood 12 21 3 14 -- 50

WD: Preston Harcum 6, Justin Hansen 14, Mike Gardner 8, Tyler Leonhard 13, Marquise Owens 8.

C: Tyree Mann-Barnes 16, Jordan Wallace 10, Isaac Destin 3, Steve Earl 7, Malik Muhammad 8, Ibraham Kargbo 6.

-- Contact Phil Anastasia at panastasia@phillynews.com

-- Follow @PhilAnastasia on Twitter

Published: The Philadelphia Inquirer

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.