CHANDLER, Ariz.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Nobility RCM, a new healthcare company in Chandler, AZ, is creating the Nobility Pre-Funding Program.

The program solves the problem of declining reimbursements and rising costs by providing medical practices with predictable revenue every month. This provides financial stability, opens up great opportunity for better care, and helps build more successful practices.

"Our program provides outright predictability of revenue and decreases the expense of utilizing an EHR," says Matt Gauer, COO of Nobility.

Eliminate the burden of medical billing uncertainty.

The creation of Nobility RCM was as a result of the massive changes brought on by the Affordable Care Act, also known as “Obamacare,” and the challenges small, medium, and large healthcare practices face in getting paid from insurance companies. In particular, the onset of the new ICD-10 coding practice guidelines.

In 2014 the American Medical Association (AMA) drafted a letter to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) expressing its concern over the financial burden for physicians practices to transition from ICD-9 to ICD-10.

ICD-9 to ICD-10 transition has major financial impact on practices of all sizes.

"The markedly higher implementation costs for ICD-10 place a crushing burden on physicians, straining vital resources needed to invest in new health care delivery models and well-developed technology that promotes care coordination with real value to patients," said AMA President Ardis Dee Hoven, M.D.

Based on new information, a 2014 study found the following cost ranges for each practice size based on variable factors such as specialty, vendor and software.

Small practice: $56,639 - $226,105 Medium practice: $213,364 - $824,735 Large practice: $2,017,151 - $8,018,364

Nobility RCM helps physicians succeed.

Independent medical practices and healthcare networks have struggled to maintain stable cash flow in order to meet the growing demand of patients as the Affordable Care Act continues to expand enrollment.

“After many years helping healthcare practices find higher revenue and better profits we created a system that took the risk out of the equation so they could focus on great patient care,” says Gauer.

About Nobility RCM

The main mission of Nobility RCM is to help physicians and practices achieve financial freedom through 3 core services that include Revenue Pre-Funding, Complete Medical Billing, and EHR support.

Visit Nobility RCM at www.nobilityrcm.com to find out more.