Buy Photo A duck swims along the bay of Green Bay shore near an accumulation of algae off Communiversity Park near the University of Wisconsin-Green Bay. Concerns have been raised about a dead zone in the bay that no longer contains enough oxygen to support most fish and other living things. (Photo: File/Press-Gazette Media )Buy Photo

Toledo, Ohio, had to turn off its drinking water supply recently. Toxins produced by algae, which are in turn produced by farm runoff into Lake Erie, the source of the Toledo area's water, threatened public health.

It begs the proverbial question: Can it happen here, in Wisconsin? Probably not. But that doesn't mean Wisconsin's waters are free of toxic algae blooms.

Several water bodies — Petenwell and Castle Rock "lakes" (they are actually hydropower reservoirs in the Wisconsin River), "Lakes" Menomin and Tainter, in western Wisconsin (part of the Red Cedar River system) and the Green Bay (the water body) are all plagued by algae blooms fed by phosphorus entering our water from farm runoff.

Related: EPA official: Green Bay waters could be ripe for harmful algae

None of these water bodies act as a municipal drinking water supply for a city, like Lake Erie does for Toledo. Most of us Wisconsinites get our drinking water from underground wells. Our "coastal" cities — Milwaukee, Green Bay, Racine, Ashland, etc. — get their water from the Great Lakes. And while Lake Michigan suffers farm runoff-induced algae blooms in some near-shore areas, that pollution is diluted enough in such a big water body that it won't likely threaten drinking water.

The city of Green Bay is smart enough to not get its water from the bay, which is now suffering a dead zone from the same phenomenon. Filtration systems for the Lake Winnebago cities drawing water from that water body seem to be handling algae-induced toxins.

But are there lessons for us in Toledo's crisis? Yes. Just like here, Ohio officials tiptoe around agriculture's culpability. They lump the runoff that comes off streets as roughly equal to that of farm runoff. It is not: Every major water-quality study (of big river basins) done by the Wisconsin DNR in recent years shows that farm runoff is the biggest contributor of phosphorus that, as a fertilizer, does a great job of growing algae.

The tiptoeing around ag continues when people talk about solutions. How big a crisis does a state needs — like a big city's water supply contaminated — to compel what is ultimately necessary — firmer, stricter regulation of agriculture? We keep thinking that farmers will voluntarily do the right thing. They volunteer for the easy stuff, but large-scale management of farm runoff will require active regulation, strict enforcement, and big public investments.

One example: With a few exceptions, livestock farmers can still spread manure on frozen ground. This is a ticking time bomb: If it rains or the snow melts before the ground is thawed, all that manure (and in Wisconsin, dairy farmers feed phosphorus to cattle as a nutritional supplement) runs into the nearby river and will grow a nice, useless and potentially toxic algae crop. The medieval practice of winter spreading of manure should simply be banned, statewide, for all livestock operations.

Another solution would be to purchase conservation easements from farmland owners for preserving structures on land that prevent erosion and protect water, like grass waterways and buffers. Farmers foolishly plow those under when grain prices are high. Permanent easements would compensate them for putting those soil- and water-protecting natural structures permanently out of the way of the plow.

The Toledo situation shows we have to get serious about farm runoff. It's no longer — and never has been — just a matter of water users having their beach time inconvenienced. It is a matter of public health.

— Denny Caneff is executive director of the River Alliance of Wisconsin.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/VdJM7M