The lexical definition of Democracy is a form of government in which the supreme power is vested in the people and exercised directly by them or by their elected agents under a free electoral system. The definition of Democratic is relating to or supporting democracy.

So when did the Democrat Party become the Democratic Party? Democrat leaders – Obama, Reid, Pelosi, Clinton, Sanders, Wasserman-Schultz – are as far as you could possibly get from being Democratic.

Do you remember the Obamacare debates of 2008, when then-Speaker Nancy Pelosi notoriously demanded of her House members, that we have to vote for the bill “so that we can find out what is in it.”

Not one single Republican in the United States Senate voted for Obamacare, after the administration notoriously drafted the bill behind tightly closed doors. The two Democrats’ two presidential contenders are both socialists of varying degrees. One could even argue that they strongly resemble communists.

I can imagine that the meeting went something like this…

“Debbie, since our President rules by executive orders and has no taste for the Constitution, what can we do to make the American people think we are still Democratic?”

“Hillary, let’s change the name of our party to the ‘Democratic Party,’ that way nobody can say that we’re not DEMOCRATIC… Get it?”

If you thought you belonged to a party that cared, you are sadly mistaken.

Did you want to be told what health insurance you can have? Did you want all of your medical and personal info put online by the government? Do you like being asked by your doctor, ”are you nuts, yet?” Do you want to keep your gun for self-defense?

Did you want the Somerset Plant and the Huntley Plant closed? What took their place? How do we make up for the lost power?

Did you want your Military reduced below longtime standards set by our military leaders? Ask any fired General or Secretary of Defense what they think. That’s right – if they don’t agree things are great – Obama replaces them with someone who does! That’s real progressive leadership!

Fortunately – and in my humble opinion – Hillary will be indicted for violating multiple Sections of Title 18 USC regarding her failure to treat classified information as such and for a host of other charges (including conspiring to sell our uranium to Russia in return for donations to the Clinton Foundation.

The evidence and charges will be so overwhelming and egregious that Attorney General Loretta Lynch will be forced to prosecute. Mrs. Clinton has lied, cheated, and stolen so many times – always dodging the bullet. But not this time: her behavior is on par with espionage, the Hobbs Act, and treason!

Voting for Hillary because she’s a woman would be like biting a dog turd because it looks like a Tootsie Roll. Voting for Hillary is equally as distasteful.