"In the course of my doing this, I've never seen a site report with as many adverse findings."

Two federally funded community health centers in Alabama are under investigation by the FBI and the Inspector General for Health and Human Services, AL.com has learned.

Birmingham Health Care and Central Alabama Comprehensive Health in Tuskegee are among 1,200 community health centers nationwide that have been called the "backbone" of the Affordable Care Act's strategy to treat the uninsured.

They are receiving collectively about $11 billion under the ACA to grow and expand.

BHC and CACH brought on the federal scrutiny following a May 10, 2011, site visit at CACH by federal authorities acting on anonymous tips of fraud and mismanagement of funds.

Birmingham Health Care had a contract to manage the operations of CACH at the time.

After the site visit, Health Resources Services Administration (HRSA), under HHS, initiated the inspector general investigation, said HRSA spokesman Martin Kramer in a statement.

"HRSA takes allegations of wrongdoing in our programs very seriously," Kramer said. "In our May 2011 site visit in Tuskegee, we identified several areas of concern. We immediately referred our concerns about Central Alabama Comprehensive Health and Birmingham Health Care to HHS's Office of the Inspector General."

Kramer said he couldn't comment further on ongoing investigation. FBI spokesman Paul Daymond in Birmingham said they could not confirm or deny an investigation. But a HRSA official, on condition of anonymity, said the FBI is investigating.

"It is our understanding that the issues you raise may be part of an ongoing FBI investigation," said the official in response to questions from AL.com. "As this is part of an ongoing investigation, HRSA cannot comment on issues involved."

While federal officials wouldn't comment on specific wrongdoing being investigated, records newly obtained by AL.com and The Birmingham News through the Freedom of Information Act show that inspectors found instances of gross mismanagement, alleged fraud, and dangerously poor quality of health care.

In one instance, the acting chief financial officer -- using federal funds-- bought her son a "fish finder for a bass boat" and a set of four truck tires totaling about $1,400, according to the May 10, 2011 site inspection report.

In another instance, there was no documentation as to whether the X-ray equipment had been tested for radiation leakage and there was no evidence that the medical assistant taking X-rays had any training.

"There are few official reads (of X-rays) since radiologists reportedly refuse to interpret film from CACH due to the poor quality," the report stated.

In another example, one of CACH's satellite clinics in Lafayette was closed without notification.

The report said patients with diabetes, seizures, thryroid disease, asthma and heart problems could face "life-threatening" consequences if medications were abruptly discontinued.

The decision to close it, according to the report, was made by Jonathan Dunning, who wasn't officially on staff at the time. He was once the CEO of both organizations, but at the time of the decision, he was a consultant.

"It appears that Mr. Jonathan Dunning has been acting as a consultant to both organizations and founded various companies that provide consultative services for both BHC and CACH," the report stated.

When inspectors asked the acting CEO Alan Yoe about Yoe's role, Yoe said he was "CEO for CACH in name only and that the organization was being controlled by Jonathan Dunning and contracted staff from BHC."

John Lozier, executive director of the National Health Care for the Homeless Council, a nonprofit membership organization of consumers and health care providers, said he's helped community health centers with problems before but had never seen anything like this.

"In the course of my doing this, I've never seen a site report with as many adverse findings," Lozier said. "It indicates fiscal mismanagement and medical mismanagement.

Ken Dowdy, lawyer for Birmingham Health Care, was sent a copy of the site visit document by AL.com and asked for a comment.

"This three-year-old inquiry has been closed for some time, with all parties having satisfactorily addressed any and all concerns," Dowdy said.

In 2012, AL.com and The Birmingham News reported that Dunning -- while serving the dual roles of CEO in Birmingham and at CACH -- formed private for-profit companies that landed contracts with both health clinics.

In four years from 2007 to 2010, both during and after Dunning's tenure as CEO, his companies were paid by the clinics more than $2 million under various contracts, according to a review of tax filings.

Dunning's private companies are still doing business with Birmingham Health Care, according to his testimony in a sexual harassment suit brought against him by former BHC grant writer Sharon Walsh.

Last year CACH lost its federal funding as a community health center and its service area of Bullock, Chambers, Macon, Russell, Lee and Tallapoosa counties were picked up by Quality of Life Health Services Inc., a Gadsden-based community health center with a large network.

CAHC was a HRSA grantee for at least the last 10 years and their funding was mostly stable year to year. CAHC received $1,398,873 annually in grant funding under the Health Center Program, in addition to their other federal and non-federal resources.

The 1,200 community health centers nationally have an annual collective budget of more than $2 billion.

By law 8.7 percent of that money goes to health care for the homeless, he said.

BHC is one of 248 health centers nationwide that has grants designated for the homeless through HRSA.

Birmingham Health Care, originally named Birmingham Health Care for the Homeless, was part of a 19-city pilot project in 1985 seeded by Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and Pew Memorial Trust money.

Updated 7:52 a.m. May 28 to add Dowdy quotes.