Fremont Unified School District might find itself paying $1 million to $8 million in fines to the U.S. Government for not complying with the Affordable Care Act, the federal statute signed into law by President Barack Obama in 2010.

According to a report presented to the Board of Education by American Fidelity in February, large employers with 50 or more full-time employees such as the district are required to offer and provide affordable health care coverage, or face potential penalties. The reason the district faces a fine is because 20 years ago collective bargaining units asked the school district to increase their base salaries instead of paying for their health insurance.

The Fremont district does offer a health insurance plan that is available to all full-time employees. However, the plan does not meet the affordable coverage standard.

If the employer, in this case the district, is not able to offer and provide affordable health care coverage and if the employee's household income is below 400 percent of the federal poverty level, the employee will be eligible to receive a subsidy to help buy coverage in the health care exchange, Covered California.

The district is required to pay the penalty up to $3,000 per year for each employee who receives subsidized coverage from the health care exchange. Since household income is not available to the employer, an alternative way to calculate if an employee may qualify for a subsidized coverage is to use the employee's wages.

Advertisement

The law requires that a full-time (30 hours per week) employee's contribution toward health care coverage should be no more than 9.5 percent of wages, otherwise the district may be subject to a penalty.

The board asked if it was possible to create a benefits or insurance committee, to help the district navigate through implementation of the Affordable Care Act.

"So years ago our insurance benefit was rolled into salary, so I'm assuming that it's a done deal, not something we can consider at this point," board Vice President Ann Crosbie said at the Feb. 11 meeting.

Superintendent Jim Morris said the agreement could be discussed and possibly changed through the negotiation process.

Board Clerk Larry Sweeney expressed his frustration at the district being in a position to lose essential funding.

"Suppose the penalty is $6 million this year. If the state gives FUSD an additional $6 million due to the increased revenues the state now has and say they would like to share with schools, the $6 million would not go to students or classrooms or any of our needs but would go directly to the federal government as a penalty. That is ridiculous," Sweeney said after the meeting. "But it appears that is how it will work. It is not like we could take the $6 million and use it 'toward' providing health benefits to our employees. It is either/or. Either we provide the entirely mandated ACA amount, or we are obligated to pay the penalty. In the out years, when the state does not have 'extra revenue' to share with us, the (increasing) penalty will come right out of the general fund."

The fine the district will pay is contingent on how many employees sign up for the health care waiver, which the district will find out after officials submit the month-to-month pay roll information at the end of the year, Morris said. He said after all the payroll statements are submitted, the Internal Revenue Service will determine how much the district owes, probably by early 2016.

Morris said other school districts in Alameda County did the same thing around 1997, where they rolled the health benefits value into the salary, and are now all facing the same issue.

At the Feb. 25 meeting, the school board approved opening up negotiations with Fremont Unified District Teachers Association on teachers' work days and salaries.

Contact Aliyah Mohammed at amohammed@themilpitaspost.com or 408-262-2454 or follow her on twitter.com/Aliyah_JM . Visit us on our social media sites at facebook.com/FremontBulletin and twitter.com/FremontBulletin