Art by Mike Lucas

Advertisers have been studying Snapchat for how to get exposure to its audience. Naritiv, a startup functioning as a digital agency, has figured out way to help brand advertisers create promotional snaps. The company has raised $3 million to create this branded content for Snapchat. “We don’t look at Vine or Snapchat as similar at all. We look at Snapchat as the future where messaging and media come together,” said the company’s co-founder and chief executive, Daniel Altmann.

ALSO IN TODAY’S VENTUREWIRE (subscription required):

Pindrop Security Inc. picked up $75 million to bring its voice fraud authentication platform to the Internet of Things. Google Capital led the Series C round, with participation from Andreessen Horowitz, Citi Ventures, Felicis, GV (formerly Google Ventures) and Institutional Venture Partners. The company has raised $122 million to date but isn’t disclosing its valuation.

Blockchain Capital, a venture firm that invests exclusively in bitcoin-related startups, closed its second fund at $13 million. Brock Pierce, Bart Stephens and Brad Stephens are the principals at the San Francisco firm. It has backed 37 companies since its launch in 2013. It backed many of the bitcoin startups that raised the most institutional funding to date, including BitFury, Circle Internet Financial, Coinbase, Ripple Labsand Xapo.

Insurify Inc., a Cambridge, Mass. startup that spun out of the Sloan School of Management at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, has raised $2 million in seed funding to help motorists shop for auto insurance without having to talk to agents on the phone or fill out annoying online forms with personal data.

(VentureWire is a daily newsletter with comprehensive analysis of all the investments, deals and personnel moves involving startups and their venture backers. For a two-week trial, visit http://on.wsj.com/DJPEVCNews, scroll to the bottom and click “try for free.”)

ELSEWHERE AROUND THE WEB:

Theranos Lab Practices Pose Risk to Patient Health, Regulators Say. Federal health inspectors have found serious deficiencies at Theranos Inc.’s laboratory in Northern California that could put the facility at risk of losing its certification, according to a letter from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Theranos’s lab in Newark, Calif., was inspected last fall by CMS, the chief regulatory overseer of clinical laboratories. During the inspection, the agency uncovered five major infractions that violate conditions of participation in the Medicare program, CMS told Theranos in a letter dated Jan. 25. One of the infractions put patients in “immediate jeopardy,” the letter said. The agency made the letter public on Wednesday.

Uber lawsuit cleared to proceed. A lawsuit filed against Uber will proceed to trial without waiting for Uber’s appeal against the suit’s class-action status, according to a ruling by the U.S. Appeals Court Wednesday, Marketwatch reports. The suit was brought against Uber by three former drivers over their status as independent contractors, not employees.

Lessons Learned on Startups’ Shenzhen Tour. For the past few years, a flood of hardware startups based in Silicon Valley have been traveling to Shenzhen to find easier, better and less-costly ways to make products. Following six of those startups on a recent Shenzhen factory tour yielded some interesting trends and lessons.