There is little doubt President Obama has been beset by the so-called second-term curse. Since his second inauguration in January 2013, Mr. Obama has seen his approval ratings plummet, and his administration has found itself ensnared in several scandals.

For this reason, Mr. Obama has been compared with Richard Nixon on more than one occasion.

With that in mind, Victor Davis Hanson, a historian affiliated with Stanford University’s Hoover Institution, asked in the headline of a recent column “Is Obama Walking the Trail Blazed by Nixon?” Mr. Hanson subsequently argued many of the Obama administration scandals involve abuses of power eerily reminiscent of those of the Nixon administration.

He paid particular attention to the Internal Revenue Service’s harassment of conservative groups between 2010 and 2012; on-the-fly revisions to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act; the recently scuttled Federal Communications Commission investigation of news decisions; and political use of the Department of Justice, among other things.

Mr. Hanson also pointed out that most news outlets have taken a pass on reporting the nitty gritty of these scandals, a 180 degree turn from 40 years ago. He contended this disparity simply is because Mr. Obama is a Democrat, while Mr. Nixon was a Republican.

Mr. Hanson had a succinct conclusion to this excellent column: “Both presidents once had enormous potential and high poll ratings, but their treatment of the Constitution was as Orwellian as it was unnecessary. Before Nixon imploded, he was warned to stop it. Will Obama?”

Read it here.

Indeed, the Obama administration’s doings are frightening and have set some horrible precedents. They stand in contrast to the president’s 2008 “hope and change” rhetoric. However, it is equally appalling that most journalists are content to let most of the dirtiness go unchallenged; this is a point we have made on the editorial page many times in recent months.

The Fourth Estate exists to hold public officials to account, but it seems most members will stand aside when their guy is the one in the hot seat. This is shameful and dangerous.