The holiday season is upon us once again. The holidays are a time to be with our families and reflect on how grateful we are for our many blessings. The holidays are often a stressful time of year. But there is always something to be grateful for. De-stressing during the holidays will make it much more fun and memorable. Take some time to connect with friends and family heart to heart.

Every time my family has Thanksgiving dinner, we go around the table and each person tells what he or she is grateful for. As we recognize the value of every experience in our lives, our gratefulness will increase. Having an attitude of gratitude is the first step to living a fulfilled life. It’s not what happens to us in life that matters; it is how we handle what happens to us.

During the holidays, our family likes to make a blessings or gratitude board. Each person brings photos and magazine cutouts to glue onto a piece of poster board. Everyone in the family writes on everyone else’s board one thing they are grateful for about that person and then signs his name. Each person takes home his board and hangs it up where he can read it every day.

Write In A Gratitude Journal And Watch Your Life Improve

Developing an attitude of gratitude toward every person, thing and event in your life is an effective way to strengthen your emotional resilience and reduce stress during the holidays. A gratitude journal makes it easy to focus on the positive. It is also a tool to help us recognize that we are blessed. Here’s what to do:

Get a blank notebook or journal and start writing every day. At the end of each day, list at least three things you are grateful for in your journal. Take each of the things you are grateful for and write a sentence or two to expound on them. Attach a photo or drawing to as many as you can. Do this consistently each day for 365 days, and your life will improve. When you have written about all the obvious things, then dig deep and write about the subtle things you have noticed such as young children, nature, flowers, bumblebees, garden vegetables, your health and any other amazing thing for which you are grateful. Extend yourself beyond the journal. Give the gift of yourself to others. Start telling people in your life that you are grateful for them and the little things they do to bless your life. The response may be so great that you will do it on a regular basis.

Gift-Giving Is A Tradition

It is time to think about gift-giving. Preppers love to give practical gifts that can be used now or in any crises situation, so why not give practical gifts that your loved ones can use year-round? The following items are my favorites for gift-giving.

Solar-Powered Flashlights

I love my solar-powered flashlight. I keep it in my car at all times. It charges with sunlight, natural and artificial light.

This solar-powered flashlight works in extreme temperatures, hot or cold. You never have to purchase batteries. It works for more than 100,000 hours, and it holds a single charge for three years without exposure to any light. This solar-powered flashlight is 100 percent waterproof, and it floats. It is made of 50 percent polycarbonate and 50 percent plastic. It is unmatched in durability due to its one-piece construction. It withstands a strong impact and has a lifetime warranty.

Food Dehydrator

I love my food dehydrator, and I use it all the time. My married daughter wants one of these for Christmas because she has several fruit trees in her yard and she loves to snack on dried apples, peaches and pears.

NESCO®/American Harvest® has been the leader in food dehydrators for more than 30 years. The Converge-a-Flow® airflow assures even drying from top to bottom, without the tray rotation required by other dehydrators.

Whether you’re a beginner or an experienced “pro” making beef jerky, drying fruits, vegetables, herbs or flowers, NESCO®/American Harvest® offers the best units available.

Wonder Mill Junior Hand Grain Grinder

The Wonder Junior is the highest-quality, most-versatile hand grain mill available. You can create super-fine flour or coarse cracked grains for cereals. By simply swapping the stone heads for the stainless steel burr heads, you can make delicious peanut butter or other nut butters and grind flax or any other oily or wet grains, herbs, spices, soybeans and legumes. You can even grind fresh coffee. In all these applications, you are assured to always have the perfect fresh nutritious ingredients for your family — even if the power is out.

Deluxe Emergency Car Kit

This Emergency Car Kit fits most all road emergency situations. All items are packed in a heavy-duty backpack. Each kit contains: one 30-minute, high-intensity light stick; a tow rope; an auto spotlight; jumper cables; a first aid kit; a flashlight with batteries; a fire extinguisher; a solar blanket; a waterproof poncho; a Swiss army knife; a flat-tire fixer; drinking water; leather gloves; a whistle; duct tape; a utility knife; emergency instructions; a help sign; wet wipes; a reflecting triangle; and a distress banner.

Deluxe 72-Hour (Grab-And-Go) Backpack For 1 Person

This 72-hour backpack contains the following items: a flashlight that takes D batteries, two D batteries, four eight-hour light sticks, one emergency AM/FM radio, two AAA batteries, a solar reflective blanket, an emergency rain poncho, one tube tent, 3,600-calorie food bars, six 4.2-ounce water pouches, 50 water purification tablets, 30 bandages in two sizes, two sterile sponge dressings, six alcohol pads, two antiseptic towelettes, two butterfly closures, 10 cotton-tip applicators, one iodine pad, four masks, a multi-tool knife, one five-in-one survival whistle, one 50-foot rope, work gloves and an emergency-preparedness guide.

Sun Oven With Bakeware And Preparedness Package

I own one of these Global Sun Ovens and I use it all the time. I even bake bread in it. The Global Sun Oven bakes, boils or steams any kind of food with the power of the sun.

The Sun Oven basic package includes: one black, round, covered enamelware cooking pot; a built-in thermometer that reaches temperatures of 360 F to 400 F; attached one-piece collapsible reflectors; a spill-proof leveler; and a self-contained focusing leg.

The Sun Oven weighs 21 pounds, folds up in seconds and comes with a carrying handle.

The preparedness package includes: one additional round, covered, enamelware cooking pot for stacking; one water-pasteurization indicator; one set of two loaf pans; one set of two stackable cookie sheet/brownie pans.

Books Are Great Gifts For Christmas



I have a six-book special available this holiday season.

All six of the books I have written can be purchased as a gift package at a 25 percent savings. Any prepper would love the practical and simple recipes in these books.

–Peggy Layton