The Eye

‘The Flash’ 2014: 5 Reasons Why We Absolutely Adore Barry Allen And Iris West’s Relationship

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : The CW/The Vampire Diaries' Official Facebook Page) "The Flash" fans, if you hope Barry Allen and Iris West will start to date on the show, then check out our list of the top five reasons why we love their relationship!

As any loyal DC fan can tell you, Barry Allen and Iris West are an item in the original comics, although "The Flash" showrunners have clearly decided to go with the slow burn and build up the tension between the two.



If you're a WestAllen fan who can't wait for Barry and Iris to declare their love for one another, then read on to see why we here at Fashion&Style absolutely adore their on-screen relationship!



Barry And Iris Compliment One Another



While Barry is adorable, shy, nerdy, and a complete lovable dork, Iris is fiery, determined, and incredibly sweet. They say that opposites attract, and we can't wait for these two to become an item, because they really do compliment one another and their strengths offset the other's weaknesses.



Barry Doesn't Treat Iris Like A Prize



Unlike some men, Barry doesn't treat Iris like a prize to be won or plot to steal her away from Eddie Thawne. Instead, he treats her like a goddess and loves her for who she is, not who she represents.



They Are Best Friends



While Iris may still be in denial of her feelings for Barry, they are still best friends and she admits to the Flash that she is determined to reignite his faith in the impossible.



They Trust One Another



Even though Iris and Barry are on the rocks because the latter feels incredibly guilty for lying to his best friend about being the Flash, they still trust one another.



It is most evident when Barry finally tells Iris that he loves her-he trusts that she will not laugh at him or grow angry at him for not telling her sooner.



Plus, Iris trusts him too-otherwise, she would have never told him that she was dating Eddie and planning on moving in with him if she didn't.



They Know Each Other Inside And Out



Barry and Iris know each other inside and out. The former spent a ton of money to buy Iris a replica of her mother's wedding ring and the latter purchased a very expensive microscope for Barry, which clearly shows that she cares very deeply about him.



WestAllen fans, why do you like Barry and Iris's relationship? Let us know your thoughts by leaving a comment!











SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.