Topics: Affordable Care Act, Capitalism, Democrats, Economics, Editor's Picks, GOP, Healthcare Reform, Obamacare, The Right, Work, Politics News

Much of this week’s political debate centered around that most exciting of topics: a Congressional Budget Office report. The report in question concerned the effects of the Affordable Care Act. Republicans initially argued that the report said the ACA would “destroy” millions of jobs. That was a misinterpretation: It said that many Americans would voluntarily work less as a result of healthcare reform. So that became the problem: The ACA will encourage sloth and dependence! This line has resonated among certain political pundits, but I don’t expect it to win many elections. When even Ron Fournier can grasp that it’s a good thing that Americans will eventually be less dependent on employment for health insurance, there’s no excuse for any other pundit, no matter how brain-dead, to fall for Republican spin.

(It’s also ridiculous to imagine that many able-bodied, working-age Americans will outright quit working altogether thanks to this slight improvement on our meager welfare state. Man cannot live on subsidized health insurance alone.)

It’s not surprising that Republicans, the party that was recently shocked to learn that most Americans are not and do not aspire to become small business owners, would decry any program that allows people a bit of freedom from tedious, unrewarding labor. It’s a bit annoying that liberals are scared to openly defend the philosophy that people deserve freedom from tedious, unrewarding labor. If liberals want a “freedom” and “liberty” agenda of their own, this ought to be it: If you hate your job, you can quit it. Freedom from menial work should be a rallying cry, not a cudgel to be used against the left. How much liberty is there in having to do something you hate in order to survive?

In our political culture, for some reason (capitalism), dependence on government is considered sinful while dependence on an employer is virtuous. (One small irony of the conservative fetishization of work for work’s sake is that work requirements for welfare literally force mothers to take jobs outside their “traditional” roles as mothers and homemakers.) I suppose this is because when you are depending on an employer, you are “doing something” for the money. But what are we asking people unable to find work in lucrative, “high-skill” industries to do these days, exactly? We are mostly asking them to place ingredients in Dorito powder-dusted hard taco shells, or get trampled by mobs of their fellow low-wage workers at Wal-Mart the day after Thanksgiving.