AUSTIN — House Republicans and Democrats clashed Tuesday over stalling tactics that endangered bills championed by staunch conservatives, such as a “campus carry” gun bill and a measure that would bar health insurers that sell policies in the Obamacare state marketplace from covering abortions.

At times, the daylong wrangling baffled onlookers. The chamber’s outnumbered Democrats began to stall by asking extensive questions and then abruptly stopped, only to resume again early in the evening. By then it was unclear if there was still enough fodder on the agenda for their “chubbing” to work.

Late Tuesday, the House was debating the gun measure, though it was unclear if it would pass.

Several Republicans said that after the initial slowdown, Speaker Joe Straus intervened in the early afternoon, to get things moving. There were conflicting accounts, though, of precisely how Straus, a San Antonio Republican, did so.

House Republican Caucus Chairman Tan Parker of Flower Mound said that in conversations with individual Democrats, “the speaker was firm that he would use everything,” meaning parliamentary “nuclear options,” to shut down debate and force votes.

Straus, though, was coy.

“I didn’t talk to Democrats,” Straus told a reporter. “But I intend to get through this,” he added, referring to the House’s agenda.

One consideration may have been that the campus carry bill is part of a grand bargain on tax cuts, border security, guns and ethics. The deal may allow lawmakers to finish their work Monday, as scheduled, instead of having a special session.

As passed by the Senate, the campus carry measure would allow the licensed concealed carrying of handguns in most public university buildings. There were rumblings the House might restore a campus-by-campus opt-in provision, as it did two years ago, or let the measure die when the clock struck midnight.

Whether Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick and his GOP allies in the Senate would consider that a breach of the grand bargain remained unclear.

Intense day

The floor tactics led to an intense, sometimes dizzying day in the House. Republicans slammed Democrats and targeted some of their legislation, and when Democrats relented and let action speed up, some lamented that they had given up too easily.

Rep. Trey Martinez Fischer, D-San Antonio, said Republicans should blame themselves. He noted that GOP leaders revived the abortion coverage bill late Sunday. Under House rules, that required a 36-hour notice, which made the agenda with many of the hot-button bills ineligible for consideration until nearly noon on a crucial day, he said.

Midnight Tuesday was the deadline for tentatively passing Senate bills.

Republicans signaled they would try to free up more time for the hot-button bills by shoving onto Wednesday’s agenda a bloc of Senate bills that already have won preliminary House approval — and could wait another day.

Rep. Marisa Marquez of El Paso described Democrats’ frustration.

‘Enough already’

Opponents of abortion rights “have gotten enough already,” she said, noting that sweeping restrictions enacted two years ago have closed many abortion clinics. This year, lawmakers are close to finishing a bill tightening the judicial bypass that can allow pregnant teens to have an abortion without a parent’s consent.

Marquez noted that the insurance bill on abortion would block 31 other bills, some important to individual Democrats.

“A lot of people want to get through to their bills that have a direct impact on their districts,” she said. “We’re running out of time. We’ve had numerous opportunities to debate reproductive health. … Enough.”

To run out the legislative clock, Democrats began “chubbing.” One Republican has described the technique as the “practice of utilizing Texas House procedure, rules and the back mike to delay the clock.”

Rep. Rafael Anchia, D-Dallas, for example, soared to lofty rhetorical heights for nearly 10 minutes on a quotidian bill to keep the Texas Workforce Commission operating through 2027.

After an hour or so of desultory debate on that and another bill, Republicans grew testy.

Rep. Ron Simmons, R-Carrollton, said some Democrats’ tactics of feigning interest in minor bills and introducing amendments were “making a mockery of this process.” Fellow Republicans applauded.

Others took direct retaliation. House members defeated, 80-60, an innocuous bill offered by two Democrats on background checks for child care providers.

Democrats huddled privately. After a second private huddle of Democrats, the House got on track. In less than two hours, it passed about 40 bills.

Rep. Terry Canales, D-Edinburg, said he was upset that some senior Democrats relented.

“We’ve given away too much leverage,” he said.

There was talk that Martinez Fischer and other long-serving Democrats were worried the minority might be asking for too much, especially after gaining key House GOP leaders’ cooperation in squelching bills aimed at unions and stopping hailstorm damage lawsuits.

Martinez Fischer, though, called that too facile.

“You can’t view everything as a quid pro quo,” he said. “It’s not personal. It’s all about business.”

rtgarrett@dallasnews.com;

mbarnett@dallasnews.com

What’s chubbing?

Chubbing is talking extensively on bills in hopes of endangering other measures further down the agenda as a deadline approaches. It’s a longtime tactic in the Capitol.

The term’s origins are steeped in mythology. Veteran lawmakers have recalled it going back to the 1960s.

Former Rep. Jim Jackson, R-Carrollton, has said that a long-forgotten representative named Joe Chub began the practice. And some have tied it the use of “chubby” — as in flabby speech. But no definitive source has been found.

From staff reports

AT A GLANCE: What’s at stake

Some measures that were in danger of dying late Tuesday as a key House deadline arrived:

ABORTION: A bill would have removed abortion coverage from insurance plans offered in the federal health care exchange. Some conservatives planned to expand the measure to bar the coverage from private and employer-provided insurance plans as well. Supporters say the change is necessary to guarantee that people who do not support abortion aren’t paying for others to have the procedure by paying into an insurance plan. The proposal would have allowed women to buy coverage for abortion as an add-on to their base plan.

CAMPUS CARRY: The bill would allow Texans with concealed handgun licenses to carry their firearms in most state university buildings. Republicans could still try to attach the measure as an amendment to another gun bill.

From staff and wire reports

On Twitter:

@RobertTGarrett @MarissaMBarnett