Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share More than a dozen states that opted to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act have seen enrollments surge way beyond projections.

Gov. Doug Ducey has unveiled a plan to step up efforts to reduce the Arizona's Medicaid enrollment numbers. (Photo: Emmanuel Lozano/The Republic) Story Highlights Gov. Doug Ducey’s effort to change the way Arizona protects its most vulnerable is short-sighted

His proposal undoes almost every consequential part of the previous governor's Medicaid expansion

Limits on program eligibility and mandatory payments into a health savings account jeopardize the health care that nearly 350,000 adults depend on

Often, things sound much better in theory than in reality. That last piece of pizza. A timeshare in Hawaii. Josh Collmenter as an opening-day starter. And, of course, forcing people in poverty to pony up for health care.

But we know that theory is different than reality. We know that campaigning is different than governing. The proposal by Gov. Doug Ducey’s administration asking for federal waivers to change the way Arizona protects its most vulnerable is short-sighted and demonstrates either a deep lack of understanding or a willing indifference to those experiencing poverty.

There are dozens of reasons why this policy proposal is the wrong reform at the wrong time, but these are the three most glaring:

PROBLEM 1: AHCCCS doesn't need to be fixed.

From 2013 through the end of her term, Gov. Jan Brewer spent enormous amounts of energy and political will pushing the Legislature to pass important reforms and an expansion to the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System. Ducey’s proposal undoes almost every consequential part of that expansion.

AHCCCS brings cost-effective health care to more than 1 1/2 million Arizonans by putting to use effective public-private partnerships and evidence-based practices.

If this waiver request were to proceed, it would put 350,000 Arizonans’ health care at risk and weaken the integrity of the overall system. This is the wrong reform at the wrong time.

PROBLEM 2: Opportunity for all?

Both Candidate Ducey and Gov. Ducey promised “opportunity for all,” but this proposal ensures the exact opposite will be realized by nearly 350,000 of our neighbors. Individuals experiencing poverty face a bevy of challenges including access to transportation, healthy food, meaningful employment and safe housing.

Access to quality health care is another barrier to the independence that every Arizonan deserves, and AHCCCS is a key piece of the puzzle as individuals chart their path towards independence.

EDITORIAL: Ducey's proposal makes sense (with big exceptions)

However, the changes that Ducey proposes — lifetime limits on program eligibility, mandatory payments into a health savings account and so forth — puts the health care that nearly 350,000 adults depend on in serious jeopardy.

Henry St. John, an 18th century English philosopher, said, "Liberty is to the collective body what health is to every individual body. Without health no pleasure can be tasted by man, without liberty no happiness can be enjoyed by society.”

If liberty, defined by Ducey as "opportunity for all," truly is the goal, this is the wrong reform at the wrong time.

PROBLEM 3: This is a classic case of a solution in search of a problem.

Mandatory payments into a health savings account and lifetime limits on program eligibility are not policy solutions that lead to better health outcomes. These headline-grabbing soundbites are the stuff of campaigns, not responsible governance.

Samuel Richard is the executive director of Protecting Arizona’s Family Coalition. (Photo: handout)

Having “skin in the game” is one of the key rallying cries tied to the proposal. But this do-it-yourself boot-strapping prosperity is a dangerous fallacy. People experiencing poverty struggle to pay rent, put food on the table and pay for child care. Children, families and vulnerable adults need fewer barriers to independence, not additional challenges.

Far from the picture our governor may want to paint, people experiencing poverty have thick skin and self-determination beyond measure. This proposal, however, creates more problems for individuals working hard to achieve the permanence and independence they desire.

It’s time to tell Ducey this is the wrong reform at the wrong time. People experiencing poverty deserve dignity and a real opportunity to succeed. In short, Arizonans deserve more than hashtags and headlines..

Samuel Richard is executive director of Protecting Arizona’s Family Coalition, which advocates for fully funded health and human service programs.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1IDZ22k