Classics, Pride make a run before bowing out

NoCo batter Braydee Bakovich connects with a pitch during the USSSA Mountain States Championship on Saturday at Barnes Complex. The Xplosion are one of six teams still alive in the tournament entering Sunday. ( Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

The USSSA Mountain States Championship isn't the only club softball championship in the state. But it's the only one played at the end of the season.

Naturally, every team wants to be playing its best as the schedule winds down and when a title is one the line, and that's exactly what the NoCo Xplosion-McWilliams is doing right now.

Thanks to a 10-5 win over the USSSA Pride and a 14-0 romp over Team United on Saturday at Barnes Complex, the Xplosion advanced to Sunday's third and final day of the tournament, one of only six teams remaining in the 18U A bracket.

Also still in the hunt for the title: the Colorado Warriors Select and the Colorado Hawks, the only two squads still without a loss in the double-elimination event, and the Warriors, Colorado Diamonds Red and Colorado Majestix Elite.

Colorado Classics' Kassi Reiger makes her way to first during the USSSA state tournament Saturday at Barnes Complex. (Trevor L. Davis/ Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"We're playing about .500 ball (this summer), but we put this team together to win every weekend and unfortunately we just haven't come together," coach Mike McWilliams said "But you know what, it's coming together now. If you're going to do it, do it at the right time."

The Xplosion, which draws heavily from the Mountain View High School program, began the tournament Friday with a 5-3 win over Colorado Stampede Elite. They then started Saturday with a 4-2 win over the Colorado Tigers before suffering their first loss to the Warriors, a 5-4 nail-biter. But they were able to bounce back with the wins over the Pride and Team United.

Advertisement

The game against the Pride was very much a pseudo Mountain View intrasquad scrimmage as both teams feature several current and former Mountain Lions. But although the faces in the dugout were plenty familiar, that didn't mean the Xplosion were going to approach the game any differently, first baseman Courtney Baeckel said.

The Xplosion offense proved to the difference maker as they jumped out to a 7-0 lead before holding off the Pride's comeback bid.

"I think we've had more hits this entire weekend than we've had probably in three tournaments combined," said Baeckel, who graduated this spring from MVHS. "We practice hitting so much and sometimes it doesn't work, but now it's just coming together and clicking, and I think it's because it's our last tournament all together."

The Xplosion continue the tournament first thing Sunday with an 8 a.m. game against Majestic Elite.

Classics finish strong

With the 16U A tournament cancelled, Colorado Classics coach Ceri Anderson challenged her team by playing them up a level in the 18U A bracket. And at first it looked like the challenge would be perhaps too much as they dropped their opener 5-1 to the Colorado Warriors Select on Friday.

But the Classics were not quick to give in — quite the opposite in fact. They proceeded to rip off three straight wins Saturday before bowing out with a tough 4-3 loss to the Diamonds.

In being one of the last 10 teams remaining at one point, the Classics feel they made a strong statement in not backing down against several more experienced opponents.

"I feel like we peaked at the right time when it mattered. We're moving up next year to 18s, and I think it's a real confidence boost for all them leaving the season like they did," Anderson said. "After getting beat our first game we came back and battled and showed that we belong playing here."

USSSA Pride's Mackenzie Villarreal scores a run during her team's win over the Stampede on Saturday at Barnes Complex. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

The Classics nearly played their way into Sunday. With their game tied 2-all against the Diamonds, play was delayed due to lightning. After the break the Classics made a pair of errors on the first two Diamond batters, providing what proved to be the difference in the game.

It was a tough way to end the summer, but certainly nothing to be discouraged about.

"It was just motivation, and were just having fun," said third baseman Wendy Dykstra, who will be a junior this fall at Loveland. "A good way to end, going out having fun instead of hanging your heads."

Playing with Pride

Like a lot of teams at the tournament, the weekend was very much a roller coaster for the Pride. They began with an 8-2 win Friday over Premier West before getting sent to the consolation bracket later in the day with a 3-0 loss to the Warriors.

A 10-0 win over Planet Fastpitch and an 8-4 victory over the Stampede on Saturday seemed to get the Pride back on track, especially considering they were 0-3 against the Stampede this year. But in facing the Xplosion for the first time, emotions might've gotten the best of the Pride.

"I think just knowing all those girls on that other team, we kinda just got in our heads," said catcher Kaley Barker, who will be a sophomore at Mountain View. "We knew them, they knew us. It was different not playing with them and against them."

The season however isn't quite over yet for the team, which will finish up the summer at the USSSA World Series in Kansas City next weekend. Coming off the loss to the Xplosion isn't ideal, but perhaps the team can draw from their elusive victory over the Stampede, which coach Daniel Montez called the high point of the weekend.

"I was hoping that high would take us into the Xplosion, but it just kind of melted there in the first inning," he said. "We fought back and we'll never give up. That's what the Pride is all about."

Sean Star: 970-669-5050, sstar@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/rhpreps