Topics: Books, Editor's Picks, neanderthal man: in search of lost genomes, Neanderthals, svante paabo, What to Read, wtr, Entertainment News

I came for the cavemen, but I stayed for the geeky nail-biter of a story about doing historic science in a climate of fierce international competition and rapid technological innovation. Svante Pääbo’s “Neanderthal Man: In Search of Lost Genomes” is an account of the first sequencing of Neanderthal DNA by the molecular biologist who led the project and assembled the team who pulled it off. The book shuttles back and forth between Pääbo’s own story — his personal life has been as eventful as a soap opera, although he recounts it with a minimum of drama — and, if not the full nitty-gritty of genetics research, then at least a goodly chunk of the nitty. It’s a job characterized by grinding repetition, disappointment, bickering, frustration, anxiety and then, when you least expect it, a precious and revelatory insight into the workings of nature and the long-lost world of human prehistory.

Truth be told, DNA sequencing is pretty wonky stuff, but perhaps it’s Pääbo’s own passionate investment in the undertaking that makes his story so exciting to read about; “Neanderthal Man” does for paleogenetics something like what Steven Spielberg did for the legislative process in “Lincoln.” Pääbo began his career as a Swedish medical student with a keen amateur interest in Egyptology. He went to work as a junior researcher at an Uppsala lab that had “mastered the then-novel methods of cloning and manipulating DNA by introducing it into bacteria.” His friendship with a Finnish Egyptologist inspired him to try something new: isolating the DNA in very old tissue — namely, mummies. To test if this could be done, Pääbo bought some calf liver from a supermarket and “mummified” it in a low-temperature lab oven. The stench soon tipped his colleagues off to his secret side project, but fortunately no one told his professor about it until he’d moved on to actual mummy tissue, supplied by his Egyptologist friend.

This project helped get Pääbo a gig as a postdoctoral fellow with the biochemist Allan Wilson at the University of California at Berkeley (“a demi-god, in my view”). It also gave him inklings of the two greatest challenges he’d face in the future: the degradation of DNA molecules after an organism’s death and what Pääbo refers to as “the plague of contamination.” Water and oxygen are the primary threats to the long double helix of DNA, and as tissue decays, the strands break apart into smaller pieces. Sequencing — that is, reconstructing — a genome from such material is “a monumental task, much like doing a giant jigsaw puzzle with many missing pieces, many damaged pieces and lots and lots of extra pieces that would fit nowhere in the puzzle.” When Pääbo finally obtained enough Neanderthal DNA to attempt this feat in the late 2000s, it required “a cluster of 256 powerful computers” working for days at a time to map a single run.

But even before they could do that, Pääbo and his team at the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig, Germany, had to rustle up enough of those broken bits of Neanderthal DNA. This required extracting the fragments from old bones and creating copies of the DNA using a process called polymerase chain reaction, or PCR. The unfortunate thing about PCR is that it’s so good at amplifying DNA that it also multiplies whatever other random genetic material happens to have settled on your specimen. Some of this might come from the bacteria that decompose flesh, but a lot of it is human: hair, skin, saliva and other microscopic particles of contemporary human DNA from the people who touch the specimen or simply move through the room where it’s kept. This fresh DNA is so robust it can proliferate like crazy during PCR and overwhelm the fragile old DNA you want to study.

Preventing contamination is the backbeat of “Neanderthal Man,” a major obsession of Pääbo’s. He writes frankly of his contempt for “flashy ancient DNA results that did not meet the scientific criteria our group considered necessary,” and the willingness of two high-profile journals — Nature and Science — to publish papers about these results without exercising due diligence. He dismisses reports of DNA retrieved from 17-million-year-old leaves or purported dinosaur bones as “ludicrous” and “outlandish” claims that grab headlines and mislead the public. Any report claiming to have retrieved DNA older than tens of thousands of years, he insists, must come from samples contaminated by contemporary DNA.