STDs rising both nationally and in Connecticut

The number of syphilis and chlamydia cases increased statewide last year as the number of gonorrhea cases dropped slightly, according to newly released figures from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

“For all three diseases, Connecticut’s rates are below the national average,” said Dr. Lynn Sosa, deputy state epidemiologist with the Department of Public Health.

Nationally, the number of cases involving all three common sexually transmitted diseases increased for the first time since 2006, the CDC reports.

The 2014 Sexually Transmitted Disease Surveillance Report, released in November, shows that, nationally, the number of reported cases of syphilis increased 15 percent over the number reported in 2013.

The number of gonorrhea cases rose 5 percent, and reported chlamydia cases increased by 3 percent.

Statistics for the state show a slightly different picture. Connecticut last year reported 13,382 cases of chlamydia and 169 cases of syphilis — 607 more chlamydia cases and 36 more syphilis cases than in 2013. Gonorrhea cases fell from 2,860 in 2013 to 2,333 last year.

Some more vulnerable

Connecticut last year ranked 40th of the 50 states in the number of reported chlamydia cases per 100,000 residents, according to the CDC. The state ranked 37th in gonorrhea cases and 37th in primary and secondary syphilis cases.

As in other regions of the country, there is a wide disparity in Connecticut in the rate of sexually transmitted diseases among races and ethnicities.

The rates of reported cases of chlamydia and gonorrhea are five times higher for Hispanic residents than for white residents in Connecticut, Sosa says. For African American residents, the rate of reported chlamydia cases is nearly 17 times higher than the rate for whites and 24 times higher for gonorrhea.

Nationally, the CDC reports, the gonorrhea rate among Hispanics last year was 73.3 cases per 100,000 population, nearly double the rate among whites. The rate of chlamydia and primary and secondary syphilis among Hispanics was also double the rate among whites.

Most cases in big cities

Hartford and New Haven last year reported the most chlamydia and gonorrhea cases in the state. There were 1,666 chlamydia and 398 gonorrhea cases in Hartford and 1,400 chlamydia and 250 gonorrhea cases in New Haven. Hartford reported the most primary and secondary syphilis cases last year at 13. New Haven, Bridgeport and Waterbury tied for the second-highest total, each reporting 11.

The Fairfield Health Department has seen the total number of sexually transmitted disease cases remain stable since 2011, according to Sands Cleary, the department’s director of health. Fairfield has an estimated 61,000 residents and 8,000 college students and averages 115 sexually transmitted disease cases each year. No local data explains why the yearly number has remained stable, Sands says.

Last year, the Fairfield Health Department saw a slight increase of chlamydia cases, compared with 2013, and a slight decrease in syphilis and gonorrhea cases.

In Connecticut’s most populous city, Bridgeport, the city’s communicable disease clinic has seen a slight increase in syphilis cases but a stable number overall of sexually transmitted diseases, according to Kristin duBay Horton, the director of health at the Bridgeport Health Department. Horton said that the number of patient visits to the clinic has decreased, likely as a result of the Affordable Care Act, which has provided people with health insurance and created more health care options.

To reduce the likelihood of contracting a sexually transmitted disease, Connecticut residents should use condoms and have safer sex practices, including limiting the number of partners and having partners tested, Horton said.

There’s been an increase in the number of people using PrEP (pre-exposure prophylaxis) — a pill to prevent HIV infection — and these people “are less likely to use condoms and follow other preventative measures,” she said.

This story was reported under a partnership with the Connecticut Health I-Team (www.c-hit.org).