Sitting in the driver’s seat of his patrol car, Patriot contently slurping water in back, Josh English smiles and says his mother wouldn’t allow even toy guns in the house when he was a kid. Or a dog.

Today, he never works without them, although the guns are real and Patriot isn’t your typical family pet. “It’s kind of weird,” he says, still smiling.

English, 36, and Patriot, a 6-year-old German shepherd from — yes, Germany — form the latest K-9 unit in the Keene Police Department, an invaluable resource on many levels. From tracking down suspects and lost individuals to nosing out narcotics, the pair follow a line of K-9 teams in Keene that have enhanced law-enforcement capabilities and officer safety.

Lately, Patriot has been called upon to investigate a string of shoplifting incidents in the area, and he’s often front and center in rooting out the escalating, and alarming, influx of heroin. English says heroin is actually one of the easiest drugs for a dog to identify because of its strong odor, comparable to cat urine.

Patriot is especially valuable in tracking down a suspect. “If the bad guy is in a building and Patriot finds him, he’ll bark and let us know he’s hiding,” English says. “We don’t have to go in the building and risk our safety; we can stand outside and call the suspect to us.”

On patrol Thursday night, Patriot wasn’t needed, although, as always, he was alert the entire shift. Typically, he got some exercise and played fetch at an abandoned parking lot, but because of a long overtime shift the night before, English says he’s a little off. Still, Patriot isn’t about to let anyone get too close to him without a menacing bark from his kennel in back.

Almost all black, Patriot is difficult to see in the car’s black interior, especially at night. The back is his domain, the backseat taken out and modified for a police dog. It’s equipped with a regulated temperature system monitored by a computer. Training is so precise that Patriot always enters and exits on the driver’s side, except when duty calls and the push of a button on English’s uniform releases him out the passenger door.

Otherwise, Patriot is the ideal rider, never whining — bathroom breaks come when they come — “kind of like us,” English chuckles.

Patriot lives with English and his wife, Jen, and their young children, Tyler and Dayna (and a third on the way). While he’s always up for a game of fetch or hide-and-seek with Tyler, Patriot isn’t the cuddling type. Rather than curl up on the couch, he patrols the house, for that’s the way he’s wired and trained.

“The difference between a working dog and a pet dog is huge, like the difference between a high school athlete and an Olympic athlete,” English says.

Patriot arrived in Keene in 2010, the successor to the K-9 team comprised of officer Steven Tenney and Laika. Before that, officer Brian Costa, now Keene’s police chief, had a seven-year run with Niko. (An aside: Don’t miss Costa’s emotional reflections on Niko in the online video that accompanies this article.)

Watching Laika and Niko track through the years, English says he developed a keen interest in the K-9 unit and its unique skills. “You’d be looking for somebody and think by looking at a (barren) area, there’s no way someone came through here. Sure enough, they’d pick up a scent. That impressed me so much,” he says.

Patriot came to Keene through a $5,000 grant from the Working Dog Foundation. English, Costa and Tenney picked him up late at night on May 8, 2010, at Logan International Airport in Boston. He was accompanied by two other dogs and Andy Schaeffer, a captain in the German Police Department who has worked closely with the foundation since it was established in New Hampshire in 1995.

Patriot lived in Germany his first 18 months, and responded to commands in his native language; thus, English had to learn some German. He still remembers that first night he brought Patriot home.

“I got home about 1, 2 in the morning, brought him inside and he woke my wife up,” English says. “It was pretty much bonding the first couple of weeks before training started.”

English didn’t name Patriot; his original name was Milo, coincidentally the same name as the English family’s pet Labrador retriever. His name was given by Air Force Staff Sgt. Bernard E.J. Reed shortly before he deployed to Iraq for a second tour.

Reed donated the $5,000 to the foundation with the intent it be earmarked for Keene’s police dog. He requested it be named Patriot in honor of those who serve in the armed forces — and because he loves the New England Patriots.

The team went through vigorous training at the N.H. Police K-9 Academy at the Pease Air National Guard base in Portsmouth, and still does today. English and Patriot travel there once a week, as the certification process encompassing obedience, apprehension and narcotics is demanding. They just went through three certification exams this spring.

“It’s nerve-wracking still, and I’ve done four of them,” English says of the exams, adding, “As I look back on it, it amazes me I was able to get it all together and we have the product that we do.”

English spends hours on his own training with Patriot, sometimes having Tyler hide so Patriot can seek. While the game gives father-and-son bonding time, it’s also serious training for Patriot. In addition to his own shifts, the team is on call and invariably family functions are interrupted. English and Patriot also make numerous appearances at local schools and public events.

He says Costa and Tenney have given him plenty of advice through experiences gained with their dogs, advice he leans on. And his colleagues are supportive. “Without the cooperation of my co-workers, we would not be where we are today,” English says. “If they weren’t interested, we wouldn’t have been able to progress to this level.”

The praise is twofold: Costa says English is an extremely knowledgeable and effective handler and Patriot has developed into an exceptional working dog.

English is a native of Southbury, Conn., a town of about 20,000 in the southern part of the state, which explains the New York Yankees floor mat in his cruiser. Although his mother didn’t allow pets or toy guns in the house, he grins and says he still loved playing cops and robbers with kids in the neighborhood.

He went to Keene State College, graduating in 2001 with a safety and occupational health degree, though he says he only half-heartedly looked for jobs in that field. He was on the swim team, specializing in sprints, and in the rugby club. He met his wife at Keene State. And he served in the Marine Corps Reserves.

The busy schedule “kept me out of trouble at school. May have been a good thing. Missed some of the rowdier parties,” he quips.

His Reserves unit was activated as the war in Iraq ramped up, and that led to a stint in Zamboanga City in the southern Philippines in 2003-04, where it guarded the city’s air strip. He and Jen were already engaged, and with some help from priests at St. Joseph’s Church in Walpole, hurriedly got married before he was deployed.

His interest in law enforcement had also been enhanced through his in-laws, who worked part-time in the Vermont Sheriffs’ Association. That steered him to the Cheshire County Sheriff’s Office, preceded by a short spell at Bergeron Construction, and he found his calling.

“Three or four former Marines were in the department. It was a great group of guys, a mixture of young and old. I felt very comfortable with (then-Sheriff Dick Foote’s) leadership style,” English says.

He put down roots in Keene and his jump to the police department was all but inevitable.

Although this Thursday night was relatively quiet, the team never knows what it may face shift to shift. In last October’s tension-filled riots during the Keene Pumpkin Festival, the pair patrolled for hours just behind the police lines with Patriot discouraging those who breached the wall from heading downtown.

Patriot has about two to three years of active duty left, depending on his health, and so far he’s held up well. Police dogs retire at about 9 years old, and live out their lives with their handlers. English can see himself getting another K-9, though he says, “Outside of having kids, this is probably the hardest job I’ve ever had.”

And one of the most rewarding.