Frederick Police Officer III Andrew Fairbanks stands next to a 2012 Chevy Caprice on Friday, Aug. 30, in Frederick. The car was named the best Chevy Caprice in Law and Order Magazine's 2013 police vehicle design contest. (Matthew Jonas/Times-Call)

FREDERICK -- It's not often a police officer hears "Hey, snazzy ride!" But Frederick is now an exception on a national scale.

In a contest held by Law & Order magazine, the department's fresh look for its wheels took first place in the Chevy Caprice category.

The solid black cruiser includes an image of the Front Range on the side rear, connected by a silver line to a large silver POLICE over both side doors. The car has no external light bar, instead running its flashers on the visor, in the grill, and on the side-view mirrors.

"It kind of breaks up that profile, blends into the crowd a little more," said Officer Andy Fairbanks, who helped lead the police department's redesign effort.

Wait a minute. Blend into the crowd? With a big POLICE on the side?

Fairbanks chuckled. Part of the idea, he said, was to both stand out and be inconspicuous. On the one hand, the car is clearly marked and can be identified at a distance. But if it's just glanced at in the flow of traffic, or off the side of a road, it could seem to be just one more car -- or not even that much, at night.

But the reason for a black car was far more simple than that.

"Firestone has white, Dacono still has black-and-white, the state patrol has silver," Fairbanks said. "We chose black because no one else had it in the Tri-Towns or the south Weld County area," Fairbanks said.

When this started in 2011, though, it wasn't to be stylish. It was to save a little money. That's when the Frederick Police Department found out that two-tone paint jobs, like its old black-and-white cruisers, would no longer be free with the purchase of the police car.

That stung, Fairbanks said, since it meant the police would be paying at both ends: to have the paint put on when the car was built and delivered, and then the more usual cost to take it off again when retiring the cruiser from service.

So, a solid color, with details. Just what sort of details were worked out inside the department -- mainly by a team of four officers, including Fairbanks -- and then refined in back-and-forth conversations with the design company that would make the idea real.

"We were trying to say 'This is not a car that drives around Frederick. This is a car that incorporates Frederick,'" Fairbanks said.

The detailing costs about $700; not free, but less than the two-tone paint job was going to be. And when it's time to take the vehicle out of service, the department doesn't have to do a full repaint. Just remove the details along with the cop gear, and the car's ready to go.

Three Caprices and three Tahoes now have the new design; another five still have the old. By 2014, all the patrol vehicles should have the new style, though the old may still crop up in non-patrol areas, such as for a school-resource duty.

The award was surprising, Fairbanks said. But the response of residents since the new cars first hit the road has been the real prize.

"We're getting a lot of really good comments from the public," he said. "Some people just yell out, 'Hey, nice car!' It's kind of shocking."

Scott Rochat can be reached at 303-684-5220 or srochat@times-call.com.