If you go What: University of Colorado's New Opera Workshop events Schedule: • 2 p.m. Sunday, June 8: Recital featuring scenes by student composer fellows and songs by previous CU NOW composers. • 7:30 p.m. Friday, June 13, and 2 p.m. Sunday, June 15: Staged performance of the second half of "The Master" by Alberto Caruso. • 7:30 p.m. Saturday, Saturday, June 14: Concert performance of "The Master" in its entirety. Where: All events are in the ATLAS Black Box Theater, 18th and Colorado, University of Colorado campus. Tickets: Admission is free, but seating is limited. Email christopher.t.martin@colorado.edu for reservations.

The University of Colorado New Opera Workshop (CU NOW), in its sixth summer season, has established itself enough to gain solicitations from composers, according to Patrick Mason, CU voice professor and co-artistic director of the workshop.

And this year's workshop is a result of one such solicitation.

"We now receive quite a few manuscripts," Mason said. "For this year's work, we were actually contacted by Jake Heggie, who pointed us to a new opera based on the life of Henry James."

Heggie, the composer of "Dead Man Walking" (which will be staged next month by the Central City Opera), has a relationship with the program since his masterpiece was presented by CU in 2007.

The work, by Italian composer Alberto Caruso, is "The Master," with a libretto by Irish author Colm Toibin, from his notable novel of the same name.

"I started collaborating with Colm a couple of years ago, and we actually met together in Spain for a couple of summers," Caruso, who is in Boulder to oversee the workshop, told the Camera.

Alberto Caruso

Caruso said he always has loved James' work and noted several operas based on his stories. The most famous is probably Benjamin Britten's "The Turn of the Screw."

"What is interesting about Colm's work is how it shows that real people from the author's life became characters in his books," Caruso said. "When I proposed an opera, Colm was excited about it and offered to write the libretto himself."

Director Ron Daniels was also an important figure in the opera's creation. Daniels has worked in both straight theater and opera, including a position with the Royal Shakespeare Company. He is also in Boulder this week.

"Ron loved the university and admires the work of Patrick Mason and (CU Opera director) Leigh Holman," Caruso said. "He thought it would be a great place for the first workshop of the piece."

Caruso describes his musical style as "eclectic and free, accessible to the audience, but not easy for the singers."

According to Mason, giving student singers the opportunity to present something totally new is one of the main principles behind CU NOW.

"They have to create a character from the ground up, with no previous models," Mason said, "and that is a rare opportunity."

He emphasized that the program is a boon for the visiting composer, but that is secondary to the students' experience.

This year's public events are slightly different from previous years, including new features. As usual, a portion of the opera will be fully staged in the ATLAS Black Box Theater. In this case, it will be the work's second half. These performances are Friday, June 13, and Sunday, June 15. But on Saturday, the entire work will be presented without staging in a concert version.

"We really wanted to give them a hearing of the whole piece," Mason said, "but we knew that our time constraints would not allow us to stage it all. The director, Mr. Daniels, decided to do the second half for the staged version."

Also, the full concert performance on Saturday, June 14, will be recorded.

Piano professor emeritus Robert Spillman, also a former CU Opera music director, will provide piano accompaniment for both the staged and non-staged versions. The conductor will be Joshua Horsch, who has been serving as assistant conductor for music director Nicholas Carthy and University Symphony Orchestra conductor Gary Lewis.

The workshop week also has typically been paired with a recital on the preceding Sunday. This year, that event, which takes place on the afternoon of June 8, includes another new aspect of the workshop, the Composer Fellows Initiative. Composition faculty member Daniel Kellogg wanted to give students an opportunity to write for the stage.

"We had four student composers each write an eight-minute scene," Mason said. "They really had to discipline themselves and realize that not a lot of text can be sung in that short a time."

For the recital this afternoon, also at the ATLAS, these scenes will be sung in semi-staged versions on the first half. After an intermission, art songs from all previous CU NOW composers, including Kellogg, Lori Laitman, Libby Larsen, Robert Aldridge, Herschel Garfein, and Kirk Mechem, will be sung by student performers. The recital closes with a scene from "The Master" as a teaser.

CU Opera changes opener

The CU Opera has switched its 2014-15 season opener from the previously announced "Kiss Me Kate" to Gilbert and Sullivan's comic operetta, "The Pirates of Penzance."

The opera's season-opening weekend is set for Oct. 24-26 at Macky Auditorium.

A CU spokesperson said the change was made because of contractual issues. Those who bought tickets to "Kiss Me Kate" may call the CU Presents Box Office (303-492-8008) with any questions.