Six thousand classic Blackpool seaside deckchairs to be brought out of storage and restored with original stripe pattern by entrepreneur

Blackpool Council withdrew seats in 2004 to make town feel 'continental'

But it has only just decided to sell them - to entrepreneur Maria Hopwood

She already has business selling replacement canvas for old deckchairs

They will always hold a special place in British seaside tradition, with picture postcards and donkeys.

But while beaches up and down the country were packed with deckchairs in the mid-20th century, they have experienced a steep decline since their heyday.



Now, an entrepreneur is taking 6,000 deckchairs out of storage in Lancashire in order to restore their original striped pattern - and make them available for hire.

Seaside heritage: Maria Hopwood has bought the seats from Blackpool Council - who withdrew them from beaches in 2004 to make the town feel more 'continental', but have only just decided to sell them Maria Hopwood has bought the seats from Blackpool Council - which withdrew them in 2004 to make the town feel more ‘continental’, but has only just decided to sell them. She told the Daily Telegraph: ‘We’re thrilled to be keeping these chairs in use. It would be an absolute travesty to lose this institution of the British summer.’ RELATED ARTICLES Previous

1

2

Next Head for the beaches! Britons make the most of beautiful 22C... We're NOT all going on a summer holiday: More than half of...

Left to rot: The eerie wreckage of a crashed U.S. Navy... Share this article Share Ms Hopwood’s new business Heritage Deckchair Hire was launched seven years after she founded Deckchair Stripes, which sells replacement canvas for old deckchairs. The company, based in Waverton, near Chester, Cheshire, took a revenue of £450,000 last year and now manufactures whole chairs in Britain. Popular: Holidaymakers sit in deckchairs in Blackpool in 1979. Blackpool Council banked an astonishing £6million in cash from the takings of deckchair hire within a period of three years in the late Fifties Ms Hopwood added: ‘I was the person who introduced the deckchair back into Britain after they had been consigned to the shed with the arrival of plastic in the Sixties. ‘I’m the only one mad enough to bring back Blackpool’s chairs now.’

She said Blackpool Council did not have enough funds to restore the deckchairs, but held onto them for some time – until she heard that officials were finally ready to sell them last month. Ms Hopwood said: ‘Until then, the council wouldn’t part with them for love nor money. To get them to relinquish a major asset like that was amazing.’



Seaside tradition: The beach and pier in Brighton, East Sussex, with rows of sunbathers in deckchairs, in 1955

On the beach: Holidaymakers in deckchairs at the seaside in Bognor Regis, West Sussex, in 1960

Until deckchairs were invented, people heading for the beach used to pay one old penny to sit on wooden benches dotted along the coastline.

'We’re thrilled to be keeping these chairs in use. It would be an absolute travesty to lose this institution of the British summer' Maria Hopwood, Heritage Deckchair Hire

But these were replaced by deckchairs, which were monitored by attendants who collected money from people on the beach.

Blackpool Council banked an astonishing £6million in cash from deckchair hire takings within a period of three years in the late Fifties.