SOUTH BEND - Last fall, Data Realty became the first tenant to move into Ignition Park, the state-certified technology park located on former Studebaker land south of downtown.

One year later, the data storage and analytics company has doubled its employment to more than 20 workers and continues to fill space in its 45,000-square-foot data center.

Metronet, the fiber-optic network around South Bend and Mishawaka, has already had to pull more fiber into Data Realty's data center to keep up with demand there.

"We knew at some point that (Data Realty's) first fiber cable installation would be used up," Metronet executive director Mary Jan Hedman said. "It happened a lot quicker than we expected."

Data Realty formed in 2010 at Innovation Park at Notre Dame -- the business incubator that is the other half of South Bend's dual-site technology park. The company announced in 2011 that it would build a data center at Ignition Park, and it opened that building in October 2012.

Heather Short-Davis, director of marketing for Data Realty, said the company is planning to focus in 2014 on encouraging mid-sized businesses to use the data they collect instead of just storing it. The data that businesses accumulate from transactions can be analyzed to help them run their businesses better.

"Whether it's with Data Realty or with a different type of analytics-infrastructure company, we just want mid-sized businesses to let their data live and really utilize their data," she said.

Short-Davis said Data Realty is planning to announce a new offering next month that allows companies to test an analytics project to see if the service makes sense for them.

Data Realty is also planning to announce new data center locations next year in other parts of the country.

Working with health care organizations has been an area of growth for the company.

The implementation of the Affordable Care Act, which includes incentives for hospitals to reduce readmission rates, is leading many institutions to examine the factors that cause patients to return for more care. They're turning to analytics companies like Data Realty to predict and prevent those readmissions.

Data Realty still is the only tenant at Ignition Park, but it won't be alone there for much longer.

City officials announced earlier this month that Great Lakes Capital will develop a multi-tenant building at the park.

The $6 million building will be about the same size as Data

Realty's data center and provide space for early-phase companies that might be ready to move out of an incubator but not ready to finance their own buildings.

The project is scheduled to begin in the spring and open in late 2014 or early 2015.

KAllen@SBTinfo.com

574-235-6244

Twitter: @KevinAllenSBT