A TORY MP is under fire after his aristocratic mother revealed plans to build a housing estate - in the middle of his upmarket family seat in the Chew Valley.

Residents claim Lady Gillian Rees-Mogg is taking advantage of a relaxation in planning laws to try and build 19 houses in the tiny village which dates back to the Domesday Book.

The North East Somerset MP fiercely opposes development in the green belt but locals say they cannot turn to him for help - because he is her son, Jacob Rees-Mogg.

The proposed development is close to the Mendip Hills Area of Natural Beauty and only 40 yards from a conservation area.

Furious residents in Hinton Blewett say the application will increase the size of the village by more than a fifth.

The village is seen as the 'seat' of the Rees-Mogg family after Jacob's father William took the title of Baron Rees-Mogg, of Hinton Blewett, when he was made a peer in 1988.

Locals have grown up on friendly terms with their aristocratic neighbours but say they are now "disappointed" because they feel the family is 'selling out'.

One of the leading opponents of the development is farmer Graham Sage, whose aunt was once William Rees-Mogg's nanny.

The 65-year-old has written personally to Lady Gillian, 74, but believes she does not understand the strength of feeling.

"I think people are feeling very disappointed and let down by this," he said.

"It's totally inappropriate and I've never known them so upset about anything before.

"Even when the family moved they kept the Lord of the Manor title and there was always this great closeness between the Rees-Moggs and the people of Hinton Blewett."

Consultants claim Bath & North East Somerset Council does not have enough housing land within its boundaries for the next five years.

They submitted a planning application for 19 three, four and five-bedroom detached houses, one third of which will be affordable, shortly before Christmas, claiming the village desperately needed new homes.

But objectors say the parish council has already identified around 15 small building plots dotted around the village which are more in keeping with the area than one estate.

"There is no question about it, they are taking advantage of a narrow window of opportunity," said Mr Sage.

"Two years ago this application would have been laughed out because you'd have had a job to put a garden gate or wooden shed up in this village.

"It will be the same again when Banes gets its act together."

Feelings are running so high that the village held its first ever public meeting in the local pub to discuss plans to save the agricultural land.

Villagers have already started to send letters of objection to the plans, saying it will spoil a "very sensitive" part of the Somerset countryside.

One resident, who did not want to be named, said: "People are not sure how Jacob feels about this but he's bound to have a foot in both camps because the land belongs to his mother.

"But her Ladyship might be in for a surprise. In the old days the Lord of the Manor could do what he wanted, but the peasants are educated now and are in revolt."

Mr Rees-Mogg lives in the next village with his heiress wife Helena de Chair, three sons and a daughter, but is a regular visitor to the hamlet where he grew up.

Locals met at the Ring O‘Bells to discuss the application, which is outside the settlement boundary of the village, and has a church, village hall and just one bus service a week.

The area is not green belt land but is next to a Nature Conservation Area and the site includes the Cam Brook, which is a special landscape designation.

Her Ladyship's planning consultants told villagers, in a newsletter, that she will discuss financial contributions towards improvements to highways and education or broadband if she gets planning permission.

But one objector, Joanna Burgess, told the council: "All planning is political and politically it would be convenient for BANES to grant permission for this development to help meet its housing targets, but for the residents of the village the application represents a money-making exercise by the owner of the land at the expense of the aspirations of others."

Mr Rees-Mogg said: "Planning is a matter for the local council and is not something that an MP has any say over.

"However, the green belt is a national policy designation which I strongly support and would oppose developments that threaten it."

Lady Gillian, who is now believed to live in Pall Mall, central London, could not be reached for comment yesterday.