Mayor Bill de Blasio holds a proclamation reading “Spring is Coming” after Staten Island Chuck emerges during The Staten Island Zoo’s annual Groundhog Day ceremony in Staten Island, NY on Monday. Andrew Hinderaker for The Wall Street Journal

New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio returned to the scene of the Staten Island Zoo Monday, where he watched a groundhog from afar a year after dropping the ceremonial rodent, which later died.

This year the groundhog, known as Staten Island Chuck, predicted an early spring from behind the safety of a new plexiglass enclosure, a new arrangement that ended years of tradition, but that the mayor said was for the best.

“It’s a popemobile!” Mr. de Blasio said, referring to the enclosure. “This new approach will be safer for both species involved.”

In a brief ceremony Monday morning, the mayor, zoo officials and a large group of excited children looked on as the groundhog emerged from its miniature home and zoo officials declared that the rodent hadn’t seen his shadow, meaning the city is in for an early spring. In a bit of stagecraft, the rodent appeared on a moving platform that rose as an orchestra sometimes does in a musical.

At no point did the mayor, or any other city officials, handle the groundhog, a change Staten Island Zoo Executive Director Ken Mitchell said would make for “a progressive, new and exciting Groundhog Day.”

It was a year ago that another groundhog known as Staten Island Chuck was not so lucky. Mr. de Blasio dropped that groundhog, which sailed to the ground beneath the mayor’s feet in front of dozens of shocked school children and later died.

Zoo officials didn’t make the death public for more than six months. When they did, the officials said the groundhog died of internal injuries consistent with a fall, but blamed a second tumble they said took place after the mayor’s fumble.

On the first anniversary of the mishap, Deputy Staten Island Borough President Ed Burke tried to keep the mood light.

“2015 is not a leap year!” Mr. Burke said to groans and giggles.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture issued the Staten Island Zoo a notice in November warning that it had violated the Animal Welfare Act with last year’s ceremony. USDA officials cited the use of an “untrained handler” to cradle the groundhog.

People take photos of Staten Island Chuck during The Staten Island Zoo’s annual Groundhog Day ceremony in Staten Island, NY on Monday. Andrew Hinderaker for The Wall Street Journal

Many in attendance at this year’s event said the last year’s mishap was still on their minds.

“It’s a tragedy,” said Peter Schultheis, 58, who wore a groundhog-themed hat he said he bought in Punxsutawney, Pa., home of another famous groundhog, Punxsutawney Phil.

Mr. Schultheis, of the St. George area of Staten Island, said he was happy Mr. de Blasio was hands-off this year.

“I didn’t even vote for him,” he said.