Topics: halftime show, Katy Perry, Super Bowl, Entertainment News

When Katy Perry performs today at Super Bowl XLIX, she’ll join an elite group of pop artists to have graced the game’s halftime show in recent years—among them, Madonna, Beyoncé and Bruno Mars. For the 30-year-old megastar, her ambitions for the massive performance are surprisingly simple: “I want to bring the humor, I want to bring the color, I want to bring the sass and I want to bring the incredible joy,” she told the Daily Mail.

These qualities, of course, also sum up Perry’s musical aesthetic and career to this point. Her albums are full of frothy, bulletproof-pop confections devised by her and collaborators such as Dr. Luke, Bonnie McKee and Max Martin; songs effortlessly veer between soft-glow synthpop, danceable neo-disco and sweeping ballads, with whispers of EDM, rock ‘n’ roll and hip-hop thrown in for good measure. In concert, Perry brings her vision to life in a brightly colored cartoon dreamland that in the past has resembled a cross between a rave at Willy Wonka’s candy factory and “My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic.” It’s during these marathon shows that her overarching lyrical tropes—marching to the beat of a different drummer, finding perfect love, staying strong in the face of adversity—are most striking and empowering.

Certainly Perry’s neon-and-rainbows veneer is charming—to a point. But this kitsch sometimes overwhelms her music. Although the rah-rah, screw-the-haters sentiment of mega-hit “Roar” is inspiring and sincere, the song’s lyrics (“I got the eye of the tiger, a fighter, dancing through the fire/’Cause I am a champion and you’re gonna hear me roar”) aren’t clever, just nicking themes from “Rocky.” The use of shallow, tired physical descriptors throughout “California Gurls” (“California girls, we’re unforgettable/Daisy Dukes, bikinis on top”) is cloying. And the less said about her early hit “I Kissed a Girl” and the way it plays into every insulting stereotype about girl-on-girl makeouts, the better. At other times, Perry’s over-the-top pageantry has been an inadvertent detriment. Her moments of high-profile cultural appropriation—including the notorious geisha performance at the AMAs and her exaggerated turn as a bar mitzvah host in the “Birthday” video—were tone deaf, even if she insisted she meant nothing malicious by either of them.

These lowest-common-denominator references are frustrating, because Perry doesn’t need to be edgy to attract attention; her songwriting is strong enough to stand on its own. During the Prismatic world tour, a mid-set break found her strapping on a guitar to belt out “The One That Got Away,” a perfect snapshot of ephemeral summer romance that matches memories of “[making] out in your Mustang to Radiohead” to regrets over how things ended. The piano-based “By the Grace of God” is an affecting pep talk to herself about staying strong and moving forward after her divorce from Russell Brand; “Not Like the Movies,” meanwhile, acknowledges that perfect romance is actually very imperfect. Fans might come for the self-empowerment of “Firework”—but stay for Perry’s genuine reflections about her own struggles.

What’s perhaps more impressive is that Perry’s emotional complexity isn’t an act; she’s always seemed to be completely comfortable in her skin, warts and all. Even if her music comes across as grating, as a person she’s almost impossible to dislike, because she appears to be so normal. Her Twitter feed is a conversational mix of emojis, self-deprecation, chatter about Girl Scout cookies and adorable things she’s found on the Internet. In interviews, she is cheerfully honest about everything from her über-Christian upbringing to believing in aliens. And in her 2012 documentary, “Katy Perry: Part of Me,” scenes depicting her fan meet-and-greets or her candid backstage interactions are completely lacking pretense or sugarcoating: As the documentary unfolds (and her marriage crumbles) Perry visibly grows more exhausted and vulnerable. But she never complains about the brutal traveling pace or her life falling apart. It’s hard to find fault with someone so committed to becoming successful—and so confident about who they are and what they stand for.