Bill Ellis St. Vrain Valley Voices

Demagogue: Firebrand, agitator, manipulator, haranguer, orator, tub-thumper, crowd pleaser.

Donald Trump matches all the synonyms for a demagogue.

On March 28, 2010, my guest opinion "Metaphors for life" was published in the Daily Times-Call. It turned out to be a popular piece and a warning to anyone blurting out offensive language to the public. Rush Limbaugh had angrily defamed President Obama and congressional Democrats for passing the Affordable Care Act. Nicknamed "the Great Bloviator" by Leonard Pitts, Pulitzer Prize-winning nationally syndicated columnist, Limbaugh said, "We're gonna get those bastards," and national media networks rebroadcast his comment including the tasteless word only used in hatred.

Not long after Limbaugh's ugly remark, an unbalanced man claimed he'd heard voices telling him to shoot people. And so he did. He took his rifle to a middle school in the Columbine High School neighborhood and shot two students.

Back in March 2010 I contrasted that reckless endangerment with words to a legendary basketball coach at my university. Determined not to put up with students shouting epithets at the referees, Frank McGuire stood up, faced the raucous rabble, raised his right hand and brought it down. Out of respect, we shut up and sat down. It was a lesson I'll always remember.

Advertisement

But there is no Frank McGuire around today. The communications media, loosely termed "news" media, and the GOP are aghast at their creation. Donald Trump has the bit in his teeth spewing derogatory slop left and right. How awful. Tune in to the news at 10 for another collection of demeaning sound-bites.

Though unusual with his insulting approach, Donald Trump is ordinary in submitting to the corruption of power. For it is a high privilege to have your words published whether in print or on TV. Words can equal power; just look at the effect of those nasty sound bites repeated daily. Who has he denounced today: women, people of color, or potty habits?

In her March 20 Denver Post commentary, "A conservative against Trump," Krista Kafer writes, "Ultimately though, it isn't his liberalism or ignorance that makes him unfit for the presidency; it's his character. It's his demagoguery and opportunism. It's his lies and exaggerations. It's his immaturity and lack of judgment. Seriously, a man who makes fun of another man's disability on stage for laughs should not have the nuclear codes. ... It isn't just his words, it's his actions toward widows, wives, women in general, investors, legislators, candidates and voters that attest to his situational ethics."

In his "Wonkblog" for the Washington Post, Max Ehrenfreund references the research of Matthew MacWilliams, a doctoral candidate at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst. Trump supporters, according to MacWilliams, "... fit a personality type that favors authoritarianism, and tends to prefer clarity and unity to ambiguity and difference. They are amenable to restricting rights of others, anyone whose culture or lifestyle deviates from their own." Summarizing, MacWilliams says, "... Set in their ways, their support is based more on personality than policy. They have an aversion to new experiences and to immigration."

"This support is in people's guts, not their brains," says Marc Hetherington, Vanderbilt University expert on authoritarianism, also referenced by Ehrenfreund.

The shame of it all is the general smothering of the Republican Party's long-standing goals and principles eloquently described in Ms. Kafer's commentary. "The GOP promotes the principles of limited government, constitutional constraint, rule of law, federalism, a vibrant civil society, and free enterprise, and it embraces the basic human rights of life, personal property, and self-protection, free speech, and conscience."

For a party salivating for the White House these past eight years and fighting the Democratic incumbent over every undotted I and uncrossed T, Donald Trump is a sad excuse for its nominee for the presidency. No, he is not a fascist as some are suggesting; his vision does not extend past the podium.

Bill Ellis is a Longmont resident and an advocate for human rights