Splotchy. There are few words less romantic than splotchy. Rash? Cottage cheese? But as I sit here, my memory brushing aside a couple of decades, I’m enamored by this childhood vision — a splotchy patch of dirt upon this otherwise evergreen backyard, a spot where grass just couldn’t grow.

This was the pitcher’s mound. Well, not a mound. The pitcher’s splotch. We’d play so much whiffle ball in my buddy’s backyard that the grass just gave up, surrendering to scuffing from our Agassis or Bo Jacksons.

This splotch made the back yard a ball yard.

We loved whiffle ball, lived for whiffle ball. Maybe you did too? And on this Fourth of July holiday, I bet there will be yellow bats flung throughout Denver parks, CarGos in cargo shorts.

“It’s a version of baseball, which is synonymous with summertime in America,” said Colorado Springs resident Jaime Hixson, who was the commissioner of a whiffle ball league for two decades. “You can be 55 years old or you can be 10, and it’s still a blast. Grab whatever you can for the bases, all you need is a yellow plastic bat and a ball.”

It really was the perfect game — it was hardball “childproofed,” so we could emulate the national pastime without breaking any windows. You could throw curveballs without throwing out your shoulder.

I still play. You can find me in Denver’s Riverfront Park, a 35-year-old man, grunting as I throw my oxy moron of a fastball, scuffing the evergreen grass with my shoes.

Two decades ago, back home in St. Louis, we’d play in the backyard of Daniel and David Norber. Strike that — in the grand cathedral we called Norber Stadium, with its woods behind home plate and wooden fence in right field, which was the perfect, predestined distance for a whiffle ball game. The house itself loomed in left field, but as left-handed-hitting Daniel recently reminded me, “Once my parents added a porch to the back of the house, I always felt like I was (cheated), because the power alley for right-handed hitters was super close, because on the porch is a ground-rule double.”

I love how he said “is” a ground-rule double, as if it’s a standing rule, everlasting, just in case we all reunite in his boyhood backyard and someone smacks one to the porch.

Everyone seems to play whiffle ball with variations of the rules, kind of like accents from different parts of the country. We’d play “pitcher’s hand,” meaning we had to literally run to first base — safe if we arrived before the pitcher retrieved the ball.

These days, baserunning has given way to beer drinking, and hits are thus simply categorized — grounder past the pitcher is a single, deep drive is a double, and such. Defense is extremely more taxing than offense, be it pitching or chasing down flyballs. A few years back, my buddy Luke Price leapt for a liner, and when he arose from the grass, his lower leg was bloody. At first I was like, “Dude, what were you thinking?” But then it dawned on me. I thought, “You know, man, there’s only one way to play whiffle ball — like you’re 11.”

The games get intense. I’m still bitter about the debacle of March 2011. My buddies Peter and George were visiting from Los Angeles. Now, the farthest east Peter had ever been was like Palm Springs. So, knowing he was headed to Colorado, and assuming I lived atop Pikes Peak, he purchased these ridiculously thick, waterproof mountain shoes. But it was 70 and sunny all weekend.

We decided to play some whiffle ball, one-on-one-on-one. There’s always a batter, pitcher and fielder, and by the bottom of the last inning, the score was Benjamin 9, George 9, Peter 0.

I was on the mound, George at the bat.

I pieced together a pair of outs, but George soon loaded the bases. I felt like the world stopped — surely all the joggers and families paused in the park — as I unleashed the fateful pitch. George whisked the yellow bat and walloped the whiffle ball to the outfield, and the ball hovered in the air, as Peter scampered.

Peter chased that thing, Luke Price-esque, leaping into the air, arm extended … and the ball misses his fingertips by a fingertip.

George won. I blew the save. But darn it — if Peter had just worn normal, human shoes, I swear he would’ve caught that thing.

Whiffle ball, man. It stays with you.

Benjamin Hochman: bhochman@denverpost.com or twitter.com/hochman