I’ve spent most of the last decade hammering one message: The Republican Party is awful.

That is, if you’re a conservative or libertarian.

Libertarian conservatives like me weren’t looking for just another party hack who could make the trains run on time in Washington, D.C.

We wanted to reverse course.

The GOP has pretended to be for small government, but functionally has been big government. Before Obama was exploding the national debt, George W. Bush was nearly doubling it. Republicans say they’re for the Constitution and individual liberty, but have been an enemy of the Bill of Rights and privacy protections. Dick Cheney was no civil libertarian.

+ Elaine Thompson Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump campaigns in Washington state last week. Elaine Thompson ×

It says it cares about its voters, but betrays them every chance it gets. Obamacare, illegal immigration and Ex-Im bank/cronyism, to name just a few offenses the base found intolerable.

Many forget that the tea party movement didn’t originally begin with Barack Obama, but with President George W. Bush when he “abandoned free market principles… to save the free market system” with the bank bailout in 2008.

The GOP presidential nominee that year, John McCain, suspended his campaign to rush back to Washington to assist Bush in pushing this through. “The fundamentals of the economy are strong,” said McCain.

Of course, Obama defeated McCain handily in 2008. Americans-at-large were fed up with the GOP at that point, too.

By 2012, the tea party had actually elected a number of its own — Sens. Rand Paul, Mike Lee and Ted Cruz stand out — and yet the GOP nominee that year essentially promised to keep the same old Republican model intact that the base had been rejecting since the last presidential election.

Obamacare was a primary issue in 2012 — and the Republican nominee who campaigned against it was also the architect of the model it was based on — Romneycare in Massachusetts. Seriously?

Of course, Romney lost too.

Donald Trump, policywise, is against virtually everything the tea party ever stood for. He’s a crony capitalist who wants single-payer health care and even supported the bank bailouts that sparked conservative grassroots uprisings in 2008.

But most of Trumps’ Republican supporters don’t give a rip about policy.

They just wanted something different. Finally.

There are plenty of conservatives and libertarians who oppose Trump and who genuinely wanted something different too. I’m one of them.

But so many of the #NeverTrump politicians and pundits in the media are seen by pro-Trump conservatives as establishment shills who would’ve been completely happy with another McCain, Romney or whatever George W. Bush 4.0 they could have nominated this year.

The GOP grassroots was never happy with McCain or Romney, but endured them in the hope of defeating Barack Obama.

Now, many in the Republican establishment — including former President Bush himself and Jeb Bush — are either saying they won’t support the Republican nominee or even will vote for Hillary Clinton.

What’s a grassroots Republican voter supposed to think about that?

Intellectually, I disagree with conservatives and libertarians who support Trump.

Emotionally — and the Trump phenomenon is primarily one of angst — I find it hard to get too angry with conservatives and libertarians who support Trump after years of disappointment and rejection. I share their frustration.

But I’d be just as angry if half the candidates who ran this year had become the nominee.

Republicans desperately wanted something different — but different doesn’t mean better.