There are always misconceptions about Medicare, but this year the confusion has reached a fever pitch thanks to the rollout of the Affordable Care Act's health insurance exchanges.

Among other things, seniors are wondering how Obamacare will impact Medicare.

The Daily News asked Paula Muschler, operations manager for the Allsup Medicare Advisor, a provider of independent Medicare plan selection services, to separate the facts from the fiction.

Myth: I can use the health insurance exchanges created by Obamacare to shop for Medicare coverage.

Reality: Medicare participants are not required to use the health exchanges in any way. The Medicare program is completely separate.

Medicare participants are considered insured under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

Myth: I should sign up for the same Medicare plan as my spouse.

Reality: Medicare truly is individual coverage. It's not necessary for you to be on the same plan, and it could cost you more.

In addition, your needs, such as physicians, specialists, medications and medical conditions, are likely to be different from those of your spouse.

Myth: I don't need to worry about Medicare if I am working when I turn 65.

Reality: This myth can trip up many people. It's true that you may not need to enroll in Medicare if you are working and have employer health insurance.

But this depends on the size of your employer, when you are planning to retire and other variables.

You can avoid missteps by talking with a Medicare specialist before your 65th birthday rolls around to be certain you are taking the right steps.

If you don't have the right information, you could face penalties and be uninsured while you wait for the next Medicare enrollment period.

Myth: I'm better off with Original Medicare, as opposed to Medicare Advantage because Original Medicare doesn't change from year to year.

Reality: Medicare Advantage plans offer the convenience of having hospital, medical and drug coverage under one plan.

Some also provide dental, vision and other extra benefits. In addition, people with specific health conditions may find Medicare Advantage plans that provide important cost-savings for their treatment needs.

Enrollment in Medicare Advantage plans continues to increase, reaching 14.4 million people this year. Instead of starting with the plan, start with yourself.

It's more important to first determine your health care priorities and financial resources, then takes steps to identify the plan that best matches those needs.

pfurman@nydailynews.com