Rapides Parish schools set open house dates. (Photo: JGI/Jamie Grill, Getty Images/Blend Images)

Rapides Parish schools set open house dates

Acadian Elementary open house Aug. 5 at 3:30-5:30 p.m.

Alexandria Middle Magnet open house Aug. 4 at 5:30 p.m.

Alexandria Middle Magnet back to school Sept. 3 at 5:30 p.m.

Alexandria Senior High open house Aug. 7 at 3-6 p.m.

Ball Elementary open house Aug. 7 at 12-3 p.m.

J.I. Barron Elementary open house Aug. 7 at 12-3 p.m.

Scott M. Brame Middle School open house Aug. 7 at 2-4 p.m.

Mabel Brasher Elementary open house Aug. 7 at 4-6 p.m.

Buckeye Elementary open house Aug. 6 at 4:30-6:30 p.m.

Buckeye High open house Aug. 6 at 4:30-6:30 p.m.

Cherokee Elementary open house Aug. 7 at 4:30-6:30 p.m.

Caroline Dormon Junior High open house Aug. 9 at 3:30-5 p.m.

Forest Hill Elementary open house Aug. 6 at 4-6 p.m.

Mary Goff Elementary open house Aug. 7 at 4-6 p.m.

Hadnot-Hayes Elementary open house Aug. 9 at 3-5 p.m.

W. O. Hall Elementary open house Aug. 2 at 2-4 p.m.

Horseshoe Drive Elementary parent/teacher conference Aug. 7 at 4-6:30 p.m.

D.F. Huddle Elementary open house Aug. 7 at 3-6 p.m.

Hayden R. Lawrence open house Aug. 6 at 4:30-6:30 p.m.

Martin Park Elementary open house Aug. 7 at 4-5:30 p.m.

Lessie Moore Elementary open house Aug. 5 at 3:30-5 p.m.

J.B. Nachman Elementary open house Aug. 5 at 5-6:30 p.m.

Northwood High School open house Aug. 5 at 4-6 p.m.

Oak Hill High School open house Aug. 5 at 4-6 p.m.

Paradise Elementary open house Aug. 9 at 2-4 p.m.

Julius Patrick Elementary open house Aug. 9 at 2-4 p.m.

Peabody Montessori open house/orientation Aug. 7 at 12-1 p.m.

Phoenix Magnet orientation: Grades 1-3 Aug. 17 at 6 p.m., Grades 4-6 Aug. 18 at 6 p.m.

Pineville Elementary open house Aug. 9 at 2-4 p.m.

Pineville Junior High seventh grade only orientation/open house Aug. 1 in gym 10 a.m.-1 p.m. Parking is provided on school property. Administration asked that no one park along the side street, Iris Park.

Pineville Junior High eighth grade schedule pickup at main school office July 29-31 at 10 a.m.-1 p.m.

Pineville High School freshman orientation Aug. 10 at 7:20 a.m.-2:30 p.m. Freshman parents meet & greet in auditorium at 1 p.m.

Plainview High open house Aug. 7 at 3-5 p.m.

Poland Junior High open house Aug. 6 at 3:30-6:30 p.m.

RAPPS intake/orientation Aug. 5 at 1 p.m.

Rapides High open house Aug. 5 at 4-6 p.m.

Rapides Training Academy open house Aug. 7 at 1-3 p.m.

Carter C. Raymond Elementary open house Aug. 5 at 4-6 p.m.

Alma Redwine Elementary open house Aug. 6 at 5:30-6:30 p.m.

Rosenthal Montessori open house Aug.7 at 2:30-4 p.m.

Ruby Wise Elementary open house Aug. 6 at 4-6 p.m.

Arthur F. Smith Middle Magnet open house Aug. 6 at 5:30 p.m.

Tioga Elementary open house Aug. 9 at 2-4 p.m.

Tioga Junior High open house Aug. 9 at 3-5 p.m.

Tioga High School senior, junior and sophomore parents meeting pertaining to Advanced Placement and dual enrollment Aug. 3 at the school auditorium at 6 p.m.

Tioga High School freshman parents night Aug. 6 at 6 p.m. at the school auditorium

Tioga High School freshman orientation/”Welcome to the Reservation” Aug. 10 at 7:15 a.m.-2:30 p.m.

Tioga High School Senior Prep Day July 28 9 a.m.-1 p.m.

Tioga High School Junior Prep Day July 29 9 a.m.-1 p.m.

Tioga High School Sophomore Prep Day July 30 9 a.m.-1 p.m.

Tioga High School Freshman Prep Day July 31 9 a.m.-1 p.m.

Agreement expands online program

A newly approved memorandum of understanding between Northwestern State University and Nunez Community College in Chalmette will create an articulation program between the two institutions. Students who complete the Medical Office Management Associate of Applied Science degree at Nunez will be able to transfer all of their credit hours to Northwestern State toward completion of the Bachelor of Applied Science in Allied Health program.

This articulation agreement creates a new pathway for students who complete an associate degree from Nunez Community College.

“Our online degree programs help students from across the state complete their educational goals, and Northwestern State University enrolls many students from South Louisiana in our programs — particularly working adults who need flexibility in scheduling,” said Lisa Abney, provost and vice president for academic affairs at NSU.

“At Nunez we are preparing our students for careers as well as for future academic success,” said Annette Accomando, vice chancellor for academic and student affairs. “Students who complete the Medical Office Management degree now have more options. They can enter the workforce, or choose to continue onto the Allied Health degree at Northwestern.”

Articulation agreements between community colleges and four-year universities are critical for students who plan to transfer into baccalaureate degree programs. Northwestern State has agreements in place with community colleges around the state that allow students to transfer credits towards completion of a baccalaureate degree.

“The articulation is for our online bachelor of applied science program,” said Dr. Laura Aaron, director of NSU’s School of Allied Health. “Since the program is online, students anywhere in the state can complete the program.”

LSUA announces new hires, promotions

Louisiana State University of Alexandria announced promotions and new hiring of several faculty and staff members.

Deron Thaxton was named vice chancellor for finance and administrative services. Thaxton had been serving in an interim capacity since the departure of David Wesse in February 2014. He previously served as the chief information officer at LSUA.

Jason Normand has been promoted to director of information and educational technology services. He had been working as a network administrator on campus.

Brent Porche now is athletic director at LSUA. Porche became interim athletic director following the resignation of Charlie Zeilman. Porche has been elevated to the position on a permanent basis and will remain LSUA’s head baseball coach.

New hires at LSUA include:

Debra Wood is in a full-time tenure tract position in the Department of Nursing. She has been a registered nurse for 17 years with experience as an ER nurse, educational coordinator and house supervisor. She received her MSN and BSN from Northwestern State University in Shreveport and graduated from LSUA with an ASN degree.

Cynthia Menton is joining the nursing department as an adjunct ASN clinical faculty member. She has been a registered nurse for 24 years with clinical experiences in medical/surgical/neuro ICU and quality improvement. Most recently she served as the director of the Nursing Skills Lab at Louisiana College and earned certification as a healthcare simulation educator in 2013. She is passionate about art and is pursuing an art degree from NSU.

Jessica Gardner is joining the nursing department as an adjunct ASN clinical faculty member. She has been a registered nurse for seven years graduating from Harding University with a BSN and Vanderbilt University with a MSN. She is certified as an acute care pediatric nurse practitioner with work experience in pediatric intensive care specializing in trauma and neurology. While enrolled at Harding University she participated in a mission trip to Namwianga, Zambia, and worked in mobile clinics in rural villages taught clinical rotations in government clinics, and assisted with providing healthcare for orphaned children.

Michelle Cascio is joining the nursing department as an adjunct RN-BSN faculty member. She has been a registered nurse for 15 years and has clinical experience in ER, case management and as a flight nurse. Michelle is currently certified as a legal nurse consultant and has experience in worker’s compensation as a medical case manager. She is employed full time at medical care manager in the Department of Worker’s Compensation for Younger and Associates, Inc. in Lafayette.

Read or Share this story: http://www.thetowntalk.com/story/news/local/2015/07/18/childs-school-open-house/30372749/