By Joe Rutherford

Daily Journal

TUPELO – The U.S. House and Senate decisively approved a five-year, $305 billion highway and transit bill Thursday, advancing the first long-term national transportation spending package in a decade.

President Barack Obama’s signature is expected today.

The 359–65 House vote and 83-16 Senate approval was a bipartisan compromise coming one day before today’s funding cutoff.

Northern District Transportation Commissioner Mike Tagert said the bill will provide funding stability. But Tagert said he had not seen enough finalized details to make extensive comments on the bill’s specifics related to Mississippi.

Tagert also said he expects the Mississippi Economic Council to make a major announcement about transportation needs in Mississippi at a Dec. 18 event at the Downtown Marriott in Jackson. MEC chief Blake Wilson said earlier the council and many key statewide leaders have worked for months on perfecting a proposal with deep and wide support.

U.S. Sen. Thad Cochran, R-Miss., and Sen. Roger Wicker, R-Miss., voted for the Fixing America’s Surface Transportation (FAST) Act, which would ease federal regulatory burdens and direct additional resources for transportation improvements in Mississippi and across the country for the next five years.

“A long-term surface transportation bill is an important step toward giving Mississippi and all states the certainty and resources they need to improve infrastructure to promote economic growth, development and public safety,” Cochran said.

Wicker, who also was active in shaping the bill, said it includes more than $2.7 billion for investments in Mississippi.

“Simply put, the nation’s roads, bridges and railroads need a shot in the arm,” Wicker said. “This bill does just that. It puts an end to years of inaction that have stalled critical highway and bridge projects, including some in Mississippi. Our state and local leaders are now armed with the certainty they need to plan ahead, which in turn will make the roads safer for drivers, boost economic growth and create jobs.”

Wicker added several provisions to the Highway Bill, including passenger rail legislation, which was introduced in June with Sen. Cory Booker, D-N.J. Efforts to restore Amtrak service along the Gulf Coast, between New Orleans and Orlando, took a major step forward. The bill funds a new Gulf Coast Working Group with a $500,000 grant specifically to help bring rail service back to the region, which was lost after Hurricane Katrina.

The bill also includes Wicker’s proposal to reauthorize the Appalachian Regional Commission, important across Northeast Mississippi, with approval of $100 million annually over the next five years, including $10 million a year to improve rural broadband services. ARC is a regional economic development agency and built the Appalachian Development Highway System. Mississippi has 24 counties within ARC.

Additionally, the FAST Act would emphasize bridge reconstruction and safety, a key issue also cited by Tagert.

According to the Federal Highway Administration, 2,275 bridges in Mississippi, approximately 21 percent of the state’s total, are structurally deficient or functionally obsolete.

The bill also includes provisions to reduce the regulatory burdens associated with the National Environmental Protection Act (NEPA) process for infrastructure projects.

U.S. Rep. Trent Kelly, a Republican from Tupelo, also voted for the bill.

“(Thursday) the House passed, with my support, a five year transportation reauthorization,” Kelly said in a statement released by his office. “This legislation provides long-term certainty and more flexibility to states and local governments seeking to improve our nation’s ailing transportation infrastructure. The bill streamlines the environmental review and project approval processes, which will save time and money.”

Conservative groups panned the reliance on transfers from other areas of the federal budget to finance the highway bill.

“This deal enables more deficit spending out of the Highway Trust Fund without any real reform,” said Michael Sargent, Heritage Foundation transportation policy expert, in a statement.

Sargent pointed out the deal increases the federal government’s annual spending on highway and transit programs.

joe.rutherford@journalinc.com