In this June 10, 2015, file photo, Sen. Cory Booker, (D., N.J.,) attends a Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation hearing on Capitol Hill in Washington. Andrew Harnik/Associated Press

Citing a New Jersey law that protects elected leaders, Sen. Cory Booker (D., N.J.) says he can’t be sued over an alleged multimillion-dollar corruption scandal that unfolded at a nonprofit agency that once delivered water to customers throughout the state’s northern communities.

In court papers, lawyers for Sen. Booker urged a federal judge to drop the lawsuit over the Newark Watershed Conservation and Development Corp., which shut down nearly three years ago after a state report said it “recklessly and improperly spent millions of dollars of public funds” during Sen. Booker’s tenure as mayor of Newark.

Under the nonprofit’s rules, the mayor of Newark led the board of trustees. But Sen. Booker’s lawyers argued in court papers filed Friday that a New Jersey law shields public officials from lawsuits.

The law, New Jersey’s Tort Claims Act, is meant to keep people who are running for elected office from worrying that they will be held personally liable for the work they do as a public servant, they said in documents filed in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Newark. Few people could afford to take on such a potentially expensive risk, they said.

“The consequence of a failure to uphold these immunities would dissuade an even wider swath of individuals from seeking to hold public office. This would impoverish our democracy, as the absence of immunity would pose the risk of narrowing the pool of people willing to serve the public to the super-rich or the judgment-proof.”

The Nov. 6 lawsuit against Sen. Booker also named other ex-board members. Most of the allegations focused on the agency’s former director, Linda Watkins-Brashear, who was accused of mismanagement and abusive spending.

Specifically, the lawsuit says Ms. Watkins-Brashear improperly awarded more than $2.5 million worth of no-bid contracts for consulting, landscaping and other services to people who had agency connections, including more than $332,000 in no-bid contracts to her ex-husband for interior-design work. That violated the nonprofit’s charter that restricts officers and employees from having “any interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract to supply goods or services,” the lawsuit said.

The lawsuit also said Ms. Watkins-Brashear improperly spent the agency’s money, including at a 2010 conference where the agency paid for a dinner for 20 that cost $1,410 and included lobster, king crab, filet mignon, cognac and martinis.

Ms. Watkins-Brashear, through her lawyer, has denied wrongdoing.

Sen. Booker appointed Ms. Watkins-Brashear to the executive-director position shortly after he took office in July 2006. He served until October 2013, when he became a U.S. senator. In Friday’s court filing, Sen. Booker’s lawyers said it wasn’t “his duty to monitor directly the executive director.”

Last month’s lawsuit is the work of several court-appointed trustees who were put in charge of shutting down the agency after its work was transferred to the city of Newark. Any money recovered in the lawsuit would be used to pay the agency’s final bills.

Founded in 1973, the agency was paid by Newark to manage the city’s expansive fresh-water reservoirs in northern New Jersey and handle operations at a water-treatment facility. The agency took in more than $40 million in city money from 2008-11 under two service contracts, the lawsuit said.

The agency dissolved in March 2013, and several people who were appointed by a judge to wind up its affairs put it into bankruptcy Jan. 2.

Write to Katy Stech at katy.stech@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @KatyStech