12 days ago, Annette Bosworth received a suspended jail sentence after being convicted on 12 felonies connected with election law violations...stemming from her 2014 U-S Senate campaign.

Bosworth has been silent until now.

Last Thursday, Bosworth contacted KSFY....saying she would agree to an interview about her conviction, her sentence and her future.

The only condition was that if we wanted to talk to her, we would have to go to Pine Ridge where she is serving 500 hours of community service.

Last Friday, we went to Pine Ridge.

Pine Ridge, South Dakota.

An area with 70% unemployment.

Where alcohol and drug abuse is more common than not.

It's where we sat down with Dr. Annette Bosworth. "I don't enjoy this. I don't enjoy the constant battle."

On july 1st, Bosworth received a suspended prison sentence after being convicted of 12 felonies in connection with her 2014 U-S Senate race.

State law says a candidate must personally oversee the signature gathering for his or her nominating petitions.

There is an oath, right above where the candidate has to sign, where the candidates promises he or she did this.

Bosworth signed off, saying she had. But she hadn't on all of them.

And she says an experienced campaign advisor told her she could sign them. "You draw the understanding not just from the documents written but also by the people around you saying here's the job you're supposed to do, here's what we are doing. and there was no signal anywhere that I was doing something wrong."

Judge John Brown gave Bosworth a suspended sentence. 24 years that would have been served concurrently.

He also ordered her to pay court costs and perform 500 hours of community service.

That is why we met Bosworth in Pine Ridge.

It is here, working with those with drug and alcohol problems, that she is doing that community service.

But last week, Bosworth received a notice from the South Dakota Board of Medical and Osteopathic Examiners. "The medical board sent out a notice that said essentially we would like you to turn over your license."

State law says the medical board can revoke the license of a medical professional convicted of a felony crime.

Typically it would involve malpractice. But these violations of election laws are legal felonies and would fall under state statues as written.

Bosworth tells me she doesn't know if she will fight the request or honor it. "The more I pray about it the more I hear say 'Dont give up. I've given you a talent. Use it.' "

But should she choose to fight, it appears she has an ally ready to stand by her side.

"I would be comfortable going before the medical board and telling them about this endeavor and telling them about the great possibilities that her work could do for our people here." Tatewin Means is the Attorney General for the Oglala Sioux Tribe. She is one of many overseeing Bosworth's community service work here. Means and Bosworth talked about the possibility of Bosworth working in Pine Ridge after Bosworth was charged with violating election laws but before her trial started.

Means says she believes in Bosworth and her approach to treating those with addictions. She also tells me she knows the situation surrounding Bosworth is by no means clear...or finished. "What I know right now....today....is that she's willing. She has tremendous knowledge and expertise in this area."

But Bosworth meeting with Pine Ridge officials about working here before her trial began and then ending up here following her trial to serve community service makes it appear this was planned.

So I asked Bosworth point blank...was it planned? Did she see this an opportunity...with the backing of a Native American tribe... to keep her medical license if the state tried to take it following the trial? This is how she answered that question. "I can have no money. i can have no form of income. I can be here serving the poorest of people and they'll say its an opportunity. I mean.....how ironic."

Bosworth says she feels she has been unjustly prosecuted by the state for a crime she says she did not intend to commit. She says her advisors told her it was O-K.

She references previous investigations from her medical practice about alleged Medicare fraud.

She tells me other politicians wanted to silence her voice because she was calling for real political change.

But I asked her isn't it possible she was prosecuted....simply because she broke the law? "I know it now. I know I have 12 felonies because a mistake was made....absolutely. I get it that. I'm the leader and I am the one holding the bag. But did I intentionally sign an oath that I knew was wrong? No."

Bosworth says as a doctor and as a U-S Senate candidate her entire focus was serving others.

I asked her...given all that has happened...does she regret making the decision to mount that Senate campaign? "To regret running for U.S. Senate means that I wouldn't get to appreciate how valuable it is that i sit right here and say 'God use me'."

We are following the status of Bosworth's medical license and will keep you up to date.

In the meantime, Bosworth is living on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation serving her court ordered community service.