At home in their fourth-floor apartment, Felisha Young and her daughter sometimes hear gunshots in the surrounding Sun Valley neighborhood.

Four floors from the street, she thinks her windows are high enough that a stray bullet is unlikely to find its way in. And at 6 years old, Christina is low enough to the ground that a shot from below probably won’t find her.

The girl is usually asleep at night when gunfire erupts, but if she does hear a shot, “she will tell me guns are bad,” Young said.

Young protects her daughter the best she can and tries not to worry about things she can’t change.

Instead, the 35-year-old, who dropped out of high school at 16, has been working to change her life and that of her daughter.

With the help of Colorado’s temporary assistance for needy families program, Young studied for and received her general equivalency diploma. She went on to study culinary arts at the Emily Griffith Technical College.

In late April, she started a job as a cook at a nearby Family Crisis Center that provides temporary shelter for children awaiting a more permanent placement from Denver Human Services.

The job, which can provide anywhere from zero to 40 hours of work a week, pays $13 an hour. “I’m excited,” she said. “It is on call, but at least I have my foot in the door.”

PHOTOS: Poverty in Colorado rural and urban families

As poor as Sun Valley is, the neighborhood on Denver’s west side is in a metro area where a number of social service providers are easily accessible. “It took me a long time to apply for help, but there really is a lot of help out there if you are willing to go in there and stand up and ask,” she said.

Young and Christina, a blond bundle of energy, live in a two-bedroom unit at the Decatur Place apartment building, which is owned by nonprofit Mercy Housing.

Decatur offers subsidized, two-year transitional housing to single parents and their children.

Young receives $364 a month in financial assistance from TANF, $300 a month in food stamps, and pays $80 a month in rent. “I do manage to pay all the bills and assure there is always food in the house,” she said.

Tom McGhee: 303-954-1671, tmcghee@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dpmcghee