Buy Photo Peter Affatato, center, owner and chef of Nona Mia, makes a pizza while other employees make pasta dishes, salads and more at the West Asheville Italian kitchen and deli on Tuesday evening. (Photo: Katie Bailey/bkbailey@citizen-times.com)Buy Photo

Restaurant wage disputes have been in the spotlight, with fast-food workers marching in rallies nationwide to push for wages of $15 an hour, and other restaurant employees asking for a living wage.

Last month, Johaunna Cromer, a fast-food worker at Hardee's, explained why she marched. "No one can survive on $7.25," Cromer said. "You can't even feed your children."

But many restaurant owners say there's no quick fix.

"Reason number one?" said Michel Baudouin, owner of Bouchon, Creperie Bouchon, and the soon-to-open Lafayette. "Money does not grow on trees."

Baudouin pays a living wage, as certified by Asheville worker-advocacy group Just Economics. "I believe that there's no way that someone making $7.50 an hour, working 40 hours a week, can survive," he said. "You're talking about 15K a year."

But he doesn't think an across-the-board wage hike to $15 an hour is feasible.

"Equality is a beautiful word," said Baudouin. "But to apply it is a different story. A business, not just a restaurant, has huge liability, huge overhead that they've got to meet, before they can even get the doors open."

It takes money to make money in all areas of business, but Peter Affatato, owner of the 8-year-old Italian restaurant and deli Nona Mia, said restaurants take more capital than others.

"If you've got money, you've got backing, your chances of making it are much greater than if you're trying to make it on a shoestring," he said.

On busy Haywood Road in West Asheville, Nona Mia hums, particularly on weekends. But in the restaurant industry, profit margins are slim, business changes with the weather, and utilities are steep. Payroll expenses, many restaurant owners say, can seem insurmountable.

"I don't think most people understand the margins, and what it takes to pay your employees to be here all day, making food from scratch," said Affatato.

Affatato's most short-term employee has been working at the restaurant for two years. He hires employees at a fair starting wage, like many businesses.

"I continue to move them up," he said. "I have a dishwasher who's been working here for five years who makes $12 an hour."

But with a hypothetical wage hike to $15 an hour, what fast-food workers across the country marched for last month, Affatato figures he would have to increase his prices by about 5 percent.

He thinks the market won't bear that, which is why he says tax cuts could make life easier for business owners and their employees.

"That's where the government could lend a hand to small business," he said. "By giving tax cuts to the people who are making these lower wages ... especially in this industry, everybody lives day to day."

Affatato's no fan of the system for payroll taxes, either. Where they used to be due quarterly, or even once a month, taxes must now be paid with every payroll.

"That used to be money a business could float on," he said. "That was operating capital that could get you through hard times. The government doesn't let you do that any more, because they need their money."

It's another way the government makes life hard for small business, he said.

"I feel like saying, I'm doing something good," he said. "I'm providing jobs for the community, I'm providing tax dollars, but then I'm being charged to have an employee. For me, it's a concept I go crazy with; why am I paying to provide a job?"

Drawing from a limited pool

Dan Rattigan, who owns French Broad Chocolates with his wife Jael Rattigan, agrees some sort of tax reform could help.

"Lower my taxes," he said. "Or provide subsidies. There's not enough money in the bucket. At the end of every two weeks, when it's time to cut payroll checks, I'm drawing from a limited pool."

French Broad Chocolates opened in 2008 with 20 employees, becoming Living Wage certified in 2011. The living wage for one person living in Buncombe County until recently was $11.85 per hour without employer-provided health insurance, or $10.35 per hour with insurance.

Despite lines nearly every night at French Broad Chocolate Lounge in downtown Asheville, its owners say there is still only a finite amount of money for wages and benefits. (Photo: Citizen-Times photo)

In February, those rates were lifted to $12.50 per hour without health insurance. For employees receiving benefits, it's now $11 per hour.

In February, the Rattigans decided not to renew the certification.

"To my great sorrow, but we have it in our goals to work toward a more logical system that develops our staff, that gives them growth opportunities, that ultimately provides a living wage for everybody," Rattigan said. "But in the meantime, we can't commit to the increase. It's untenable."

There are lines out the door almost every night at The French Broad Chocolate Lounge, and it seems like every major media outlet has featured the darlings of artisan chocolate in their pages. By all accounts, French Broad Chocolates presents itself as a roaring success.

"But it doesn't matter how long the lines are," Rattigan said. "There's still a finite amount of money to spend on my staff's wages and benefits."

Rattigan's products are made in a company-owned bean-to-bar chocolate factory on the South Slope, meaning every ounce of chocolate bearing the company's name was created from raw cacao beans. That sort of scratch-made focus requires a lot of manpower, the costs of which add up quickly.

Rattigan said he believes in promoting upward mobility by hiring from within; most of his management staff started in entry-level positions, including his assistant general manager, who started as a dishwasher. His business model makes room for employees to work toward higher wages through intensive training.

With 70 employees, Rattigan's business is swiftly growing out of the normal realm of a small mom-and-pop. But as business grows, it only becomes more complicated to manage, he said.

"It seems to get more challenging, and I think it's because we're trying to operate like a larger company, but we're still in the very low profit margin food industry," he said. "That's the double-edged sword that we're dealing with."

The pool of resources will get even smaller soon, when Rattigan will have to conform to the Affordable Care Act rules for businesses with more than 50 employees. The ACA's employer mandate requires businesses of French Broad's size to provide health insurance to at least 95 percent of its full-time employees and dependents up to age 26, or pay a fee.

"As soon as we have to start offering medical benefits, we've got to pull it out of thin air," Rattigan said. "There's just not enough to go around."

Once those rules are put into place and the company does provide medical insurance, Rattigan thinks it will feel like the right thing to do, even if it now seems an insurmountable expense.

Raising prices "not an option"

One of the rallying cries for people advocating for an across-the-board pay raise is raising the cost of goods and letting the customer pay a little extra for fair wages. But raising prices at the French Broad Chocolate Lounge is "not an option," Rattigan said.

"There's only so much comfort people can have with the prices," he said. "The core of our values is small luxury. And until Asheville is willing to pay $5 a truffle, it's not happening.

Rattigan said he hopes to run his business with full transparency for his employees, with a dream of some form of profit sharing for the future. "We look forward to sharing that profitability with our staff, who has helped us to earn it," he said. But the company will have to thrive before that happens. "You can't just make the pie bigger, unless you sell a lot more stuff," he said. "And I totally want to make a bigger pie."

Baudouin said the cost-of-goods struggle is real. "I'm a good guy and I want to pay $15 an hour," isn't really enough to inspire customers to pay more, he said.

Still, Baudouin's philosophy is that the higher you pay your staff, the less turnover you have. "Turnover is expensive. It creates cost, because you have to train them," he said. It also creates inconsistency, which the restaurants' many regulars notice.

Rising housing costs strongly influence the formula for determining the local living wage. As landlords jack up rents, that translates to higher payroll and payroll taxes for Living Wage-certified businesses. The affordable housing issue is making life hard for employees, too.

"Employees cannot afford to live within the city limit; it keeps going up," said Baudouin. "I know affordable housing is something that's on the table, but we need to figure something out and hope that something comes down — but everybody's out to make a quick buck also."

"It's tough to live in Asheville," acknowledged Walker Aderhold, a longtime employee at the Whole Foods-owned Greenlife Grocery.

Whole Foods pays people well, he said, but the independent businesses often have a tougher time paying what it takes to subsist in the city. "The guys making top dollar are working 60 hours a week, and that eats you alive," he said.

But he acknowledges restaurant owners are the ones with the money on the line. "Those guys are the ones putting risk down, and they're going to try to pay you a fair wage," he said. "I applaud the small restaurants that do the best they can. It's tough."

As the cost of paying a living wage rises, which it has twice in the past three years, Baudouin is working to match it. There are some challenges, he said. Money for higher wages must come from somewhere.

"It's a bit of a catch-22 because people want to be paid more, but when they go out, they don't want to pay more," he said. "You're damned if you do, and damned if you don't. Fortunately, I have very good leases that are very well-structured."

The restaurant industry gets a "little bit of a black eye sometimes because of a few entrepreneurs who don't care," Baudouin said.

"But before everybody start throwing darts and getting excited, everybody needs to realize what it's going to take and what needs to be in place. There are always people who will be unhappy, and there are always businesses who will not give a damn."

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1RdCr1g