CLEVELAND, Ohio – The head of Cuyahoga County's Alcohol, Drug Addiction and Mental Health Services board opposes a 17 percent budget cut proposed by the county executive.

CEO William Denihan said he will ask Cuyahoga County Council members on Thursday to restore $6.7 million that Armond Budish wants to cut from the board's annual budget.

"We are dealing with a horrendous heroin epidemic and a continuous demand for mental health services," Denihan said Wednesday. "I have the greatest respect for Mr. Budish. But in this particular case I really disagree with him."

Budish said earlier Wednesday that the ADAMHS board can operate on a $32.6 million annual budget and absorb the cuts without reducing core services.

Budish said Medicaid and the Affordable Care Act now cover the cost of more services the board provides. The board has used money it saved by adding services, including employment and housing, that other county agencies provide.

Denihan, who submitted a $39.3 million annual budget to his board on Wednesday, disagreed.

He said the full funding is needed to address urgent issues including a rise in heroin addiction and the need to provide long-term beds for people who have completed treatment.

"That is life-saving," he said of providing the beds. "That is part of the funding we would lose."

Denihan said Medicaid expansion does not cover all the services his board provides, including a crisis line and recovery beds.

Budish said he provided an alternative way for the board to regain up to $6 million a year by providing mental health services to children who had been overseen by the county's Division of Children and Family Services.

When that agency responds to a call, it takes the child into custody.

While that step is necessary for children suffering from abuse and neglect, children who have mental health issues could receive treatment and remain at home, Budish said.

If the ADAMHS board provided services and the child did not need board and care, the county would send the board a check each quarter for the amount of money it saved, Budish said.

Denihan said board officials reviewed Budish's proposal and evaluated a sample of the 149 current cases the county said could be transferred to the board.

It was determined only half would qualify and many were high-risk, he said.

"They made a good faith effort and this is not in the best interest of the ADAMHS board at this time," he said.

Denihan plans to propose a similar pilot program in 2016 to accept children that would have been placed in board and care by Children's and Family Services to see if it is viable to provide services to them.

"We didn't reject the alternative," he said.