As part of a trip across part of the state Monday, Chelsea Clinton, the daughter of Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton, made a campaign stop at the Little Learners on Campus Child Care Center in Rome.

The day before Tuesday's presidential primaries in New York state, the daughter of one candidate was in Rome making the case for her mother.

As part of a trip across part of the state Monday, Chelsea Clinton, the daughter of Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton, made a campaign stop at the Little Learners on Campus Child Care Center in Rome.

“I hope what will matter to voters … is that my mom is the candidate that has a real record of being able to deliver change,” Chelsea Clinton said. “She's the only one who's actually, I think, driven real progress and made a real difference in so many New Yorkers' lives.”

Hillary Clinton, a former Secretary of State and U.S. senator from New York, was polling at 55 percent in the state, according to a recent poll by Emerson College. Her opponent, Democratic Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders was polling at 40 percent.

Chelsea Clinton, meanwhile, touched on several issues during her appearance, while occasionally referencing her mother's campaign. Those issues included:

* Healthcare: Chelsea Clinton said that what President Barack Obama has done with the Affordable Care Act was “extraordinary” and while there was still work to be done, the country can't afford to start over and put what the act has done in jeopardy.

* Gun control: What Obama has done through his executive actions is “so crucially important,” Chelsea Clinton said, and needs to be “protected” and “built upon.” She said there is much support for universal background checks and child safety locks. She said she has “such a tremendous respect and humility” for the families of the Newtown, Connect. Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting who are suing Remington Arms and “every part of the tragic chain that enabled the shooter in Newtown to buy an arsenal of weapons to take into that elementary school.”

* Public education: Chelsea Clinton said the federal education department to provide federal funding directly to school district that have a high percentage of Title 1 students. Children also need a “full ecosystem of support” in schools, she said.

When it comes to Tuesday's election, Chelsea Clinton said that her mother is able to find a common ground, is able to stand her ground protect the country's values.

“She's a candidate who tells you how she's going to pay to get it done,” Chelsea Clinton said. “I hope it will matter to voters that (Hillary's) the only candidate, Democrat or Republican, who does rely on raising middle class and working class taxes to pay for her programs.”

Rome resident Mona Straney said during the event that she is planning on voting for Hillary Clinton in the general election later this year.

“To be honest with you, I'm a Republican and I plan on voting for your mom come November,” Straney told Chelsea Clinton.