Political newcomer Vance McAllister will be Louisiana's newest representative to Washington, after he handily beat state Sen. Neil Riser in Saturday's runoff for the vacant 5th Congressional District seat.

Thanks largely to huge turnout for the Monroe businessman from Lincoln, Morehouse, Ouachita and Rapides parishes, McAllister beat Riser by more than 17,500 votes. With all of the precincts reporting, he had garnered 60 percent of the vote.



"I'm so humbled. So humbled. This is such a great monumental win -- victory," McAllister said Saturday night. "(This race) was never about why not to vote for Neil Riser. It was about why to vote for Vance McAllister."

Ryan Cross from the Riser campaign said they would not be commenting on the loss Saturday.

Turnout was low at just under 19 percent, according to an unofficial number released by the Secretary of State's office. This number was more than three points below turnout in the October primary.



McAllister, a veteran who owns oil, gas and pipeline businesses as well as several Subway franchises, rose to prominence after he personally bankrolled a hefty media buy in the sprawling 5th District.

He also gained attention with the strong backing of Duck Dynasty stars Phil, Willie and Jep Robertson and former congressman Clyde Holloway, who ran and lost in the primary.

Riser, meanwhile, was supported by outgoing U.S. Rep. Rodney Alexander, House Majority Leader Eric Cantor and the entire GOP contingent of the Louisiana Congressional delegation except U.S. Sen. David Vitter. He also raised huge sums for the race and was long seen as the frontrunner, until McAllister started gaining traction just ahead of the October primary.





While some thought the all-Republican runoff would be marked by each candidate running to the far right of every issue, McAllister took leave of the usual party line during a debate last week by coming out in support of optional Medicaid expansion offered under the Affordable Care Act.

McAllister said he disagreed with Gov. Bobby Jindal's decision not to accept the expansion because of the economic make-up of the 5th District.



According to census data, the district is one of the poorest in the nation with nearly 25 percent of its more than 750,000 people living below the poverty line in 2010 and 21 percent without health insurance.

Riser blasted McAllister for the admission, issuing an ad stating "a vote for Vance McAllister is a vote for Obamacare." He also claimed McAllister flip-flopped on the issue by telling Democrats he supported the health care law and Republicans that he did not.

Campaign manager Josh Robinson said he thought Riser's negative ads were one reason his candidate won, adding his team ran "ran a different campaign than we think you're going to see run across the country this year."

"We built a broad base coalition," Robinson said, thanking Holloway, Democratic Monroe Mayor Jamie Mayo and the crew from Duck Commander for their support. "It's not about ideology; it's about getting behind the right person."

McAllister refused to go negative during the campaign, saying Saturday he was proud he "never once went to the dirty side of politics."

U.S. Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La., welcomed McAllister to the state's congressional delegation in a statement Saturday, saying she was heartened that he "emphasize that he wants to find solutions and common ground."

Greg Walden, chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee, also congratulated McAllister, adding "I know that Vance will continue Rodney Alexander's record of fighting for commonsense policies and strong fiscal discipline here in Washington.



"I look forward to working with Vance as we fight back against ObamaCare and this Administration's expensive, big-government, tax and spend policies."



Riser and McAllister were thrown into a runoff after no one candidate clinched a majority of the votes in the primary held Oct. 19. All together, 14 men from five parties threw their hat into the race, including three other state lawmakers.



The special election was triggered after Alexander, R-Quitman, the longest serving member of Louisiana's congressional delegation, announced he was stepping down over a year early to take a job as Jindal's veterans affairs secretary.

Alexander's announcement was unexpected, but some parties -- including many of Riser's opponents, political pundits and even Vitter -- questioned whether Riser was tipped off early to allow him time to gather a campaign team ahead of the other candidates.

Jindal, Alexander and Riser all denied the allegations, which were originally voiced by Riser's colleague in the state House Jay Morris, R-Monroe. The governor did not endorse a candidate, but Alexander backed Riser.



Louisiana's 5th Congressional District is the state's largest geographically, encompassing all or parts of 24 parishes in the northeast and central portions of the state as well as the Florida Parishes.

<br>

. . . . . . .

Lauren McGaughy is a state politics reporter based in Baton Rouge. She can be reached at lmcgaughy@nola.com or on Twitter at @lmcgaughy.