“I was in Chicago when my children were small. We were sitting on a bus,” my grandmother, Gisa Spektor, recalls in a Polish-Yiddish accent. She holds back tears.

“A lady was sitting by me, and the lady said, ‘I’m not sitting with a jailbird.’ She saw my number. She didn’t want to sit with us.”

The lady on the bus thought my bubby had been to prison, but she had gotten it wrong.

Gisa Spektor hadn’t been to prison; she’d been to hell.

That story is one of many my bubby tells in a video she made on Aug. 8, 1990, called “The Surviving Generations of the Holocaust.” The video, part of a project conducted by Washington state, documents testimonials of Holocaust survivors and their children. It was produced under the direction of Spektor’s son and my uncle, Michael.

Some families have letters, pictures or other artifacts kept through the years to help tell the stories of their lives. Some have antiques, or land, or furniture lasting from generation to generation, priceless heirlooms that parents will pass down to their children and say, “This belonged to your great-great-grandmother.”

Some families have a big family tree, reaching back through the years, branching out to great-aunts, great-uncles, great-grandparents.

My family doesn’t get to have that. Our ancestral heirlooms were stolen, our family tree destroyed.

But we have that video.

I understand the importance of telling my bubby’s story. I tell people about the incredibly shameful and private moment when my bubby, then 21 years old, had to strip naked in front of Nazi soldiers who laughed and shaved her head.

I tell how one of her jobs in the camps was to drag corpses onto wagons, how she’d watch fellow prisoners run into the barbed-wire fence just to avoid dying at the hands of German soldiers.

I tell people that for six years, the only shoes my bubby wore were wooden clogs that didn’t fit, that the only food she ate were bits of stale bread and slurps of soup made from poison ivy leaves, and that in the dead of winter, all she wore was a slip.

Once in awhile, I tell the very few details I know of how she and her friend, Sylvie, somehow escaped after being locked in a barn set on fire by Nazis.

I sometimes tell about how in Auschwitz, my bubby wept as she hugged the body of her best friend, Libby, who had died from typhus.

But I’m always left wondering if I shared her memories the right way — or if I even shared the right ones.

“Did I get the timeline right?” I wonder. “Did it happen in Auschwitz, or was it when she was in Dachau?”

“Maybe I should have told the story about my bubby during the Death March.”

Truth is, I don’t know which moments will do her the most justice, or how I could even have the authority to decide.

I do know that every part of any survivor’s story, no matter how atrocious, needs to be told and repeated.

International Holocaust Remembrance Day, being marked this Tuesday, is about remembering the way that it happened, not disguising the events to cause less grief. It’s about sharing those stories of unthinkable horror so that we don’t forget, and so it never happens again.

Today, I will tell some of my bubby’s more difficult stories — the ones that are almost too devastating to say out loud — so that we will always remember.

In the fall of 1939 — when Nazi Germany had already begun to occupy Poland — my bubby stood on the porch of her family’s house in Krakow. Her father sat in a chair, surrounded by German soldiers. She watched as one of the Germans violently sheared her father’s beard until his cheeks bled. The rest of the soldiers stood and laughed.

We remember.

Bubby grew up with her parents, three sisters and a brother. She married at 18, and by 20 had a 2-year-old daughter, Hanna.

Once the Nazis invaded Poland, they began occupying Jewish homes, and shipped family members off to different ghettos. Two of Bubby’s sisters and her brother were sent away; she never knew to where or what happened to them.

Bubby was assigned to live in a ghetto with her parents, her husband, daughter, and a sister, Sally. They all lived in the same small room.

“One morning at 5 a.m., German soldiers came knocking on the door with a dog while we were sleeping,” Bubby says in the video.

“It was hot, and the window was open. My sister Sally was in a nightgown, and she got very scared. She jumped from the third floor, and I saw her get killed right away on the sidewalk.”

Sally was 21 years old.

We remember.

For eight months, Bubby lived in that ghetto, where she and her husband worked in a factory. She ironed uniforms for German soldiers and he sewed their pants.

One day, Nazis boarded up the doors to the factory from the outside, locking hundreds inside. There was no food, no water.

Two days later, the doors were opened. Everyone was gone. The ghetto had been liquidated.

Anyone too old or too young to work needed to be exterminated, she had learned. Her mother, father, and her baby girl Hanna had been taken to a gas chamber.

The next day, anyone left in the ghettos was loaded onto trucks and transported to different concentration camps. My bubby and her husband were split up, and she never saw him again.

We remember.

It took my bubby years after the war to no longer feel envious when she’d see another family, even though she remarried soon after. They eventually had two children (my mother and uncle), and then four grandchildren.

I knew very little of Gisa Spektor’s experience in the Holocaust growing up. The woman I knew and loved was a teddy bear. She smelled of Dune perfume, gave me succinct advice in Yiddish, made chicken soup from scratch, and was elegant, magnetic and funny. She always smiled at me, and hugged me, and I insisted on sitting next to her at every meal.

My bubby died in 2006, at the age of 87. Her family tree may have been destroyed, but she will always remain the root of mine.

Contact Francie Swidler at fswidler@denverpost.com, 303-954-1001. Follow her on Twitter: @FrancieSwidler

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.