“From the time I crossed that line after the final run until now has been a ton of emotion,” Matt Antoine said. “It’s just been awesome.” Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Sochi, Russia – In the hours after he won the bronze medal in men's skeleton Saturday night, Matt Antoine of Prairie du Chien barely had time to process what he'd just done.

There was doping control and a press conference. Wave after wave of congratulatory emails and text messages. Dinner at 3 a.m. A restless night of sleep. Another press conference Sunday.

"It's been a crazy experience for sure," Antoine said. "We didn't finish up competing until late at night so I haven't had a lot of time to think about it. But from the time I crossed that line after the final run until now has been a ton of emotion.

"It's just been awesome."

Antoine became the first American male to win a skeleton medal since 2002 when he laid down two flawless runs at the Sanki Sliding Center. He advanced 0.32 seconds ahead of Tomass Dukurs of Latvia in the final run to claim a podium position.

"I don't think I've fully processed it yet to be honest with you," Antoine said. "I think it will hit me more (Sunday night) at the medals ceremony. I've had a smile on ever since that moment. I had a hard time falling asleep last night and I probably slept about three hours and then I was wide awake again and ready to go.

"I'm going to take in every experience I can and enjoy every moment of it."

One year ago, Antoine was struggling through a difficult season after undergoing knee surgery the previous summer. A trip to the Sochi Olympics was far from a sure bet, let alone a podium finish.

"You never want to say there is a good time to have a surgery but if there was a good time, that was probably it," he said. "I knew that I needed to do it in order to be successful this year. So I had to take a step back last year and (tolerate) results that I wasn't very pleased with.

"I knew the long-term goal was these Olympics. It definitely was the right decision. The summer training prior to this season, I was the strongest and fastest I've ever been. I knew everything was headed in the right direction and got my confidence back.

"I knew this year that I could compete with the best and it showed."

His mother, Mary Antoine, and brother, Nick, were at the Sanki Sliding Center to witness his bronze medal. They were sitting with John Daly's family.

"It was very, very emotional," Mary said.

Antoine and Daly are close friends and are rooming together in the Athletes' Village. They went into the final run battling for the bronze medal, but Daly's sled popped out of the start groove and skittered sideways into the wall and by the time he recovered, his chance to medal was gone.

"John came up and popped the groove and I mean, literally, all your emotions fall out," Mary Antoine said. "Then Matt has to come right away and I'm thinking, 'Oh my god, did he see what John did and is it going to upset him? Hopefully, he didn't see it and he's totally focused.' "

Antoine knew something had gone wrong with Daly's run but he put it out of his mind and raced down the track to bronze.

"I would say the best runs are the ones that you can't remember," he said. "I got asked about 10 minutes after the race what I thought about that final run. I just kind of shrugged my shoulders and said, 'I honestly don't remember it.' "

Antoine said his coach, Tuffy Latour, already has gotten "tons and tons" of emails from people who saw him win the bronze and Noelle Pikus-Pace win silver and want to give skeleton a try.

"It's kind of funny," he said. "That's the reason why I'm here. In 2002, the success that the U.S. had in skeleton, it exploded and everyone wanted to try it and I was one of those people. I guess to be told now that I'm giving that to the next generation of sliders is an honor. I encourage anyone to give it a try because it's an awesome sport."

Will Antoine hang around to make a run at the 2018 Olympics?

"For right now I'm going to enjoy this and take it all in," he said. "I don't have an answer for the question but I'm not saying I'm walking away. There's a lot more that I can accomplish and I still love the sport so I don't see a reason to leave."