Leading global professional services firm Alvarez & Marsal (A&M) has bolstered its Healthcare Industry Group with the addition of Donald Casey Jr. MD, MPH, MBA, who joins as a managing director based in Chicago.



A board-certified primary care internist, Dr. Casey brings 19 years of high-level clinical, senior leadership and consulting experience to A&M. He has worked with nearly 150 hospitals and health systems throughout the U.S. to foster cutting-edge solutions that enhance quality of care, improve the value of service, ensure proper cost-of-care investments, provide for value creation and facilitate accountability.



Dr. Casey advises on physician and medical staff leadership and accountability practices, population health management for chronic illnesses and quality outcomes measurement and improvement. He has evaluated and implemented performance-based “Pay for Value” contracts with commercial and government payers and has provided expert advice and support to federal agencies and non-governmental organizations.



“Health provider organizations continue to seek the help of outside experts as they work through Affordable Care Act provisions driving the measurement of quality through outcomes,” said Guy Sansone, Managing Director with Alvarez & Marsal and head of the firm’s Healthcare Industry Group. “With his broad range of clinical and administrative skills, Don will be a tremendous resource for our clients as they pursue ways to achieve lower costs in conjunction with optimal, effective and high-quality care delivery.”



Before joining A&M, Dr. Casey consulted for hospitals and health systems as principal of the firm IPO4Health, which he founded following his tenure as Chief Medical Officer (CMO) at the Clinically Integrated Network at NYU Langone Medical Center in New York. He also held the role of system CMO, among other titles, at Atlantic Health System (AHS) in New Jersey; Catholic Healthcare Partners (now Mercy Health) in Cincinnati; and the Delmarva Foundation for Medical Care, where he revolutionized the nation’s first large-scale population-based quality improvement initiatives, Medicare and Medicaid claims data analytics and quality transparency.



Dr. Casey’s experience also extends to the managed care arena. He has served as a member of the Quality Improvement Oversight Committee for Horizon Blue Cross in New Jersey and as medical advisor for the Central States Southeast and Southwest Health and Welfare Fund, among other engagements.



Dr. Casey has published more than 75 peer-reviewed journal articles and book chapters in publications including the Journal of the American Medical Association, New England Journal of Medicine and Annals of Internal Medicine. He has held academic appointments, including Professor of Medicine in the Department of Population Health at New York University, and Associate Professor of Medicine at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York and Rush University in Chicago. He has also served as an advisor, consultant and participant for many national initiatives, including the NQF Care Coordination Steering Committee, which he has chaired since 2006.



Dr. Casey holds a bachelor’s degree from Dartmouth College, an MD from the University of Cincinnati, a master’s in public health from Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health, and an MBA from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania. He is a Certified Physician Executive of the American Association of Physician Leadership (AAPL), and a Distinguished Fellow of the American College of Medical Quality (ACMQ). He currently serves as adjunct Faculty at Thomas Jefferson University School of Population Health and at Loyola of Chicago Quinlan School of Business’ Healthcare Management Executive Education division.



With more than three decades of experience providing hands-on support and results to organizations navigating times of change and challenge, Alvarez & Marsal is a global professional services firm that specializes in turnaround management, operational performance improvement and business advisory services.