U.S. Rep. Matt Cartwright said Friday that the growing pains of the federal Affordable Care Act, popularly known as Obamacare, are serious, but the law's benefits will be worth the wait.

"Anyone who thinks something this big is going to go off without a hitch is not living in the real world," Cartwright, D-17, told approximately 50 people at a town hall meeting in Pottsville's Sovereign Majestic Theater.

Divided between friends and foes of Obamacare, the skeptical audience heard Cartwright say the computer glitches that have plagued the start-up of the insurance exchanges that are a central feature of the law are not insurmountable.

"It wasn't anything I didn't expect," Cartwright said. "It is the law and it's up to us ... to do the best for Americans under this law."

Congress passed and President Barack Obama signed the act in 2010, and Democrats have beaten back several Republican attempts to repeal it.

The act requires most Americans to buy health insurance, although it offers subsidies for low- and some middle-income citizens. It also expands eligibility for Medicaid, bars discrimination against people due to pre-existing conditions and mandates that insurance companies include many features in the policies they offer.

"Every plan has to be a qualified health plan," said Athena Ford, advocacy director for the Pennsylvania Health Access Network.

Cartwright said the act will greatly reduce care given to uninsured people, the cost of which he maintains has been greatly underestimated.

"We all pay the price for uninsured care. We lose hospitals," including Saint Catherine Medical Center Fountain Springs in Butler Township, which filed for bankruptcy and closed in 2012, he said.

Jim Palmquist, president of the Pennsylvania Chapter of AARP, who arrived late because he mistakenly went to Pottstown instead of Pottsville, agreed, saying uninsured people go to hospital emergency rooms to get care, which is far more expensive than similar treatments in a doctor's office.

Cartwright, Ford and Palmquist answered several questions from audience members.

"They need to be shopping for health insurance," Cartwright said of people who do not have Medicare.

In response to a question about deductibles, the out-of-pocket costs a person must pay before insurance starts covering bills, Ford said those vary according to the type of plan the person has. There are four levels of plans - bronze, silver, gold and platinum - with the bronze having the highest deductible but the lowest monthly cost, she said.

Concerning abortion coverage, Cartwright said the Hyde Amendment, which he supports, bars the use of federal money to fund abortions. Ford said in other states where it is offered, people must purchase it separately from the remainder of their policy.

When asked about people losing their current health insurance, which Obama had promised would not occur, Cartwright said that actually will work to a person's advantage.

"They don't meet the minimum requirements under the Affordable Care Act," Cartwright said of policies that will not be allowed under the new law. "Some existing coverages ... don't meet the minimum requirements."

Earlier, Cartwright said Obama should not have promised everyone that they would not lose their current coverage.

"Yes, there are people who are going to be dropped," but they will have access to new insurance policies with lower deductibles, he said.

On one of the most controversial features of the act, the requirement that almost everyone buy a policy, Cartwright made no apologies. He said even healthy young people, many of whom are now not insured, will come to appreciate health coverage, and their participation will improve the entire system.

"Everybody's young and healthy until they're not," he said. "Their premium was zero and they had zero coverage. We must get young people insured."