Christmas release

An Oregon woman arrested weeks ago in the Southeast Asian country of East Timor was released on Christmas Day. Dr. Stacey Addison, a 41-year-old veterinarian, shared a taxi in September with a stranger who happened to be carrying methamphetamine, and that's when her ordeal began, reports CBS News correspondent Debora Patta. Addison still can't leave the country. But news of her release has come as a relief to her mother, who's been dedicated to securing her daughter's freedom.

War zone aid

More than 100,000 children are among nearly one million people forced to escape into northern Iraq because of ISIS' rampage. Many have come to their aid, but one little-known group of American civilians is helping those kids face winter by giving new meaning to "boots on the ground. CBS News Correspondent Margaret Brennan looks at Spirit of America, a unique charity that partners with the U.S. military in war zones to provide aid to local populations.

Patriotic moviegoers

Although critics have panned the film, moviegoers say pride is a reason for seeing the controversial comedy "The Interview." Seth Rogan, the star and co-director of the film, made a surprise appearance to thank fans at a screening in Los Angeles. As CBS News correspondent Ben Tracy reports, it's still unclear if Sony will make its money back.

Cajun movies

California isn't the epicenter of movie-making anymore. The movie business has left Hollywood and gone south, to Louisiana. Eighteen feature films shot there were released into theaters last year, three more than runners-up Canada and California. Following the surge, several celebrities have purchased homes in the state, including Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie, Sandra Bullock, and John Goodman. CBS News correspondent Anna Werner explains why most of the lights, cameras and action have moved thousands of miles away from Hollywood.

CDC exposure

The CDC is conducting a review of the latest mistake in which a lab worker may have exposed to the Ebola virus. CDC Director Tom Frieden is promising action, the latest in a string of pledges to upgrade safety. In a statement, he said: "No risk to staff is acceptable." CBS News correspondent Julianna Goldman reports it's becoming a familiar refrain for Frieden, who made similar statements on two similar occasions this year.

Obamacare-related delay

If you're one of the almost 6 million individuals who received a government subsidy toward the health insurance you bought on Healthcare.gov or your state's insurance exchange, then prepare for a possible delay in the processing of your 2014 tax return and refund.

No basketball?

The president himself admits time has caught up with his 6-foot, 1-inch, 53-year-old body. He's more cautious than he was even as a first-term president, fearing injury and a prolonged recovery. Golf has overtaken basketball as his preferred recreational pursuit, and there hasn't been an announced presidential basketball game in more than a year.

Marijuana's year

2014 was a big year for marijuana. This month, Colorado wraps up its first year as the first state with legal marijuana. Governor John Hickenlooper calls it "one of the great social experiments of the next 50 years." CBS News correspondent Barry Petersen looks back at the highs and lows in Colorado during the first year of legalization.

Candid camera

In Palo Alto, California, every police car is equipped with multiple cameras that provide a panoramic view. CBS News correspondent Bob Orr reports there are now five cameras in every regular beat officer's patrol car, capturing a panoramic view around the car.

Top News

World

Alleged mastermind of deadly Pakistan school attack killed

Asia marks 10 years since tsunami

McDonald's Japan resolves french fries pickle

Politics

On Christmas, Obama marks end of Afghan combat

Former President George H.W. Bush wasn't home for Christmas

U.S.

Cops help deliver baby on Philadelphia subway

Protesters get rowdy in downtown Oakland

Man dies after being shot with stun gun on U.S.-Mexico border

New Yorkers remember slain officers on Christmas Day

Bah humbug! Xbox Live, Playstation Network offline on Christmas

Secure your new tech toys against hacking

MoneyWatch

6 cures for a holiday debt hangover

12 stores with great return policies

Health

Drug unapproved by FDA saves infant's life

Ebola survival rate improving in Sierra Leone

'Tis the season -- for breaking up

7 surprising facts about mistletoe