Top Stories Library explores options amid budget cuts Posted: Saturday, Jul 4th, 2015









EVANSTON — The Uinta County libraries in Evanston, Mountain View and Lyman have been working with the Uinta County commissioners as they seek an expanded budget for the upcoming fiscal year.



The libraries are currently receiving one mill for their budgets. A mill represents one-tenth of one cent for each dollar of assessed property value. Each state has an assessment ratio by which these mills are multiplied. In Wyoming, this is 9.5 percent.



“We are able to tax up to 12 mills,” Uinta County Clerk Lana Wilcox said, “… and we are currently taxing that amount.”



However, depending on the economy, mills are worth more or less, and, as of now, they are worth much less than they once were.



According to a press release issued by library director George Strawley, the library staff “have endured stagnant wages since 2011 and lost 6,100 work hours since 2011.”



Strawley said most of the library employees are “earning less than the starting wages at Walmart,” even though they have more specialized skills, and nearly all of the employees are part-time. Many of them have been working at the library for several years.



Strawley said that their work dedication “needs to be recognized, or we’ll lose them.” Strawley submitted a request that library employees be given a raise of $1 per hour and that hours be restored for each branch to better serve the public. Neither library in the Valley is open on weekends. The Uinta County Library is closed on Sunday and Monday and has reduced hours on Friday and Saturday.



However, the county has expressed concerns that there is no way to sustain raises and more hours, as the county is seeing a continued downturn in revenue and sees no immediate hope for next year.



“[Revenue from] oil and gas is down an average of 45 percent from what it was last year,” Wilcox said.



Next year is predicted to be even worse. The county’s revenues primarily come from oil and gas taxes. County Commissioner Craig Welling said that the county expects natural gas production to decline 15 to 20 percent next year.



Wilcox said the library isn’t the only department affected by recent budget cuts.



“The county employees haven’t had raises for seven years,” she said.



To make matters worse, the Affordable Care Act has made it unaffordable for the county to have many full-time employees, Wilcox said. Even though the library employees are not county employees, the same budget cuts are affecting everyone.



“It’s just a very difficult time, and we’re just trying to hang on so we don’t have to take huge cuts next year,” Wilcox said.



Welling said the county is unable to make more appropriations.



“I suppose we could give [the library] more,” he said, “but who do we take it from to give it to them?”



However, this does not mean that the library is receiving no support. The county will be picking up the utilities costs for the Mountain View and Lyman libraries this year. This will remedy an inconsistency, as the county has been paying for the utilities costs of the Evanston branch, but not the Valley libraries. This will save the libraries $17,000 – $18,000 per year.



“I wasn’t aware of [the inconsistency] until just recently,” Welling said.



Wilcox said the libraries are also having about $100,000 worth of new computers installed, courtesy of the county. She said the county’s IT and maintenance staff have been working to help set up and get security for the new computers.



The library also has some security concerns, some of which are being met with the current security measures being installed on the new computers. This is partially motivated by the fact that two laptops were stolen from the library in recent years.



The county has agreed to set aside about $80,000 to install a security system for the libraries, including security cameras and anti-theft systems.



However, Strawley would like to put these purchases and installations on hold for a little while in order to reevaluate the immediate need for such systems.



“I want to take a more cautious look at it,” he said.



Strawley has instead proposed that the money appropriated for security systems be used to boost the library for the coming year by raising wages, increasing hours and purchasing materials, as the library’s materials budget has been cut entirely in past years.



He said if the economy continues to shrink, “we’re going to have bigger problems than just the $1 an hour raise.”



He emphasized that, from what he has seen, “everybody in this whole process … wants to see our libraries thrive.” The problem is that people disagree over what the best approach is to help the libraries survive long-term. There are currently discussions over whether closing one of the libraries in the Valley would be a good move to give the entire county library system more support and resources.



If this drastic step were to be utilized, Strawley said, “we’d probably look for ways to fill essential open positions with staff from the affected location.”



The main issue is that the county and the libraries are seeking a balance between being careful for the future and using the resources available for current needs.



Part of this discussion will also involve the definition of what a library is, especially in the 21st century. When asked about what he believes a library is and does, Welling said that he believes the most pressing need in the Uinta County community is “the increasing demand [for] computers and the Internet, whether it be for job applications or research.” The county’s support of technological resources and new computers is specifically designed to meet this need.



Strawley has a slightly different vision, for he said that the libraries exist to “give people an opportunity to learn how to become information-literate … in the flood of information” with which everyone is currently inundated.



Both Welling and Strawley believe that libraries have changed in purpose from past traditional functions, extending now to online resources, makerspaces, and the like.



Strawley hopes to continue “publicly examining options with the help of an advisory committee representing the library and the larger community.” He said input from the community is welcome in this ongoing discussion. EVANSTON — The Uinta County libraries in Evanston, Mountain View and Lyman have been working with the Uinta County commissioners as they seek an expanded budget for the upcoming fiscal year.The libraries are currently receiving one mill for their budgets. A mill represents one-tenth of one cent for each dollar of assessed property value. Each state has an assessment ratio by which these mills are multiplied. In Wyoming, this is 9.5 percent.“We are able to tax up to 12 mills,” Uinta County Clerk Lana Wilcox said, “… and we are currently taxing that amount.”However, depending on the economy, mills are worth more or less, and, as of now, they are worth much less than they once were.According to a press release issued by library director George Strawley, the library staff “have endured stagnant wages since 2011 and lost 6,100 work hours since 2011.”Strawley said most of the library employees are “earning less than the starting wages at Walmart,” even though they have more specialized skills, and nearly all of the employees are part-time. Many of them have been working at the library for several years.Strawley said that their work dedication “needs to be recognized, or we’ll lose them.” Strawley submitted a request that library employees be given a raise of $1 per hour and that hours be restored for each branch to better serve the public. Neither library in the Valley is open on weekends. The Uinta County Library is closed on Sunday and Monday and has reduced hours on Friday and Saturday.However, the county has expressed concerns that there is no way to sustain raises and more hours, as the county is seeing a continued downturn in revenue and sees no immediate hope for next year.“[Revenue from] oil and gas is down an average of 45 percent from what it was last year,” Wilcox said.Next year is predicted to be even worse. The county’s revenues primarily come from oil and gas taxes. County Commissioner Craig Welling said that the county expects natural gas production to decline 15 to 20 percent next year.Wilcox said the library isn’t the only department affected by recent budget cuts.“The county employees haven’t had raises for seven years,” she said.To make matters worse, the Affordable Care Act has made it unaffordable for the county to have many full-time employees, Wilcox said. Even though the library employees are not county employees, the same budget cuts are affecting everyone.“It’s just a very difficult time, and we’re just trying to hang on so we don’t have to take huge cuts next year,” Wilcox said.Welling said the county is unable to make more appropriations.“I suppose we could give [the library] more,” he said, “but who do we take it from to give it to them?”However, this does not mean that the library is receiving no support. The county will be picking up the utilities costs for the Mountain View and Lyman libraries this year. This will remedy an inconsistency, as the county has been paying for the utilities costs of the Evanston branch, but not the Valley libraries. This will save the libraries $17,000 – $18,000 per year.“I wasn’t aware of [the inconsistency] until just recently,” Welling said.Wilcox said the libraries are also having about $100,000 worth of new computers installed, courtesy of the county. She said the county’s IT and maintenance staff have been working to help set up and get security for the new computers.The library also has some security concerns, some of which are being met with the current security measures being installed on the new computers. This is partially motivated by the fact that two laptops were stolen from the library in recent years.The county has agreed to set aside about $80,000 to install a security system for the libraries, including security cameras and anti-theft systems.However, Strawley would like to put these purchases and installations on hold for a little while in order to reevaluate the immediate need for such systems.“I want to take a more cautious look at it,” he said.Strawley has instead proposed that the money appropriated for security systems be used to boost the library for the coming year by raising wages, increasing hours and purchasing materials, as the library’s materials budget has been cut entirely in past years.He said if the economy continues to shrink, “we’re going to have bigger problems than just the $1 an hour raise.”He emphasized that, from what he has seen, “everybody in this whole process … wants to see our libraries thrive.” The problem is that people disagree over what the best approach is to help the libraries survive long-term. There are currently discussions over whether closing one of the libraries in the Valley would be a good move to give the entire county library system more support and resources.If this drastic step were to be utilized, Strawley said, “we’d probably look for ways to fill essential open positions with staff from the affected location.”The main issue is that the county and the libraries are seeking a balance between being careful for the future and using the resources available for current needs.Part of this discussion will also involve the definition of what a library is, especially in the 21st century. When asked about what he believes a library is and does, Welling said that he believes the most pressing need in the Uinta County community is “the increasing demand [for] computers and the Internet, whether it be for job applications or research.” The county’s support of technological resources and new computers is specifically designed to meet this need.Strawley has a slightly different vision, for he said that the libraries exist to “give people an opportunity to learn how to become information-literate … in the flood of information” with which everyone is currently inundated.Both Welling and Strawley believe that libraries have changed in purpose from past traditional functions, extending now to online resources, makerspaces, and the like.Strawley hopes to continue “publicly examining options with the help of an advisory committee representing the library and the larger community.” He said input from the community is welcome in this ongoing discussion.



















Select Page: Top Stories Sports Obits Opinion Rich County Outdoors Classifieds

Within: 1 Months 3 Months 6 Months 12 Months

Keyword: Advanced Search Select Page:Within:Keyword:

Enter your search terms Submit search form

Entertainment