More than 25,000 people visited the German Christmas Market of Oconomowoc last year. This year’s market is Nov. 27-29. Credit: Joe Haas

Boulder Junction: Christmas Walk. Get in the holiday spirit in Boulder Junction with a variety of festive happenings Friday and Saturday. Activities include a craft fair, horse-drawn sleigh rides, tree lighting, cookie walk and visits with Santa and Mrs. Claus Friday, and kids' shopping and crafts plus lunch with Santa on Saturday. See boulderjct.org.

Egg Harbor: Holly Days. Celebrate the holidays in Door County with children's activities, breakfast with Santa, horse-drawn carriage rides, a tree lighting and more Friday and Saturday. Activities take place around downtown Egg Harbor including the visitor center at 4666 Orchard Road. Most are free. See eggharbordoorcounty.org.

Green Bay: WPS Garden of Lights. Stroll through a beautiful landscape decorated with nearly a quarter of a million lights beginning Friday at the Green Bay Botanical Gardens, 2600 Larsen Road. In addition to the light displays, there will be live entertainment, a model train exhibit and photos with Santa. The display is open weekends through Dec. 30. Tickets are $9 for people age 13 and up, $5 for children 3 to 12 and free for kids 2 and under. See gbbg.org.

Oconomowoc: German Christmas Market of Oconomowoc. Find a gift for that hard-to-buy-for person on your list at this market Friday through next Sunday. More than 30 vendors will have goods for sale, and visitors can also enjoy German food and beer, live music and take photos with Santa. The market is at Main St. and Wisconsin Ave. and is open from 11 a.m. to 10 p.m. Friday, 11 a.m. to 11 p.m. Saturday and 11 a.m. to 4 p.m. next Sunday.

River Falls: River Dazzle. Bring the whole family for holiday activities in downtown River Falls on Friday. Activities include cookie decorating, visits with Santa and reindeer, a chili cook-off, free horse-drawn wagon rides, strolling carolers and a parade. See rfchamber.com.

Wausau: Birds in Art. This is your last week to see the annual "Birds in Art" exhibit at the Leigh Yawkey Woodson Art Museum, 700 N. 12th St. The exhibit showcases the best contemporary artistic interpretations of birds and things related to birds. The exhibit is open through next Sunday. The museum is open from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. Tuesday through Friday (until 7:30 p.m. Thursday) and noon to 5 p.m. Saturday and Sunday. Admission is free. See lywam.org.

Illinois: Parade of Lights. Watch lighted floats make their way through downtown Champaign during this annual parade Saturday. The parade — with an appearance by Santa — begins at 6 p.m., with live entertainment at 5 p.m. and a tree lighting immediately after. See champaigncenter.com.

Minnesota: Amsoil Duluth National Snocross. Watch some of the country's top snowmobile racers compete at Spirit Mountain, 9500 Spirit Mountain Place, Friday through next Sunday. Three-day tickets are $55 for adults and $45 for kids age 17 and under; one-day passes are $30 for adults and $25 for kids. See spiritmt.com.

— Chelsey Lewis

Please send notice of events three weeks in advance to: All Over the Map, Travel Section, P.O. Box 371, Milwaukee, WI 53201 or to jsfeat@journalsentinel.com, with All Over the Map as the subject.