The Federal Trade Commission is "raising a lonely but powerful voice" in response to hospital consolidation, a trend that predates the Affordable Care Act but has accelerated since the law passed, The New York Times reports. Most recently the regulatory agency has successfully litigated three deals, in Georgia, Ohio and Illinois, according to the report.

Commission officials are skeptical of hospital executives who say mergers increase leverage with insurance companies, creating savings to reinvest in facilities, according to the report.

"That incentive to invest may not be there if you don't have competition as a spur to innovation -- if you're not worried about losing business to the hospital down the street," the commission's director of competition, Deborah Feinstein, told the newspaper.

Read The Times' full report.

The New Orleans-area market is evolving into a two-player game, with the ascendant LCMC Health challenging Ochsner Health System for dominance. LCMC owns and operates Children's Hospital and Touro Infirmary, and manages the city-owned New Orleans East Hospital. LCMC is also in talks to lease the publicly owned West Jefferson Medical Center. That deal is subject to FTC review.

Additionally, LCMC operates Interim LSU Hospital with a deal in place to lease University Medical Center, scheduled to open next year. The UMC deal faces scrutiny from another federal agency, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, which already has rejected one state plan to finance the deal. Another one is under review, and the agency has reiterated concerns it expressed the first time.

Ochsner Health System, the largest provider in the region, has announced three deals in suburban parishes in the last four months. It took over operations at St. Charles Parish Hospital earlier this month and a few days later said it would buy River Parishes Hospital. In May, Ochsner and St. Tammany Parish Hospital announced the outlines of a working partnership, although the details of the agreement aren't yet clear.