Consumers who missed the Monday deadline for enrolling in, or changing, an insurance plan on HealthCare.gov still have two months to act. But there may be some drawbacks to procrastinating.

Monday, Dec. 15, was the deadline to buy or switch plans in the insurance marketplace coverage that would begin on Jan. 1. You can still enroll in, or switch, a plan during the next two months. But new coverage won’t take effect until Feb. 1 at the earliest.

If you were enrolled in an Affordable Care Act plan in 2014 and didn’t make changes by Monday, you’ll generally be re-enrolled in the same plan next year, said Karen Pollitz, a health insurance expert with the Kaiser Family Foundation. (There are some exceptions; you should have received a notice outlining your options, if you are ineligible for automatic re-enrollment.) You still can decide to change plans, however, as late as Feb. 15 — the final deadline for open enrollment — for coverage starting March 1.

However, there is at least one potential caveat: If you are automatically covered by your old plan for a month or two in 2015 before switching to a new one, your plan deductible — the amount you must pay out of pocket before the plan pays for certain kinds of care — will probably reset when the new plan starts. That means if your new plan starts on Feb. 1, bills you paid in January may not count toward your “new” deductible.

Ms. Pollitz said some insurers might allow you to apply the expenses toward your new deductible if you switch to another plan offered by the same insurer. So you should ask about that possibility. However, she noted, “this is not required under federal law.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Still, a spokeswoman for Anthem, a large insurer, said someone enrolled in one of its individual plans bought on the marketplace for 2015 can move to another Anthem individual plan and have their accumulated deductible amounts carry over to the new plan. (But the carry-over would not apply to someone moving from another insurer’s individual policy, or moving to an individual policy from a group policy, the spokeswoman said.)

It’s likely that some people who haven’t paid close attention may want to make changes after they get the new bill for their existing plan, even if their deductible resets. That’s because premiums for many plans have increased.

And in some cases, consumers could see their own costs rise, even if their plan’s premiums didn’t increase, because of the way the Affordable Care Act calculates income-based tax credits. Your credit amount is based partly on the cost of the lowest-priced “benchmark” plan in your market — and the plan that cost the least last year may not cost the same this year. So, your credit could shrink.

For that reason, health policy experts and federal officials have urged consumers to go online to compare plans and to actively re-enroll, to make sure they understand all the options available and to update their income information, so their tax credit will be accurately calculated.

If you missed Monday’s deadline and subsequently decide that your plan’s premium is too high, you could cancel the plan as of Jan. 1 and enroll in a lower-cost one starting on Feb. 1, said Sabrina Corlette, a senior research fellow at the Center on Health Insurance Reforms at Georgetown University. But that would mean forgoing any coverage for January.

Here are some questions and answers about participating in open enrollment:

■ I enrolled in an exchange plan in the spring of 2014. Why does my plan expire on Dec. 31 instead of after 12 months of enrollment?

All marketplace plans run on a calendar year, regardless of when you enrolled. For many, this is a change from the pre-Affordable Care Act individual insurance market; previously, individual plans could be bought at any time, and often renewed 12 months later. (The calendar year approach aligns marketplace coverage with the system used by many large employers, which offer group insurance on a calendar year, with an annual open-enrollment period).

■ Do some state-run exchanges have different deadlines?

HealthCare.gov, which serves 37 states, set the deadline for coverage beginning in January at Dec. 15, and the final deadline at Feb. 15, but states running their own exchanges may set more expansive deadlines. Last week, New York said it would extend to Dec. 20 the deadline for coverage as of Jan. 1 because of bad weather that hit the state. And California and some other states have recently extended their deadlines too. So it’s best to check with your state’s exchange for its deadlines.

■ What if I miss the Feb. 15 marketplace deadline?

You can’t sign up for marketplace coverage until the next open enrollment in the fall of 2015, unless you have a special circumstance, like the loss of a job or the birth of a child.