St Vincent de Paul Society state council members and partners, senior staff and guests are spending the weekend at the Tattersall’s Club.

BOSSES of one of Queensland’s biggest charities are on an all-expenses-paid retreat at an exclusive private club this weekend — while the organisation runs a Christmas appeal for the disadvantaged.

St Vincent de Paul Society state council members and partners, senior staff and guests have been enjoying the salubrious surroundings of the Tattersall’s Club, which promotes itself as “Brisbane’s premier private membership club’’.

The charity’s Queensland CEO Peter Maher defended spending nearly $6000 on the two-day event, which combined the council’s quarterly meeting with a Christmas party for them and six members of the Ozcare board.

“Members of our board don’t get paid, they are all volunteers so the least we can do is provide them with a meal and a bit of accommodation,” Mr Maher said.

“We need to look after them but we don’t go over the top. They dress up and feel special.”

But the luxurious getaway has angered society members.

“This is just a very bad look for an organisation that purports to have the needs of the poor and destitute front of mind,’’ one said.

“Don’t launch a Christmas appeal asking the public to donate to help the homeless and so on and then take this lot off to a Tattersall’s for a nosh-up. You won’t be seeing any poor homeless bugger there, that’s for sure.

The 149-year-old Tattersall’s Club — whose $1000-a-year members include business and political leaders — says it offers “the ultimate atmosphere, style and service’’.

Six council members will stay in the club’s “spacious suites’’ with king-size beds and access to facilities including a 25m pool, health centre and billiards room — at a cost of $1200.

Flights for four members will add nearly $1700.

The event, including last night’s Christmas dinner for 33 people, cost $2817. Mr Maher said it was cheaper than going to a restaurant and as a Tattersall’s member — “which I fund personally” — he got a good deal on meeting room hire.

He admitted that using such a luxurious venue could create an image problem but said: “It would be a shame if some people judged Vinnies on the event rather than the $25 million worth of assistance they provided to people in need each year.”

The charity recently launched its annual Christmas appeal “to support the people that will suffer in silence and will be doing it tough over the Christmas period’’.