Topics: aol_on, Casper Weinberger, Editor's Picks, iran contra, John Yoo, Oliver North, Torture, News

A recently disclosed John Yoo memo that helped grease the skids to war with Iraq may have helped President Obama avoid war with Iran. Or perhaps it’s just a bit of epic trolling. Or maybe a bit of both. Whatever the case, it should not go unremarked in the wake of Obama’s success in preserving the Iran deal against GOP opposition in Congress, because of how it illuminates the broader landscape of U.S. foreign policy battles over the decades. Whether or not it played any role—or figures in possible future lawsuits—it underscores both how dark and twisted GOP foreign policy and defensive secrecy demands have been, and how Democrats have been much more eager to adopt the GOP’s rationales when they hold power than to challenge them when they do not.

On August 24, Obama’s Office of Legal Counsel responded to a Freedom of Information Act request by releasing a 2003 John Yoo memo arguing that the Executive Branch could withhold WMD information from Congress, regardless of any laws to the contrary. As explained by Steven Aftergood, of the Federation of American Scientists, who made the request:

Despite an explicit statutory requirement to keep Congress “fully and currently informed” about the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the President may withhold proliferation-related information from Congress if he determines that doing so could harm the national security, according to a sweeping opinion from the Justice Department Office of Legal Counsel (OLC) that was prepared in 2003.

Yoo’s memo was dated Jan. 27, 2003, the day before George Bush’s State of the Union speech in which he famously lied about Iraq’s WMDs: “The British government has learned that Saddam Hussein recently sought significant quantities of uranium from Africa.” Yoo’s timing certainly seems significant, as does the timing of the memo’s release.

Although we don’t know for certain what Yoo was being asked to help hide, national security writer and Salon contributor Marcy Wheeler points out, “we know there has been good reason to question whether Bush’s aides deliberately misinformed Congress in that address, and now we know John Yoo pre-approved doing so.” We also don’t know why the memo was released when it was. But if Obama meant to stand by Yoo’s analysis, however suspect, he was essentially telling Congress, just before it returned to vote, “I don’t have to tell you anything about Iran or the Iran deal that I don’t want. If you’ve got a problem with that, take it up with John Yoo.”

The significance of the withholding information argument was underscored by some of Obama’s bitterest foes in Congress, who—facing imminent defeat in the U.S. Senate, began talking about suing him in court (a la Obamacare) for failing to disclose the so-called “side deal” between Iran and the International Atomic Energy Agency, which governs IAEA inspections.

But Obama’s not just engaging John Yoo in his defense. He’s bringing in 30 years of GOP national security arguments, dating back the Iran/Contra scandal. (Yes, pesky old Iran, once again!) Wheeler also wrote:

By releasing this memo just a week before the Iran deal debate heats up, the Obama Administration has given public (and Congressional, to the extent they’re paying attention) notice that it doesn’t believe it has to inform Congress of anything having to do with WMD it deems too sensitive. John Yoo says so. Reagan’s OLC said so, in large part to ensure that no one would go to prison for disobeying Congressional notice requirements pertaining to Iran-Contra. If you think that’s wrong, you have to argue the Bush Administration improperly politicized intelligence behind the Iraq War. You have to agree that the heroes of Iran-Contra — people like John Poindexter, who signed onto a letter opposing the Iran deal — should be rotting in prison. That is, the opponents of the Iran deal — most of whom supported both the Iraq War and Iran-Contra — have to argue Republican Presidents acted illegally in those past actions.

Wheeler refers to this as “the ironic part — and one I only approve of for the irony involved, not for the underlying expansive interpretation of Executive authority.” And that’s precisely the point that progressives should be most worried about, since it signals, once again, just how completely the neocon mindset has infected even those who believe themselves opposed to it.

Reinforcing the sense that the memo’s release is a bit of trolling is the second-to-last sentence in the cover letter to Aftergood: “The document is protected by the deliberative process and attorney-client privileges and exempt from mandatory disclosure pursuant to FOIA Exemption Five, 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(5), but we are releasing it to you as a matter of discretion.” In short: “You don’t have a right to this, we’re just being nice.”

Nice to Aftergood. Not so nice to the congressional back-benchers who seem to have brow-beaten Boehner into submission once again, and are itching to haul Obama into court. As U.S. News & World Report explained:

Under the deal struck this spring by Sens. Bob Corker, R-Tenn., and Ben Cardin, D-Md., the administration was required to turn over the contents of the nuclear deal and “all related materials and annexes.” Once it did so, Congress had 60 days to pass either a resolution of disapproval, which would prevent Obama from granting waivers to U.S. economic sanctions against Iran, or a resolution of approval.

But the Iran/IAEA side deal hasn’t been turned over. And opponents of the Iran deal pounced:

“We want to make sure the leadership understands that we do not believe that administration has complied with the Corker bill,” said Rep. Raul Labrador, R-Idaho, during an event with leaders of the conservative House Freedom Caucus on Wednesday.

And, of course, as with Obamacare, there’s always the courts:

House Republicans suggested that, with the leadership on board, they could potentially file a lawsuit against the Obama administration seeking an injunction that would tangle the agreement in a legal morass lasting well beyond the target implementation date of the deal sometime this fall.

There’s just one problem: the U.S. never had the side deal. It may have known something about it, but like all such deals the IAEA strikes, it was a secret deal between the IAEA and Iran. So if the U.S. (meaning the Obama administration) never had the side deal, it could not turn it over. It turned over everything it had. Case closed.

Or at least that’s what would happen in world ruled by facts and logic. But the world of national security law is not that world at all. That world is ruled by the precedent of previous rulings—and, in many cases, per the OLC memo in question, simply by the precedent of previous arguments asserted in private, and never even seen, much less tested, in a court of law. And that is the ground on which the Obama administration appeared to be saying it would be happy to fight.

Both Wheeler and Aftergood pointed out how shoddy Yoo’s memo was in making its case. Wheeler calls it “7 shoddily written pages,” while Aftergood writes, “Even to a layman, the Yoo opinion seems muddled and poorly argued, in several respects.” The first is that Yoo blatantly lies about a Clinton signing statement:

Yoo claims that the statute requiring reporting of WMD proliferation was obviated by a signing statement issued by President Clinton in 1999. “In signing the legislation, President Clinton stated that section 1131 and similar provisions raised serious constitutional questions.” But upon examining the text of that 1999 signing statement, one finds that Clinton did not mention section 1131 at all, and the President’s comments there have no bearing on WMD proliferation or congressional reporting requirements.