Any day now, the Oregon Supreme Court will rule on the appeal of a fateful free-speech decision that has transformed TriMet buses and trains into rolling billboards for the most shocking political views, horrifying passengers and frightening children and family pets from Hillsboro to Gresham …

Oh, wait. Such a cascade of horrors did not inundate the Metro area following a 2008 court decision, upheld by the Oregon Court of Appeals, that dinged the transit agency for rejecting an advertisement for content-related reasons. If TriMet’s going to lease space on its vehicles for expression, the courts decided, it must honor the speech protections guaranteed by the state Constitution.

We hope the Supreme Court continues the trend. Even if it doesn’t, however, TriMet’s advertising experiment will have demonstrated that greater freedom need not create greater problems, which is something to keep in mind whether you’re talking about billboards or booze sales.

Loosening TriMet’s advertising rules has produced so little shouting that most Portland-area residents, including those who use public transportation daily, may have forgotten there was a controversy at all. Moments of unease have occurred, as when Middle East tensions played out in dueling ads in 2012, but these have been fleeting. A little free speech on a passing train isn’t the sort of thing that flusters a city that embraces the World Naked Bike Ride.

Controversial political advertising gets a lot of attention, for obvious reasons, but the free-speech rulings have brought a much more mundane change to the appearance of buses and trains. They now carry ads for alcoholic beverages. Among the brands touted on TriMet vehicles over the past 12 months are Pabst Blue Ribbon, Coors and Bacardi. Beer and booze ads aren’t a big money-maker for TriMet – they account for less than 5 percent of the advertising revenue from agency vehicles, says spokeswoman Mary Fetsch. Still the change hasn’t sparked a rebellion.



Editorial Agenda 2014

More jobs for Oregon Position the Port for the future Make Portland a city that works Keep people moving Build a culture of student success Move forward on tax reform



Protect and expand personal freedom

_______________________________ Read more about the editorial board's priorities for Oregon.





TriMet isn’t the only government entity that breaks out in a sweat whenever a lawyer says “free speech.” Port of Portland officials kicked up a fuss last year when Oregon Wild tried to buy an anti-clear cut ad at the Portland International Airport. The Port lost in court , however, and the ad appeared for about a month on a digital billboard near the baggage claim, says Oregon Wild Executive Director Sean Stevens. Planes are still taking off and landing regularly.

TriMet and the Port of Portland have nothing on the Department of Motor Vehicles, where restrictions on expression have fallen right down the rabbit hole. For an extra fee, Oregonians may order up custom license plates that say whatever they want … sort of. You can’t, for instance, use “objectionable combinations” of numbers and letters, including those that “refer to alcoholic beverages.” This may seem a little weird given the fact that companies can place alcohol advertising on publicly owned vehicles. It’s downright wacky, however, considering the availability – for a fee – of a “Wine Country” specialty license plate … which may not be customized to say “wine.”



<a href="http://polldaddy.com/poll/7901693/">Should the DMV allow Oregonians to order custom plates that refer to alcoholic beverages?</a>

The explanation for this contradiction is fairly mundane. When the Legislature approved the “Wine Country” plate a couple of years ago, it didn’t tell the Department of Motor Vehicles to amend administrative rules governing what may appear on custom plates, says agency spokesman David House. And even though DMV expected the plate authorization to cause a push for changes in custom plate rules, says House, that simply didn’t happen. So here we are.

Even when they don’t make much sense, government regulations possess a momentum that requires effort on someone’s part to change. In some cases – license plates, for instance – nobody cares enough to expend the required energy. In other cases – advertising on TriMet vehicles and in Portland’s airport – it is worth someone’s effort, which is why change is happening. But that effort can be substantial, as the people in charge are often change-averse. In the end, the expenditure of so much energy to prohibit greater freedom often seems silly.

This regulatory momentum produces a sort of prudishness – no “wine” on your “Wine Country” plate - which isn’t confined to matters of expression. Oregon is one of only two states to prohibit self-service gas stations. Among the justifications contained in statute: “Small children left unattended when customers leave to make payment at retail self-service stations creates a dangerous situation.” Oregonians, it seems, are almost uniquely unqualified to be parents.

Similarly, Oregon is also among a minority of states clinging to a government monopoly on liquor sales, as if privatization would create commercial and social mayhem. People in other states might be able to handle this sort of freedom, the law implies, but not Oregonians. Pumping gas, selling liquor in grocery stores. Too radical for us!

Because it is worth someone’s trouble to shift the momentum of Oregon’s prudish liquor laws, a measure to that end may end up on the ballot in November. As voters consider it, they should remember that the degree of resistance to change is a poor predictor of the consequences of change. The freedom against which TriMet and the Port of Portland resisted so zealously has done no harm. Shaking off Oregon’s liquor prudishness will prove similarly benign.

Now, if only we can find somebody with an interest in self-serve gas stations ….