Topics: From the Wires, News

MOSCOW (AP) — Uzbekistan is going through the motions of a presidential election this weekend, with a crushing win for its longtime leader a foregone conclusion, but the long-term future of the Central Asian nation is still far from certain.

Islam Karimov, 77, has led the double-landlocked former Soviet republic of 30 million people uninterruptedly since the late 1980s, and ruthlessly quashed all opposition to his rule.

While Uzbekistan is untroubled by any immediate signs of unrest, its future is colored with uncertainty amid a troubled security situation in neighboring Afghanistan and the lack of a clear succession plan should Karimov suddenly leave the scene. Economic woes could also be in store as a knock-on effect of the looming recession in Russia, where around 3 million Uzbeks live and work.

Karimov faces three purely nominal rivals in Sunday’s vote. In the previous election in 2007, he won 91 percent of the vote.

Since gaining independence in 1991, Uzbekistan has pursued a policy of economic self-reliance and sought to balance its diplomatic relations with the West and Russia, playing them against one another.

The United States installed a military base in the country after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. It was forced to abandon that facility in 2005 as relations between the countries soured following a violent government crackdown on rioters in the Ferghana Valley city of Andijan that is believed to have left hundreds dead.

Almost all Western media have been barred from reporting inside the country since that time. Independent journalists and activists face sustained harassment.

At campaign rallies ahead of the elections, Karimov said Uzbekistan would never again host a foreign military base. In a calculated snub to Russia, however, he also ruled out membership of economic blocs led by Moscow.

In recent years, Uzbekistan has also attracted strong interest from China. Beijing has pledged tens of billions of dollars in loans and investment to Central Asian nations as part of an ambitious series of energy and transportation projects.

Security is a perennial feature of official rhetoric in Uzbekistan.