MOREHEAD CITY — Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Carolina announced Monday in a media blitz it’s failed to reach a new contract with Carteret Health Care after three years of negotiations and gave notice its customers will become out of network for non-emergency care starting on Monday, Feb. 1, 2016.

The move through news releases, social media posts and online ads that attacked what Blue Cross’ officials said was a high cost delivery and poor quality of care, appeared to stun Carteret Health Care, whose officials thought they were still negotiating.

This means there will likely be a higher out-of-pocket cost for BCBSNC-insured individuals who go to the hospital for treatment beyond the Emergency Department.

BCBSNC is the only available insured option for the Affordable Care Act here under the federal exchange in the county. According to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, more than 4,600 Carteret County residents enrolled through the federal exchange last year.

Dick Brvenik, hospital president, said Carteret Health Care continues to move forward with contract negotiations with BCBSNC, and sent the hospital’s latest contract proposal to the insurance company Sunday.

He told the News-Times Tuesday afternoon a conference call is scheduled for today with BCBSNC representatives to discuss a new proposal from the insurance company.

However, Mr. Brvenik noted he had yet to receive a new proposal and was uncertain if he would have the chance to view it before the conference call or if it would even be ready.

“Our objective has been, and remains, to secure a fair and reasonable contract that protects consumers and patients that meets certainly the needs of the insurer, but most importantly, the needs of the patients we care for in this community and hospital,” he told the News-Times Tuesday.

If a contract is not agreed on by both parties by Sunday, Jan. 31, 2016, then patients at Carteret Health Care with Blue Cross insurance will likely have to pay more money out of pocket for non-emergency care, such as surgeries, X-rays and childbirth care.

This affects both state and federal Blue Cross policyholders.

Emergency care services that qualify for BCBSNC’s Continuity of Care program, and “care that isn’t readily available at other available facilities,” will still be considered in-network, as well as most appointments that have been scheduled ahead of this deadline.

The contract changes will not affect Medicare Advantage (Blue Medicare HMO/Blue Medicare PPO) customers.

Although the hospital facility will be out of network, Carteret Medical Group physician services will remain in the network.

The breakdown won’t, however, impact hospital employees, according to Mr. Brvenik. BCBSNC acts as a third-party insurer for those employees, since the hospital is self-insured.

Although Darcie Dearth, a communication specialist in the corporate affairs office for BCBSNC, said there had been several negotiations attempts with the hospital since 2012, and BCBSNC gave Carteret Health Care adequate noticed that an announcement would be made around Nov. 1 if no contract was agreed on, hospital officials were surprised by the move Monday.

“Legally, Blue Cross would have to announce (the change) in advance by 30 days of the change,” said Mr. Brvenik. “We think it is important not to have people alarmed and confused and this (announcement) will only achieve to do this.”

Ms. Dearth said BCBSNC policy is to give its customers a 90-day notice of a policy change, which prompted the action this week.

BCBSNC moved quickly to notify the public. Mr. Brvenik said he spoke with a BCBSNC employee Monday who said the company will send notices to employers that offer their employees BCBSNC insurance advising of the change, and “as soon as my conversation with him concluded, there were things (press releases) out in two minutes,” he said.

A statement released by hospital officials Monday night stated, “We are disappointed that BCBSNC has chosen to take such a public and aggressive action rather than work collaboratively with us to reach a new, rebalanced agreement.”

In addition to contacting the News-Times about the topic, BCBSNC sponsored a tweet on Twitter that blasted a blog post about the change to the area. The tweet said, “What happens when a hospital gets too expensive?” and, “We’re working to rein in costs and smooth the transition for customers.” A Google ad sponsored by BCBSNC with the same information has also been seen by individuals searching for information about the county.

In the news release, Mark Werner, BCBSNC vice president of network management, outlined the insurance carrier’s grievances with the hospital.

“Carteret Health Care is the only hospital in the state that insists on raising costs for BCBSNC customers without negotiation,” Mr. Werner said in a press release. “This is unacceptable, considering that our customers already pay more at Carteret Health Care than at similar hospitals.”

The press release states, “The hospital is one of the most expensive community hospitals in the state. As a result, BCBSNC customers pay, on average, 19 percent more for the same health care services or procedures at CHC than at peer hospitals.

The costs associated with treatment at Carteret Health Care “directly impact area patients, businesses and the local economy,” BCBSNC states in the press release. “Just five local employers could collectively save $2 million if Carteret Health Care’s costs were more in line with other hospitals statewide, according to BCBSNC data.

“Unfortunately, CHC’s high prices are not justified by higher quality,” said the release from BCBSNC. “The quality of care at CHC ranks lower than the care provided by most hospitals in the state, yet CHC is one of the most expensive when compared to similar hospitals using BCBSNC’s standard quality measures.”

Carteret Health Care officials disputed this allegation in their own press release.

“Further, despite inaccurate statements in BCBSNC’s press release, CHC has some of the highest quality of care compared to other hospitals in the state, which has been verified by independent, third party sources including the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid, The Joint Commission, The Leapfrog Group, Truven Analytics and Business NC,” noted the hospital in its press release.

Carteret Health Care officials said the hospital is competitively priced and a high-value hospital that provides essential services to the county.

“We are unsure where BCBSNC is getting its data, but we question its validity. We are working to address the inaccuracies made by BCBSNC and to set the record straight.”

Mr. Brvenik further disputed this insurance carrier’s statement.

“I would say that is inconsistent with knowledge we have,” he said. “We would be very pleased to share our data. I would encourage visiting Blue Cross Blue Shield’s own transparency pricing tool and seeing it is inconsistent data … from what the transparency pricing tool suggests.”

Ms. Dearth confirmed Tuesday afternoon that letters have been sent in the mail to all BCBSNC policyholders in the area, and should be arriving this week. The letters announce the change in the contract with the hospital and provide details about where patients can seek in-network care.

Mr. Werner stressed in his press release Monday the need to alert the public in a timely manner.

“With little progress after months of attempting to negotiate reasonable terms with the hospital, we must now turn our full attention to our customers to make sure they understand how this impacts them,” he said.

Mr. Brvenik said the hospital has had “on-again, off-again communication,” with the insurance company and that hospital staff has dealt with numerous BCBSNC employees over the past three years.

According to a statement, the hospital has not seen a written counter offer to multiple proposals it has offered.

“Instead, they demand Carteret accept their proposed contact terms, with their reduced rates, which equates to a multi-million decrease over the next three years. Then, BCBSNC brought the entire community in the middle of our negotiations, forcing us to respond in kind. This isn’t exemplary behavior from the state’s largest health insurer.”

Joanie King, chief financial officer for the hospital, has been the main hospital source for the contract negotiations. This spring, Mr. Brvenik also joined in negotiation talks.

While Carteret Health Care is a county-owned hospital, the County Board of Commissioners has stepped back from the contract dispute. A statement released by commissioners, which appoints representatives to the hospital board of directors, said Tuesday that the county board and government has no part in the negotiations, and that matter is strictly between Carteret Health Care and BCBSNC.

Carteret Health Care recently opened a roughly $50 million facility expansion, which includes a comprehensive cancer center on site. The goal of this expansion, hospital officials said in the past, was to better serve the community so residents here would not have to travel as far for service.

If an agreement is not made with BCBSNC, Carteret Health Care may stand to lose patients that go elsewhere in search of less expensive care, based on numerous comments made on the News-Times Facebook page, website and in emails to News-Times staff.

The BCBSNC press release said in case of emergency, patients should always go to the nearest hospital.

Yet, it said for other customers who want local, in-network care, they can visit six Eastern North Carolina hospitals, including Onslow Memorial Hospital in Jacksonville, CarolinaEast Medical Center in New Bern and Vidant Medical Center in Greenville.

Non-emergency care can be sought at several area in-network offices in Morehead City, such as FastMed Urgent Care, Nova Urgent Care and BeachCare Urgent and Family Medical Center.

Carteret Medical Group offices will also be considered in the network. These offices are in Cedar Point, Morehead City and Sea Level.

Information about alternative facilities and the care transition is available online at www.bcbsnc.com/Carteret, or customers can call the customer service number on their member identification cards.

Contact Anna Harvey at 252-726-7081, ext. 229; email anna@thenewstimes.com; or follow on Twitter @annaccnt.