GRAND RAPIDS, MI — Businessman Brian Ellis unleashed his first television advertisement against U.S. Rep. Justin Amash, calling a single 2012 abortion vote "very wrong."

The 30-second spot attacks Amash, R-Cascade Township, as being the only Michigan Republican voting against the 2012 Prenatal Nondiscrimination Act, which reportedly would have imprisoned doctors for performing abortions based solely on gender.

The bill failed in the House with a vote of 246-168 in favor. It needed 276 yeas to pass.

"Amash voted to allow gender selection abortions to continue," the ad states. "Right to Life called Amash's vote 'shameful' and 'pro-abortion.' They're right. Amash's vote was very wrong."

In response, Amash's campaign called the ad "despicable, disgusting and beyond the pale" in the run up to the August primary election.

"West Michigan expects more — even from desperate politicians like Brian Ellis," Amash's spokesman, Will Adams, said in an emailed statement. "Amash is 100 percent pro-life and opposes abortion."

He more recently voted for the No Taxpayer Funding for Abortion Act, which largely set aim on the Affordable Care Act and would have barred federal dollars from being used for an abortion if a healthcare plan included coverage.

More: Project Vote Smart: Justin Amash's voting record on abortion

"The legislation at issue would not have made a single abortion illegal," Adams said. "Instead, it would have created a thought crime, which conservatives oppose."

Right to Life withdrew support of Amash in 2012, citing an inconsistent voting record. Ellis said the TV ad will not be the first time he calls out a voting record that is not consistent with residents of the Third District.

"We're just pointing out how he voted; this is a fact," Ellis said. "He had ads run on me that were a complete distortion, (and) we're trying to be factual.

"I wanted voters to know this is how the congressman voted, and say I would have voted for the ban if I were in Congress."

Ellis' campaign reportedly spent about $75,133 across West Michigan's four major television stations, with 32 spots running Monday, March 10 through March 23 during WZZM-TV's newscasts, "Good Morning America" and other late-night news programs, according to an Federal Communications Commission filing.

About $11,270 was spent on the local ABC affiliate.

Although WOOD-TV's filings have not yet been published, WZZM-TV's report provided a glimpse. About $35,313 was spent on the NBC affiliate, in addition to $24,043 on WWMT-TV and $4,508 on WXMI-TV.

A six-figure ad buy earlier this year by conservative special interest group Club for Growth attacked Ellis during his time spent on the East Grand Rapids School Board.

Watch Ellis' TV ad, here:

Andrew Krietz covers breaking and general police/fire news for MLive | The Grand Rapids Press. Email him at akrietz@mlive.com or follow him on Twitter.