At a time when frustration with Congress is higher than ever and many take a dim view of those who have held elected office for a long time, Philip Blumel is hoping an old movement can get some new life in Florida and across the country.

Blumel is the president of U.S. Term Limits, a group that has spent decades advocating for caps on the number of years elected officials can serve.

The concept has caught on in many states and municipalities. Term limits, for example, are in place for the Florida Legislature and the Sarasota County Commission. But amending the U.S. Constitution to impose term limits on members of Congress has been more difficult. Bills are introduced year after year and go nowhere.

With Congress unwilling to impose term limits on itself, Blumel is taking the unusual step of trying to convince state leaders to establish a constitutional convention with the sole purpose of establishing congressional term limits. Article 5 of the U.S. Constitution allows the states to force a convention if two-thirds vote in favor.

Blumel knows it sounds like a herculean task to convince lawmakers in 34 states to pass legislation calling for a convention, but he’s convinced it will work, and his group is putting serious money behind the effort.

“U.S. Term Limits is not an organization prone to grand philosophical pronouncements or gestures,” Blumel told a group of Venice Republicans last week. “We do see that path (to victory) and we’re going down it.”

The organization is targeting a handful of states for “serious” lobbying efforts in 2016 and plans to spend up to $2 million on the campaign next year. Legislation already has been introduced in Florida. The Senate bill (SM 630) is up for its first committee vote Tuesday.

Critics of term limits say they deprive governments of valuable experience and enhance the power of outside interest groups. Some state lawmakers complain that lobbyists hold more sway in Tallahassee because there are so many inexperienced elected officials.

Blumel and others say it’s just the opposite: That elected officials become more entwined with lobbyists the longer they stay in office and are more independent when they first arrive. They also argue that term limits allow new ideas to proliferate and elevate community service over collecting a paycheck.

“I hope it might take some of the profit motive out of it,” said Barbara Vaugh, a Venice Republican who participated in a lawsuit that sought to enforce Sarasota County’s term limits.

Blumel expects the convention push to quickly gain steam. He pointed to a Gallup poll from 2013 showing 75 percent of U.S. adults support congressional term limits.

“It’s immensely popular with both parties,” he said.

Firing up the base

There are fewer Democrats in Congress than at any time in the last 65 years, but one of the party’s top leaders told a crowd on Longboat Key last week that the problem is more about complacency among voters and how the party is selling itself than the policies espoused.

“We have delivered mightily for the America people,” U.S. Rep. James Clyburn told the 225 Democrats gathered at the Longboat Key Club and resort. “We have been on the right side of history on all of these issues but in too many instances people are not aware of where the credit is due.”

A 22-year veteran of Congress from South Carolina, Clyburn is the third-highest ranking Democrat in the House. He said in an interview before his speech that Democrats must embrace the Affordable Care Act — a law that inspires great enmity on the right — and partially faulted President Barack Obama for not doing enough to explain its benefits.

“He let the other side define what we’d done,” Clyburn said.

Clyburn recently was put in charge of a new Democratic “Outreach and Engagement Taskforce” designed to fire up Democrats in advance of the 2016 election. He hopes to engage voters by selling them on some of the Obama administration’s achievements, from expanded health care coverage to improved veteran’s benefits.

“We as Democrats need to go out and make a little more noise about what we’ve done,” he said.

The congressman was on Longboat Key promoting a new book “Blessed Experiences: Genuinely Southern, Proudly Black.” A longtime civil rights activist who met his wife in jail after a demonstration, Clyburn said recent controversies over the Confederate flag and other racially-charged incidents show “we have to be vigilant.”

“The country is always moving like a pendulum on a clock,” he said. “We thought all these battles had been won and would never be fought again, but that’s not true.”

Senate money chase

State Rep. Greg Steube raised $45,910 in October and extended his fundraising advantage over the two other Republicans seeking the state Senate seat covering Sarasota County.

Steube, R-Sarasota, has $171,779 in cash on hand compared with $100,044 for former Sarasota state Rep. Doug Holder and $78,204 for former Sarasota County Commissioner Nora Patterson.

Patterson raised $14,461 last month and Holder collected $2,500.

Steube is trying to build up a large war chest now because he will be prohibited from raising money during most of January, all of February and part of March when the Legislature is in session. The other two candidates do not face such restrictions.

Events

■ The Anna Maria Island Democratic Club meets Monday at 11:30 a.m. at the Seafood Shack. Manatee Superintendent of Schools Diana Greene is the speaker. For reservations call 941-761-4017.

■ The Republican Club of Longboat Key meets Tuesday at 5:30 p.m. at the Longboat Key Club’s John Ringling room. The speaker is for U.S. Department of Defense official Curtis L. Gilroy. For reservations call 941-383-5349 or email ruthlbk@verizon.net.

■ The Democratic Club of Sarasota meets Wednesday at 6:30 p.m. at the Fogartyville Community Media and Arts Center. The speaker is economist and University of Wisconsin professor Ayse Somersan. For reservations call 941-379-9233 or email reserve@SarasotaDems.com.

■ The Sarasota Republican Club meets Thursday at 6 p.m. at Marina Jack. U.S. Senate candidate Todd Wilcox is the speaker. For a reservation call 888-325-3212.

■ The Manatee Democratic Club meets Thursday at 11:30 a.m. at Peridia Golf and Country Club. Representatives for Democratic presidential candidates Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders will discuss the candidates’ views on income inequality. For reservations call 941-756-4050.

■ The Lakewood Ranch Republican Club meets Friday at noon at The Ranch Grill. Jeremy Sheftel, regional director for the Republican Party of Florida, is the speaker.