The Hoboken Housing Authority board of of trustees will hold a special meeting Monday to "terminate the contract" of Executive Director Carmelo Garcia, according to the agenda for the meeting.

The meeting is scheduled for 7:30 p.m. at City Hall.

Garcia, also an assemblyman for the 33rd District, has been at odds with Mayor Dawn Zimmer's administration and filed a lawsuit against Zimmer, her husband and the former chairman of the HHA.

Garcia accuses the mayor of policies that amounting to "ethnic cleansing" and pressuring him to hire her political supporters.

The Hoboken Housing Authority Resident Advisory Board is planning to march from the housing complex on Jackson Street to City Hall in support of Garcia.

They believe Garcia "has been instrumental in the positive changes that have occurred in the Hoboken Housing Authority and has been a great leader," Resident Advisory Board President Barbara Reyes said in a news release.

"Garcia spent sleepless nights in the Housing Authority ensuring the safety of his residents," she said. "He came to the aid of his residents and fought for us as we were devastated the worst by the impact of (superstorm) Sandy."

Garcia's supporters say he has been unfairly targeted because of a power struggle over hirings and awarding of contracts.

"I'm humbled and honored by the support (during) the harassment that continues against me," Garcia said. "Hopefully, the residents will get them to have a change of heart."

The assemblyman said the board has kept him "in the dark" and he didn't receive a Rice notice to inform him of the expected position change.

Dana Wefer, the new chairwoman of the HHA, declined to comment on Monday's meeting. The board is also expected to name an acting executive director.

While they have not disclosed the replacement, Garcia said it "could be the chairwoman that wants to take control."

Garcia's annual salary as executive director is listed as $163,000, although he says his salary is $155,000. He also says he is one of the lowest-paid public housing authority directors in Hudson County.