Name: Andrew Brock

Office sought: 13th District

Party affiliation: Republican

Lives in: Mocksville

Contact: www.andrewbrock.com

Age: 42

Profession: Consultant

Highest degree earned: Bachelor of Science, economics and political science

Leadership experience: Agriculture/Environment/Natural Resources co-chairman; Appropriations on General Government and Information Technology; Appropriations on Natural and Economic Resources, co-chairman; Appropriations/Base Budget; Commerce; Finance; Information Technology, co-chairman; Program Evaluation; Redistricting, vice chairman; Rules and Operations of the Senate; Ways & Means, vice chairman; Agriculture and Forestry Commission, chairman; Joint Legislative Elections Oversight; Joint Legislative Commission on Energy Policy, chairman; Environmental Review; Joint Legislative Governmental Operations; Joint Legislative Oversight Committee on Information Technology; Revenue Laws Study

QUESTIONS

What is the value of prior elected experience? If you have none, how will you overcome the lack of experience to be a successful member of Congress?: In the Senate I have learned how to get good legislation through the process and how to stop bad legislation from becoming law. I am known for my work ethic and commitment to constituent services and tenacious on voting conservative values. No one works harder than I do.

Give an example of how you have worked with someone from another political party to accomplish a goal? Or, if you haven’t held elected office, how will you do this?: Most pieces of legislation are non controversial, but rarely is that reported. I have influenced many pieces while in the minority (ethics bill) and lead conservative polices in the majority (pro-life, guns, property rights, Farm Bill, regulation reform, and government reform).

Would you support an independent commission for redistricting? Why or why not? : In North Carolina we have several directives in drawing districts. Federal laws and court cases as well as state law and court cases dictate how to draw districts. When you go through the multiple steps that satisfy the law and court precedents, there are few alternatives for the maps.

How would you change federal health care?: I will end Obamacare. It has been the biggest mistake to medicine ever. It has exacerbated paperwork and taken time away from the provider-patient relationship. Ask any health care provider and ask how it is working. My wife is a physician assistant so I understand their frustration.

What would you do to reduce illegal immigration? What would you do about the illegal immigrants that are currently in the country?: I would move the IRS agents to the border, they are some of the meanest people we have in government. We need to secure all of our borders including our ports. We should hold the employers responsible for their foreign workers. Mandatory verification of all employees, present and future.

Should there be a federally mandated minimum wage? Why or why not?: No, I believe the minimum wage is an artificial number set by the government to give false security of well being. Anyone starting a job should learn three things, show up to work on time, do your job correctly, and be as time efficient as possible.

What do you think the federal government should do to balance gun rights and safety?: Having the right to bear arms is safety. The right of citizens to defend themselves is paramount to all rights. Without the Second Amendment, all other amendments will be subject to a tyrannical government. The Founding Fathers knew the importance of keeping a free society through security of guns.

How should the U.S. handle North Korea's expansion of its nuclear program?: North Korea is run by a madman. We must do everything in our power to keep him from developing weapons, which includes sanctions against countries that aid North Korea. The same can be said of Iran. I will work starting on Day One to nullify the Iran nuclear agreement.

How would you change the process for allowing refugees to relocate to the U.S. and the number allowed to do so each year?: Our world is unsafe. We need to close our borders, reform our immigration policies, and give clear directives to federal agencies not to let in any refugees. By keeping loopholes in immigration policies it will allow terrorists to infiltrate our country.

What will you do to reduce the deficit?: The same way I did in Raleigh, line by line. It's slow and painstaking, but well worth the time and effort. Unnecessary programs and giveaways should be stopped immediately. Review all contracts and impacts of entitlements. We must erase the debt or our children and grandchildren will suffer.