WASHINGTON -- If you are negotiating a hospital merger, suggesting that you're willing to keep prices below a certain level might not be a good idea, according to Deborah Feinstein, JD, director of the Bureau of Competition at the Federal Trade Commission (FTC).

"Often in hospital mergers, we get promises proffered to us from hospitals that they'll agree to price caps, or change prices only at rate of inflation," Feinstein, who was speaking only for herself, said Tuesday at a briefing on healthcare consolidation sponsored by the Alliance for Health Reform and Health Affairs. "Those aren't remedies the FTC finds acceptable. We can't guess what the right price is. And the literature makes it clear that when you put a price cap on something, the quality diminishes. So we find these sort of conduct remedies problematic."

Those kind of exchanges are the reason why hospital mergers often get litigated, said Feinstein, adding that her agency has also brought cases against outpatient clinic mergers as well as physician practice mergers. The FTC has not yet challenged the purchase of a physician practice by a hospital, although it is on their radar, she said.

Consolidation has been on an upswing in the healthcare industry, but with a lot of variability between sectors and in the rationales offered for the deals, said Alan Weil, JD, editor-in-chief at Health Affairs. "In the pharmacy space, in addition to tax issues, there's the high cost of drug discovery and bringing products to market, and in insurance the rationale is 'Everyone else is doing it and if we don't do it we can't negotiate effectively against a consolidated provider system.'"

In considering whether to challenge the merger of two physician groups, the FTC "looks at the facts and decides whether there is a high enough concentration and if payers are telling us they are worried a change in the bargaining dynamics," Feinstein told MedPage Today.

For instance, "We might be interested in a hospital combining with a physician group -- to take the most extreme example -- [if it's] a dominant hospital in an area with an 80% market share and it acquires every single cardiologist within a 50-mile area," she said. "Now you've got another hospital with no cardiologists ... that is not going to be able to compete to provide cardiac services. That [merger] would allow a hospital in a particular area to suddenly have 100% of the market and exclude all competition."

On the other hand, Feinstein continued, there is often a price-reducing effect from such vertical transactions, and such benefits "are why neither [the FTC nor the Justice Department] has gone to court to challenge any vertical transactions in decades [though have been many settlements]."

"One thing we would look at is [ease of market] entry," she said. "It's one thing to enter with a new hospital -- it's expensive and there may be certificate-of-need laws -- but that doesn't exist with respect to physician practices, and it may be quite easy for entry to occur. It's very, very much a fact-specific issue depending on the type of physician group you're talking about, and depending on the geographic area."

A question that came up at the briefing was whether the Affordable Care Act conflicts with antitrust law. Not at all, according to Feinstein, especially since "the ACA specifically says it's not meant to supplant competition."

For example, she added, "There are hundreds of [accountable care organizations]; how many have been challenged by antitrust authorities? Zero ... That suggests there are ways for folks to collaborate. It suggests that folks are finding a way to do it that doesn't run afoul of antitrust laws."

But Andrea Murino, JD, a lawyer in private practice at Goodwin Procter here, disagreed. "The difficulty is that when I talk with my clients, they say 'We don't have a choice; there is no way to get the benefits of collaboration without a full-on merger," she said. "I do think there's a tension between the ACA which values collaboration, and the antitrust laws, which sometimes think that collaboration can lead to improper consolidation."

George Slover, JD, senior policy counsel at Consumers Union's Washington office, said his organization is "encouraging [the Justice Department] to take a careful look at the Anthem/Cigna and Aetna/Human health insurance mergers ... [Those companies] would seem to be already as big as they need to be to make a go of it on their own without joining forces with their most able competitors."

Murino commented that "As I think about [those] insurance mergers, the thing that occurs to me is these are well-counseled sophisticated entities, so the analysis and investigation is likely to be very heavy on economics ... The private-party economists have the challenge of convincing the government ... that they believe prices will be reduced but quality will not be reduced. It's a very data-heavy exercise."