Danna Gonzalez has worked at McDonald's for four years. (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights Despite the fact that jobs like mine are essential, our pay does not reflect this.

I am forced to rely on public assistance and live in a neighborhood where I don’t feel safe.

Tennessee has the highest percentage of minimum wage workers in the country.

I love the state of Tennessee and the city of Nashville. It’s where I grew up, and where I always imagined I’d raise my family. I’ve watched this city grow and change into a booming metropolis over the last few years. Unfortunately, while the cost of living has increased dramatically, I’ve only been given 10-cent raises for the past four years.

I work for McDonald’s, which is the second largest employer in the world behind Wal-Mart. It is a multibillion-dollar corporation that relies on the hard work of employees like me to serve millions of people each and every day. After years of proving myself as a reliable and passionate employee, I’m frustrated because I’m still struggling on $7.85 an hour.

Workers across the country have been organizing and going on 24-hour strikes for $15 an hour and union rights, and some states and cities are taking our lead by raising the minimum wage. Seeing people in office, including our own state Rep. G.A. Hardaway, stand on the side of the people is a small victory. As a member of Nashville Show Me 15, I’ve been fighting for a living wage and union rights for me and my coworkers, and I won’t stop until I win.

No matter what, McDonald’s and corporations like it will always need people like me to cook and serve their food. Despite the fact that these jobs are essential, our pay does not reflect this. Instead of being incentivized to work hard, we are stigmatized as lazy and low-skilled, which couldn’t be farther from the truth. The reality is that service industry jobs are on the rise across the country, and there aren’t enough management positions for everyone. Someone has to do the heavy lifting.

I’m a mother who is willing to do whatever it takes to provide for my family. I am raising a son who was born prematurely and has medical issues as a result. On $7.85 an hour, I am forced to rely on public assistance and live in a neighborhood where I don’t feel safe. All I want is for my son to grow up healthy and with more opportunities than I had. This is a dream that all parents have for their children.

Tennessee has the highest percentage of minimum wage workers in the country — 110,000 people work at or below minimum wage in our state. By raising the wage to $15 an hour, we could lead the country in living wages and ensure working families can provide for themselves and not rely on government assistance. McDonald’s is not only taking advantage of its workers, it's taking advantage of the taxpayers who subsidize low wages in the form of public assistance.

Full-time workers shouldn’t have to need public assistance. They should be making a living wage, especially if they work in a $200 billion industry like fast food. Fifteen dollars an hour amounts to $30,000 a year without taking a single day off. That won’t make anyone rich, but it will help me raise my son. We all want a fair shot at a decent life. That is why we need living wages for all workers in Tennessee.

Danna Gonzalez has worked at McDonald's for four years.

Buy Photo A small group of demonstrators gathered Tuesday in Nashville to demand a $15-an-hour minimum wage. Nov. 9, 2015. (Photo: Lizzy Alfs | The Tennessean)

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1pCoIYK