Stained glass artist Lori Jones demonstrates her art on the street in front of Gadabout Gallery & Artisan Shoppe during the downtown Jeffersonville Trolley Hop on Friday. (By Jenna Esarey, special to The Courier-Journal) August 14, 2015

The Downtown Jeffersonville Trolley Hop lured a crowd on Friday to peruse the 22 participating shops, galleries, restaurants, and the artists exhibiting there.

Stained glass artist Lori Jones created whimsical Christmas trees in front of Gadabout Gallery. Across the street at Silica Ceramics, Jennie DiBeneditto showed off her skills on a pottery wheel.

The Vintage Fire Museum hosted fused glass artist Marilee Burnside, a docent at the museum. Burnside worked on a glass dish to be raffled off as a fundraiser for the museum. For a $1 donation, guests were able to help design the dish by placing a piece of glass. Burnside will fuse and shape the finished piece in a kiln at her home studio.

The free hop was the second as a stand-alone event. Two earlier hops were tied to the city’s wine tasting event and a chocolate stroll.

“This is the second one that was tied to art rather than food,” said Jay Ellis, director of Jeffersonville Main Street, the organization that hosts the hop.

The hops are modeled on two trolley hops in Louisville, each highlighting art galleries, shops and restaurants, which have proven quite popular.

“We wanted to see if that could work here,” said Natalie Carden, manager of The Springs Salon & Spa. “With all the interest in public art it seemed like it could work. And I think it’s always important to do things that will support local businesses.”

With six stops, the route covered 19 participating businesses along a long stretch of Spring Street, with three other participants on Riverside Drive and Pearl Street.

Each location featured an artist either exhibiting or demonstrating their work. “I think this is really exciting,” said Dawn Spyker, Jeffersonville’s public art director and co-owner of Silica Ceramics and Gadabout Gallery, both stops on the trolley hop. “Having live demonstrations sets us apart.”

Live music featured heavily as well, with a number of locations hosting sidewalk performances. The trolley itself was home for the evening to Mike O’Bryan

With the summer concert series on the RiverStage at one end of Spring Street, and the Concerts in the Park series at Warder Park near the other, the Trolley Hop was just one of the attractions on a beautiful Friday night in the city.

“What a gem we have in our downtown,” Ellis said. “People are coming in and saying, I didn’t know we had this wonderful downtown here!”

The next Trolley Hop is scheduled for September 11 from 6:00 to 9:00 p.m. For more information visit jeffmainstreet.org.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1TGXVHE