Remember Adriana? She was the smiling face that greeted visitors to healthcare.gov, the glitch-ridden Obamacare website that had a disastrous rollout in October 2013. The Maryland woman became the Internet whipping gal for those who had bad experiences with the site.

Adriana has been succeeded as the unintended poster gal for Obamacare by Los Angeles resident Janice Riddle, after the story of her unexpected Obamacare tax bill made national news.

She applied for health insurance in late 2013 through Covered California, the state’s online Obamacare “marketplace.” Because she was unemployed, she qualified for a $470 monthly subsidy, which left her with a monthly premium of $1.

In early 2014, Ms. Riddle got a job with a life insurance agency. Her new employer didn’t offer health benefits, so she continued her Obamacare plan.

Unfortunately, she neglected to update her income with Covered California. So, when she prepared her tax return this year, she learned she had to pay back the entire Obamacare subsidy.

“I was blindsided,” said Ms. Riddle, who acknowledged her mistake. And she hardly is the only recipient of an Obamacare subsidy who is facing an unanticipated tax bill this year.

Indeed, Jackson Hewitt, the nation’s second-largest tax preparation service, said that more than half its clients who received Obamacare subsidies will have to pay back all or some of the money.

The problem is that those who applied for Obamacare had to predict their 2014 income.

If their circumstances changed, and their earnings turned out to be higher than expected, they were supposed to notify their Obamacare exchange so that their subsidy could be reduced.

Perhaps the most perverse – if not unfair – thing about the Obamacare subsidy is that a person deemed eligible at the time they signed up for health insurance could later be determined ineligible.

Take, for instance, a person unemployed for the first three months of 2014, during which he or she received a monthly Obamacare subsidy.

If they found a job, and their annual income rose to the level that they no longer qualified for an Obamacare subsidy, they would not only have to pay their own way for the nine months during which they were employed, but also reimburse the government for the three months they were out of work.

The unforeseen tax hit that awaits millions of Obamacare beneficiaries between now and April 15 is yet another unintended consequence of the president’s supposed health care reform. It also is further evidence that Obamacare is broken beyond repair.