Cover Story

As the Affordable Care Act reshapes the face of health care, unintended challenges are facing O&P.

The total number of amputees in the United States could reach 2.4 million by 2020; the total number of orthosis users could nearly triple that the same year, the American Orthotic & Prosthetic Association has found.

Although the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) was designed to make care more accessible and cost-effective, local and national providers are seeing the opposite effect.

Defining the law

The ACA was drafted to reform the American health care system by providing low-cost health insurance, new rights, benefits and protections for consumers.

Although it requires Americans to have health coverage, it is not a government-mandated health plan, Peter W. Thomas, JD, counsel to the O&P Alliance and general counsel to the National Association for the Advancement of Orthotics & Prosthetics (NAAOP), told O&P News.

“It is more like a mandate to have health insurance,” he said. “Whether that is from a public program like Medicare or Medicaid, or coverage through a separate, private insurer.”

“It was put in place to help those who are uninsured have options for care,” Dennis Clark, LCPO, president of the Orthotic and Prosthetic Group of America (OPGA) in Iowa, added. “Not just in O&P, but in the health care system overall.”

Image: © Shutterstock

It seems as if the law is doing that. As of 2015, 11.9 million Americans are newly insured, according to the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. The Association of American Medical Colleges predicts that number could rise to 30 million in the coming year.

The way it works is through health insurance exchanges. An exchange is a federal- or state-based marketplace where consumers can compare coverage options, Thomas said.

“They can go onto websites or even into brick and mortar buildings to review different insurance plans,” he said. “Different plans have different levels of cost sharing, but as long as they meet certain requirements, they can be sold on these exchanges.”

One of those requirements is “essential health benefits.” The ACA mandates the Department of Health and Human Services delineate 10 categories of benefits in every insurance plan, which include “rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices.”

Although orthoses and prostheses are not specifically defined in the regulation, it is generally assumed that they fall under that category, Thomas said.

‘Racing to the bottom’

With more individuals having access to care, it stands to reason that O&P providers would gain more patients and dollars, Thomas said.

“But, that is not necessarily the sense I get from people in the field,” he added.

Bruce “Mac” McClellan

People like Bruce “Mac” McClellan, CPO, LPO, FISPO, FAAOP, private practice owner in Texas and representative to the O&P Alliance. McClellan said the expansion of Medicaid to cover millions of additional Americans “could be detrimental in the long term.”

Clark agreed.

“It causes funding concerns. Some of us [independently owned practices] do not have the cash flow to take on those numbers,” he said, adding that more patients mean tighter reimbursement levels and more restrictive coverage policies.

Rebecca Hast

“When it comes to documentation and demonstrating medical necessity, payers, who have always had rules in place, are now following them more strictly,” Rebecca Hast, president of Linkia, a Hanger company, told O&P News. “Insurers who may not have paid much attention to ancillary services such as O&P [before] are now looking at every provider relationship for how they can get value.”

“It adds layers of administrative costs on top of providing the prosthesis or orthosis,” Clark said. “So you find people racing to the bottom to find cheaper ways to care for their patients.”

It also increases insurance churn, Scott Williamson, MBA, CAE (Ret.), president of Quality Outcomes in Virginia, told O&P News.