Buy Photo Michael Kazmierczak, left, and his parents, Natalie Marinelli and Michael Kazmierczak, of Farmingdale, before a 5:10 p.m. showing of “The Interview,” a comedy starring Seth Rogen and James Franco whose wide release was scrapped after threats from a group of hackers. The Cine Grand Middlebrook 10 in Ocean is one of just 299 theaters nationwide to show the movie on Christmas Day. (Photo: Staff photo/Russ Zimmer)Buy Photo

Natalie Marinelli was determined to see "The Interview," a comedy that's been surrounded by sobering conversation. Just try and stop her.

The screwball-comedy-meets-assassination-caper has become a flashpoint in debates about self-censorship, cybersecurity and corporate backbone ever since Sony Pictures seemingly put the movie on ice after hackers stole troves of confidential data and later threatened violence if the movie was released.

Marinelli, whose parents emigrated from Russia to escape communism, said she wanted to see the movie as an act of defiance against the Sony hackers, who are believed to be acting on behalf of the communist government of North Korea.

"That's why my parents came to America in the first place," the Farmingdale woman said.

Marinelli attended with Michael Kazmierczak and their son, also named Michael, who explained that the family also was big fans of the brand of comedy found in the movies of Seth Rogen and James Franco, the film's stars.

"Everything kind of fits together," he said.

Only 299 theaters nationwide agreed to show The Interview, well below the 3,000-screen threshold that marks a big studio movie's wide release. Marinelli went to the 5:10 p.m. showing at the Cine Grand Middlebrook 10, a newly refurbished first-run theater tucked behind a carpet and flooring store on Route 35 in Ocean.

Related: Where to see "The Interview" in New Jersey

The first two showings of the day were well attended, according to General manager Maurice Zuniga, who said they were "not selling out, but close to it."

Zuniga told the Asbury Park Press that his theater sensed an opportunity to fill a void when the bigger chains announced they wouldn't be screening the film.

"We knew that a lot customers wanted to see it," he said. "We're a company that's committed to attracting movies that our customers want to see."

Buy Photo Cine Grand Middlebrook 10 in Ocean is one of just 299 theaters nationwide that agreed to screen the controversial comedy “The Interview” on Christmas Day. (Photo: Staff photo/Russ Zimmer)

The theater recently reopened under new ownership and Zuniga said showing a movie with this much attention swirling around it is a powerful way to announce their return. The cinema is scheduled to show the film five times per day through the weekend: 11:50 a.m., 2:35 p.m., 5:10 p.m., 7:45 p.m. and 10:20 p.m.

Related: Rogen, Franco celebrate the release of "The Interview"

In the movie, Franco and Rogen star as a talk show host and a producer, respectively, who are enlisted by the CIA to assassinate North Korea dictator Kim Jong Un.

The Interview was supposed to be the R-rated comedy option for moviegoers this holiday season, but it's place in history became something else when a group calling itself the "Guardians of Peace" infiltrated sensitive Sony data — which turned out to be anything from employees' Social Security numbers to embarassing emails to unreleased screenplays — on November 24.

At first, it was not publicly known what the hackers' motivation was until the group blamed the attack on "the movie of terrorism" — presumably referring to The Interview.

Sony pledged to push forward with a wide release until the hackers posted a threat online on Dec. 16 warning potential viewers to keep their distance from theaters that show the movie, invoking the memory of the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001 to make their point. Sony allowed theater owners to decide individually whether or not they would screen the movie, and the four largest chains elected not to.

In this photo illustration two tickets for the movie "The Interview" are seen in front of the Los Feliz 3 Cinema in Los Angeles, California on December 23, 2014, where "The Interview" is scheduled to be shown December 25, 2014. Some US independent cinemas said they will show the Sony Pictures film on Christmas Day, a dramatic U-turn after its decision to cancel the film following a cyber-assault blamed on North Korea. AFP PHOTO / ROBYN BECKROBYN BECK/AFP/Getty Images (Photo: AFP/Getty Images)

North Korea has denied involvement in the hack — though it has not been reticent to share its negative opinion of the movie — but the FBI says it has enough evidence to prove that the Communist nation is indeed behind the breach.

Last week, President Barack Obama chided Sony for giving in to the intimidation tactics. Then on Tuesday, the film's stars announced that the film would still debut on Christmas Day, though on a much smaller scale than originally planned.

The 299 theaters that took a chance on The Interview were likely undercut somewhat by the deal Sony consumated Wednesday to make the film available for online streaming — for a fee — through certain websites.

Video: Sony made a mistake in pulling "The Interview," Obama says

Russ Zimmer: 732-557-5748, razimmer@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1AOHNbr