WASHINGTON -- Republican Rep. Bill Cassidy's first TV ad for his Senate campaign centers on his No. 1 issue -- his opposition to the Affordable Care Act.

The Associated Press reported Wednesday it received a copy of the 30-second ad from the Cassidy campaign. It is slated to run next week in the New Orleans area.

The AP said the ad "shows Cassidy, a physician, in his doctor's coat, with a stethoscope around his neck and a dog-eared copy of the federal health law in his hand. He says most members of Congress who voted for President Barack Obama's health overhaul didn't read the bill before passing it."

In the ad, Cassidy says: "It affects your job, your pocketbook, your life. And they didn't read it. I read the bill. It was clear there'd be canceled plans, expensive premiums, no guarantee that you could keep your doctor. I voted no."

Cassidy, a Baton Rouge Republican, was first elected to the House of Representatives in 2008. He received the endorsement over the weekend of the Louisiana Republican Party, although two other Republicans are also running -- retired Air Force Col. Rob Maness and State Rep. Paul Hollis, R-Covington.

Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La. has been attacked relentlessly by Republicans and conservative advocacy groups for her support of the Affordable Care Act, better known as Obamacare. She has said the law isn't perfect and that she supports some modifications. But she has said repeal, as Republicans are demanding, would mean Louisiana residents with pre-existing conditions will once again be priced out of health insurance markets.

Adam Sullivan, the senator's campaign manager, responded to the Cassidy ad with this statement: "Congressman Cassidy says he's read the bills he votes on, but has he really read the radical budgets he's voted for multiple times over the last four years? These are the same bills that end Medicare as we know it, raise the Social Security age to 70, and cut Pell Grants for college students. The same bills that would prevent more than 30,000 Louisianans from gaining the skills they need for high-paying energy jobs."

Cassidy has said he has voted for the budget written by Rep. Paul Ryan, R-Wisc., and a more conservative version by the House Republican Study Committee, because he believes deficit reduction is critical.