This is where Barack Obama and our leftist friends want to bring us.

Advertisement - story continues below

Sir Bruce Keogh, medical director of the National Health Service of the United Kingdom, warns that the NHS needs a complete transformation. He goes on to say that if changes are not made, “it may be forced to abandon free healthcare for all.”

Americans must take a good look at this situation. Here is a modern, developed, Western country that instituted socialized medicine, and it is collapsing around them. If the Brits can’t get this right, what is the future for socialized medicine in America?

As Western populations age, it is a common thread that their healthcare systems will come under enormous strain. Simply put, there are less working men and women to support a large number of older, more expensive patients. This is not rocket science. No matter what costs are taken out of the system, it is a fact that healthcare will have to be rationed. The death panels under a socialized system will become a reality.

Advertisement – story continues below

I recently spent a week in a Russian hospital due to a kidney stone and experienced socialized medicine (the real thing) first hand. The people were generous, hard working, and compassionate. However, they did not have enough resources to do the job. Of course, if you have a lot of money, you can get admitted to a private hospital, but that is not where they took me when I collapsed at a flat in the center of Moscow.

First, there was no toilet paper. You had to bring your own drinking water. There was one dirty bathroom per room. When I arrived at the hospital, the doctor asked me how long I wanted to stay. My reply was, shouldn’t you be telling me that? My girlfriend said he wanted money. I could not get access to the ultrasound machine to destroy the stone as the line was too long. There were about twenty-five people in one room, all with varying degrees of problems. Their family members took care of them day-to-day.

This is not the Russian people’s fault. It is simply the result of socialized medicine. It cannot compete with the free market.

Advertisement – story continues below

This is where Barack Obama and our leftist friends want to bring us.

If there is one thing you can count on, it is progressives and their desire to control others. This will eventually happen in our healthcare system. There is no other way for it to go. It will not end well.

America should end this experiment with government control and repeal Obamacare for good before it’s too late.

Advertisement – story continues below

The views expressed in this opinion article are solely those of their author and are not necessarily either shared or endorsed by the owners of this website.