Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton had an ecstatic reaction to Thursday's Supreme Court ruling that saved a critical component of Obamacare.

The Democratic presidential front-runner exclaimed "Yes!" in a Twitter post:

Yes! SCOTUS affirms what we know is true in our hearts & under the law: Health insurance should be affordable & available to all. -H — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) June 25, 2015

In a second post, she included a photo of her hugging President Barack Obama, in whose administration she used to serve. The photo is the same one she posted earlier this year to celebrate the Affordable Care Act's fifth anniversary:

A great day! Add your name if you agree: Affordable health care is a basic human right → http://t.co/5xR3n1XDoc pic.twitter.com/kATncnkfGq — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) June 25, 2015

Updated (11:29 a.m.): Clinton released a much lengthier statement as well:

I applaud the Supreme Court’s decision to affirm what the authors of the Affordable Care Act clearly intended and wrote into law: that health insurance should be affordable and available in every state across the country.

Republicans in Congress have waged a sustained attack against this promise. They’ve voted more than 50 times to repeal or dismantle the law, roll back coverage for millions of Americans, and let insurers write their own rules again – all without proposing any viable alternatives. Now that the Supreme Court has once again re-affirmed the ACA as the law of the land, it’s time for the Republican attacks to end. It’s time to move on.

The Affordable Care Act isn’t perfect, but the evidence is clear: it’s working. Sixteen million Americans have gained coverage. Millions of young people are able to stay on their parents’ plans. Insurance companies can no longer discriminate against people with preexisting conditions or charge women higher rates just because of their gender.

Republicans should stop trying to tear down the law and start working across party lines to build on these successes.

I’ve fought for the promise of quality, affordable health care for every American for decades. And I’m not going to stop now. Anyone seeking to lead our country should stand up and support this decision.