Normally Business Profile features people prominent in the private sector.

This month, however, we are doing something different and putting the spotlight on Jon Evans, the executive director of the Boys & Girls Club of the Lewis Clark Valley.

Evans wrestles with many of the same challenges that CEOs do. His annual budget is $1.8 million, and he oversees a staff that swells to 60 in the summertime. Like many employers, he's working his way through the intricacies of the Affordable Care Act.

Unlike an entrepreneur, he can't just raise prices if he needs more revenue. His organization adheres to the rules of the Boys & Girls Clubs of America, which require not only that no child is turned away for an inability to pay, but that fees are affordable for all families in a community.

That means he has to seek grants or donations for much of the money in his budget. What's more, he's not just accountable to himself. He answers to the club board and the club's foundation board that together have close to 50 members.

On top of that, on any given day, he might be expected to find help for a child who is suffering from hunger, abuse or mental illness. Business Profile talked with Evans about how he makes it all work.

Business Profile: Most of your experience was in western Washington. What convinced you to make such a big leap in terms of location?

Jon Evans: When I was a kid in Federal Way, Seattle started having gang problems. They formed a task force to drive the gangs out of Seattle. Well, they went to Tacoma.

Tacoma said, "Let's do what Seattle did and form a task force." So they pushed them out of Tacoma. A lot of those bad elements ended up in Federal Way, which was unincorporated at the time. I got married when I was working in Federal Way.

My wife and I wanted to raise our kids in a safe place. So I had an opportunity to go up to Bellingham. It was a lot more rural with a lot of farming communities and a lot of blue collar residents. We loved it.

Coming to Lewiston wasn't all that different in terms of not worrying about your kids walking out the door every day.

BP: You've been a club member since you were 10 years old. How does that influence how you manage the club?

JE: I was a club member as a kid, and then I literally did every job there was in a club, from janitor, program director, unit director, sports official and athletic director. When I'm sitting in the executive director chair today and I need to talk to a kid or a parent or a staff member, I've actually been in their shoes.

Even my own kids come to the club, so I'm a club parent as well. It helps, especially in the relationship-building. I understand the challenges, the good parts and the bad parts. It helps build some confidence that I care about them.

BP: What was your first priority when you took the position at the Boys & Girls Clubs of the Lewis Clark Valley?

JE: It's been around for a long time, and it's gone through a lot of growth. Any time any business goes through a lot of growth, you're going to have to look at: "How do you meet the needs versus how do you pay the bills?"

The club had been in a number of places over the course of the years. They were in an old theater. They were in an armory. They kept moving into buildings to try to meet the current need and then were having to move a few years later. When the community got behind three bigger, at the time state-of-the art facilities, you also have all of the additional costs that comes with operating that.

The board may have undershot what the additional operating expenses were going to look like. Running a club out of the armory was probably a heck of a lot cheaper than an 18,000-square-foot facility with full-time staff.

BP: What is an average day like for you?

JE: There's no such thing. You have to keep in mind we're dealing with 40 employees on average and somewhere between 3,600 and 4,200 kids. Average daily attendance among our sites is 633. Then we have about 800 to 1,000 kids playing sports, which is 120-some coaches and officials.

Any time you're working with people, you've got stuff going on. Getting kids to and from school in buses and vans. It all ends up on my desk. A kid gets hurt in a sports game and broke his leg. You're dealing with insurance. Even kids who come here once or twice and it's not a good fit, we may have helped get them the assistance they needed.

Unfortunately, as hard as it is to believe in this community, we've had kids who are homeless. We might try to help them find shelter, try to help the parents find work.

BP: How often do you get involved with issues that arise from your sports programs?

JE: Ninety-nine-point-five percent of the time there aren't problems. When there are problems, almost always it's adult related. It's parents questioning a call and ultra-competitiveness. They're trying to live vicariously through their child and not realizing that little Billie or little Susie is not going to be a professional athlete.

BP: Of all the club programs, which one do you believe is most effective in meeting the club's mission and why?

JE: There's no one program. It all starts with someone coming into the club. The members learn it's a safe, fun place where there's a caring adult.

I've told people that you take the best child psychologist and I'll put them up against the best club professional, and the club professional is going to win hands-down every time. A boy will be talking to a club professional during a game of foosball and share his mother got unexpectedly called into one of her two jobs and didn't make his lunch or help him with his homework. After the game, the club professional can refer Billy to homework tutoring and get him a grilled-cheese sandwich. We have a daily snack at 4 p.m.

BP: If someone donated $250,000 to the club with no strings attached, what would you do with it?

JE: Put it in the endowment. Our endowment is about $1.3 million, and the annual revenue is about $50,000. If the endowment was $10 million, modestly returning $400,000 a year, that would be $400,000 we wouldn't have to raise.

Our auction netted about $285,000 this year. You wouldn't have to do an auction, and you would still have another $115,000.

Wow, we could take all that time and effort we as board and staff have to put into raising that money and turn that focus onto kids and programs and outreach. Holy cow.

BP: What's the biggest challenge the club faces?

JE: It's always going to be fundraising.

No matter how successful our auction is, no matter how many grants we knock out of the park, I have yet to ever be in a situation where we meet all the needs in the community.

We're serving 4,000-plus kids. There's 8,000 kids in the school district. Maybe all those kids don't necessarily need the full club experience, but I'm sure they need something.

---

Williams may be contacted at ewilliam@lmtribune.com or (208) 848-2261.