By Sean Batura, Kerrville Daily Times, Texas McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

Aug. 15 --A 5-year-old Kerrville boy is paralyzed following a wreck authorities say was caused by a drunk driver.

Xabier Cuellar will be repeating kindergarten at Tally Elementary , due to classes missed as a result of his injuries that required several surgeries and left him paralyzed from the waist down.

A 216th grand jury recently indicted 24-year-old Victor Manuel Martinez on two counts of intoxication assault, each punishable by as much as 10 years in prison and a $10,000 fine. Martinez is accused of having marijuana, cocaine and more than twice the legal limit of alcohol in his bloodstream on Oct. 19 , when he was said to have caused a head-on collision in Center Point with another vehicle occupied by the boy and his aunt.

According to a state trooper's report, Martinez was driving a green 2004 Pontiac Grand Am shortly before 10 p.m. Oct. 19 when he made a left turn from Center Point River Road to go south on Texas 173. According to the report, the Pontiac entered the northbound lane and collided head-on with a green Ford Focus carrying Cuellar and 46-year-old Christina Rodriguez . The Pontiac also carried 19-year-old Adriana Nava and 35-year-old Rita Montanez , both of Kerrville .

Rodriguez and Cuellar were taken by helicopter to University Hospital . Martinez and the other two occupants of the Pontiac were taken to Peterson Regional Medical Center in stable condition.

Martinez, jailed nine times in Kerr County since 2009, has been convicted of failing to appear in court, misdemeanor assault -- he hit a woman in 2010 -- striking an unattended vehicle while driving, failing to attend school, and he's paid fines for driving without insurance and driving without a license.

He has been charged with speeding three times in Kerr County , but two of the charges were dismissed, and it's it's unclear from the digital records whether he was convicted of the other two.

___

(c)2014 the Kerrville Daily Times (Kerrville, Texas)

Visit the Kerrville Daily Times (Kerrville, Texas) at www.dailytimes.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 336

[jetpack-related-posts]