By Martta Kelly | Special to The Star-Ledger

At 77, Elaine Diegmann is believed to be one of the oldest practicing midwives in the United States. To date, the Edison resident said she has delivered nearly 5,000 babies since she began practicing as a midwife 34 years ago, including two very special to her, grandsons, Jacob, and Michael, today 11 and 9, respectively.



“The delivery of my two grandsons was indescribable,” she said. “My eyes were the first to see them and my hands were the first to hold them. The first time, I remember gently placing the baby on my daughter’s stomach. I was just so happy he was crying and healthy that I didn’t even bother to check the sex at first! It was not important.”



Diegmann, a professor and director of nurse midwifery education at Rutgers School of Nursing, is a recognized expert among the country’s more than 11,000 certified nurse midwives, of whom 3 percent are male, according to the American Midwifery Certification Board. They are typically licensed nurses specializing in prenatal and postnatal care, childbirth, and a wide array of women’s health issues.



She started three midwife faculty practices-- Newark’s University Hospital (1978-96), Jersey City Medical Center, and Newark Beth Israel Medical Center--where midwives deliver around 900 babies a year.



Many people are surprised to learn that midwifery is not just about delivering infants, she said. “It’s a well-kept secret,” Diegmann said, adding that midwifery (pronounced “mid-wiff-ery”) encompasses everything from adolescent health, family planning and pre-natal care, to post-menopausal wellness. Midwives can perform breast exams, PAP smears, ultrasounds, and endometrial biopsies. They can also prescribe medication when necessary.



“Women choose midwives so that they can have more control over their pregnancy and their well-being,” she said, adding that many women are moving away from the “medicalization” of birth. “Years ago, when I began my nursing career, three percent of all pregnancies were Caesarean sections,” she said. Today, it's exponentially higher.

Other aspects of birthing have changed as well. "Women today want control over the birthing process, they want hydrotherapy, they want to be free to walk around, and they want spontaneous, not induced, labor,” she said.



Sometimes, a woman doesn’t plan on using a midwife but may end up doing so if her baby decides to enter the world when a midwife is on shift.



That is what happened to Rosa Guerrero, 34, of Elizabeth, who gave birth to her daughter, Astrial Ciana Nieves, on December 8 at Newark Beth Israel, with the help of Diegmann.



“I was in pain and Elaine came into the room,” Guerrero said. “She looked like an angel and she immediately made me very comfortable. I was glad that she was there.”



Nationwide, nearly 8 percent (7.9 percent) of all births are attended to by a midwife, according to the National Center for Health Statistics, but the percentage varies state by state, Diegmann said. In New Mexico, for example, 33 percent of births are performed by a midwife but in New Jersey, it’s about 6.5 percent, according to Diegmann.



The program provided at Newark Beth Israel gives women options, said Dr. Patrick Anderson, chairman of the obstetrics and gynecology department at Newark Beth Israel Medical Center. “It allows patients to experience childbirth their way, with individualized, family-centered care that results in lower Caesarean section rates and excellent outcomes. Our long-term vision is to have a full-service program focused on delivery, patient education, and wellness,” he added.



One of the questions Diegmann said she gets asked is whether a woman who has an at-risk pregnancy can still use a midwife. What if she is diabetic, suffers from pre-eclampsia (high blood pressure during pregnancy), or is at an advanced maternal age?



“If it’s a vaginal birth, there is no reason why a midwife cannot collaborate with a physician,” she said. “A physician can help the mother manage her diabetes, for example. But the midwife can perform the birth.”



Unlike some midwives, Diegmann does not deliver babies outside of the hospital. She pointed out that New Jersey used to have three birthing centers but they are now closed.



The interest in midwifery is growing in the Garden State, with approximately 350 certified midwives practicing in the state. Currently, 29 students are enrolled in the nurse midwifery program at Rutgers, the state’s only midwife education program. All student clinical rotation slots are area hospitals are regularly filled, Diegmann said.



The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recently reaffirmed its endorsement of midwives who are certified by the American Midwifery Certification Board or who meet the standards of the International Confederation of Midwives.



Diegmann was recently recognized for her work, earning the Lester Z. Lieberman Humanism in Healthcare Award from The Healthcare Foundation of New Jersey and is a fellow of the American College of Nurse-Midwives and a member of the Master Educators’ Guild at Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences (RBHS). She frequently lectures medical students and professional organizations throughout the country.



It was during her first clinical rotation as a student at the University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing, when observing a birth for the first time, that Diegmann said she knew this would be her life’s calling. “I love what I do,” she said. “There is nothing else that compares with helping to bring a life into the world.”



She went on to work as a labor and delivery nurse at St. Peter’s Hospital in New Brunswick and later was among the first graduating class of the midwife program at the then College of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey (CMDNJ), which later became known as RBHS.



That passion runs in the family: Her daughter is a labor and delivery nurse at Newark Beth Israel.



Although the first school of midwifery in the U.S. was started by southern aristocrat Mary Breckinridge in 1939, Diegmann likes to talk about how it goes back to the Old Testament. She jokingly refers to it as the world’s second oldest profession.



“The Ten Commandments would not exist if it wasn’t for a midwife,” Diegmann said. It was a midwife, she explained, who instructed Moses’ mother, Jochebed, to save her baby from Pharaoh’s armies by putting him in a basket and placing it in the Nile so that he would float away to safety.