Header in second extra session leads CU past No. 14 Cal in Pac-12 opener

Joss Orejel professes to have no specific approach as the designated corner kicker for the University of Colorado soccer team.

The goal is to just serve the ball in the best possible position. On Sunday, that spot was the top of Emily Paxton's head.

That duo combined for a dramatic header goal off Orejel's corner kick midway through the second overtime, as Paxton's first career game-winning goal lifted the Buffs to a 2-1 victory against No. 14 Cal in their Pac-12 Conference opener.

"Usually I aim for the back post," Orejel said. "Everyone who's really good with their head just crashes back there, and then hope someone gets there to head it in."

Against Cal, that person was Paxton.

CU's Danica Evans goes up for the ball against Cal's Kelly Fitzgerald, left, and goalkeeper Emily Boyd on Sunday in Boulder. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

It was a great hustle play from Brie Hooks that allowed Orejel to launch CU's ninth corner kick of the contest. Camped along the back post, Paxton fought through a Cal defender to deliver the winner just inside the left post, tallying her second goal of the season and the eighth of her career.

"It was a great win by Brie to get that corner," Paxton said. "It was just a great ball by Joss. She knew where she needed to play and she hit me far post. Alex Vidger did a great job of blocking and making sure she picked some players to free up some space. She did that really well and it let me have a free header."

Advertisement

Head coach Danny Sanchez was pleased with the way his club responded to an opening tally by Cal. The Golden Bears took a 1-0 lead in the 39th minute on a goal by Lynsey Hromatko, who took advantage of a chance after CU's attempt at clearing a Cal corner landed at her feet.

Instead of brooding, the Buffs immediately answered as Hooks and Paxton played a ball to sophomore Brittney Stark, who evened the match at 1-1 with her second goal of the season.

"Credit to our players, because I felt that even when the game got stretched they kept working hard and made the plays that we needed to," Sanchez said. "It's a game that could've gone either way. But at home, with a good crowd, this is a game we had to get results out of.

"I was really pleased with how we responded after giving up that early goal. It was a soft corner that we didn't deal with well enough. But it was great to get (our) goal to feel some confidence going into the second half."

CU also received a gutsy effort from its defense, which limited the chances for Cal's leading scorer, Ari Ship, while dealing with injury issues throughout the match. Heather Ward left the field in the 55th minute due to an ankle injury and did not return. Fellow senior Madi Krauser went off in the 73rd minute due to leg cramps and played intermittently the rest of the way.

"I was really pleased with how Brooklyn Varnadore stepped in the back and Alex Vidger," said Sanchez, referring to the freshmen who filled the injury voids on defense. "With our team it's been 'next man up,' and it's going to be like that the rest of the season."

CU continues Pac-12 play later this week with matches at Oregon (Friday) and Oregon State (next Sunday).

Pat Rooney: rooneyp@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/prooney07

CU 2, Cal 1 (2 OT)

At Prentup Field

CU (7-2-1, 1-0) 1 0 1 1 — 2 1 0 1 1 — 2 Goals (assists) — Cal: Hromatko (unassisted), 38th minute; CU: Stark (Paxton, Hooks), 40th minute; CU: Paxton (Orejel), 106th minute. Goalies (Min-Goals allowed-Saves) — Cal: Boyd (106-2-5); CU: Scheele (106-1-3).

1 0 0 0 — 1