Novartis AG (ADR) (NYSE:NVS) has received a recommendation by US Food and Drug Administration staff for the approval of its biosimilar drug, an imitation of Amgen, Inc.'s (NSADQ:AMGN) oncology biotech drug, Neupogen. The approval was based on the reviews from the staff that reported that the safety and efficacy profiles of the drug were similar to Neupogen.

Novartis’s imitation drug is the first biosimilar to be reviewed in the US. The FDA can now approve imitation drugs under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act 2010, according to which, biosimilars can be developed which are not exactly identical and are cheaper. Biosimilars have been getting approved in Europe since 2006, but the lack of a regulatory framework in the US was the reason the country lagged in the biotech drug imitation market.

Biotechs have better safety profiles and are more effective in cancer treatment and other immunological diseases resulting in highly expensive price tags which are not affordable to everyone. Out of the world’s 10 best-selling drugs today, six are biotech drugs.

Biotech drugs are developed from living cells and thus cannot be copied exactly. Since the cheaper imitations are made from different cell-lines, regulatory authorities have to develop studies to be conducted to ensure the safety of the imitations and assess their safety and efficacy.

The FDA reported that the staff reviewing the biosimilar from Novartis did not find any "clinically meaningful differences" between the original and the copy. In December 2014, Novartis announced top-line results from a late-stage study showing that the imitation had similar safety and efficacy profiles as those of the original drug.

Neupogen is an injectable drug and has been developed to prevent infections in cancer patients who are already receiving chemotherapy. The drug generated $1.2 billion in revenue for Amgen in 2014. Novartis sells imitations for Neupogen in over 40 countries under the brand name Zarzio, manufactured by its generic drug unit, Sandoz.

The FDA reviewers recommended that the biosimilar should get approval for all five indications for which the original drug has been approved. The recommendation report will be reviewed by FDA experts on January 7 to make a final decision about the approval.

Biosimilars are expected to cost 20% to 30% less and are expected to save $250 billion in 10 years from their introduction, as estimated by Express Scripts Holding Company (NASDAQ:ESRX)