White Memorial Launches Health Show On Spanish Language TV

By EGP Staff Report

Emmy award-winning host and local radio personality Carlos Alvarez and long-time L.A. reporter, Ofelia de la Torre are the hosts of “Tu Mundo Hoy,” the White Memorial Medical Center’s (WMMC) new health focused television show now airing at 2 p.m., Monday through Friday on Spanish language station KBEH-DT Channel 63.

White Memorial, located in Boyle Heights, sees the hour-long TV show as an opportunity to take the vast knowledge of its health professionals to a larger community.

“We’re excited to bring Tu Mundo Hoy to our community. The program will present local experts to discuss topics such as the latest news on Health Care Reform (ObamaCare), disease prevention and other timely topics to help give viewers a clear understanding of the issues,” says Sara Rubalcava-Beck, WMMC’s Director of Marketing.

According to White Memorial, Tu Mundo Hoy provides viewers with information they can use as they face a variety of health issues, helping them to better understand and enhance their well-being.

White Memorial doctors and services will be a regular feature of the show, which will provide health education on topics such as how to prevent diabetes, heart disease, obesity and other chronic illnesses.

The show, which will be air in Spanish, will also offer segments that specifically address issues related to Hispanic’s overall health and well-being, White Memorial’s statement says.

White Memorial, which in December completed a yearlong celebration of its 100 year anniversary, has long been viewed as a vital health care provider and safety net in the Latino community, and for low-income families in general.

“The hospital is a thriving part of the neighborhood, presenting health fairs and other community services throughout the year. The launch of Tu Mundo Hoy brings health education right into Latino homes, giving viewers information they can use on subjects they are concerned about, thus, extending the services of the hospital,” says the TV show announcement.

Tu Mundo Hoy is produced by CentroNetProductions. Veronica Nichols, CentroNetProductions’ Director of Business Development, adds, “We’re breaking down issues that are affecting the daily lives of Latino’s to really get our audience in-the-know.”

The first season of the new television show will run through October 2014. For more information about WMMC and Tu Mundo Hoy, go to the website www.whitememorial.com.

Comments