U.S. Rep. Joe Wilson, R-S.C., was widely condemned for shouting, “You lie!” while President Barack Obama spoke to a joint session of Congress on health care.

The breach of decorum came after the president said illegal immigrants would not be covered by his signature health care law — a contention that now appears to be untrue.

According to Breitbart News, Covered California, the state’s Obamacare exchange, is openly recruiting illegal immigrants to sign up for coverage. Breitbart reported:

The Covered California website includes a special page entitled: “No temas si eres indocumentado/a y quieres inscribir a tu familia en un seguro médico” (“Fear not if you are undocumented and want to enroll your family in health insurance”). The website goes on to explain that information shared with Obamacare cannot be shared with Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). It does not explicitly warn that illegal aliens are ineligible.

“According to the laws and implementing regulations,” the website says, “the information provided by individuals for coverage can not be used for purposes other than ensuring the efficient functioning of the insurance market ( Covered California) or administration of the program, or to verify certain eligibility determinations including verification of the immigration status of these people.”

With the Obama administration nowhere near its goal of signing up 7 million people by the end of March, and with enrollment lagging among California’s Latinos, recruiting illegal immigrants could be a sign of desperation.

Or maybe the administration always meant to include them, as Wilson insisted in September 2009.

The Department of Health and Human Services announced Wednesday that 3.3 million people are now enrolled in Obamacare, but it would not say how many have paid a first-month premium.

And to make matters worse, Breitbart reported that Obamacare is experiencing “a slowing rate of enrollment.”

US Army builds 300-acre eerily fake American city to train soldiers