WASHINGTON -- Hillary Clinton says fee-for-service medicine is probably an idea whose time has passed.

"The fee-for-service model, which made a lot of sense for a long time, may not make sense for physicians, for hospitals, or any other providers and may not make sense for patients and other payers," Clinton told a packed house of 3,000 cardiologists at the Transcatheter Cardiovascular Therapeutics (TCT) meeting here.

Answering a question from TCT president Jack Lewin, MD, she said, "We need to have as evidence-based and mature a conversation as we can have about [fee-for-service]."

The Clinton appearance was billed as a keynote address, but was treated as a private event.

Press were not barred, but no seats were reserved for it, and the TCT asked members of the press to acknowledge that they were asked not to write about Clinton's remarks.

At the same time, many at the TCT were clearly delighted to have Clinton -- a former Secretary of State, former Senator, former First Lady, and current (although unannounced) front-runner in the 2016 presidential race -- featured on the program, especially since, as one highly-placed TCT official told MedPage Today, Clinton was "speaking about healthcare."

Clinton spent about 20 minutes sharing very softball observations on the state of health, especially cardiovascular health, in the U.S. and the world and another 40 minutes answering questions from Lewin, who has a long association with Hillary Clinton and her husband Bill, the former president, including work on their failed healthcare reform plan in 1993-1994.

Just as fee-for-service may be sunsetting, Clinton said that employer-paid health insurance may also be a time-honored tradition that "we can no longer afford." But, a move away from healthcare as an employment benefit "should not be mandated."

The Affordable Care Act generally won praise from Clinton, who noted, "more than 8 million have gained coverage through the healthcare marketplaces and another 7 million through Medicaid expansion and the children's health. I think it is fair to say that Kentucky reduced its rate of uninsured by 40% and Arkansas hit almost the same percentage -- so there are success stories."

She agreed that more work needed to done on implementation of Obamacare, but offered no specifics.

Asked about another issue that bedeviled her husband's administration -- tort reform -- Clinton pointed to use of checklists to eliminate procedural errors and initiatives such as that at University of Michigan "where they have created an environment in which saying you are sorry and going immediately to patients cut down litigation."

But, "whether the malpractice is lawyers who betray clients' confidence or doctors who are negligent, you need to really isolate that very small group of professionals who cause a lot of problems for everybody else," she said.

Clinton was not asked about her future plans, but she sounded more like a candidate than a diplomat when she chastised the gridlock in Congress and she made a personal plea for bipartisan support of the children's health insurance plan, which will be defunded unless Congress reauthorizes it.

On nonhealth issues Clinton said she supported President Obama's economic stimulus, but admitted that it did not result in the type of robust recovery that the country wants and needs.