Paying physicians for their productivity is the norm, but some hospitals are experimenting with methods that reward other accomplishments without inviting fraud and abuse. “Nonproductivity” models of compensation are gaining traction as the first round of hospital-physician employment agreements come up for renewal. In a world of hospital-physician alignment and pay for performance, some hospitals are trying to use compensation as a lever to improve quality of care and patient satisfaction, shape utilization, promote efficiency and contain costs and practice expenses, according to Bob Wade, an attorney with Krieg DeVault in Mishawaka, Ind.

“This is a new concept in the past year or so. Hospitals and health systems are reacting to what they perceive the future to be: either accountable care organizations or the forced bundled payment model,” Wade says. “While productivity is still the common compensation methodology, it is probably decreasing in number or in the portion of the overall compensation. I am seeing in almost every fair-market valuation, there is a higher percent of compensation going toward nonproductivity factors.” However, in this context, establishing fair market value (FMV) — the crux of compliance with the Stark self-referral law — is more of a challenge, he notes.

For the past five years or so, during the first “tidal wave” of hospital acquisitions of practices and subsequent physician employment, hospitals rewarded physicians according to their work relative value units (wRVUs), Wade says. RVUs are one component of the Resource-Based Relative Value Scale (RBRVS) used by CMS to calculate Medicare payments to physicians. The harder physicians work and the more patients they treat, the more wRVUs they generate. To get a wRVU, hospitals add the number and types of CPT codes (e.g., 99212, 99213). Productivity compensation can be a mix of base salary plus rewards or purely incentive based. Hospitals are supposed to derive base salary from data in major national surveys, including the Medical Group Management Association’s, according to the Phase II Stark regulations issued March 26, 2004. Then hospitals set the per-RVU incentive payment, which is the amount that physicians will earn for the work they do above and beyond the work RVU threshold established by the hospital. Next, hospitals determine the point at which the incentive part of the compensation kicks in. After a certain amount of RVUs are generated, physicians will earn a reward for every wRVU they generate thereafter. Then hospitals multiply the per-RVU payment (at the percentile appropriate for a particular specialist) by the number of wRVUs the physician has earned beyond the threshold. The product of that equation is how much the specialist will be paid for incentive compensation.

Health Reform Drives Value Model

Now hospitals are looking beyond that model. “The industry, thanks largely to the Affordable Care Act, is moving from volume-based compensation to value-based compensation, meaning that physician compensation will be tied to the health and outcomes of their patients,” says Julie Chicoine, senior assistant general counsel at Wexner Medical Center at the Ohio State University in Columbus. The implementation of ICD-10 codes in October will fuel this trend because their “granularity” will reveal far more information about patients. “There will be an opportunity to quantify health outcomes based on the fact the codes are much more detailed.”

Recently Wade worked on a compensation arrangement that wasn’t rooted in productivity at all. “It’s hard from a fair-market value perspective,” he notes. The hospital wanted fair-market value assistance and he tried to use the MGMA data and work RVUs, “but how do you compare fair-market components like quality and utilization to a standard like MGMA data? It’s still applicable, but we have to think more critically about whether nonproductivity incentives are appropriate.” Another hospital decided to reward physicians for quality indicators, such as smoking cessation. The material question, Wade says, is how were its physicians performing at that moment in time? If the hospital established a $30,000 bonus for physicians who provided smoking cessation counseling for at least half their patients but it turned out most already achieved that for 75% of them, the threshold is too low. “With nonproductivity compensation, you want to challenge the physician to improve the patients’ health,” he says. “My problem from a fair-market value perspective is setting the thresholds too low and they hit a home run on every disease indicator.” A simple solution is to raise the threshold.

Suppose the fair-market value salary for a certain specialist (according to the MGMA survey) is $300,000. The hospital might set a base salary of $200,000 and then dangle bonuses for a series of utilization/efficiency and quality improvement measures. They could include expanding office hours to reduce patients’ non-urgent trips to the emergency room and improving patient outcomes on Medicare core measures (e.g., controlling high blood pressure, treating heart attacks). The specialist has the potential to earn $400,000 if she hits a home run with every quality improvement measure but would earn the fair-market value amount if she just did very well, Wade says. Hospitals have to monitor this closely; if physicians are perfect all the time and raking in the dough, the thresholds are probably too low and hospitals are playing with Stark fire. Or maybe they just have amazing physicians, but there are still fair-market value concerns. “If the doctor is already in the top 10%, it is OK to continue to compensate the doctor for meeting the thresholds, but with each utilization or quality initiative, you have to step back and look at the likelihood of success and where doctors may be willing to improve,” Wade says. “It’s a probability game.” It’s not always about paying them too much; some doctors refuse to play ball. One hospital he worked with has a physician who so far refused to engage in the nonproductivity compensation deal.

Wade cites three compliance concerns with nonproductivity models of compensation:

(1) Are thresholds for nonproductivity indicators set too low? If so, there’s a risk of compensation not being fair-market value or even being construed as a kickback to a referral source.

(2) Do hospitals have mechanisms to effectively monitor physician performance in each indicator? For example, if one indicator is the extent to which physicians reduce emergency-room use by their patients through appropriate methods (e.g., establish Saturday office hours), is there a way to track ER usage and count that back to the physician who receives incentives? Wade urges hospitals to avoid the mistakes he has seen with productivity compensation. Physicians received $30 per wRVU after the initial 3,000 wRVUs, but the hospital lacked a way to track it. “You should be able to go into the computer system and push a button, but a lot of systems track the personally performed work RVUs and the work RVUs for work not personally performed and allocate them to the supervising physician” — a recipe for a Stark violation.

(3) Is the overall compensation commercially reasonable and fair-market value, as required for compliance with the Stark law? MGMA data are still relevant in terms of the aggregate compensation, Wade notes. “It’s challenging. You may have a doctor so invested in improving overall patient health that his work RVUs drop. The doctor is performing in the 25th percentile based on wRVUs but is paid in the 90th percentile because he is focused on overall health and utilization. He keeps patients out of his office because of quality initiatives and utilization [changes].” This may become the gold standard, Wade says, and existing productivity models may be considered dinosaurs soon enough, but it will be a slippery slope in terms of fraud and abuse until the numbers are worked out. “There is art here,” Wade says. For example, a cardiologist who aggressively counsels a population of high-risk patients on smoking, diet and exercise may keep his volume of office visits low. “His work RVUs may go down because his patients are healthier,” and blood pressure and other data can be sent to him through the patients’ smart phones. Conventional productivity compensation will not do the physician justice. “Hospitals are truly thinking about it and entering this new analysis with baby steps,” he says.

Compliance officers and attorneys can take heart that the Stark law gives them some wiggle room as they recalibrate nonproductivity compensation relationships, Wade says. Stark says when hospitals enter into a compensation arrangement, “you are probably fine as long as it was reasonable when you entered into it,” he says. “But you have to have the ability to rebase it year to year rather than locking it in for three to five years.”

Chicoine says hospitals will need data to make nonproductivity compensation meaningful and some of it will come from ICD-10. The number of codes increases from 17,000 in ICD-9 to 141,000 in ICD-10, allowing them to capture details about patients’ lifestyles, comorbid conditions, management of chronic illnesses and other factors, she says. ICD-9 can’t distinguish between a Type 2 diabetic who runs three times a week, has good blood sugar numbers and no comorbid conditions and a diabetic who is obese, cavalier about blood sugar and doesn’t exercise. But ICD-10 recognizes acuity and can help hospitals develop compensation models that recognize physicians for maintaining wellness for both kinds of patients. It’s good for physicians who complain they don’t get paid for spending time with patients, she notes.

© 2014 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The AIS E-Savings Club offers regular opportunities to buy AIS products and services at substantial savings. Click here to see the current specials — including a $150 discount on a subscription to Report on Medicare Compliance.