State Sen. Jim Banks, R-Columbia City (Photo: Submitted photo)

WASHINGTON — Conservative groups are spending hundreds of thousands of dollars to help state Sen. Jim Banks win the congressional seat in northeast Indiana.

Agribusinessman Kip Tom is running as the political outsider who would bring real world business experience to Congress.

And two of the other four Republicans on the May 3 primary ballot, state Sen. Liz Brown and former Wisconsin state Sen. Pam Galloway, have added enough of their own money into the 3rd District race to be contenders.

The primary is hotly contested because the incumbent, Rep. Marlin Stutzman, R-Howe, is running for the U.S. Senate.

Also, the Fort Wayne-based district is the state’s most Republican, meaning the winner of the GOP primary will likely also win the general election.

“It would be an incredibly unusual thing if that were not the case,” said Andy Downs, director of the Mike Downs Center for Indiana Politics, who also teaches political science at Indiana University-Purdue University Fort Wayne.

There’s little ideological daylight between the major candidates. All tout their opposition to abortion, support for gun rights and desire to get rid of Obamacare.

Banks, a commercial real estate broker, is also heavily emphasizing his service in the Navy Reserve and past deployment to Afghanistan.

“Radical Islamic terrorists are attacking. But one battle-tested conservative leader has a plan to defeat them,” declares one of Banks’ ads.

Banks also has a long list of endorsements, from state Senate leader David Long to Phyllis Schlafly and groups that include the Tea Party Express, the Club for Growth and the House Freedom Fund.

The latter is the political arm of the House Freedom Caucus, a group of House members — including Stutzman — who joined last year to try to move the House leadership to the right and gain more power for the rank-and-file.

The House Freedom Fund spent $100,000 on ads touting Banks’ conservative credentials, part of the more than $400,000 in advertisements and mailings spent by outside groups to help Banks.

In addition, the Club for Growth has boosted Banks’ fundraising with more than $187,000 in contributions from members. Supporters of the Senate Conservatives Fund have given Banks $49,215.

“Banks has done a remarkable job of straddling the line between anti-establishment support and getting institutional support from within the state,” said Nathan Gonzales, editor and publisher of The Rothenberg & Gonzales Political Report, who has analyzed the race. “It’s not easy to do.”

Still, Tom is hoping that an electorate upset with the status quo will be receptive to a first-time candidate.

“If you want to change Washington, don’t send another politician there,” says one of his ads.

Tom had kept pace with Banks on fundraising, in part with help from various agricultural interests. For example, Tom received $2,000 from the CEO of agriculture giant Monsanto, as well as contributions from a number of other Monsanto officials. The CEO of Dow AgroSciences gave $760, as have a number of agriculture-related political action committees.

Tom also loaned his campaign $150,000 this month. That upped his receipts to $894,473, compared with $754,647 raised by Banks.

But after Tom ran an ad calling Banks, Brown and Galloway career politicians, the political arm of the Club for Growth unleashed an attack on him.

The group’s ad criticizes Tom for serving on the board of the ethanol trade group Growth Energy and the quasi-governmental Indiana Economic Development Corp., which the ad accuses of doling out corporate welfare.

David McIntosh, a former Indiana congressman who heads the Club for Growth, said the group will do what it takes through the rest of the primary to help Banks, the first House candidate in the nation it has endorsed.

“It’s a big priority for us,” he said.

Downs said the ads by Tom, Banks and Banks’ supporters are dominating the Fort Wayne airwaves. But with so many candidates in the race, the GOP nominee could win with as little as 30 percent of the vote.

“At that point,” Downs said, “you could start to make an argument that someone like Liz Brown, who has some very passionate supporters, might be able to pull off a victory.”

Brown, a veteran of Fort Wayne city politics, started the race with the most name recognition but hasn’t kept pace, according to the nonpartisan Cook Political Report, which tracks congressional contests.

She’s contributed nearly half of the $364,975 her campaign has raised, including a $100,000 personal loan this month.

“If you want a Republican straight out of central casting, or a candidate of the establishment and big donors, you won’t find it here,” she says in an ad. “If you’re looking for a principled, pro-life conservative, then I need your vote.”

Galloway, a retired surgeon who served in the Wisconsin state Senate from 2011-12, has loaned her campaign about 70 percent of the $372,628 raised through mid-April.

Galloway said her proudest accomplishment in the Wisconsin legislature was working on the bill that restricted the collective bargaining abilities of public sector union members.

“This was the most pro-taxpayer piece of legislation to be passed in the past 100 years,” she says in a video on her website.

None of the two other Republicans on the ballot, Mark Willard Baringer or Kevin Howell, have reported raising any money.

“It’s a multi-candidate race … where only a plurality of voters is needed to win,” Gonzales said. “And I think a lot of voters are going to make up their minds in the last week.”

On the Democratic side, only one of the three candidates, Todd Nightenhelser, has reported raising any money — less than $1,603 through March.

Besides the 3rd District, the other House race attracting outside attention is the Republican primary in the 9th District. That’s also an open seat as Rep. Todd Young is running for the Senate.

In the state's seven other House districts, all incumbents have a primary challenger. But none have raised much money.

Here’s a look at those matchups:

1st District

Rep. Pete Visclosky, D-Merrillville, who is seeking a 17th term, faces Willie Brown in the Democratic primary. Visclosky has raised $574,128. Brown has not reporting raised anything.

There are no Republicans on the ballot.

2nd District

Two-term Rep. Jackie Walorski, R-Jimtown, who has raised nearly $1.1 million, faces Jeff Petermann in the GOP primary. He has not reported raising any money.

On the Democratic side, Lynn Coleman has raised $173,281. Douglas Carpenter has not reported raising any money.

4th District

Three-term Rep. Todd Rokita, R-Indianapolis, who faces an unfunded GOP challenge from Kevin Grant, has raised $842,685.

John Dale, who has not reported raising any money, is the only Democrat on the ballot.

5th District

Two-term Rep. Susan Brooks, R-Carmel, has raised more than $1 million. GOP challenger Stephen MacKenzie raised $59,314, of which $25,500 came from his own pocket. The other Republican challenger, Mike Campbell, has not reported raising any money.

On the Democratic side, Angela Demaree has raised $69,314. Allen Davidson has contributed the $1,814 his campaign reported raising.

6th District

Two-term Rep. Luke Messer, R-Shelbyville, has raised nearly $1.1 million. Republican challengers Charles Chuck Johnson Jr. and Jeff Smith have not reported raising any money.

Five Democrats are vying for the chance to take on Messer. None have reported raising much money.

7th District

Rep. Andre Carson, the Indianapolis Democrat in his fourth full term, faces two primary challengers who have not reported raising any money. Carson has raised $684,648.

Of the three Republicans running, only Wayne Harmon has reported raising any money: $636. Catherine Ping reported $2,489 remaining from a previous race.

8th District

Three-term Rep. Larry Bucshon, R-Newburgh, is being challenged by a fellow doctor. Bucshon has raised $617,437 compared to Richard Moss’ $52,345. More than half of that came from his own pocket.

On the Democratic side, David Orentlicher has raised $208,986, including a $22,500 personal loan to his campaign. Ron Drake has raised $2,700.

Source: Campaign disclosure reports filed with the Federal Election Commission

Email Maureen Groppe at mgroppe@gannett.com. Follow her on Twitter: @mgroppe.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1StLdqb