ARVADA — Wagging tails, chew toys and lots and lots of bombs.

In the cafeteria of Arvada West High School this week, about 25 law enforcement canines and their trainer counterparts will attempt to pass the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms’ national odor-recognition test and prove they are more than ready to protect the public.

“They are used to detect explosive devices all over the place,” said Raphael Martinez, the Virginia-based branch chief of the bureau’s national canine division. “These detective canines are one of the forefront weapons we have on the war on terrorism.”

Handlers representing local agencies and ones from out of state — including Iowa and Oklahoma — gathered Tuesday afternoon for the first of a three-day program that helps familiarize canines with 10 explosive scents, allowing them to detect up to 19,000 explosive odor combinations. The program is offered in about seven regions each year.

Dogs big and small ran around the cafeteria sniffing inside paint cans, hoping to recognize a smell for the small prize of a treat or a tennis ball in exchange for a brief squat.

While the two-year national certification isn’t mandatory for law enforcement canines, it’s highly regarded.

“There are no days off for our dogs,” said Rennie Mora, who runs the canine program for the bureau’s Denver field division.

Mora and his canine often work calls with Denver police and played a role last fall in the response to the Arapahoe High School shooting. Other dogs that completed the program have worked in war zones.

John Gulley, of the Salt Lake City-based Unified Fire Command, traveled to the Denver area for his first run at the certification. He called the experience nerve-racking, although he said he trains his canine daily, sometimes for up to five hours.

“We are trying to prevent something from happening,” Gulley said. “It would just be the one time that we need (the canines) that makes it worth it.”

Jesse Paul: 303-954-1733, jpaul@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jesseapaul