2014 ELECTION

Refugee children need to be sent back to Honduras, Guatemala, he says

By peter roper The pueblo chieftain

Republican candidate Ken Buck wants to cut back the size and reach of the federal government, but he would boost U.S. aid to the Ukraine, other Eastern European allies and also Central American countries as a tool for dealing with the ongoing crisis there.

CHIEFTAIN PHOTO/JOHN JAQUES Ken Buck

Buck, who is running for the 4th Congressional District seat, said Russian leader Vladimir Putin is “laughing at” President Barack Obama over the economic sanctions Obama has ordered in response to Russia’s violent agitation in the Crimea and the Ukraine.

“We should give the Ukraine the (military) training they need,” Buck said Friday. “That’s what Putin is doing in training and arming pro-Russian separatists.”

Putin already has bagged the Crimea, Buck said, and only an aggressive U.S. response can protect Poland, the Baltics and other U.S. allies.

Buck is the Weld County district attorney and was an unsuccessful candidate for the Senate in 2010. He was running again this year until Rep. Cory Gardner, R-Colo., announced his Senate campaign. Buck then shifted focus to winning Gardner’s seat.

He’s being opposed by Vic Meyers, a Democrat from Elizabeth. Meyers is an Army veteran and a Department of Corrections case manager.

On the question of dealing with the thousands of young Honduran and Guatemalan refugees at the U.S. border, Buck said they need to be returned to their countries.

“Republican leaders in Congress have talked to the leaders of those nations and they want their children back as soon as possible,” he said, adding he would support extra spending to speed up their repatriation.

The U.S. policy on Cuban refugees is called “dry foot-wet foot,” meaning if they if they can reach dry land, they are allowed to ask for asylum in the U.S. Intercepted at sea, they are returned to Cuba.

Buck said he didn’t consider the Honduran and Guatemalan refugees to be similar to Cubans leaving that country because the U.S. is not at odds with the governments there — even though the refugee families say they are fleeing drug-related violence there.

“But that’s another reason we need to assist those countries and their economies,” he said. “We can’t afford to open our doors to everyone.”

Which also is why Buck does not support giving a path to citizenship for the 11 million or so undocumented people in the U.S. He said most of those people don’t want citizenship, just a way to legally work in the U.S.

Like Gardner, Buck would repeal the federal health care law known as Obamacare. He said Republicans share the blame for the nation’s health care problems by not making improvements when they were the majority party in Congress and had the White House as well.

“We created the conditions that let Obama bring forward this legislation,” he said. “But I don’t agree the government should force me to buy insurance to cover the health problems of someone else’s lifestyle.”

While Buck supports energy development, he was uncertain whether he would support extending the federal wind-power tax credit for Vestas and other wind-turbine makers.

“That credit was supposed to help the industry get on its feet,” he said. “If wind power can survive on its own, then I don’t want to extend the tax credit. That’s just corporate welfare.”

proper@chieftain.com