As we enter 2015, community contention around issues of growth and development in Boulder will undoubtedly remain high. In these early weeks of the year, I hope we can all resolve to face these issues, and the challenges they represent, with a shared commitment to respectful dialogue and collaborative problem solving.

Boulder has a legacy of intentionally planning for our community's future. Throughout our history, community members have grappled with thorny issues, and forged creative responses that have defined our community and provided models for others in the nation and beyond to emulate. Today, as at other points in time past, there are differing views about our challenges and how we should best respond. We can allow these differences to divide us, or we can embrace the opportunity to listen to each other and forge, yet again, an innovative and positive path forward.

As city manager, I am committed to excellence and continued improvement in the services provided by the city organization to this community. I am equally committed to making sure that our city processes are inclusive and respectful, and result in solutions uniquely tailored to this community.

I must admit to being both disappointed and disturbed by the claims and counterclaims that have been filling the opinion pages of the Daily Camera as well as our email inboxes, and the accusations of unethical behavior and malintent. Boulder's city government is committed to a vision of "service excellence for an inspired future," and our staff works every day in support of our core values: customer service, respect, integrity, collaboration, and innovation. They put in long hours, and often take the brunt of people's disagreements, but through it all, they continue to believe in and strive to facilitate an inclusive, respectful dialogue in which all voices are heard and, when things go well, creative solutions are collaboratively developed.

Advertisement

A recent article and subsequent editorial in this paper insinuated that city staff are meeting in secret with developer representatives, blindly creating favoritism due to resulting personal relationships. Not only does the statement fly in the face of the facts and common sense, but it ignores the myriad of neighborhood and other groups and individuals our city planners meet with every day, of every week, every year, in their ongoing commitment to transparency and inclusiveness. The meetings in question are a valuable customer feedback mechanism used to support continued improvement in a core business process of local government: the application of our land use, engineering, and building codes in development review.

I believe this coming year is an opportunity for Boulder to be at its best: to embrace our common purpose of creating a truly unique city that is environmentally responsible, socially conscious and economically vital; to truly listen to each other; to understand that we share many core goals and values; and to engage in a respectful dialogue around complex and difficult issues, with the aim of developing creative and meaningful responses.

It is my commitment to you, the community, that we are listening and that the city team is putting in place a number of new tools and work efforts to support inclusive, respectful and meaningful conversations in 2015, and beyond. These include the hiring of a new neighborhood liaison, a position that was approved last year by council as part of the 2015 budget; a new partnership with Code for America and local volunteers to develop better tools for online engagement and information sharing; and robust community participation processes for the work related to affordable housing, design excellence, our climate commitment, and our community's comprehensive plan. We are also, in the coming two weeks, meeting with City Council to review our 2015 work program, to ensure it aligns with the most critical issues we currently face.

You can learn about all of these initiatives, sign up to receive regular email updates, get information, and find out how to get involved by visiting our new Planning Boulder web portal, at www.BoulderPlanning.org.

I hope everyone in our community will take the time to participate in the important work ahead, engaging constructively in our vibrant deliberative democracy, as we continue to plan for the future of Boulder, together.

Jane Brautigam is Boulder's city manager.