The UFC Fight Night Dillashaw vs. Cruz live stream online and televised fight card highlights a busy Sunday in sports around the globe. This latest mixed martial arts event takes place at Boston's TD Garden and will be the biggest championship match ever offered for free on television. T.J. Dillashaw will put his UFC Bantamweight Championship on the line against former champion Dominick Cruz. Also on the card will be former UFC Lightweight Champion Anthony Pettis as he'll battle No. 4-ranked Eddie Alverez. A total of five fights will be presented on the UFC Fight Night live streaming and televised main card from Fox Sports network.

According to FOX Sports in their Jan. 15 report, one fighter in particular will be rooting extra hard for a Dillashaw victory tonight, as his former coach Urijah Faber from Team Alpha Male would love to face his former teammate. Faber and Dillashaw split from one another recently, with the Bantamweight champ deciding to train with Elevation Fight Team in Denver as well as head coach Duane "Bang" Ludwig. Despite that, Team Alpha is sending Justin Buchholz from their camp out to serve as a corner coach for Dillashaw at Fight Night. Faber told the media, "We have an amazing system, a system built on tradition and TJ's a product of that. So we're proud of that. This will be the last time that we send someone out to his corner."

Dillashaw won the UFC Bantamweight Championship on May 24, 2014 during the UFC 173 pay-per-view when he defeated Renan Barao via technical knockout in the fifth round. He was awarded performance of the night with the fight also receiving "Fight of the Night" honors from the UFC. Dillashaw has now successfully defended the title twice, once defeating Joe Soto via knockout and then more recently winning against former champ Barao again at a UFC on Fox event in July of last year. Tonight he will have former champion Dominick Cruz who may have a bit of rust since he hasn't fought since 2011. However, Cruz has lost just once in his career and certainly has what it takes to reclaim the belt.

Two preliminary cards lead up to the event, with the first at 6 p.m. ET on UFC Fight Pass online, and the second at 8 p.m. ET on Fox Sports 1. Four total fights make up the main card for UFC Fight Night 81 at Boston's TD Garden. The odds have favored Dillashaw on the moneyline slightly at -145 with Cruz priced as a +115 underdog for the main fight. Anthony Pettis will also be a favorite, as he was priced at -300 several days ago, with Eddie Alvarez at +235. Travis Browne is a -150 favorite against Matt Mitrione (+120), while Ross Pearson (-160) is also a favorite in his bout against Francisco Trinaldo (+130).

UFC Fight Night Dillashaw vs. Cruz has a scheduled start time of 10 p.m. Eastern Time for the main card. To watch the UFC event live on television, viewers can use Fox Sports 1 or FOX Deportes around the United States. To watch the event live streaming online, cable and satellite subscribers can use Fox Sports Go website or mobile apps where available. There's also live online coverage available to watch worldwide from Fight Pass on UFC.TV for the main card.