Buy Photo Gov. Rick Snyder said this week that he would give a state-based version of the federal Religious Freedom of Restoration Act extra scrutiny. (Photo: Brian Kaufman/Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo

It's not what he said, it's how he said it.

Gov. Rick Snyder, generally reluctant to weigh in on proposed legislation that hasn't passed the state Legislature, took an uncharacteristically firm stance on the state version of the federal Religious Freedom Restoration Act, introduced by House Speaker Jase Bolger.

Bolger's RFRA bill originally appeared alongside a bill that would expand the state's civil rights law to protect lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender Michiganders — something along the lines of a sweetener for lawmakers hesitant to support civil rights expansion.

The federal RFRA was passed to protect minority religious practices, but has become a right-wing cause celebre. It was the foundation of the U.S. Supreme Court's decision that the corporate owners of the craft store Hobby Lobby need not contribute financially to insurance coverage for female employees' contraceptive coverage, as mandated in the Affordable Care Act, because of a "sincerely held" religious (but not scientific) belief that some types of contraception cause abortion. The Supreme Court ruled that the federal act only applied to the federal government; GOP lawmakers in state Legislatures around the country have since pushed state-level RFRAs.

Passage of such a state law would allow business owners with "sincerely held" objections to homosexuality, for example, to refuse to serve gay customers — the example trotted out most often is the case of a baker refusing to make a wedding cake for a same-sex couple.

But opponents of the law have painted more dire scenarios: EMTs refusing treatment to gay patients, doctors refusing service to unmarried, sexually active women. Supporters of the law scoff at such scenarios, which seems to make the subtext clear: RFRA proponents see the law as designed specifically to enable discrimination against LGBT Michiganders.

So passing RFRA alongside a civil rights expansion is a legislative sucker punch: Extend protection from discrimination to LGBT Michiganders — but defang those legal protections by cloaking discrimination in a religious shroud.

In any circumstances, passing a state-level RFRA would be the wrong choice, but without the civil rights expansion, it's just gratuitous.

It seems Snyder agrees.

Tuesday, the generally cautious Snyder seemed chill to the notion of a standalone RFRA, saying that without the context of a civil rights expansion, there's a "different expectation."

I know, you're not bowled over by this chiding disapproval. Trust me, there was tone.

And it was refreshing to see from the governor, who's well aware that his ability to hold the line has been questioned.

It's unlikely the state RFRA will go anywhere in the current legislative session. But next year is another story. The new state Legislature is even more conservative than the current body, and it's likely the civil rights expansion is dead in the water.

Since 2012's right-to-work debacle, Snyder's lost the trust of Michiganders who believed that such a contentious issue was truly not on his agenda. Is this a panacea? No, but it's a sign of hope.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1DNNQAJ