Holding signs in the front row of over 100 red-clad protesters of a "states' rights" resolution at the county commission are, from right to left, Kathy Ferris, Pat Sanders and Austin Dubuc. JOHN BUTWELL / The Murfreesboro Post

A controversial "states' rights" resolution was amended twice in front of a capacity crowd of opponents and finally was passed, 15-6, by the Rutherford County Commission Thursday night. Both sides claimed victory.

Under the original resolution recommended by the Steering, Legislative and Governmental Committee, the county commission would have asked the General Assembly to "take no action, as a sovereign state, to further the US Supreme Court's attempt through judicial decision, to amend our Tennessee state laws."

Judging by their signs and remarks, over 100 protesters attending the meeting interpreted the resolution to be aimed at Supreme Court rulings legalizing same-sex marriage and upholding Obamacare - among whom six of the protesters addressed the 21 commissioners and crowd during citizen comments.

'States' rights stronger'

Afterward, District 12 Commissioner Robert Stevens said the amendment he made to the resolution - which was what ultimately passed - made it "a stronger states' rights resolution" by broadening its scope from "just" the same-sex issue.

Stevens' amendment dropped all mention of the Supreme Court and of Tennessee being "a sovereign state." Instead, it resolved that the county commission ask the General Assembly to "take the necessary action to protect and defend our State's and citizens' powers delegated and reserved to our State and our people by the United States Constitution."

"What came from Steering asked for nothing," Stevens said. "It asked them to take no actions. We want them to do whatever is needed to stop things like executive overreach. This is a much bigger issue than was discussed at the Steering Committee. It's not just the one Supreme Court issue."

But Stevens' amendment changed again when it was amended to end by resolving "to protect and defend our State's and citizens' powers delegated and reserved to our State and our people by upholding our State and United States Constitutions."

'Added meaning?'

The amendment to Stevens' amendment was made by District 4 Commissioner Robert Peay, Jr., and seconded by District 5 Commissioner Carol Cook. It seemed to take Stevens by surprise, and he asked Peay what he intended to add to the meaning of Stevens' original amendment.

"It affirms the oath of office that each one of us made to uphold the Constitutions of Tennessee and the United States," Peay replied. "That's what it does."

Peay's amendment to Stevens' amendment passed 16-5, with the "no" votes cast by Commissioners Rhonda Allen (District 11), Phil Dodd (District 15), Allen McAdoo (District 18), Shawn Kaplan (District 19) and Chantho Sourinho (District 21).

The subsequent two votes were each 15-6, with District 9 Commissioner Joe Gourley joining "no" votes by the same five commissioners. First the commission passed Stevens' amendment and then as a formality, it passed the original resolution as amended by Stevens, whose wording completely superseded the original wording.

'Win for equality'

That was one reason why Chris Sanders, executive director of the Tennessee Equality Project that coordinated the protest, called the commissioners' final vote a win for marriage equality.

"The preamble (of the original resolution) is gone. This resolution is substantially changed," Sanders said afterward. "They lost their original resolution. It's gone. The same-sex marriage element faded away. They've walked themselves back to where they were. Unfortunately, they had to go through a very circuitous route to get to it."

The final wording, in fact, left many somewhat confused about what the resolution does mean. "All it says is, we will do what each and every elected official in Tennessee has already taken an oath to do," County Mayor Ernest Burgess said.

The mayor also said he doesn't know if the original resolution was actually aimed at stopping same-sex marriage in Tennessee or not. "I can't read the hearts of the people who proposed this," he said.

'Don't secede'

But the protesters Thursday night seemed to believe members of the LGBT community were targeted in the original resolution of resistance to the feds - and that such resistance is unjustified.

"I'm against this resolution. I don't want Tennessee to secede," said Pat Sanders, holding a large hand-printed sign declaring "ONE NATION, INDIVISIBLE" with the "ONE" and "IN" underlined.

Seated beside Sanders on the front row, dressed mostly in red like most of the protesters, Kathy Ferris held another large hand-printed sign that chided the commissioners, "DON'T BE STUPID - OBEY THE LAW."

Other prominent signs read, "SUPPORT HUMAN RIGHTS" and "AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE FOR ALL."

Ferris said she attended because "I don't want the commission to be opposing Supreme Court rulings on same-sex marriage and affordable health care." She added, "I think if they go through with this kind of vote, they're going to make a laughingstock of Tennessee."

'Terrifying rhetoric'

MTSU student Austin Dubuc said the wording of the original resolution was no laughing matter, however. He added that he's unbiased about the Civil War, playing the roles of both Federals and Confederates at re-enactments "because I think they were both American soldiers." But he was alarmed by the nullification ideology he perceived in the original resolution.

"The same rhetoric terrifies me, because I'm a history minor, and I've seen it before," Dubuc said.

Tennessee Young Democrats Black Caucus Chairman and MTSU student, senior Madison Biggs, summed up the protesters' general viewpoint after each commenter had spoken for the three minutes they each were allotted.

First Biggs outlined his claim that the 10th Amendment reserving powers to the states that aren't specifically assigned to the feds is "trumped" by the "Supremacy Clause" of the original US Constitution, which requires state judges to follow federal rulings and gives all treaty-making power to the feds, but requires the states to obey those treaties.

Earlier, the first protester who spoke, Sara Mitchell, also said the 14th Amendment, "obviously passed after the 10th," guarantees every citizen equal protection under the law and like the "Supremacy Clause," also supersedes the 10th.

'Excuse to discriminate'

"States' rights are mostly invoked as an excuse to discriminate," Mitchell said. "We need to follow the law of the land. We don't need to fight the Civil War again."

Biggs essentially agreed with her. "Frankly, this is just mere grandstanding," he said, "without any legal grounding, and it's a waste of the taxpayers' money."

That was a common theme in the protesters' comments - the cost to taxpayers of defending the state against civil rights lawsuits.

"This resolution does nothing to promote the interests of the people of Tennessee," Mitchell said, "and may result in another costly lawsuit. Tennessee already has an $8.3 million bill from fighting same-sex marriage."

She also said the commission's proposal "harms Rutherford County, because we must present a forward-thinking image" to attract high-paying jobs. And Kelly Northcutt said the commission was pursuing the wrong priorities and opening some dangerous doors.

'Advancing their agenda'

"In getting the county to propose this resolution," Northcutt said in her three minutes, "they're trying to advance their agenda at our expense. It opens up the door to ignoring any Supreme Court ruling at all. And it uses up funds that I'm sure each of you (commissioners) has a better place to put, so I strongly encourage you to vote this resolution down."

"I'm a teacher, a public school teacher," Christie Crowell said. "This resolution undercuts the job I do every day." And it also would undercut Rutherford's economic development, she claimed.

"This resolution is not patriotic disobedience," Crowell added. "I consider it political grandstanding."

Brendon Holloway, a December social work graduate from MTSU, said the resolution would further imperil the "vulnerable LGBT population" which faces constant discrimination on the job and elsewhere.

'Honor us all'

"If you want to honor Rutherford County citizens, honor us all," Holloway urged the commission. "Not just some."

Some of the protesters shared fairly personal messages. Caleb Banks discussed his marriage of four years to his husband and the fact they married civilly rather than in church so "my marriage is not a perversion of religion, by any means."

Banks said he had faced "losing my job based on who I am" and appealed it through the EEOC, and he told the commission he considered the proposed resolution another of many "essentially Jim Crow laws."

Such frank comments may have been what Joe Gourley was referring to when he remarked during the commission's debate, "I don't agree with everything that has been said here earlier this evening. I'm not sure the country is going in the right direction."

But then Gourley added, "There's a lot of issues, but the way we deal with that is by the rule of law."

'Insult to legislators?'

Gourley started by saying, "I have to question why we even have this resolution before us. It seems to me that we're sending a message to our legislative body that, if I were a member of the legislative body, I would be insulted."

But District 1 Commissioner Charlie Shafer said that by sending the resolution to the legislature, the commission would at least be trying to do something about excessive federal rules, laws and "unfunded mandates" such as Obamacare.

"Last year, it cost Rutherford County $62 per belly button for every person that's on our medical plan" for the county to comply with the Affordable Care Act, Shafer said.

The commission's resolution "probably will be ignored," Shafer conceded. But he added, to some quiet skeptical laughter from the protesters, "It probably will make everyone in here feel better if we're doing something."

'Eye-opening turnout'

In the end, Chris Sanders gave a lot of credit to the protesters - who filled both the main gallery and balcony with a sea of red sweaters and jackets - for getting the resolution's focus shifted somewhat.

"They spoke so well," he said, "and the commissioners saw the writing on the wall."

Sanders elaborated, "Regardless of how they feel about the individual issue, they now know that hundreds of their constituents in this county support equality, and I think that was eye-opening for them."

But District 10 Commissioner Brad Turner, who seconded the original resolution that District 20 Commissioner Trey Gooch made as chair of the Steering Committee, had perhaps a different group of his constituents in mind.

"Folks on my end are concerned about federal government intrusion - some of the executive orders, court decisions and things that are coming out of Washington," Turner said. "We feel good about this (amended resolution) because we were able to clean that up and really make it more of a universal resolution."

Writer Connie Esh can be contacted at cewrites@yahoo.com.