By Jessica A. Botelho, Staff Reporter, Rhode Island Catholic

PROVIDENCE — Less than a week after the 41st anniversary of the U.S. Supreme Court’s decision to legalize abortion in the Roe v. Wade case, the Rhode Island Right to Life Committee (RIRTL) held its annual statewide pro-life rally at the Statehouse in Providence. More than 250 people, including infants and children, along with at least 12 pro-life legislators, were in attendance.

“I’ve been praying to stop abortion,” said Jolie Simonim, 10, who accompanied her mother, Tammy, to the rally. “It’s wrong to murder babies.”

According to Barth E. Bracy, RIRTL Executive Director, more than 56 million lives have been aborted since the decision was made in 1973. He said the rally is a way to commemorate the lost lives and broken families, as well as put an end to the legality of abortion.

“We have to come together to raise our pro-life voices as a witness to protect human life,” Bracy said during an interview with The Rhode Island Catholic. “We must work to change the laws [and] bring pro-lifers together from around the state in order to support each other in standing up for innocent human life.”

A few of the ways to do that, he said at the rally, which took place Monday from 3 to 4 p.m., are to reject and oppose the anti-life and anti-conscience measures of Obamacare, vote against elected officials who supported the measures, and by supporting legislators as they work to pass bans on partial birth abortions and sex-selection abortions.

The rally also featured testimony from pro-life advocates, including Carol Owens, director of the Office of Life and Family for the Diocese of Providence.

Other guest speakers were Mike Krzywonos of 40 Days for Life Rhode Island, David O’Connell of Problem Pregnancy of Providence Mother of Life Center, Sandra Pyram-Loyer of Bethany Christian Services of Rhode Island, Rachel Nguyen of CareNet Rhode Island, and James E. Gilcreast, the state deputy of the Knights of Columbus Rhode Island State Council.

“The greatest weapon for pro-life is prayer and good works,” Gilcreast said.

Members of Silent No More Rhode Island, an organization that makes the public aware of the effects they believe abortion has on women, men, and their families, also shared testimony. Holding signs that said, “I regret my abortion,” they not only expressed remorse, they also spoke of the power of Christ’s forgiveness.

“How I would love to turn back time,” Rosa Morena said. “But today, I can say that I am renewed by God’s love and mercy.”

They weren’t the only ones holding anti-abortion signs. Students and teachers from Bishop Hendricken High School and LaSalle Academy proudly held pro-life banners.

“We need to support the cause and bring it to peoples’ attention that abortion is not good,” said LaSalle junior, Madison Robar, 17. “It needs to be stopped.”

Hendricken students echoed her sentiments. Senior Richard Lisi, 17, president of the school’s pro-life group, said he is an example of the gift of life.

“I was born premature and I want to inspire others to stand up and advocate for life,” he said. “Doctors told me that I was going to have learning disabilities and I am currently 27th in my class, I’m an Eagle Scout, and will be studying next year at URI to become a doctor. You can choose life, and all of the wonderful things that can come out of choosing life.”

Editor’s note. This first appeared in the Rhode Island Catholic and is reprinted with permission.