Will salt be Obama's last nutrition hurrah?

With help from Jenny Hopkinson, Helena Bottemiller Evich and Jason Huffman

WILL SALT BE OBAMA’S LAST NUTRITION HURRAH? With less than a year left in the Obama administration, FDA watchers are expecting that sodium cuts will be one of the last items on the White House’s nutrition agenda. For seven years, food companies and consumer groups have been waiting for the FDA to come up with voluntary sodium reduction targets — an issue that has sparked litigation.

Story Continued Below

One former top FDA official said he believes a lawsuit brought by a consumer advocacy group will finally shake loose the voluntary targets that were completed two years ago but have never been released. The FDA agreed in February to respond by June 1 to the petition from the Center for Science in the Public Interest.

That timetable “is the reason for my optimism,” said Michael Landa, former director of the FDA’s Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition and an advocate of government action to reduce sodium. Read the full take on sodium, including the politics and the science, from Pro Agriculture's Helena Bottemiller Evich here.

HAPPY MONDAY, APRIL 4! Welcome to Morning Ag, where your host is among those delving into Beverly Cleary nostalgia as the author is set to turn 100 next week. “Ramona Quimby, Age 8” was one of my favorite books growing up. You know the deal: Thoughts, news, tips? Send them to cboudreau@politico.com or @ceboudreau. Follow the whole team @Morning_Ag.

THIS WEEK: IS THE SENATE READY TO TACKLE GMO LABELING?: After the failed effort to limit debate on Senate Agriculture Committee Chairman Pat Roberts’ voluntary GMO labeling bill last month, the Kansas Republican and other supporters vowed to try again when they returned from the two-week spring break. Now that they’re back, can middle ground be found to lure enough farm-state Democrats and states'-rights Republicans to vote for the bill? Talks on how to move forward could start this week, especially given that there are fewer than 90 days before Vermont’s mandatory GMO labeling law takes effect. Brush up on the fight here.

MA also is keeping an eye on the Senate because it’s been more than a month since the Agriculture Committee, in a bipartisan vote, approved a bill that would reauthorize child nutrition programs but the measure has yet to get floor time.

Meanwhile, the Agriculture Committee’s panel on rural development and energy on Wednesday will hold a hearing on the economic impact of the Agriculture Department’s rural development programs. The witness list includes representatives from the Iowa Renewable Fuels Association and wind turbine manufacturer Dakota Turbines, so renewable energy will likely be the topic du jour. Details here.

The other side of the Capitol building will stay quiet, as House lawmakers don’t return until next week.

Also on the agenda: The National Food Policy Conference, hosted by Consumer Federation of America, will take place Wednesday and Thursday. Noteworthy keynote speakers include former Acting FDA Commissioner Stephen Ostroff, who in June will replace Michael Taylor as deputy commissioner for foods and veterinary medicine; Kevin Concannon, USDA undersecretary for food, nutrition and consumer services; and Sen. Debbie Stabenow (D-Mich.), ranking member of the Senate Agriculture Committee.

Two of your favorite MA hosts — Helena Bottemiller Evich and yours truly — will moderate panels on the presidential candidates’ food policy positions and the role of small producers in ensuring food safety, respectively.

VILSACK TRAVELS TO BERLIN, PARIS: Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack is in Berlin today to meet with his German counterpart, Christian Schmidt, and other government officials and farmers to discuss rural development opportunities and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership. Later in the week, Vilsack will co-chair the U.S. delegation to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development agriculture ministers’ meeting in Paris. Discussions are expected to focus on feeding a growing world population while managing natural resources and dealing with climate change, the USDA said in a statement.

DELAURO: EXPAND ACTION LEVEL FOR ARSENIC IN RICE: FDA’s draft guidance setting a new action level for arsenic in rice-based infant cereal at below 100 parts per billion doesn’t go far enough to protect public health, Rep. Rosa DeLauro (D-Conn.) says. After the FDA published the guidance Friday, DeLauro said in a statement that the move is a great first step, but the agency should expand the guidance to include action levels on all rice-based products. “What about two-year-olds and three-year-olds? What about expectant mothers? This is about the health and well-being of our families,” DeLauro said.

FDA’s action follows years of pressure from consumer groups worried about exposure to inorganic arsenic, a naturally occurring carcinogen. The agency is not recommending all consumers change their rice consumption habits, but is giving more targeted advice to pregnant women to minimize exposure. The FDA recommends pregnant women eat a variety of grains, including wheat, oats and barley. The majority of rice cereals on the market already fall under the new action level, which is identical to the limit set by the European Union. Read the draft guidance here. Read DeLauro’s statement here.

WESTERN GROWERS NOT MOVED BY OBAMACARE WAIVER: Pressure is building in California to pursue an Obamacare waiver that would allow undocumented workers to purchase insurance plans with their own money, Pro Healthcare Rachana Pradhan reports. California is the U.S.’s largest grower of produce and its labor force includes about 1.85 million undocumented immigrants, the second-highest statewide share (9.4 percent) in the nation after Nevada (10.2 percent), according to the Public Policy Institute.

The expansion is one of several measures Covered California is weighing for a so-called "Section 1332 waiver," which allows states to change major pieces of the Affordable Care Act starting in 2017 as long as the reforms meet certain requirements. The state insurance program has a board meeting Thursday where it is set to act on initial waiver recommendations.

But Western Growers, the California and Arizona produce industry’s trade group, isn’t particularly excited about the Obamacare development. The association already has thousands of farmworkers enrolled in the Western Growers Assurance Trust, a health plan it created for its members in 1957, a spokesman tells Pro Agriculture. “We will continue to work with our members to offer affordable health benefits to farmworkers, irrespective of the state of California seeking a waiver to broaden eligibility for the exchange,” the group says in a statement. Read more about the Obamacare development in California here.

FOOD COMPANIES CALL FOR MORE FUEL EFFICIENT TRUCKS: A dozen environmentally minded food makers and retailers — including General Mills, Organic Valley, Clif Bar, and Ben & Jerry’s — wrote to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and EPA on Friday to request more stringent regulations on fuel efficiency in trucks to aid businesses seeking to lower their carbon footprint, reports Morning Transportation. The existing proposed rule calls for new standards for heavy-duty vehicles that would ramp up to model year 2027 and lower fuel consumption by 24 percent; the group wants the standards to require a 40 percent reduction in fuel consumption in new trucks by 2025.

“We have the technology needed to significantly cut fuel consumption and emissions from large trucks,” the group says in its letter. “As compared to the proposed standards, a 40% reduction in fuel use would cut an additional 200,000 barrels of oil daily in 2035 and provide 33% more in fuel cost savings. ... Greenhouse gas rules for heavy trucks will provide a level playing field for companies seeking to reduce their carbon footprints.” View the proposed rule here.

APRIL FOOLS, BROUGHT TO YOU BY FOOD AND AG: You’re pretty funny, food and ag world. April 1 brought with it the standard array of faux foods and services that companies like to advertise for April Fools’ Day. Among MA’s favorites: USA Rice’s push to have presidential hopeful Donald Trump consider building a wall along the border with Mexico out of rice husks to help reduce costs; big data group Agrible’s nod to The Martian with its 2016 Astronaut Bundle that “is perfect for keeping track of your water and nutrient consumption, increasing potato yields, and for knowing when it's safe to take your Rover out”; and MA will admit to giggling over the new juice line from McDonald’s in Southern California featuring Filet-o-Fish Swish.

INSTANT OATS:

— Boulder County, Colo., is drawing up a plan to prohibit genetically engineered crops on land leased from the county, and the Denver Post is not a fan.

— Farmers in China plan to shift to more lucrative crops like soybeans, rice and peanuts now that the government is ending its corn stockpiling program and allowing the market to set prices, Reuters reports.

— Blue Bell, the ice cream company responsible for a deadly listeria outbreak last year, told FDA inspectors that it couldn’t locate all sources of the bacteria but has put controls in place, the Wall Street Journal reports.

— The University of Maryland determined that a professor who led research that found a brand of chocolate milk could improve concussion recovery violated conflict-of-interest policies by not disclosing he received money from the company, Vox reports.

— Brazil’s economic downturn has raised the price of sugar for consumers, Quartz reports.

THAT'S ALL FOR MA! See you again soon! In the meantime, drop your host and the rest of the team a line: cboudreau@politico.com and @ceboudreau; jhopkinson@politico.com and @jennyhops; hbottemiller@politico.com and @hbottemiller; mkorade@politico.com and @mjkorade; and jhuffman@politico.com and @jsonhuffman. You can also follow @POLITICOPro and @Morning_Ag on Twitter.

** A message from Just Label It: Without mandatory GMO labeling, consumers will not be able to make food choices that reflect their values, according to a long-awaited report by the National Academy of Sciences. Congress should act now to require mandatory, GMO labels on the package, not just high-tech gimmicks. Nine out of ten consumers want mandatory GMO labeling on the package — just like consumers in 64 other nations. Listen to the experts: the right-to-know is reason enough to require GMO labels. http://bit.ly/1W6njad **