Shirtless, armless and legless–meet Noah Galloway.

Loading #Bataan View on Instagram



The 32-year-old father of three is the “2014 Ultimate Men’s Health Guy” and will adorn newsstands across the nation this month with his November cover in Men’s Health magazine.

Wow! Thanks to all who voted for me. Proud to represent @MensHealthMag! #KCMankind #guysearch #noexcusesnoah pic.twitter.com/1D2KVbf9dZ — Noah Galloway (@Noah_Galloway) October 7, 2014



On Dec. 19, 2005, Galloway’s Humvee hit an explosive device in Yusafiah, Iraq. He lost his left arm and left leg above his knee. His jaw needed to be reconstructed, and his mouth was wired shut.

Loading View on Instagram



According to TODAY, his life immediately changed — and not for the better:

A soldier who had been dedicated to fitness since he was a teenager, Galloway gained weight and spent hours every day laying in bed after returning home from the hospital, consumed by depression and alcohol. In 2010, a look in the mirror jolted him into turning his life around, and he dedicated himself to getting back in shape.

>>> READ MORE: Life After War

Now Galloway spends his days running, climbing, weight-lifting and training for races. His journey back to fitness and inspiration started during late nights at a 24-hour gym where he would adjust different machines so he could use them with his missing limbs. He’s finished multiple marathons, seven Tough Mudder events and 12 Spartan Races.

Loading Team @QuestNutrition had some fun this past weekend at the Georgia #spartanrace. View on Instagram

“What kept me moving was never going back to where I came from,” he told Men’s Health. “I wanted people to see more than my injury.”

Loading Me during the second WOD at the @CrossFit competition #GarageGames1 in GA View on Instagram



Galloway is passionate about leading other veterans to recovery, before they hit the low point he did during his own recovery. His involvement in the nonprofit, Team X-T.R.E.M.E., gave him the opportunity to participate in physically demanding races wearing gas masks to raise money to take injured veterans on morale-boosting trips.

Loading Right before jumping out of the plane to the start line of the Heroes heat at the Leesburg #SpartanRace last summer racing with #TeamXtreme View on Instagram



“If I can show them the route I took to success,” he told CNN. “Then they can follow the same, and that makes me feel good.” His other motivation for success: his three children.

“I’m showing my two sons and my daughter that no matter what happens to you in life, you can continue pushing. You can continue to be happy and do whatever you want to do. I feel like I’m showing them what they need to do, because as a parent, you can try to preach to your children all day long. They don’t hear your words. They only see your actions. And I hope that I’m showing them a healthy, happy way of leading their life.”