The first quarter was huge for West Henderson on Monday night. The Lady Falcons jumped out to a 15-2 run with a ferocious press against Hendersonville and never looked back.

West (2-1) finished that quarter with a commanding 21-4 lead and that was all it took en route to a 60-41 victory over the county rival.

“That was our goal,” West coach Robbie Lowrance said of jumping out early.

That hole was too big for the Lady Bearcats (0-1) who played better the last three quarters.

The big issue in the first few minutes was the West press. That press and a strong defensive performance hindered the Lady Bearcats all night as West gobbled up 20 steals.

Leading the way defensively were Taylor Houck and Savannah Smith. Each had five steals on the night.

“Defense is the key to winning,” Houck said.

Defense may be the key to winning, but one thing that Lowrance was excited about on Monday night was the West offense. His team scored plenty of points.

Houck finished with 16 points, 10 rebounds and the five steals. Smith finished with 13 points, four assists and the five steals. Kendall Gilliam had 10 points.

Freshman guard Jaia Wilson chipped in 13 points.

If his team can score and play defense like it did on Monday night, Lowrance is excited about the possibilities.

“It's going to be tough,” the coach said. “We'll surprise a lot of people. We just have to keep playing as hard as we are right now.”

For Hendersonville, it's about identity, first year coach Jessica Eblen said.

Once that first quarter was over, the Lady Bearcats settled down and played competitively. Tiara Gary had 16 points and 12 rebounds. Sierra Arant had 10 points and five rebounds.

Her team outscored the Lady Falcons in the second quarter.

“There were moments of brilliance,” Eblen said. “We're still working to find our identity as a team. We're optimistic about our future.”

In the night cap, West Henderson's boys's squad beat Hendersonville 48-46 as Tyler Lindsey blocked a shot as the second ticked off the clock.

Hendersonville will play at East Henderson tonight. West will play at Madison on Wednesday night. Girls begin at 6:30 p.m.