LOCKPORT – Thanks to significant drops in many of the county’s major cost areas – most of which were completely outside the county’s control – Niagara County leaders were able to unveil a proposed 2016 budget Friday that reduces the average property tax rate by 3.7 percent.

Several of the big-ticket items in the budget – including Medicaid, employee health insurance, state-mandated pension fund contributions and workers’ compensation – all dropped by more than $1 million.

The overall budget released by County Manager Jeffrey M. Glatz and Budget Director Daniel R. Huntington totals $339.1 million, which is a spending increase of $2.46 million, or 0.73 percent.

Much of the blame for that lies with the state-mandated programs for preschool education of handicapped children, which are rising nearly $1.5 million, and child care and foster care programs, up $900,000.

There is partial state reimbursement for some of those costs, so the budget documents offer a “net appropriations” figure that actually shows a spending decrease of 0.29 percent.

The county is raising its property tax levy by 1.77 percent, but Huntington said the county’s “real” tax cap was 2.06 percent. He said the county was able to gain more head room under the state-mandated cap by rolling over the $843,000 by which it was under the cap last year.

Glatz said, “I think we got a very good budget that was well constructed by Mr. Huntington. We have to deal with that tax cap that doesn’t give you much flexibility in balancing a budget.”

That task was made easier by a variety of factors that pushed many of the county’s cost drivers downward.

The county share of Medicaid, always the largest item in the budget, fell $1.5 million, to $43.66 million.

Glatz said he thinks one of the reasons for that might be Obamacare moving Medicaid recipients into buying policies through the Affordable Care Act’s exchanges.

Good stock market results earlier in the year for the state public employee pension fund led State Comptroller Thomas P. DiNapoli, the sole trustee of the fund, to decree a decrease in local government contributions. That cut the county’s cost by $1.4 million, to $11.5 million.

Seemingly healthier county employees also helped the budget, as health insurance costs are being reduced by $1.8 million, to $29.2 million. Workers’ comp funding is down $1.5 million.

“For health insurance, we’re self-insured. We set the rates for 2015, and the expenses were less than the premiums,” Huntington said.

“It’s good that people are not getting sick or injured,” Glatz said. He said the county has been working with its unions on wellness programs that may be paying off.

All union members will receive their annual “step increases” in 2016, which the County Legislature restored last year after they had been frozen for four years. That will cost $800,000. The budget includes 2 percent pay raises for all non-union employees.

Also, $2.7 million has been stashed in the budget to pay for raises that would result if the county is able to reach contract agreements with its unions. At present, only one bargaining unit, the blue-collar American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, has a current contract. The other five unions are working under terms of deals that ran out at the end of 2011.

The county isn’t using its savings to produce a tax cut. Glatz is proposing to spend $7.2 million from the county’s surplus in 2016, but this year the county appropriated $9.9 million from that source, and the 2015 budget gave most taxpayers a small tax increase of less than 1 percent.

The county had $30 million in fund balance at the start of this year, but has spent about $4 million during the year. Most of that pertained to the county’s unexpected purchase of three buildings in downtown Lockport, two of which the county was leasing for office space. When the out-of-state owner put them up for auction, the county won them, and will no longer have to pay about $1 million per year in rentals, Glatz said.

The $26 million surplus remaining is better than the $24 million the county had at this time a year ago.

The county is projecting a 1 percent increase in sales tax revenues. “I don’t know if that’s conservative,” Huntington said. “We’re going to be above budget this year, but if you look at 2014 versus 2015, it’s flat.”

The budget director said sales tax revenue “is down all over the state. It’s good that we’re flat, because some counties are down 3 percent or 4 percent.”

The reasons for sales tax receipts going down may include the fall in the Canadian dollar, which might be keeping some Canadian shoppers from crossing the bridges, and the falling price of gasoline, Huntington speculated.

email: tprohaska@buffnews.com