Years from now, the record book will show that the 2015 Rockies’ home season was one of the worst in franchise history. Bullpen meltdowns, Kyle Kendrick’s string of stumbling starts, foolish baserunning and inconsistent offense were the primary symptoms of the letdown in LoDo.

But none of that mattered on a perfect Sunday afternoon as Nolan Arenado — touted as a dark-horse National League MVP candidate by manager Walt Weiss — continued his torrid September and the Rockies hammered the Los Angeles Dodgers 12-5 at Coors Field to complete a three-game series sweep.

“This meant a lot, because we didn’t quit. We aren’t quitters,” Arenado said. “The fans comes out every day, even though we haven’t played very well at home and this season hasn’t gone that well at all.”

Sunday marked the first time the Rockies swept the Dodgers since Sept. 25-27, 2007, at Los Angeles during Colorado’s fantastic run to the World Series. The last time the Rockies swept L.A. at Coors Field occurred just a few days earlier (Sept. 18-20) when they took four straight from the Dodgers. That series included a memorable walk-off homer by Todd Helton off Dodgers closer Takashi Saito in the second game of a doubleheader.

There was nothing quite so dramatic Sunday, but Arenado continues to do remarkable things. He hit a three-run blast in the fourth inning off L.A. left-hander Alex Wood, a sacrifice fly in the sixth and a run-scoring single in eighth for a career-high five RBIs. Arenado has 41 home runs — tied with Washington’s Bryce Harper for the National League lead — and his 126 RBIs are the most in the NL.

Arenado has the most RBIs by a Rockies players since Matt Holliday drove in 137 runs in 2007. The last time the Rockies had anybody break the 100-RBI threshold was in 2011, when Troy Tulowitzki had 105 RBIs.

Arenado, likely on his way to a third consecutive Gold Glove, has hit 11 home runs and driven in 31 runs in September. That might put him in the MVP spotlight, even though Harper is the clear favorite.

“Nolan has certainly had the year to pull it off, and he just keeps adding to his amazing season,” Weiss said. “He did it again, and he’s definitely put himself in a position to win that award.”

Arenado, though flattered by his manager’s praise, said collecting precious baseball hardware is not on his mind.

“It doesn’t really ring a bell with me because it’s never happened to me,” he said. “But it’s definitely a blessing if people are nominating me or like watching me play.”

A crowd of 32,870 turned out to see the home finale and watch the Rockies do their traditional thank-you lap around the ballpark.

The Rockies drew 2,506,789 fans to Coors Field this season — pretty good for a team that has lost 90 games in three of its last four seasons.

The Dodgers were no doubt thinking they would waltz into Coors Field and lock down their 14th National League West title. After all, the Pirates had just swept four games from the Rockies at Coors. But the Rockies outhit, outpitched and outplayed the Dodgers over three games. L.A. is only 2-7 over its last nine games as it heads to San Francisco on Monday to try to capture the division title.

Colorado finished with a 36-45 home record, the franchise’s second-worst for a full season. The Rockies’ worst home season in their history was in 2012, when they finished 35-46 at Coors Field.

Lefty Chris Rusin, who continues to audition for a spot in next year’s rotation, didn’t dominate the Dodgers on Sunday. But he gave the Colorado offense a chance to do its thing. Rusin, who earned his sixth win of the season, was tagged for four runs (three earned) on eight hits in 5 innings. He walked three and struck out three.

“It’s been the best-worst year of my life,” said Rusin, who pitched two complete games at Coors Field this season. “I’ve had some really, really good games and some really, really bad games. … I have to work on being consistent and not being such a roller coaster. That’s what I’m going to work on this offseason. I’ve learned a lot, and I think it was a successful season.”

psaunders@denverpost.com or @psaundersdp

Lodo lowdown

The Rockies completed their 2015 home season at Coors Field with a 12-5 victory over the Dodgers on Sunday. A closer look at how the Rockies fared at Coors:

• 36-45 record, second-worst in franchise history (35-46 in 2012)

• Hit .302 with 449 runs scored, 19th-most runs scored at home in franchise history (23 seasons)

• 102 home runs, 13th-most at home in franchise history

• Rockies starters had a 6.04 ERA

• Rockies relievers had a 5.20 ERA

Patrick Saunders, The Denver Post