Buy Photo Breast cancer patient Jill Brzezinski-Conley receives treatment in 2014 for pain from nurse Chelsea Davis, left, at Norton Suburban Hospital in Louisville. Sep. 11, 2014. (Photo: Jessica Ebelhar/The C-J)Buy Photo

Cancer patient Jill Brzezinski-Conley has been taken off a ventilator and is now breathing on her own, still fighting desperately to stay alive.

Her husband, Bart Conley, said Saturday that she is resting at Norton Brownsboro Hospital after collapsing and suffering a seizure earlier this week.

"Everyone knows my favorite movie is 'Rocky,' " Bart Conley said. "She is a fighter."

Conley, whose journey with incurable cancer is being chronicled by The Courier-Journal, stopped breathing on Thursday at her Norton Commons apartment and required CPR from her brother. She had a seizure in an ambulance rushing to the hospital, and she also broke two front teeth from biting down on the tubing the emergency crew inserted to help her breathe.

She was put on the ventilator at the hospital, where she was placed in intensive care.

Saturday, Bart Conley said doctors believe a lack of oxygen likely caused the seizure, and results of neurology tests were good.

Conley has been facing a series of setbacks recently after living with breast cancer for more than six years.

The diagnosis was followed by a double mastectomy, chemotherapy, radiation and breast implant surgery, after which one of the implants had to be removed when radiation burned a hole in it.

In early 2012, tests showed the cancer had returned in her sternum, and since then it has invaded her bones and left lung, and it has spread significantly over the last few months in her liver. Still, the 38-year-old has remained passionate about her dying missions - building her Jill's Wish cancer charity and spreading a message that true beauty is defined by kindness, confidence and love, and it can never be erased by illness.

Whatever happens, she has said, those missions will be her legacy.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share After being diagnosed with terminal cancer, Jill Conley has traveled the country telling her story, A recent setback has forced her to change her plans. Video by Scott Utterback

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1j0Wt1z