Somewhere in the nation's capital, paperwork is being processed for former Rep. Joe Sestak's formal candidacy in the 2016 Senate race against Sen. Pat Toomey, R-Pa.

The Delaware County Democrat, who stopped by the PennLive office Thursday to talk about everything from foreign and domestic issues to his future plans, said he's moving past 'exploratory' and plans to launch an official campaign soon.

Sestak lost his 2010 bid against the Republican by two points, but he said the 2016 race will highlight a fundamental difference between the two men.

"This issue is, who has your back?" Sestak said. "His approach is, 'You're on your own.' Mine is to advance individual opportunity."

He said Toomey claims to care about veterans, small businesses, and women, but he votes against efforts to advance solutions.

Sestak's Thursday visit also including discussion about:

ISIS and the beheadings of American journalists

A former three-star admiral, Sestak agreed with President Barack Obama's response to the rise of the terrorist group, but he said it "should've been more swift," and the objectives should've been more clearly communicated.

He's supportive of air strikes targeting the group, and he also believes the U.S. Treasury needs to find ways of stopping the flow of money to the terrorists, he said.

"This is a clear and present danger to us," Sestak said of ISIS. "When we went into Iraq the first time, it was not."

Earlier operations in Iraq set the stage, in some ways, for the current turmoil, he said, quoting Colin Powell.

"If you break it, you own it. And we broke it."

Spreading his message...on Fox News?

Sestak said Congress and Obama haven't communicated and defended their positions -- on everything from Iraq to Obamacare -- strongly enough to convey their messages.

And that means to everyone, Democratic or Republican.

"I've been on Sean Hannity half a dozen times," Sestak said. "I love it. I love the debate of ideas. Democracy is about a choice, and anyone who doesn't want to be out there and define the choices for people...isn't doing a real leader's job."

He said he welcomed a group of tea partiers who attended meetings he held on healthcare, though the tea party has opposed Obamacare.

"I shook their hands," he said. "The Delaware County tea party, my home county tea party, asked for a picture with me. At the end of the day, we're all people."

What he's been doing lately

Sestak recently finished his last semesters of teaching courses at colleges across the state, including Penn State Law.

"I turned down all the lobbying jobs, and it's outrageous what they offer you," he said, estimating the salaries at about five times what he was earning in Congress.

Over the past few years, the 62-year-old has also attended more than 300 events for other Democrats on all political levels, and he'll be on the trail for Democratic gubernatorial nominee Tom Wolf when he's needed, he said.

He's predicting a win for the new Tom

Sestak said Gov. Tom Corbett started the job facing some big challenges, but he didn't address them in a helpful way.

Corbett didn't allow taxpayers to share in profits from the state's bounty of natural gas, even though the U.S. Navy developed the bit and the sonar technology used to drill for gas, Sestak said.

"So I'd like a return on my investment as a taxpayer," he said.

Corbett's administration has also suffered from projecting "insensitivity" and making "less artful comments about certain demographics" during debates about women's healthcare and the state's voter identification requirements, Sestak said.

The gubernatorial race should draw big voter turnout in Pa., but numbers could be lower across the country, he said.

Sestak doesn't expect the majority party to change in either chamber of Congress, he said.