Highmark CEO: Stabilization needed in market

Highmark Health CEO David Holmberg says health care companies need to adapt to consumers' needs to succeed. Medical inflation, rising prescription drug prices and information technology are driving up the costs of providing treatment even as health insurance deductibles are rising, requiring individuals to pay a greater share of treatment costs.

Highmark has taken aggressive actions to try to cut its costs related to health plans sold on the Affordable Care Act's marketplace, shrinking networks of hospitals and doctors, ending commissions for brokers who sell the plans, and — controversially — reducing what it pays doctors to treat patients who have the plans.

In a recent interview with the Trib, Holmberg said he believes that integrated systems such as Highmark Health, which owns Allegheny Health Network, are positioned to navigate the changes and make health care more effective.

“I'm very focused on transforming health care to make it a much more consumer-focused industry where instead of people trying to seek out different pieces and parts as they need it, we've really transformed to one where you have the consumer or patient in the center and you build all the capabilities around that,” he said.

Holmberg, 57, started work at Highmark in 2007 and became CEO in 2014.

Following are edited excerpts from the interview.

You talk about the future of health care being this integrated model. UPMC, your competitor, has a head start on that. What kind of competitive advantages do you feel you have?

I think the difference between us and them is that they have a 20-year history of building assets or acquiring assets that they have to feed. We have a much more flexible platform, and we can go where the consumer is and go where they need us to be, and be part of this evolution to more of a preventive approach of managing chronic disease than a reactive approach, which is what you have today.

With regard to focusing on the consumer, does Highmark Health have any plans to make prices more transparent, as St. Clair Hospital recently did with its cost estimator tool?

St. Clair is a good partner of ours. At Highmark Health, we believe that it's a combination of not only the Allegheny Health Network but also the independent hospitals that are critical to the success of this region. We work very closely with the various independent hospitals to make sure that there's access to care and that it's effective. We are looking at what they're doing. We've had conversations with them. Particularly as people take high-deductible health care plans, we're going to look at that. The concept of how do you package or bundle reimbursements for everything from knee replacements to other procedures are going to have an influence in that and help to create some of that transparency.

Is that something we'll see in the next year?

I don't know if we'll see it in the next year. We haven't gotten there yet. But we are talking about it.

What is the importance of the Affordable Care Act marketplace to you, and what kinds of adaptations are you making along with those that have been in the news lately?

Highmark has always had a position of, we believe it's important to create access to care. We've played the hand that we've been dealt with the ACA markets. Obviously, once the law was put in place, we felt that it was important that we participate in it, particularly given that we provided the special needs programs for the state, for people who couldn't have access to insurance any other way. Everybody anticipated this was a population of people who had not had access to care, and some did, so a real catch-up effect was anticipated. People who didn't have access before all of a sudden had access, had insurance and started utilizing it. What people didn't anticipate is the chronic nature of many of these folks. It was chronic disease versus an episode of care. We believe that it's a shared responsibility to figure out how to stabilize this. It's not just about the insurance companies. It's not just about the hospitals or physicians. It's about the entire health care community coming up with solutions to make sure that there is access. I don't think that anybody wants to go back to the way it used to be. Because the way it used to be is that many of these folks would come into the health care system, see a physician, and it would be what's called uncompensated care. We want to find a way between premiums, quality of care, effectiveness of care, care management and pricing to be able to stabilize this market so that it can sustain itself.

Wes Venteicher is a Tribune-Review staff writer. Reach him at 412-380-5676 or wventeicher@tribweb.com.