OMAHA, Neb. (AP) - The fight to establish charter schools in Nebraska isn’t over, despite the loss of a key advocate in the Nebraska Legislature and opponents’ vow to keep the publicly funded, independently run schools out of the state.

Americans for Prosperity, the conservative anti-tax, small-government group, said the issue is one of its top priorities for Nebraska.

“Families should not be hindered by their zip code; they should have more education options and get to choose the school that best suits them,” said Matt Litt, director of the Nebraska chapter of Americans for Prosperity.

The group’s educational foundation issued a release earlier this week calling for education reform in Nebraska - including legislation to allow charter schools in the state.

Nebraska is one of only eight states that have not passed legislation to allow charter schools, according to the U.S. Department of Education. Charter schools are publicly funded and typically governed by an organization under a legislative contract - or charter. A charter school has more flexibility in its operation and can avoid some rules and regulations, but it can be more easily closed than a public school if it doesn’t meet accountability standards.

Last year, a Stanford University study said that charter schools benefit black and Hispanic English-learning student and students living in poverty, more than their peers in other groups.

But the schools have not been without controversy. Opponents say that charter schools drain money from public school systems and can cherry-pick the best students, while turning away weaker and disruptive ones - a choice public schools don’t have.

Omaha state Sen. Scott Lautenbaugh has twice introduced legislation to allow charter schools, only to see the bills die in committee. He said there will be another effort to pass charter school legislation in the upcoming session beginning in January, but the bill won’t come from him - Lautenbaugh is leaving his seat at the end of the year because of term limits.

Lautenbaugh said he believes another Omaha senator will take over his effort to allow for the creation of up to five charter schools in the Omaha Public Schools - the state’s largest with more than 46,000 students. Americans for Prosperity will work with any state lawmaker who wants to propose a charter school bill, Litt said.

Charter schools are more nimble to adapting to new practices and to the needs of their students, Lautenbaugh said.

“It’s easier for a single entity like a stand-alone charter school to go with what works and readily leave behind what doesn’t if you don’t have to try to go before a school board and a district and a union rep, etcetera,” Lautenbaugh said.

Omaha Public Schools and the Nebraska State Board of Education have steadfastly opposed efforts to allow charter schools in Nebraska.

State Sen. Ernie Chambers also vowed to fight any renewed effort, saying he rejects proponents’ stance that it’s better to help some children escape struggling schools than none.

“We don’t feed some of our children and starve the others,” he said.

Instead, lawmakers and education administrators need to strive for equality in existing public schools and address the problem of retaining incompetent teachers, Chambers said.