Police arrested four Neptune residents in connection to a Wall robbery.

Buy Photo File photo (Photo: Asbury Park Press )Buy Photo

Police arrested four Neptune residents Saturday in connection to a robbery at the 200 block of the Mews at Collingwood Park apartment complex, according to a news release.

Kadeem K. Adams, 19, Neptune Township; Derrick A. Simms, 24, Neptune Township; Tiara D. Jenkins, 23, Neptune Township; and Harold A. Peavy Jr., 19, of Neptune were arrested by Neptune police after Wall authorities notified surrounding towns of the robbery.

Simms, Adams and Jenkins were driving through the Mews about 2:30 p.m. Saturday and pulled up beside a person who was walking, according to a news release from Wall Police Chief Robert L. Brice. Adams allegedly stepped out of the car and punched the victim in the face, then stole more than $500 worth of personal items off the victim.

Simms, Adams and Jenkins drove off and were arrested a short time later by Neptune Township police after authorities there spotted the vehicle, Brice said in the release.

Wall police said the victim suffered minor injuries and refused medical treatment.

During the arrest in Neptune, authorities recovered the stolen property, Brice said.

Adams was charged with charged with one count of second degree robbery, one count of third degree receiving stolen property, one count of fourth degree drug possession of Xanax, one count of fourth degree unlawful possession of a knife, and one count of fourth degree criminal mischief. He was held in the Monmouth County Jail, Freehold Township, on $100,000 bail with no ten percent option, according to Wall police.

Police charged Simms with one count of second degree conspiracy to commit robbery, one count of fourth degree drug possession of Xanax, and one count of fourth degree unlawful possession of a knife. He was held in the Monmouth County Jail, Freehold Township, on $50,000 bail with no ten percent option, according to Wall police.

Jenkins was charged with one count of second degree conspiracy to commit robbery, one count of fourth degree drug possession of Xanax, and one count of fourth degree unlawful possession of a knife. Jenkins was held in the Monmouth County Jail, Freehold Township, on $50,000 bail with no ten percent option.

Peavy Jr. was not in the vehicle at the time of the robbery or involved, police said. He was charged with one count of fourth degree drug possession of Xanax and one count of fourth degree unlawful possession of a knife. He was processed and released on a summons, police said.

Authorities are asking anyone with information to contact Detective Elio Scarpa of the Wall Township Police Department at 732-449-4500 ext. 1145. Neptune Township police assisted with the investigation.

Amanda Oglesby:: 732-557-5701; aoglesby@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1rtZuK4