Topics: Author Interviews, Geology, Hurricane Sandy, Natural Disasters, Sustainability News, Life News

Some natural disasters — the earth-shattering, world-ending kind — we can’t prepare for. But smaller disasters, cataclysmic on a local scale, strike all the time. And yet each time they do, they never fail to take us by surprise.

The problem isn’t so much that we can’t anticipate disasters, says geologist Susan W. Kieffer, but that the public, and policy makers, don’t understand the way they work as well as they should. In “The Dynamics of Disaster,” Kieffer, a professor emerita of geology at the University of Illinois and a MacArthur “Genius Grant” recipient, explores what we know — and what continues to perplex and fascinate us — about the earthquakes, tsunamis, landslides, hurricanes, cyclones and tornadoes that come along with living on Earth. While the risk will always be there, she writes, by better understanding what are, at the core, natural processes, we can be better equipped when the inevitable happens.

Kieffer spoke with Salon about Mother Nature, human nature and the ways in which both sometimes act against our interests. The interview has been lightly edited for space and clarity.

You approach the study of natural disasters with a background in math and physics. Yet it seems — and you write about this a bit — that there is a kind of cultural attitude that disasters come out of nowhere and there’s no real way of anticipating them. Would you say that’s a faulty belief?

To some extent I think it is a little faulty. We understand a lot, geologically, about the processes that go on in the earth that impact us humans as disasters. There are natural processes of the earth, and because we have populated the planet so heavily a lot of people live in proximity to these outbursts of Mother Nature that then impact us negatively.

We have to remember that some of these processes are also very beneficial. Floods on the Nile, before it was heavily dammed, brought fresh soil and nutrients into the flood plains and the deltas of the Nile River. Volcanic eruptions put out materials that increase the fertility of soil. But when these processes harm humans, we call them disasters.

Some people live in places that are particularly disaster-prone. Should we be making more of an effort to live in safer places, or is that just a “blame the victim” mentality, where after the fact you can say, “Well, they shouldn’t have been living there if they knew this was likely to happen”?

You know, I’m not optimistic about people living only in safe places. We just don’t have that choice, with as many people as we’ve got on the planet. And unfortunately, some of the places that are very prone to disasters are actually very attractive places to live. People like living on the flanks of volcanoes. They are very fertile for farming, and they’re very beautiful. People like to live in river valleys, again, because of the fertility of the soil and the ease of travel.

Unfortunately, in some places — like Bangladesh, as a prime example — it’s the more impoverished, less advantaged people that are in the most danger of harm.

Would you say it’s human nature to not recognize the risk of disasters, whether you’re living somewhere that’s more prone to them or not? In other words, what is it that makes it hard for people to prepare for these things?

Well, I laugh at myself about this. I just recently moved to the Pacific Northwest, and I live right in proximity to the big Cascadia Fault system up here. So I’m pointing the finger at myself in this.

We as humans seem to find it very difficult to think beyond the next generation of our children or at very best our grandchildren. I think our political systems play into that, in that we have very short lifetimes: four, eight, ten years in our political system, so that you very much act on short-term interest rather than long-term planning. And that’s really a problem for planning for the medium-sized or the big events, which are fairly rare on those time scales. You know, the earthquake that only happens every few hundred years is the one that’s going to really cause a lot of damage, and because we can’t predict exactly when it’s going to happen, we can only deal with probabilities. We have trouble planning for these very, very big but rare events.

I guess that’s the same mentality behind why people aren’t doing more about climate change — these bigger systems that aren’t affecting them immediately.

I think it is the same effect. If something doesn’t immediately affect us, it’s very easy to put it out of our mind. It’s the same whether it’s something like climate change, which is really global in scale, or at best maybe regional in scale, but it’s not happening on our block in a way that we can see it. I think Hurricane Sandy brought a lot of attention to the East Coast. Hopefully people will remember that and think about it, in terms of climate change and planning for their cities.

Just from observing the way the media has addressed these big disasters, do you see people turning towards planning? Or are they just not doing enough to prepare for the next once-in-100-years event?

It’s hard to say, but I guess I think we’re not doing enough — because we can do better. I do think we are improving, and I think the media is playing a valuable role in that. There are pluses and minuses, but I think bringing things to people’s attention and presenting the facts in a careful way is helpful. I think people generally would like to do the right thing, but business interests and political interests sometimes get in the way.

What about that other way they’re depicted in the media: disaster movies? Are those in any way harmful for people trying to study disasters in real life?



[Laughs] I’m not a movie-goer, so I haven’t seen that many disaster movies, and being a nerdy scientist I always like to sit there and nitpick on the things that they didn’t get quite right. In some ways it’s a little bit like the Hollywood adage that any exposure is good exposure. It is important to get things scientifically correct, though, and I think there are movies that do that very well, but I’m going to be hard put to think of them off the top of my head.

What are the areas in which knowing more about the way disasters work can most help us, in terms of preparing for them?

The biggest advance that scientists would love to make is finding cause and effect, so that we had precursors. I’ll give you an example where we do, sometimes: when Mount St. Helens erupted, in 1980, there were about 3 months of little eruptions that had alerted us that this volcano came alive for the first time in a century. And so there was some time to mobilize resources, and to warn people. For example, the logging activities of Weyerhaeuser Paper Company were banned in a zone around the volcano. We were lucky that the volcano erupted on a Sunday, or there actually would have been more casualties. But basically the U.S. Geological Survey and the U.S. Forest Service were able to do the right things because there was some notice that an eruption was going to occur.

Earthquake prediction is much more difficult, because sometimes you have precursors and sometimes you don’t. We have a very tragic situation now in a town called L’ Aquila, in Italy, where six seismologists and a government civil servant were convicted of manslaughter. The basic circumstances around that were that there was a swarm of small earthquakes — those earthquakes are not always precursors to a big event — and the scientists were convicted for failure to properly communicate that with the public. So it would be, I’m sure, a major breakthrough for earthquake scientists if they really had a way to say, yes or no, these are going to or they are not going to lead to a major earthquake. That just doesn’t exist right now.