After rumors flew that thousands of Syrian refugees landed in New Orleans Friday night, the US State Department set the record straight.

According to the State Department, 14 refugees from Syria were accepted into Louisiana this year.

On Nov. 14, Governor Bobby Jindal sent a letter to the White House demanding to know the number of Syrian refugee allowed into Louisiana.

“As Governor of Louisiana, I demand information about the Syrian refugees being placed in Louisiana in hopes that the night of horror in Paris is not duplicated here,” Jindal wrote.

Jindal's letter came after several blogs reported that 10,000 Syrian refugees made their way through New Orleans and into Louisiana this year. Several of these stories falsely cited a story FOX 8 WVUE reported on weeks earlier. The story spotlights humanitarian agencies working to help Syrians flee a war-torn country, while also speaking with security experts to better understand any possible danger involved.

The White House has announced plans to take in 10,000 Syrian refugees in 2016, but they would not all be in Louisiana.

"The President has said the United States will accept 10,000 Syrian refugees in Fiscal year 2016, to be allocated among the states," according to a statement given by a State Department spokesman. "While we do not have predictions on how those individuals will be allocated among the states, those decisions are made in close coordination with state and local civil society organizations and government officials."

For more information on the federal government's plan and how your city could be affected go to the Worldwide Refugee Admissions Processing System website.

"Refugees are subject to the highest level of security screening of any individuals who enter the United States," according to the State Department spokesperson. "The administration committed to accepting additional Syrian r‎efugees this Fiscal Year with the confidence we will be able to do it safely."

Copyright 2015 WVUE. All rights reserved.