Mark Roberts is executive vice president and co-founder of Staff Leasing, a professional employer organization, often referred to as a PEO.

Roberts and Tom Boell, now company president, founded Staff Leasing in 1989 and remain co-owners. They relied on guidance from Roberts' late father, who had started a similar company in Florida.

"We're not a temp service -- sometimes people think that because of the name," Roberts said. "What we are is an off-site human resource department for small businesses, from one to 300 employees. By grouping businesses together, it gives us the collective buying power for benefits and administration."

The North Syracuse company provides human resources, payroll, employee benefits, workers comp and similar services to about 400 small businesses in Central New York.

Were you in leadership roles growing up?

Nothing in a formal way. As a kid, I was the one organizing things, kind of the leader of the pack, so to speak.

I grew up in Liverpool and graduated from Liverpool High School in 1972. I started working right away, everything from working in a pizza parlor to delivering newspapers.

I had interesting experiences growing up.

I have a brother (Scott) who has cerebral palsy.

Way back, during the blizzard in 1966, my parents (Jim and Louise) had gone down to Philadelphia, to learn a therapy program referred to as patterning. It was a crawling motion. Volunteers would come into our house, every hour on the hour, seven days a week, and do a five-minute pattern with my brother. One person on the head, one person on each arm and one person on each leg. The volunteers taught a lot of empathy and the value of community.

They originally didn't think my brother would live much past his teens. He's four years younger than I am, so he's 57, which is pretty amazing.

It sounds like your parents had quite an influence.

Yes, they did. I saw the drive that my parents had and the ability to overcome issues and problems and keep a positive attitude.

What's your leadership style like now?

My leadership style is positive reinforcement -- a lot.

I try to lead by example. Every person that you deal with in a company is different. They have different things that motivate them. My style is finding that thing and being able to motivate them and staying positive with them. If there is an issue, be direct, be straightforward. Handle it and move on -- don't hold grudges.

What advice would you give somebody who's promoted to a leadership position or aspires to take on a leadership role?

Be straightforward.

Be honest.

Create trust. Your employees need to trust that you're going to do what you say you're going to do.

Never discipline anybody in front of another staff member.

Once you have addressed a problem, move on.

Don't let your emotions dictate what you're going to do.

Know the facts. If you don't know, be honest about it and be willing to learn. Learn from the people who work with you. If you can hire somebody with more talent than you, the better off you are. You can learn a lot more.

You learn from people all the time.

I have said this many times: You learn more from a bad boss than you do from a good boss, because you learn how not to treat people. If you've ever worked with someone who is a dictator, who is demeaning, you see it's difficult for people.

I talk about having empathy and trust and community, it's amazing when you think about what people will do for you and what you can do for people.

How do you mentor up-and-coming leaders or train somebody to take on leadership responsibility?

Put trust in them. Communicate what you're looking for. Be willing to listen. Coach them. Bring them to where you want to be by setting goals. Show them that they can do anything. People can do anything if they put their mind to it and keep a positive attitude.

What should the leader do when an employee tries something and a good-faith effort fails?

Try again. Figure out what went wrong and move on. Take the next step to make it more positive, make a more positive outcome.

So failure does not have to be the end?

No. I learned from my father, who tried different things, failed, and kept going.

You hear about Abraham Lincoln and the failures that he had. Yet, he persevered and succeeded as one of the greatest presidents.

To succeed, you have to be willing to take the chance. There aren't successes without challenges. Take the chance, but learn. Do the research.

If you're going into a business, know the competition, know what's been successful. Know where you fit. Are you going to be the least cost or value added?

Come up with a mission statement and follow that mission statement.

Get a good accountant. Get a good lawyer. Get good mentors that you can learn from and talk to. Find somebody you can trust, who's going to be honest, and straightforward. Someone who can challenge you, challenge your knowledge, challenge what you are doing.

Your advice for overcoming obstacles and setbacks?

Find out what's causing the obstacle. Then do the research and collaborate with people to overcome that obstacle.

I would never refer to it as a problem. It's not a problem. It's a challenge. How are we going to overcome that?

PMA -- positive mental attitude -- is something that people hear me say all the time. Keep it positive. There are challenges all over life and it's a matter of how you deal with them.

Keep the emotional end out of it, which is difficult to do sometimes.

Tell me about a difficult challenge you've had in business and how you overcame it.

Recently, it's been changes in the health-care laws with ACA (Affordable Care Act) and what's taking place with rates for health insurance. When we started our company 27 years ago, a single health plan, with $10,000 in life and dental, was $99 with a $100 deductible. Now you're looking at $700 without life, without dental. And with about a $1,000 deductible. The change taking place in the benefits arena and the reporting that have to take place, that's been a challenge.

Software has been one way to overcome that challenge.

How do you get an organization to deal with change?

Work as a team. Make sure that everybody's on the same page within the organization. See what's out there and see what you need to do to handle the changes that are needed.

As our company has evolved over the years, our services had to evolve with the clients' needs. If you look at labor laws and things like that over 27 years, the number of labor laws and changes that are taking place are astronomical.

Describe a significant change you needed to make that, in retrospect, was a turning point.

The software system. Changing our entire software package so that our clients can log on to our human resource information system and pull up all sorts of information. In addition, the employees can log on and pull up their own individual information.

That was a real challenge, rolling that out, and educating the clients.

Having a great partner like Tom, as dedicated as I am, handling our software change truly made a big difference.

It took a lot of work. It's never done -- there are updates every week.

So, the answer to success is constant changing with the times.

"CNY Conversations" feature Q&A interviews with local citizens about leadership, success, and innovation. The conversations are condensed and edited. They also run regularly on Sunday in The Post-Standard's Business section. To suggest a person for CNY Conversations, contact Stan Linhorst at slinhorst@syracuse.com.

Last week: What makes a great leader? David Grindle of USITT says it's not about you. "It's about the organization or the effort or the people. When it's about you, it's self-serving and the goal is finite to you. When it's about the cause, the cause never ends."