Colorado faces a new hurdle this fall as the Common Core learning standards for mathematics are implemented in all public schools. Our state does not promote specified curricula, but the demands for deeper learning require teachers to abandon and revise long-standing practices. In many districts, educators are anxious, students are confused, and parents are frustrated.

Instead of dreading the new proficiency expectations, I encourage us to see this change as a liberating force allowing broader, more interesting and effective instruction. Before Common Core, Colorado’s standards read like a checklist. Lessons about multiplying included story problems requiring multiplication, and, although this sounds logical, students rarely had to think about when to multiply and when not to.

When consulting with elementary educators about Common Core, I start with a YouTube video of 22,000 tumbling dominoes. It takes less than 3 minutes, and the patterns are fantastic as the tiny blocks cascade into a multicolored mess. This prompts an entire lesson built upon a cluster of fourth-grade concepts about understanding numbers from zero to 1 million and developing fluency connecting multiplication and division.

Suppose you bought 22,000 dominoes but lost one. How many would you have? If five friends make this video, splitting the work evenly, how many dominoes would each friend set up? If the video takes about 2½ minutes for all the dominoes to fall, predict how long it would take for 66,000 dominoes. On Amazon, you can buy bags of 200 dominoes for $29.95. Approximate the cost of 22,000 dominoes.

These domino problems jump about to include time, money, estimation, place-value, adding, subtracting, multiplying and dividing. In the past, many teachers would have ultimately covered these same topics but as parts of six different lessons. Prior to Common Core, showing this video would have been hard to justify because it doesn’t clearly address a specific skill. But when we cluster several concepts, the mathematics is extremely rich. The emphasis on clustering topics is the best part of the Common Core math reforms.

The warm-up problems ask students to consider whether or not they should multiply and then require one or two operations. Now comes the true power of Common Core: tackling really big problems with multiple steps. For example, suppose we wanted to topple 1 million dominoes: estimate how many minutes this video would last and how much the dominoes would cost.

Working in pairs, the solution will take fourth- or fifth-graders at least 30 minutes as the teacher circulates, asking questions and encouraging teamwork. While this problem builds on the warm-ups, it is not overly structured and requires students to assemble their own scaffolding to access a solution. Confidently solving this problem demonstrates a deeper level of mastery than we accessed prior to Common Core.

Fun lessons like this are not easily found in old textbooks, and new books geared to Common Core are yet unproven. We are at an exciting moment when teachers have the power to curate curricula that will be enjoyable to teach and learn.

Donning a positive attitude, the new expectations promote creative teaching in ways that were often suppressed in the prior era. We need to make teaching and learning more fun by increasing academic challenges.

Seth Berg of Telluride is a former Colorado Teacher of the Year. He consults for school districts.