When it comes to deaths like Michael Brown's, like Trayvon Martin's, like Victor\Steen's, like so many in the sad pattern of young, black, American men, Pensacola is not that far from Ferguson.

The body of Victor Steen lies beneath a police car after he was run over in the Brownsville area. (Photo: Florida Department of Law Enforcement)

It seemed every bit as grotesque as Michael Brown's shooting in Ferguson, Mo. — the night 17-year-old Victor Steen was killed here in Pensacola, almost five years ago. Our former super-journalist Katie Brumbeloe shot the jarring, symbolic photo: A limp leg emerging from underneath the tonnage of a white police car. To look at it, you felt sick and knew what happened — even if you had not witnessed it.

But as in Ferguson, there were witnesses.

Sluggo's was on West Cervantes then. Our reporter Kris Wernowsky rushed over and got the story from bargoers who saw it all:

Jamison Boler was seated outside with at least seven friends when they saw blue lights of the police car, then noticed the male on a bike… "The man on the bike was on the sidewalk, boogeying down. … The policeman fired a Taser out the window. The guy (on the bike) made a U-turn and ditched the bicycle and kind of did a somersault on the ground. Not two seconds later, the cop car just ran over him. … The cop ran up on the curb and hopped out of the car and said, 'Where are you at?' The guy was still underneath his car. You can still see his red shoe sticking out."

Pensacola did not ignite like Ferguson. Perhaps a calmer community and more proper police presence kept us sane. Our young journalists — Brumbeloe and Wernowsky — were not gassed or arrested that night. Tanks were not deployed on our streets. Nor were retaliatory Molotovs tossed at militarized lines of camo-wearing cops.

Thankfully, we grappled better with our tragedy.

But our shame is shared: A young, black man killed by the overreaching force of government.

Several years later came Trayvon Martin in my hometown of Sanford. And now, like then, I find myself drawing cartoons about racial injustice. A familiar line of response results each time: Your cartoons are "divisive." They are a product of "white guilt." When "they" kill "each other" you don't draw it. "Liberal." "Race-baiting." "Racist."

Sigh.

White folks, I love ya. But as a cartoonist who specializes in exaggeration and caricature, trust me — it's time to get real.

The Lord may have created us all equal, but we mortals don't act like it. And simply talking about race does not make one racist. Or Liberal. Listen to Rand Paul, who wrote last week, "Anyone who thinks that race does not still, even if inadvertently, skew the application of criminal justice in this country is just not paying close enough attention."

So please pay attention. Because when it comes to deaths like Brown's, like Martin's, like Steen's, like so many in the sad pattern of young, black, American men, Pensacola is not that far from Ferguson.

Victor Steen was struck and killed by a police officer's vehicle on Cervantes Street near Q Street across from Sluggos in the Brownsville area of Pensacola. (Photo: Katie Brumbeloe/kbrumbeloe@pnj.c kbrumbeloe/kbrumbeloe@pnj.com)

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/VuLAcw