Why should you pay for a service that you do not even use? One example is we all pay into the social security system. We are not sure that it will be there when we need it but the hope is that it will be. If the funds are there in the future we hope to reap the benefits. Those that have never paid into the system or do not meet the requirements cannot expect to reap the benefits. It’s similar with health insurance. If you do not contribute to the system then should you expect to reap the benefits? Many people even ones who can pay have this attitude. When do they call to purchase insurance? When they get sick. This is equal to walking up to a stranger on the street and asking them to pay your bill.

Is there a way to bypass Obamacare and not have to pay the penalty? No. All comprehensive major medical insurance plans are subject to the Affordable Care Act which has been nicknamed Obamacare. If you do not have an insurance plan that complies with the law you will have to pay a penalty. The only way around the law is to qualify for an exemption.

Are there any alternatives for those who cannot afford the new plans that conform to Affordable Care Act? Yes but they do not help you to avoid the shared responsibility penalty. Many people have turned to Short Term Medical Insurance as a lower cost alternative. In many states you can purchase a Short Term Medical plan for 364 days and purchase another plan which would start as soon as that plan ends. These plans are generally less expensive than the new ACA plans. How can you know if this is the best choice for you?

First find a licensed agent that understands how Short Term Medical Plans work. Before you make a choice find out how much an ACA compliant plan will cost you for one year. Next calculate what your penalty will be under the ACA. Find out how much a Short Term Medical Insurance Plan will cost you for one year. Add the yearly cost of the Short Term Medical Plan and the total estimated tax penalty. If it’s lower than the cost of the ACA compliant plan it may be a satisfactory alternative for you.

Some things to keep in mind before you choose this route. Short Term Medical Insurance is not guaranteed issue. You do need to answer health questions and you do need to qualify. There are lifetime maximum limits. Some plans include doctor visit copays where as others do not. They are also not required to cover preventative care 100% which is required by for all ACA compliant plans. They are major medical plans but they do have their limitations.