ANALYSIS UAW-Lear fight shows stubbornness of two-tier wage hold

The United Auto Workers this summer vowed again to end the practice of paying workers in the same plant different wages for the same work. But a contract signed last week at a Lear Corp. seat plant in Indiana illustrates just how hard it will be to eliminate so-called two-tier wages.



When the four-year agreement was announced, it appeared the UAW had put all 730 workers at the plant on a track to earn the maximum wage of $21.58 by contract end. The vast majority of the workers were two-tier workers earning $11 to $14 an hour.



Then, more details became available from Southfield-based Lear and the union. The UAW explanation of the contract omitted a key concession the union had made to Lear to keep the contract affordable for the supplier.

That is, about 120 of the workers at the seat-assembly plant were given a new job classification of "subassembly" worker. They were told they would move in the coming weeks to a different plant in the area and not be paid the higher wages of their co-workers in the seat-assembly plant. But they would get raises: Subassembly workers will earn a maximum of $15.25 at the end of the contract with hires starting at $12 an hour.



This balancing act that eliminated two-tier wages in one plant only to re-establish it at another demonstrates why two-tier wages are likely to survive the UAW-Detroit 3 contract negotiations next year, said David Cole, chairman emeritus of the Center for Automotive Research in Ann Arbor.

Erosion, not elimination

"This is a sticky problem for the UAW," said Cole, who has witnessed decades of Detroit 3-UAW contract talks. "I don't think we'll see the elimination of tier two this time around. Maybe some erosion of it."



The Detroit 3 are profiting from a combined 130,000-person UAW workforce that is now 25 percent two-tier workers earning about $16 an hour in wages versus $28 an hour for legacy workers, Cole said.





Tier creep

New UAW President Dennis Williams said tackling two-tier wages is a priority of the union when he was elected in June at the UAW Constitutional Convention in Detroit.



Two-tier wages are divisive on the factory floor because new employees earn lower wages and benefits than veteran co-workers for doing the same jobs, said Jerry Dias, president of Unifor, the successor union to the Canadian Auto Workers.





Related Links