NASHVILLE — A large industrial fire at a federal Superfund site in central Tennessee has been put out and an evacuation order that affected at least 400 people has been lifted.

Kim Shelton with the Hickman County Mayor’s office said the last of between 400 and 500 displaced residents were able to return to their homes Friday following an evacuation of all residences within a four-mile radius of the Industrial Plastics Recycling plant fire. Shelton said the 1,800 students from the four local schools evacuated during the fire also returned for a two-hour day on Friday.

She said emergency personnel remain in the area, and all residents returning to their homes are advised to use caution.

Fire fighters from Hickman, Maury and other surrounding counties spent the day battling the blaze at the site on 8526 Plant Road, known locally as the former Wrigley Charcoal Plant site. Clouds of smoke from the fire could be seen more than 30 miles away in Columbia.

Documentation of the Wrigley Charcoal Plant site on the Environmental Protection Agency’s web site revealed “TDEC has issued several notices to the recycling facility” operating at the location. The site describes the Industiral Plastics Recycling facility where the fired occurred as “a small-scale recycling facility, (that) conducts metals and plastics recycling, storage of waste products, and other related activities.”

The site was placed on the EPA’s National Priorities List in 1989 because of “contaminated debris, ground water and soil resulting from facility operation” and has since been under EPA monitoring. The EPA asked the owners of the plastic recycling facility to remove hazardous materials in December 1998 and noted a month later the area had not been cleaned.

In February 1999, the EPA made another site visit. Officials noticed more hazardous materials were being stored on the site, and areas previously in violation were “in worse condition” than before.

The EPA took various soil and water samples of the area from 2009 to 2011, including from wells in the Clark Hollow area, and proposed a new clean-up plan for the site in 2012.

The facility where the fire broke out only covers a portion of the former Wrigley Charcoal Plant site, according to the EPA. The remainder of the land includes an athletic field owned by Hickman County Parks and Recreation Department, an unused storage basin and irrigation field as well as the residential community of Clark Hollow.

According to the EPA website, the Superfund site was home to various industrial operations, including iron, charcoal and wood distillation product manufacturing, beginning in 1880. Contaminants of concern at the site include wood tar chemicals, metals and volatile organic compounds.

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is monitoring air quality in the area.

State Fire Marshal’s office spokeswoman Kate Abernathy said investigators there have not yet determined what caused the fire. She said the fire appears to be accidental, but investigators are still taking statements from the workers.

The Tennessee Occupational Safety and Health Administration also is investigating potential worker safety hazards.

Industrial Plastics Co. official Pat Nicks, reached by telephone, declined to comment on the situation.