Chris John (Photo: Submitted)

A new era has begun in Louisiana. Last month the voters across Louisiana exercised their right to vote and the results could potentially change the direction our state is going. In addition to our new statewide leaders — Gov.-elect John Bel Edwards, Lt. Gov.-elect Billy Nungesser, and Attorney General-elect Jeff Landry — Louisianans elected 10 new parish presidents, 10 new police jury presidents, 30 new state representatives, and 11 new state senators. And this doesn’t include numerous parish councilmen, police jurors, and other local officials. Let me take this chance to congratulate them on behalf of the Louisiana Mid-Continent Oil and Gas Association (LMOGA).

All these changes begs the question of, “What does this mean?” Over the course of the next few weeks, there will be feverish activities leading up the “organizational session” that convenes Jan. 11. These actions include appointments of key cabinet level secretaries, selection of House and Senate leadership, committee makeup announcements and general policy development for upcoming sessions. The decisions made in this time will chart the course for what is to come over the next year, at least.

This is why it is imperative that LMOGA monitor, track, and engage in the various moving parts. The oil and gas industry in Louisiana has a $73.8 billion economic impact and is responsible for employing more than 300,000 citizens, according to a 2014 Dr. Loren Scott study. Additionally, our technological breakthroughs and the utilization of hydraulic fracturing has contributed to the so-called “Energy Renaissance” and the subsequent expansion announcements found in the chemical industry.

Given the low prices of the commodities we produce and manufacture, times are tough for the oil and gas industry — and forecasts indicate it will remain so for the immediate future. Therefore, it is critical decision makers understand the impacts of the decisions they make and the votes they cast. LMOGA is dedicated to working with these key players to educate them and extrapolate the impacts of future legislation

There is little doubt that along the way there will be disagreements. That is why it is incumbent for the citizenry to stay engaged. Feedback to your elected official on the effects of these issues on your livelihood plays a large role in their deliberations. The importance of voter input cannot be overstated.

It is critical that we all understand that the oil and gas industry needs Louisiana, and Louisiana needs the oil and gas industry. It is only through this collaboration that Louisiana will be able to reach new heights. As you enjoy the Christmas season, remember all choirs are most effective when everyone is singing from the same hymnal.

— Chris John, former congressman, is president of the Louisiana Mid-Continent Oil & Gas Association.

Read or Share this story: http://www.theadvertiser.com/story/opinion/2015/12/12/chris-john-oil-industry-voters-must-watch-legislative-session-closely/77142712/