Topics: 2014 elections, disabilities, Governor, hypocrisy, Texas, Wendy Davis, Politics News

Texas state senator and Democratic gubernatorial candidate Wendy Davis is making no apologies for a new attack ad directed at her Republican opponent, Attorney General Greg Abbott. The spot, which was released on Friday, notes Abbott’s partial paralysis as the result of a 1984 accident, over which he sued and was awarded over $10 million in damages. Critics on both sides of the aisle have roundly condemned the Davis campaign for the attack, which includes an empty photo of a wheelchair (Abbott uses one) as a backdrop to claims of Abbott’s hypocrisy — bullet-pointed examples of the candidate ruling against an amputee, a rape survivor and the victims of surgical malpractice. But Davis and her aides have stood by the advertisement so far, and show no signs of saying sorry.

“In 1984, Greg Abbott sought out and received justice following a horrible injury, rightly so,” Davis said at a press conference on Monday, Politico reports. “And I’m glad, he deserved justice for the terrible tragedy that he endured … But then he turned around and built his career working to deny the very same justice that he received to his fellow Texans rightly seeking it for themselves.”

Davis went on to reiterate the point of the ad — to call out Abbott’s hypocrisy — by asserting that the attorney general “has built a career kicking the ladder down behind him and denying to others the very same justice that he both deserved and received.”

““We need to call this what it is — hypocrisy,” Davis added. “But there is example after example of it, harming the people that he is supposed to be fighting for.”

But, in addition to unnecessarily depicting the wheelchair and making Abbott’s disability part of the campaign, the problem with the picture Davis paints in her ad is that it tackles the wrong issue. As the American Prospect points out, the spot’s portrayal of Abbott’s record is a mostly accurate one, based rightly on the attorney general’s decades-long history of attempting to shutter courthouses to those in need of justice. “Abbott’s record on disability issues is absolutely legitimate, since it has been part of his work as attorney general,” Paul Waldman writes. “This is an issue on which he has received criticism before, including on the specific question of whether people who are disabled should be able to sue for compensation. His own history would seem relevant to that issue.”