Betsy Denney stands in front of the grave of outlaw Charley McCoy on Saturday at the Western Fremont Historical Society's presentation of "Desperadoes, Outlaws, and Shysters." (Sally Seck / Daily Record)

Think back to the days of cattle rustling and gold prospecting, when it took three days to get from Cotopaxi to Cañon City.

Hard to imagine, right? Not for those listening to Betsy Denney present the Western Fremont Historical Society program, "Desperadoes, Outlaws and Shysters of Western Fremont County," on Saturday at the Cotopaxi School in Cotopaxi.

"My ancestors came to Howard in 1872 from the Leadville, Salida area," Denney said, establishing her credibility as a fifth generation resident of the area. She has supplemented her family stories with research and delivered a presentation on the area's history, focusing only on the unsavory characters who settled in this "rugged country."

"Western Fremont County makes up about three-quarters of the county in terms of land," Denney said. "But we've always had to travel into Cañon City to the county seat. Sometimes my family could make it in a two-day trip each way, but they were hurrying. They would spend the night in Parkdale."

It's a lot easier now to get to the county seat from Cotopaxi, but the western part of the county is still rugged, agricultural land. There were about 50 people in attendance at this presentation, which shows interest in the local heritage.

Attendees learned about the founder of Cotopaxi, Henry "Gold Tom" Thomas, a prospector who had gold but would never say where he found it; the Bloody Espinosa brothers; Emanuel Saltiel, who was responsible for starting the failed Jewish colony; the cattle-rustling, bordello-owning McCoy family; and many other colorful characters who lived outside of the law.

Advertisement

After the presentation, Denney led those interested to drive or walk up the hill behind the school to view graves of many of the characters. The land for the school and cemetery were donated by Saltiel, and the cemetery initially established for graves of the colonists that died. The graves are now set apart, a Jewish custom, by a fence and memorialized with historical marker.

The Western Fremont Historical Society is a nonprofit "dedicated to the preservation and sharing of our local history and artifacts." The society is working now on a presentation on homesteading in Coaldale, which will be Aug. 22 in Coaldale.

For more information, call (719) 942-3592. For those interested in learning more, a self-guided tour of western Fremont County, U.S. 50 from Parkdale to Wellsville, is available at Chambers of Commerce throughout the county and at www.fremontheritage.com.