What could stop Hillary Clinton from running for president? The former secretary of state told interviewer Charlie Rose the prospect of becoming a grandmother could deter her, and she has a “very personal choice” to make about a White House bid. “The job has gotten even bigger and more difficult,” she told Rose. “I understand how the job is done, and I understand what has to be prioritized. I just have to decide whether or not that’s what I want to do at this point in my life.” USA Today has more, and here’s a video of Clinton and Rose:

Fine with Hillary, pining for Warren: Politico reports from the annual confab of progressives called Netroots Nation and finds the liberal base feels Hillary Clinton would be an acceptable choice for president. But they’re really pining for Sen. Elizabeth Warren, the Massachusetts Democrat who has said repeatedly she isn’t running. “Let’s put it this way,” one attendee told Politico. “I want to see [Clinton] run for president because I know she would win. Who would I really want to see run for president? Elizabeth Warren.”

Decision time: The White House needs to make a decision soon about whether Obamacare’s employer mandate will take effect in 2015. The Hill writes federal officials are late in delivering the final forms and technical guidance necessary for firms to comply, raising suspicions the mandate could once again be delayed. It has been pushed back twice before – both times in late summer. It is now set to take effect in January.

Border funding: doubtful. House Speaker John Boehner raised doubts that Congress will be able to fulfill President Barack Obama’s funding request to deal with the influx of illegal migrants crossing the U.S.-Mexico border before lawmakers leave for their summer recess in two weeks. As the Washington Post writes, Boehner’s comments came amid a sharpening debate between Democrats and Republicans about the cause of the increase in illegal border crossings. Asked about the prospects of approving Obama’s $3.7 billion request before Aug. 1, Boehner said: “I would certainly hope so, but I don’t have as much optimism as I would like to have.”

Christie mobbed in Iowa: New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie insists that he hasn’t made up his mind about running for president. But he plans to be back in Iowa “a lot” after visiting Thursday, The Wall Street Journal reported from the state, which holds the first-in-the-nation presidential caucuses. Campaigning with GOP Gov. Terry Branstad, Christie was mobbed as he waded into a restaurant in the city of Marion, where he kissed babies, posed for selfies, signed baseballs and shook hands with about 100 people. Christie is trying to rebound on the national stage after a bridge lane-closing scandal broke his stride, as the Journal puts it.

Want to read the latest and most interesting stories and analysis to come out of D.C.? Subscribe to the WSJ’s email newsletter, Capital Journal Daybreak.

– Robert Schroeder

Follow @mktwrobs



Follow @capitolreport

More must-reads from MarketWatch:

Ex-Obama aide latest to head for Wall Street

Need to Know: Geopolitical risks, and how to nail a contrarian trade

We’re in the third-biggest stock bubble in U.S. history