Bull riders prepare well ahead of the ride

Down in the bowels of the Budweiser Events Center 11 cowboys slowly filter into the arena.

Each one carries on his back or at his side a duffle bag with the equipment they need, tossing them to the ground in favor of conversation.

Some know each other personally, others are unfamiliar faces, but all share a love for America's original extreme sport. These men are bull riders.

Most aren't imposing figures themselves — unlike the animals they mount as a profession. They are wiry, clad in denim or plaid shirts, jeans and of course cowboy hats. They are young for the most part, wearing stern expressions to match the dangerous activity they're about to undertake.

Fort Collins resident Colby Stone laces up his boots prior to the start of the bull riding competition Sunday at the Budweiser Events Center. The key to a good ride happens well before the clock starts. (Luke Whittaker/ Loveland Reporter-Herald)

It is here beneath the feet of cheering fans that good rides can become great rides, and just as easily poor ones.

"With bull riding, man that's all the game, right here between your ears," professional bull rider Justin Ellis says pressing his forefinger to his temple. "(The bull's) big, scary, mean you know, but I love doing it so it kinda takes you to where you get over that. If you think too much, that's a good way to psyche yourself out."

The time before these cowboys mount up and take a wild 8-second ride on the back of a bull is an exercise in mental preparedness. They're hanging out, joking around and even a game of hacky sack breaks out.

Advertisement

As the moment of truth draws ever closer the bull riders begin to stretch and work rosin into their bull ropes to keep their gloved hands from slipping during the ride.

"You just stay loose, it's a good time," Colorado native and current Fort Collins resident Colby Stone said. "You don't want to think about what you have to do in the arena until you get into the chutes. That's kind of like going into the office."

Both Ellis and Stone are veterans of the sport with eight and 10 years of experience respectively. Remaining calm and in the proper state of mind is easier now than it used to be at 17-years-old when the two started riding bulls.

Now each is comfortable with how they like to ride the bulls and not much has happened they haven't seen before. Stone said when he was a young rider he would ask veterans' advice, but not all of what they said made sense. He still asks questions, but at 27 he can interpret the answers.

Ellis is only 24 and doesn't think it's much easier now than it was back at the start because then he was so excited there was no room for anything thing else in his head.

"It's maybe gotten tougher because back then I was just excited. I wasn't worried about money or nothin'. I just wanted to ride bulls," he said. "Now I've got bills and stuff, and rodeo is a tough way to make a living and that can kind of wear on you a bit. But again, it's just something you have to push out of your mind and have that mentality of when you were young of just craving it.

"When you crave it, that's when you ride best."

Finally the cowboys make their way to the chutes and in turn set upon the back of a 2,000 pound beast. Ellis and Stone both say there's a calmness in that small space of metal bars, like the passing eye of a storm.

The perfect mindset is nothing at all, simply silence, all the while the animal under them is anything but calm and quiet.

"You slide up and it's go time, so I try not to put anything in my head," Stone said. "No distractions. Just nod my face, grab my bull rope and go with it because who knows what can happen?"

Only one thing for sure: the wildest 8 seconds in all of sports.

Contact Reporter-Herald Sports Writer Cris Tiller at 970-669-5050 ext. 511, tillerc@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/cristiller