By making herself queen of the school lunchroom, Michelle Obama has managed to screw things up almost as badly as Obamacare has screwed up health insurance, albeit on a smaller scale. The Twitter hashtag #thanksmichelleobama accompanying pictures of inedible school cafeteria slop is evidence that a generation of nanny state-hating youngsters will eventually enter the voting booth, just as many of their parents are turning on Democrats over Obamacare. And like Obamacare devastates family finances with high deductibles and cost increases for many, the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act that Mrs. Obama pushed so hard is devastating the finances of school lunch programs.

More than half of the nation’s school cafeteria workers expect to lose money selling low-salt, low-fat meals pushed by first lady Michelle Obama, a “serious” problem that threatens the programs, according to a survey of food providers. The School Nutrition Association, which is planning to demand changes to the meal requirements to make the food more attractive to students, found that 50.35 percent of cafeteria officials surveyed expect that serving the food will “exceed revenue” next year. (snip) As a result, the group plans to ask the administration to let schools ease up on the low-salt and fruit and vegetable demands. In fact, they plan to seek a recess from being required to put fruit and veggies on meal trays, according to a draft proposal.

Michelle Obama is the very image of an out-of-touch do-gooder, heedlessly creating problems in her efforts to do something “nice.”

By the way, her own children are not subject to the act she pushed on the rest of us. Take a look at the menu at the ultra-expensive Sidwell Friends School attended by Sasha and Malia, uncovered by the Daily Caller:

For Tuesday, Dec. 9, the scrumptious, bountiful lunch menu for both the middle school and the upper school at Sidwell Friends is: Potato Sausage Soup; Firecracker Slaw; California Chef’s Salad; All Natural Jamaican Jerk Chicken Wings; Sweet Potato Black Bean Bake; Sautéed Local Greens; Gemelli Alfredo; Sliced Pineapple This menu of completely free lunch items certainly sounds delicious and nutritious. Also, to be clear, it’s for a single day, not the entire week.

Michelle Antionette might as well say, “Let them eat kale.”