PLANTATION, Fla., May 23, 2016 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Are you sure that your eyes are as healthy as they should be? Many eye ailments that can cause blindness have no symptoms in their earliest stages. To protect your vision now and into the future, it is important to get regular, comprehensive eye exams.

May is Healthy Vision Month – and the best way to commemorate the occasion is with a complete eye exam. Especially if you are one of the more than 23 million Americans age 18 and older who, according to a national survey conducted by the National Eye Institute (NEI), have never had their eyes examined.

According to the NEI, the most common reason for not getting an exam is assuming that you don't have an eye problem.

"People tend to put off basic health care when budgets are tight. If you don't think you have an eye problem, it seems safe to delay getting your eyes checked. But that may result in missing the early signs of an eye disease that becomes harder to treat effectively over time," said Bill Chase, vice president of marketing for :DentalPlans."

:DentalPlans offers affordable alternatives to traditional health insurance, including vision care savings plans. These plans enable members to save significantly on the cost of eye exams, glasses, contact lenses, even LASIK surgery at thousands of eye care facilities – both national chains and local providers – nationwide.

A comprehensive eye exam, including dilation – a painless process which allows doctors a view inside of the eyes, is the best way to know if your eyes are healthy. A comprehensive eye exam also includes tests for glaucoma, a group of diseases that can damage the optic nerve; and tests to gauge how well you can see things at a distance and from the side.



According to the NEI, those aged 60 and up should have a comprehensive exam annually, while younger people should have one at least once a decade, starting in their 20s. Your eye care provider may wish to see you more often, particularly if you have a health condition such as diabetes, so it's best to follow his or her advice in scheduling check-ups.



Whatever you do, don't skip getting your exam. Glaucoma currently affects more than 3 million Americans, but only half are aware they have the disease, according to The Centers for Disease Control. The NEI predicts that by 2030, 4.2 million people will have glaucoma.

Besides regular exams, other ways to protect your vision include maintaining a healthy lifestyle, knowing your family's history of eye disease (some conditions that can cause blindness are genetic), using the appropriate protective eyewear on the job or while playing sports, and wearing sunglasses that block out 99 to 100% of both UVA and UVB rays.

More than 11 million Americans currently have an uncorrected visual impairment that can impact their quality of life, according to the NEI. With the help of a vision savings plan from :DentalPlans, you can see what you've been missing.

To learn more about vision savings plans, and other options that make health care more affordable, visit dentalplans.com.



About :DentalPlans

:DentalPlans, founded in 1999, is a leading dental and health savings marketplace in the U.S., helping more than a million people to affordably access quality healthcare services. Our mission is to empower consumers with the tools, information, and services that they need to live happier, healthier lives.



We provide comprehensive resource centers aimed at helping people to maintain/regain optimal health, and successfully navigate the maze of healthcare payment options (including Obamacare and Medicaid.) Our independent research – the :DP SmileMeter™ and :DP SmileIndex™ – delivers a unique look into the consumer healthcare market.



We offer user-friendly access to a wide selection of traditional dental insurance and 30+dental savings plans, along with innovative healthcare offerings including telemedicine, medical advocacy, and online counseling services. Our online plan comparison and savings calculator tools help consumers to make smart choices about essential healthcare services, and our :DP AtYourService™ customer support team leaves no question unanswered.



For more information, visit us at www.dentalplans.com and find us on Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest and YouTube.

Alissa Pifer 954-668-2148