Continuing in the long tradition of unintentionally hilarious anti-drug PSAs, the New South Wales (NSW) government’s new anti-marijuana “Stoner Sloth” campaign is reaching the hearts and minds of Australian citizens — though definitely not for the reasons they hoped it would.

Featuring an anthropomorphic sloth that looks like a combination between Michael J. Fox’s Teen Wolf and the end of a David Cronenberg film, the campaign is ostensibly meant to depict — through a series of 30-second video vignettes — the unmotivated sluggishness stereotypically seen among pot users in a lighthearted but ultimately sincere light. Though the campaign’s website has been up since November, the videos were first released online this weekend.

Whether it’s the Tim Burton-inspired costume, the inherent silliness of watching a sloth attempt any action, or the strange implied morals (Smoking marijuana will somehow make you uncool at a teen party? Or bad at passing salt?), though, it’s fair to say that the PSAs haven’t quite hit home.

Where's the rest of the #stonersloth gang? Like 'Alcoholic Ant', 'Meth Meerkat' or 'Ectasy Eagle'? The whole crew needs their own show #420 — Jarryd Watson (@_ultramegaman_) December 20, 2015

It's here #stonersloth the t-shirt pic.twitter.com/h9S5zqvQOo — Eiza (noeL) Berage (@verbaliza) December 20, 2015

Kids are so mean! I stand with #stonersloth pic.twitter.com/tyTJU8I7HT — Gozerean (@Gozerean) December 20, 2015

Meanwhile, it seems no one’s rushing to take credit for the brilliant concept, which became the #1 trending topic on Twitter’s Australia feed Saturday, with even NSW Premier Mike Baird poking fun at it.

Just saw the #StonerSloth ads. Not sure where NSW Gov's ad guys found Chewbaccas siblings, but those videos are... Quite something. — Mike Baird (@mikebairdMP) December 19, 2015

Similarly, the National Cannabis Prevention and Information Centre (NCPIC), an Australian-based organization explicitly devoted to discouraging marijuana use among youths, issued a statement Saturday clarifying its role in crafting the ads after they were initially linked to it.

“While NCPIC is an evidence-based body, and is happy to support the NSW Government with information and recommendations at any time, in this case it has been unfortunately implied in media that the Centre's involvement was greater than it actually was,” the statement read. “While we wish the NSW Government luck in future cannabis campaigns, the current Stoner Sloth campaign doesn't reflect NCPIC views on how cannabis harms campaigns should be approached, as was implied by the media.”

Perhaps thankfully, the campaign won’t be making its way to television screens anytime, according to the NSW Department of Premier and Cabinet. The DPC is listed as the copyright owner of the Stoner Sloth website.