19 Flares Filament.io 19 Flares ×

Conservatives are praising Sean Hannity for discovering the “solution” to the “health care dilemma” surrounding contraception: Create an Adopt-a-Woman birth control program.

Ordinary Americans (read: insurance companies) shouldn't be paying for health care coverage (read: why insurance companies exist) just because women are incapable of harnessing their out-of-control libidos, Hannity mansplained.







Instead, he proposed that women should be solely responsible for their own contraception—and the women who can't afford to pay up can opt into a separate insurance program funded by other women.

Read more about the Adopt-a-Woman program after the jump.Let's start at the beginning. In late January, Mike Huckabee—ever the feminist—told the RNC that the Obamacare requirement that health insurance plans cover contraception is an “insult to women.”

I doubt that Huckabee consulted any women before drawing this conclusion, and as a woman myself, I'd have to disagree. But let's hear him out:



The fact is the Republicans don't have a war on women, they have a war for women, to empower them to be something other than victims of their gender.



Compelling rhetoric, but ultimately a circular argument. If the GOP is waging a war on behalf of women so that they don't become victims of the patriarchy, who are they fighting? The women whose rights they want to take away? The women that they hope to stick with incomplete and low-quality health insurance plans? Either way, who asked all these white dudes to wage war for us?

Huckabee continued:



If the Democrats want to insult the women of America by making them believe that they are helpless without Uncle Sugar coming in and providing for them a prescription each month for birth control because they cannot control their libido or their reproductive system without the help of the government, then so be it. Let's take that discussion all across America.



Oh, there it is. Democrats are tricking ladies into thinking that they are untameable sex monsters who need the government to pay for their sex pills. The veil has been lifted.

Conservative radio show host Sean Hannity piggybacked on Huckabee's brilliance with a suggestion that all the women who are not in control of “their libido or their reproductive system” (or their PCOS, but whatever) should simply buy each other's birth control.

Speaking to a female caller who argued that not every woman can afford contraception, Hannity asked, “Why don't women like yourself, then, maybe have an Adopt-a-Woman birth control program?”

Here's why: As Slate pointed out, “[T]he contraception mandate is closer to a consumer protection law. It's really part of a larger program in the Affordable Care Act to set minimum standards about what your insurance plan must cover. It's really no different than a law requiring a car to have four wheels and two headlights to be considered a street legal vehicle.”

The government—or, as Huckabee creepily refers to it, “Uncle Sugar”—isn't paying for women's birth control (if only!). The government is raising the standards for what health insurance plans must include.

“Women like ourselves” shouldn't have to create a separate form of insurance to pay for other women's birth control, because it is a crucial part of preventive health care.







Curious that neither Huckabee nor Hannity is making a similar case for other Obamacare-mandated covered health services, like blood pressure and cholesterol screenings, vaccines and obesity counseling.

Natalie tweets from @nsanluis.