AED Macroeconomics 101: A Shifting Demand Curve

Unlike many other job skills, AED/CPR capabilities have universal utility and can be used outside of the workplace to save others, such as family members.

There are a number of stereotypes surrounding cardiac arrest. Unfortunately, many of these are dangerously inaccurate. Often, people view cardiac arrest to be a "geriatric" issue. However, numerous studies reveal the flaw in this assumption. A recently published study by Marijon, et al., showed a mean age of 53 for cardiac arrest victims over a 10-year period. As a further supporting anecdote, cardiac arrest occurs in approximately one out of every 70 U.S. high schools each year. Clearly, cardiac arrest is an issue that transcends the "aged" population.

Interestingly, the Marijon study also found that only 5 percent of the victims experienced cardiac arrest while exercising. While this may provide comfort in re-invigorating your New Year's resolution (and it should!), the key point is that 95 percent of the time, cardiac arrest occurs while people are doing everyday tasks in everyday locations such as offices, factories, stores, and homes.

While these statistics obviously underscore the need for safety professionals to consider the risk of cardiac arrest in protecting their sites, other trends in employee and customer expectations are increasing the importance and immediacy of this consideration.

Many are now accustomed to seeing Automated External Defibrillators (AEDs) in airports. Appreciating this, it is not surprising that a recent Harris Interactive survey of the consumer public revealed that nearly 80 percent of people expect to find AEDs in airports. What may be surprising to you are the results revealed by the remainder of the survey: Roughly, three out of every five respondents expect to find AEDs in locations such as factories, hotels, offices, and shopping malls. Further, approximately 40 percent of survey participants anticipate AEDs being present at sites such as retail stores, restaurants, and banks.

While these expectations are meaningful in their own right, perhaps more telling are the increases in these expectations compared to the results from a similar study 14 months prior. In this short span of time, expectations rose across all location types, with more than half of the site categories posting double-digit increases. Expectations for AED presence in the workplace were up 19 perecent. Some of the other notable increases were for venues such as banks (+33 percent), retail stores (+21 percent), and restaurants (+18 percent). These trends are meaningful in isolation; however, the latter categories are particularly significant in view of their consumer-facing characteristics. Simply, as people become more accustomed to the presence of AEDs in everyday locations-- such as the stores in which they shop--their anticipation of finding AEDs in other locations seems to rise, as well.

This article originally appeared in the June 2015 issue of Occupational Health & Safety.