The NHL’s weakest team played one of the league’s most disappointing Friday night, and sure enough, a tight and unspectacular game unfolded at the Pepsi Center.

PHOTOS: Colorado Avalanche vs. Edmonton Oilers

The Avalanche defeated the Edmonton Oilers 2-1 in a shootout, with Matt Duchene and Alex Tanguay scoring the goals in the one-on-one matchup with Edmonton goaltender Ben Scrivens. Duchene also assisted on the first goal of the game.

Avs goaltender Semyon Varlamov stopped both shots as Colorado won its fifth consecutive shootout after losing its first two this season.

Daniel Briere scored for the Avs in the second period, and Benoit Pouliot tied it early in the third. Varlamov couldn’t handle Pouliot’s second-effort chip shot outside the crease, and Edmonton’s Ben Scrivens had no chance on Briere’s weakside tap-in.

Varlamov and Scrivens each finished with 27 saves, but Varlamov proved better in the shootout.

Duchene was the player of the game for the Avalanche, but his goal-scoring drought in regulation and overtime increased to nine games. “I’m not too worried about it,” he said of his scoring woes outside the shootout. “Other than now, I thought I was scoring pretty consistently this season, and this happens. I went through it last year too. If we lose, I worry more about it.”

Briere’s 306th career NHL regular-season goal was one of his easiest, thanks to Duchene. Duchene’s threat for the side of the net drew two defensemen toward him and left Briere uncovered in front of the opposite post. Duchene’s backhander set up Briere’s back-door tap-in.

The Avs were in control through much of the first two periods, outshooting Edmonton 22-14 heading into the third. But the one-goal lead wasn’t enough.

The Oilers tied it 4:47 into the third after Colorado took two consecutive penalties, the latter on Tanguay while he was on the penalty kill with Briere in the box for tripping. Pouliot scored with Tanguay off for hooking.

“I thought we could have been up by two or three goals after the second period. We had plenty of good chances and opportunities,” said Avalanche coach Patrick Roy. “I just feel that we’re tight around the net.

“We should be more relaxed, looser and taking a split second more to take a better shot. It’s sad in some ways that we’re not as confident as we should be at the net, and tonight it proved it.”

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers