It is an interesting campaign tool by Greg Abbott — lawsuits.

It works, though.

These days, when most cringe over absurd lawsuits against fast-food establishments because a person spills coffee on herself, the attorney general of Texas is on the campaign trail touting the number of lawsuits he has filed.

I don’t blame him. Go for it, because it all depends on the target of the lawsuits.

Abbott, the presumed GOP frontrunner for governor, made a stump stop in Amarillo this past week at Oliver Saddle Shop.

One of his selling points?

Abbott has filed 29 lawsuits against the Obama administration.

“The thing I may be best known for are the lawsuits I have filed against Barack Obama and his administration,” said Abbott, a comment that drew applause and appreciative hollers. “I have filed — already — 29 lawsuits against Barack Obama and his administration.”

Abbott pointed out the “challenge” he waged against Obamacare (time will tell if the “affordable” part of the Affordable Care Act is an accurate term) and the “multitude” of lawsuits he has waged against the Environmental Protection Agency “that is trying to impose job-killing regulations on the robust energy industry in the state of Texas.”

The lawsuits are just a symbol of a larger battle, and even if the attorney general was preaching to the Amarillo choir and only trying to score political points, he has a point that will resonate.

There are many, especially in Texas, that agree with Abbott’s description of the federal government as having a “heavy hand” and being “overreaching” in its quest to control more and more of our lives. Abbott may have been using politician-speak (which hardly makes him unique among Republicans or Democrats), but there’s still an element of legitimacy to what he says — if you look past the lawsuits to the reasons behind them.

A pat on the back

To gas prices: Hard to believe, but gas prices deserve a pat on the back. I recently saw gas for less than $3 a gallon — provided you had a discount card, which I, conveniently, did not. Still, gas for less than $3 a gallon makes it a lot easier to fill up the tank.

A kick in the pants

To the national debt: It is amazing that this country is some $17 trillion in debt, but most of us just shrug.

Sooner or later, someone is going to have to pay this bill. It is as simple as that. What is disappointing is the level of apathy about what this means for the future.

Dave Henry is AGN Media director of commentary. His email address is david.henry@amarillo.com.