Business and health care leaders in Wichita are calling on the Kansas Legislature to consider an expansion of Medicaid and Kancare.

They spoke at a news conference Wednesday at the Wichita Metro Chamber of Commerce. Chamber president Gary Plummer said expanding Kancare will help the state's economy and provide financial stability to the health care system, and it will create a healthier and more productive workforce. He said a great majority of Chamber members want to see an expansion.

Via Christi Health president and CEO Jeff Korsmo said health care is one of the top economic sectors in the state, and the industry is working to make health care more affordable. He said for each job in health care that is created or preserved, an additional six-tenths of a job is created or supported because of business and household spending. Korsmo says Via Christi has absorbed $43 million a year in reimbursement cuts because of the Affordable Care Act and the state's decision not to expand Medicaid, and that has resulted in job cuts. He said the "Bridge to a Healthy Kansas" proposal that has been delivered to the Legislature would help offset the reimbursement cuts and it would reduce the charity care and unpaid costs of Kancare services, and it would provide savings to the state budget.

Wesley Medical Center president and CEO Bill Voloch said Wesley has had a $28 million loss from the Affordable Care Act without an expansion of Medicaid. Voloch said Wesley is most concerned about the future, with losses projected over the next ten years and an increase in emergency room visits. He said 40 percent of the emergency room patients do not have insurance.

Dr. Kevin Hoppock of the Via Christi Clinic said it's important for people to have the right care at the right time from the right person, and that involves a doctor's office rather than the emergency room. He said emergency room care tends to be more expensive and less effective.

Wichita resident Marcillene Dover talked about her struggles in getting access to health care, after she graduated from high school and was no longer eligible for a children's insurance program. She said she was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis and she has been helped by the Project Access program, but if that program is cut, she would not have any insurance. Dover said it's a slap in the face for some lawmakers to say the people looking for Medicaid are looking for handouts. She said the overwhelming majority of people who need access are hardworking Americans who just need to be able to see a doctor.

Kansas lawmakers return to Topeka next week to talk about budget and revenue issues, and Korsmo said it's time for them to address the issue of Medicaid expansion and vote on a plan.