Donald Trump held a rally in Cadillac March 4, 2016.





CADILLAC, Mich. (WOOD) — A longer wait didn’t stop the chants of support for Donald Trump in Cadillac Friday.

The Republican presidential candidate showed up for the rally at Wexford Civic Center about an hour later than scheduled.

Organizers told 24 Hour News 8 around 3,000 to 5,000 people packed the venue for the rally. A line of vehicles and people had already formed outside the building more than two hours before the doors were scheduled to open.

Long long line waiting to get in. They are chanting "Michigan voters for Trump." @therealdonaldtrump #decision2016 pic.twitter.com/fiDtg0nONu — Tom Hillen (@Tomhillen) March 4, 2016

Organizers broadcast the Trump’s speech outside for the people who couldn’t get in.

>>VIDEO: Trump holds rally in Cadillac

The Republican presidential candidate addressed trade, rival candidates and building a wall to keep immigrants out.

“Without a border, without strong borders you don’t have a country folks, you don’t have a country. So we’re going to straighten that out. Three months ago, they were saying you can’t build a wall, now they’re saying you can,” Trump said.

Cheers erupted from the crowd when Trump said he would eliminate Common Core and replace the Affordable Care Act. He also said he is bringing “millions” of people to the Republican Party single-handedly, but also took a jab at Senator Marco Rubio.

“So many changes are gonna be made. We’re gonna be like the smart country, not the stupid country. People are joining the Republican Party because of me, because they want common sense. They’re not coming in for little Marco [Senator Marco Rubio], that I can tell you,” he said.

Among those escorted out was a protester who screamed “No Trump in USA, no Trump, no KKK.”

Trump said he thought the protester should have been arrested.

“Get that guy out of here! I would arrest him for a filthy, dirty mouth,” yelled Trump.

Trump started his day of stumping in Warren, where a crowd packed MCC Sports & Expo Center to see him speak.

Share this: Email

Print

Facebook

Twitter

Google

Pinterest

More

LinkedIn

Tumblr



Reddit