Kacy Atkinson started Feb. 2

It's been a busy few weeks for Logan County's newest Colorado State University Extension agent, Kacy Atkinson.

Atkinson officially started on Feb. 2, and has already conducted the Beef Weigh-in for Logan County Fair projects, as well as presenting at a cattle producers workshop.

But she's OK with that, as it has afforded her the opportunity to meet a lot of people, including some fair superintendents, the Logan County Commissioners and several area producers. And that's one of her goals for her first year in Logan County: to meet as many people as possible. She said she also wants to learn as much as she can about Logan County and identify what the area's needs are. "My role for a while is really listening," she said, explaining that she can't do a good job of serving the local producers if she doesn't know what they need.

So far, the people she's met have been "very kind," making her excited to meet more people, she said. "It's nice to be someplace where people make you feel welcome and they are glad to have you." Included in that group are her new co-workers at the Logan County Extension office. She said they have made the transition very easy, and have been open to all of her questions. "The Logan County office has fantastic people."

Atkinson grew up on her family's commercial Angus cow/calf ranch in Garrett, Wyo., and still has cattle there. She spent 12 years in Texas, where she earned a bachelor's degree in agriculture, an MBA with an ag emphasis and a second master's in speech communications from West Texas A&M. She then worked there in student affairs and teaching in the ag and communications departments.

Advertisement

From there she came to Colorado for a job at the Arapahoe County Extension office. While her job there was similar, she said the focus was definitely more on 4-H, as there aren't a lot of livestock producers in that area.

Atkinson then took a job with the Wyoming L.E.A.D. program, a leadership education and development program for agriculture and rural communities.

But, she said, she missed the Extension experience of working with 4-H'ers and helping producers in the field, and when the opening in Logan County came up, she felt it was a good fit for her background.

Her role as a 4-H and adult livestock production agent means that she works with youth in the six livestock and horse programs in 4-H, offering educational programming and helping get them ready for fair. For the adults, she plans to offer some programming as well, but also is available to provide one-on-one consultations on any questions that they might have regarding livestock production, including developing business plans and ways to increase profit margins.

Atkinson said the biggest challenge facing livestock producers today is "figuring out how to stay in business." She feels it is critical to attract more young people to the industry, and make it profitable and viable for them. She also said advocacy is important, because increasingly consumers want to know where their food comes from and how it's raised.

She feels her experiences have equipped her to come at problems from different angles. While she admits beef is the livestock species she is most knowledgeable about — and says it "will always be near and dear to my heart" — she also has some experience with sheep. Atkinson said she enjoys learning about the other livestock species, and that as an Extension agent it's important to "learn as much as you can about as much as you can" because you have to field such a variety of questions.

She added that if she doesn't know an answer she's "willing to go find the person who does."

She plans to start some programming for 4-H members in March, on topics like livestock species, animal health and record books, to help them get ready for fair.

Atkinson said she welcomes visitors — although she hasn't spent much time in the office so far, so she advises calling ahead — and would be happy to give presentations or attend meetings if invited. "If I can help, let me know how," she said.

Sara Waite: 970-526-9310, swaite@journal-advocate.com