A follow-up to the Chimerix story from a bit earlier ….

Not to defend the company, but if Chimerix’s contention that it can’t interrupt the testing and approval process to help save 7-year-old Josh Hardy doesn’t hold water for you, a glance at the biotech’s Website might be of interest. It seems Chimerix /quotes/zigman/14956180/delayed /quotes/nls/cmrx CMRX has encountered this question before regarding Brincidofovir, the drug that the boy’s family seeks to help fight a life-threatening viral infection.

Shutterstock

On its site, Chimerix says it has received “hundreds” of requests for “compassionate use” of the drug, a situation that it says requires the company to work closely with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. It has offered up the drug for patients who have requested it in the past, but only in conjunction with ongoing tests, which are in a lull right now.

“Making an experimental drug available outside of controlled clinical trials has the potential to slow or derail the approval of that drug,” the company’s Website says. “Providing Brincidofovir in any of these situations, where there is currently limited evidence to suggest that our experimental medicine would be helpful, could very likely place the entire development program at risk.”

The company even has an email address set aside for compassionate use requests of Brincidofovir: compassionateuserequest@chimerix.com.

Further, it points to a paper from the trade group Biotechnology Industry Organization, which outlines the history of cases like those involving Josh. In its April 2010 paper, the group agrees that early access to program could create a conflict between the needs of a few against those of large patient populations and their need to have the drug approved swiftly.

The paper says: “A patient’s right to treatment based on his or her autonomous decision-making ability does not supersede a company’s ethical responsibility to develop and market safe and effective products as fast as possible.”

Spokespersons from Chimerix or Biotechnology Industry Organization did not respond to requests for comment.

To recap, Josh has survived four bouts with cancer, but his weakened immune system contracted a life-threatening virus after he underwent a bone-marrow transplant. His parents are pleading with Chimerix to provide Brincidofovir to their boy but the company is reluctant because it has received hundreds of requests for compassionate use of the drug, which would delay development and approval for it. Chimerix says it’s unlikely to gain approval before 2016.

Follow Russ Britt on Twitter @russbrittmktw.

Follow Health Exchange on Twitter @MWHealthBlog.

More health-care news from MarketWatch:

President finds a new way to tout Obamacare — trading comic insults

Chimerix under pressure to provide dying boy with experimental drug

La Jolla Pharmaceutical shares surge on test results