Robert Murray

January 28, 2014

Editor’s note: For more on this topic see Carmela Coyle’s Health Affairs Blog post.

Fee-for-service (FFS) medicine encourages inappropriate volume growth, but a new experiment in Maryland seeks to turn the incentives upside down. The state, in a Model approved this month by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), will transform its hospital rate-setting system from a focus on controlling per-case cost toward population health and the total cost of hospital care per capita.

As the nation’s only all-payer hospital payment system, Maryland affords CMS a unique opportunity to demonstrate that a hospital payment system with properly designed and broadly applicable incentives can generate significant efficiencies.

Since 1977, Maryland’s Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC) has established the rates paid to Maryland acute-care hospitals by both public and private payers. For nearly four decades, Maryland has shown significantly lower per-case cost growth than the rest of the nation, while reimbursing hospitals for uncompensated care and preventing cost-shifting from public to private payers. The Maryland system has rested on FFS financial incentives, however, and has therefore encouraged hospitals to boost volumes while controlling unit costs.

FFS Payment and the Volume Problem

While recent attention has focused on the increasing negotiating leverage and sometimes predatory pricing practices of highly consolidated hospitals and health systems, the provision of excess and unnecessary hospital services is also a substantial cost driver. For instance, in its 2013 report on Health Care Cost Trends and Drivers, the Massachusetts Health Policy Commission reported that wasteful spending (defined as services that could be eliminated without causing harm to patients or reducing quality) accounted for between 21 and 39 percent of health costs in the state. As the economy recovers, the increased use of health care services may become an even larger cost driver.

The provision of excess services is an understandable response by hospitals to the perverse financial incentives of prevailing FFS arrangements. First, hospitals are paid each time they deliver a service, and they are not paid unless they deliver a service. Second, the marginal revenue earned for each new case or service (paid at 100 cents on the dollar) greatly exceeds the marginal costs (thought to be 50-60 cents on the dollar). This is based on the author’s experience and discussions with Maryland hospital Chief Financial Officers. The difference provides hospitals with increased cash flow and profitability as volumes increase.

The view of hospitals as “self fueling, ever expanding machines” (as described by Professor James Robinson from the University of California, Berkeley), is consistent with many health economists’ view of the motivations of nonprofit hospital managers. Without the need to distribute profits to owners, managers of nonprofit hospitals and health systems instead have incentives to pursue business augmentation strategies – such as expanded facilities, duplicative technology, or the acquisition of physician practices — “to enhance their self-esteem and status in the community and to justify increased perquisites for themselves.” And many hospitals pay top executives bonuses for volume increases — as shown by Jay Hancock.



FFS payment also discourages hospitals from supporting efforts to reduce unnecessary services. When hospitals paid under FFS lose volumes, they forfeit 100 percent of the revenue, reducing profitability by limiting their ability to fully fund their fixed costs.

Initially, the Maryland system (as did all state-based all-payer rate systems) included a Volume Adjustment System (VAS) to remove financial rewards associated with volume growth. The HSCRC unwisely scaled back the VAS in the 1990s and eliminated it in 2001. In response, Maryland hospitals greatly expanded their volume (see Chart 1 showing the indexed growth in Equivalent Inpatient Admissions (EIPAs), which is a measure of both inpatient and outpatient volume). Thus, while Maryland controlled the growth in per-case payments, those successes were undermined by increased cost associated with volume increases.

Chart 1

Indexed Rates of Growth in Hospital Volume (As EIPAs)

(Maryland vs. the U.S. 1976 – 2011)