Alfaan Manji, 35, was on his honeymoon when he noticed the pain in his legs. They tingled when he went swimming, and he couldn't walk properly.

An avid athlete, Manji was used to injuries. He assumed this was related to a herniated disc in his back from several hockey seasons ago. Just to be sure, upon returning home he went to his doctor.

Less than three months after the honeymoon, Manji was diagnosed with chondrosarcoma, an extremely rare cartilage cancer. The tumour was the size of a medium Tim Hortons cup, and it was nestled against the right side of his spine.

More concerning, doctors told the couple traditional cancer treatments, such as chemotherapy and radiation, would not be effective for this type of cancer.

"The doctor basically told us that the only option was surgery," says Manji's wife, Zahra Kaba, also 35. "Which was very scary, because (the tumour) was so close to his spine."

Manji's type of cancer had one goal: to attach to the spine and begin to crush it. At the time of the diagnosis, he says a muscle was between the cancer and his spine, temporarily preventing this from happening.

Facing paralysis and eventually death, Manji was referred to Dr. Raj Rampersaud, an orthopedic surgeon based out of Toronto Western Hospital's spine program at the Krembil Neuroscience Centre.

'Maximally invasive surgery'

Rampersaud performed his first complex spinal tumour resection surgery at Toronto Western Hospital 10 years ago. He says the operations are a viable option for patients who would have been told in the past they were out of luck.

"It was born out of necessity for treating these patients with extremely rare tumours," he says, "giving them an option they otherwise wouldn't have. Although my specialty training was in minimally invasive spine surgery, the primary tumour cases that we do are maximally invasive surgery."

Rampersaud describes the first surgery he ever did of this nature as "incredibly time-intensive, inefficient and exhausting."

Since then, Rampersaud has worked with more than 100 patients with complex tumours directly involving the spine or the surrounding organs and critical blood vessels. Each case is unique, he says, and each operation is different from the last.

This might not seem like a lot of patients – but tumours of this nature are extremely rare.

"A spine surgeon in his or her career may only see one of these cases," says Rampersaud. "I see about one a month. As a result of Canada's largest cancer centre, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, and the gathering of highly specialized surgical teams within the University Health Network family, we have a concentrated focus here."

The spine program at Toronto Western is one of only two centres in Canada that regularly perform the type of surgery that Manji required — and one of only a handful in the world. (Vancouver General Hospital also performs these complex operations.)

Rampersaud and his team work with other specialists, changing their technique depending on the needs of the patient.

He first met Manji and Kaba in December 2010 to discuss the procedure. It would be a marathon, Rampersaud warned them, a lifelong commitment.

For Manji's surgery, there would be three teams: Rampersaud's spinal team, a team led by musculoskeletal sarcoma surgeon Dr. Jay Wunder, and an oncology plastic surgeon team led by Dr. Stefan Hofer. The surgery can involve more than a dozen people in the operating room.

There would be two operations: first an eight-hour one to prepare the area, then a second surgery that would take nearly 22 hours.

The cancerous tumour would be removed, but so would the involved nerves, muscles, tissues, bone, and part of Manji's spine. A margin of healthy tissue would also need to be removed around the tumour to ensure all the cancerous cells were gone.

To achieve the goal of removing the tumour and giving the best chance of a cure, all this would have to be done without cutting into the tumour, which could spread the cancer cells. Everything would need to come out as one piece, and be surrounded by healthy tissue.

Using advanced computer-assisted surgical technology, Rampersaud would use tools with trackers on them to more precisely cut out the tumour and preserve as much normal structure as possible. The tools are equipped with either passive reflective spheres or active light-emitting diodes (LEDs) that are sensed by a camera.

A large screen in the operating room displays the patient's CT scan, which is taken during the surgery. Using this technology the surgeons can see where they are cutting at all times.

"We cut from the inside spine outward and from outside the spine inward around the tumour to literally join the dots" says Rampersaud. "Taking out the tumour is the hardest part."

After the tumour and all the attached tissues are removed, the spine is reconstructed and the plastic surgeons work to rebuild the tissues around the patient's back.

"We go and create this great big hole and then at the end we say, 'OK, we're finished, come and fix it!'" laughed Rampersaud, noting the skill of his colleagues.

Tissue from deceased donors, some of Manji's own skin and muscles, two titanium rods and more than a dozen titanium screws would be used to rebuild the area around his spine and "sort of hold it together."

In some extreme cases, parts of femur bones from deceased donors can also be inserted into the spine.

A risk he had to take

There are serious risks involved with this type of surgery, Rampersaud warned the couple. Recovery could last more than a year and would be painful.

Further, the question wasn't if a complication would occur but when, and how bad. Manji would have to relearn to walk, and might never be able to play sports again.

"But when somebody is faced with cancer, all that just is noise," says Rampersaud. "If you're being told 'we can take (the cancer) out,' listening tends to fade off after that. But when patients actually have to live (through the recovery), it becomes much tougher."

Manji decided to go ahead with the procedures, which would take place in spring 2011. It was risky – but without the operations he would die.

Learning to walk again

When asked about the main surgery, one thing comes immediately to mind for Manji.

"It was the best sleep I ever had," he says, laughing.

His wife looks at him, shaking her head. "Well it was the worst sleep I ever had, I can tell you that!"

Kaba remembers seeing her husband in the ICU after the surgery. He couldn't lie on his back, he was hooked up to countless machines, and his face and hands were puffy.

"As soon as I saw him tears were streaming down my face," says Kaba.

Manji spent six difficult weeks recovering in the ICU. Then Rampersaud told him it was time to try walking.

"My whole right side had to learn how to walk again," Manji says. "It was tough because I used to run around all the time."

Going up a flight of stairs would leave him gasping for breath and covered in sweat — but then he would make himself do it again. With Kaba's help, Manji went from a wheeled walker, to a regular walker, to a cane.

"I would tell myself, 'if you can get through this day, you can get through this week,'" he says. "'And if you can get through these two weeks, one day you will be able to walk again.' I've got to fight for something."

Three years later …

It's been more than three years since Manji was diagnosed with cancer. A decade ago, patients with his diagnosis would have been told there was not much that could be done.

But Manji was lucky. Today, he is cancer-free. He walks confidently, sometimes even without a cane. His most recent body scan came up clean, and he was told he can add to his physiotherapy routine.

And this month, he and his wife are expecting their first child, a boy.

"I tell people when my kid starts running, I will be doing the same thing," says Manji, grinning.

Without the groundbreaking surgical approach her husband likely wouldn't be here today, says Kaba.

"They've done this (surgery) now, and they know that they can do it," she says. "Other people need to know this option exists."

Toronto Western Hospital's spine program is celebrating its 20th anniversary on June 16.

Dr. Michael Fehlings is medical director of the Krembil Neuroscience Centre, where the program is based. He says the spine centre's programs are giving patients with limited options hope for treatment.

"Many would regard this is as the leading spine program in the world," says Dr. Fehlings. "We have a long history of pushing the envelope in terms of spinal care, and want to continue to push the envelope in terms of innovation."

Despite his successes, Manji's recovery has not been without setbacks. In 2011, one of the titanium rods in his back snapped; the following year a screw broke. Both incidents required more surgery, more recovery time, and more rehab.

This was the closest he ever came to giving up, says Manji.

"One day I was just sitting there thinking oh my God, I can't do this," he says. "I'm throwing up, I'm restarting all those surgeries, restarting the rehab all over again, I can't deal with this. But I knew I couldn't give up. The only person who was going to fight for me was me."

Rampersaud says most patients experience a similar reaction post-surgery.

For those cases with malignant tumours where cure was the primary intent (as opposed to avoiding paralysis), the five-year survival rate is estimated between 70 and 80 per cent.

"You can't imagine what the recovery is like," says Dr. Rampersaud. "If you ask somebody three months after one of these surgeries if they would do it again, they'll often second-guess that. A year later if I ask the same question, universally the answer is yes. But in the moment, it's a tough thing."

His survival has not been without a price, Manji admits. But it was more than worth it. And his tumour has very little chance of returning, Rampersaud says.

"I have no regrets," Manji says. "I played more sports in 15 years than most people play in a lifetime. I had a positive attitude about this because Dr. Rampersaud assured me that he wasn't going to let me down. And he hasn't to this day."

"I'm going to be okay. I'm still here."