Doctors' group attacks Highmark incentive plan

The president of the Pennsylvania Medical Society said Thursday that a reimbursement program from Highmark Inc. worth as much as $5.5 million doesn't make up for cutting payments to doctors who treat patients with federal Affordable Care Act health insurance plans.

“To Highmark, this looks like progress. To physicians, it is a limited solution for a much larger problem,” Dr. Scott Shapiro, the society's president, wrote in a statement.

Highmark said May 3 that it would increase incentives for primary care physicians who accurately complete documentation on a higher percentage of patients with the insurer's Medicare Advantage and ACA plans.

Shapiro said the program emerged from talks between the medical society and Highmark after the society criticized the insurer for reducing payments by 4.5 percent for doctors who treat ACA patients.

The reduction was one of several measures the insurer took to stem $773 million in losses on plans Highmark sold through the federal insurance marketplace for 2014 and 2015. The insurer also raised the plans' premiums, which had been among the lowest in the nation. The medical society said doctors should not be held responsible for Highmark's cost management.

Shapiro said the $5.5 million incentive program will add more work for busy physician practices and excludes specialists whose reimbursement has been reduced. He said the money for the program comes from the federal government.

“A company that maintains $6.5 billion in cash and investments and $5.4 billion in surplus should be better positioned to keep their contractual obligations to physicians, and not continue the bad precedent of cutting physicians to restore corporate profit,” he said.

Highmark spokesman Aaron Billger declined to discuss specifics of the disagreement.

“We stand by our commitment to independent physicians and our new program, which will help support primary care providers in their critical work of taking care of patients,” he wrote in a statement.

Wes Venteicher is a Tribune-Review staff writer.