SAGINAW, MI — Lifelong Saginaw County resident Colleen Sproul is the new director of Health Home and Integrated Services for Saginaw County Community Mental Health Authority.

Sproul is responsible for the development and oversight of the Health Home program for adults with serious mental illness and for integrating the health care priorities of Saginaw County Community Mental Health Authority.

Health Home is an optional Medicaid State Plan benefit created by the Affordable Care Act to coordinate care for people with Medicaid who have chronic conditions, such as mental health, substance abuse, asthma, diabetes, heart disease and weight challenges, according to a news release.

Services range from comprehensive care management, care coordination and health promotion to comprehensive transitional care and follow-up, patient and family support and referrals to community and social support services.

"SCCMHA's commitment to ensure the coordination of medical and behavioral health care in the Saginaw community has been under development for several years," Sproul said in a prepared statement.

"I will assume the implementation and administration of a program that will establish health homes, in partnership with medical and behavioral health providers and community-based social services and supports, to improve the experience and quality of care for individuals in our county."

Sproul holds a Licensed Master of Social Work with the state of Michigan and a Master of Science in administration, the release states. She also is an active board member of the Special Needs Vision Clinic and the city of Saginaw's Human Planning Commission, serving as the chairperson to the commission.

Since 1997, Sproul has held a succession of medical case management, referral management and Medicaid service positions with HealthPlus of Michigan in Flint.

"I am excited for the opportunity and challenge to focus on leading the launch of a coordinated, person-centered care model that will facilitate access to medical and behavioral health care," her statement continued. "As a life-long resident of Saginaw County, I am very fortunate to return to Saginaw to work with an outstanding organization that is dedicated to improving the health outcomes of its residents. In many respects, joining SCCMHA is the culmination of all that I have been privileged to learn along the way."

— Heather Jordan covers business for MLive/The Saginaw News/The Bay City Times. She can be reached at 989-450-2652 or hjordan@mlive.com. Follow her on Twitter and Facebook.