Sixteen dancers and the former club manager were arrested. Most were charged with engaging in lewd acts. In an agreement with the state, those charges were dismissed in exchange for 20 hours of community service.

A bust at a strip club in Valley Brook put more than a dozen dancers behind bars. Seventeen people were charged with engaging in lewd acts and other crimes last year. Now those charges have been dismissed.

"It just seemed like it was more of a thing to grab some headlines at that time," said Mike Jollay.

Jollay is the current manager of Little Darlings, a strip club raided by the Oklahoma County Sheriff Office, state, and federal agents last summer.

Sixteen dancers and the former club manager were arrested. Most were charged with engaging in lewd acts. In an agreement with the state, those charges were dismissed in exchange for 20 hours of community service.

"The girls were very professional about it and they understood they hadn't done anything wrong it was just and unfortunate circumstance," Jollay said.

And he believes that proves the club was unfairly targeted. Jollay tells News 9 it has cost them business as well.

7/20/2012 Related Story: 17 People Arrested At Valley Brook Strip Club

"Business has come back and people understand, more or less, it was just a thing to get re-elected or whatever these politicians want to do," Jollay said.

At the time of the raid, Sheriff John Whetsel called it the largest raid on a strip club in Oklahoma County. In an untold number of man hours spent on the project, the deputies allegedly witnessed the dancers perform naked, instead of wearing the required thongs and pasties.

The women were also accused of offering sex acts for money and inappropriately touching customers. On July 20, 2012, Whetsel said, "There was no real panic at any time inside the club so I don't think this was their first rodeo."

The Sheriff declined to comment on the raid a year later and his office could not provide an estimate of how much money was spent on the investigation.

Although the club still disagrees with raid, Jollay said they will always cooperate with law enforcement.

"I'm very happy that Little Darlings has been exonerated and I think the club did the right thing."