Late last month, Mount Sinai Hospital sent out a little-noticed press release announcing its intention to rename the hospitals it acquired from Continuum Care as part of a deal to create the largest private hospital system in the city. They would all now carry the Mount Sinai name. It was about “brand identification,” the release said.

But this deal—decidedly not a merger of equals—was driven by much bigger factors than brand, ones that speak to where the industry is headed in the age of Obamacare.

“The future of payment moves away from price and volume,” said James Tallon, president of the United Hospital Fund. “Future payment models look at population management, capitation, bundled payments.”

The medical world was probably heading there anyway, but the Affordable Care Act accelerated the trend.

One of the primary goals of the law is to reduce what the nation, specifically the federal government, spends on health care. Related: Health care organizations are moving away from a fee-for-service model toward managed care or accountable care organizations.

In this model, if the health system can spend less than that taking care of the patient in a given year, it can keep the rest. If it spends more, it eats the loss. The key is keeping patients out of the hospital where treatment is much more expensive, which is why Mount Sinai will undoubtedly benefit from Continuum’s 260 primary care physicians located around New York City.

But in this new world, the thing that’s even more important than having lots of doctors is having lots of patients. Health systems need a diverse risk pool so that a few very sick, very expensive patients don’t place too great a financial strain on the system. It’s the same logic behind health insurance companies’ desire to have a large, diversified risk pool.

“The more people I have the more I can set [a model] with statistical assurance and know I’m not going to get killed by outliers,” Tallon said.

That becomes even more important for a renowned academic medical center like Mount Sinai, because its expertise attracts very complicated, very expensive cases.

At the same time, no health system wants its highest-paid doctors working on routine cases that can be handled by less experienced physicians or less specialized hospitals.

“An academic medical center will often try to link up with a ‘community hospital’ because you don’t need your gall bladder repaired or your hernia fixed at a teaching hospital,” said Dr. Mitchell Rabkin, who was president of Massachusetts’ Beth Israel Hospital when it merged with Deaconess Hospital in 1996.

In addition to creating that bigger pool, a deal like this one gives Mount Sinai room to grow, in the physical sense: The acquisition of new real estate allows allows a previously at-capacity health system to consolidate or relocate services in new locations.

This isn’t unique to Mount Sinai. North Shore-LIJ, NYU, New York Methodist all have expansion plans in the works as they look to reach new patients either through clinics or other ambulatory care facilities as a way to make up for the revenue lost because of diminished in-patient stays.

Continuum, for its part, now has access to Mount Sinai’s capital and credit, and can draw from a much larger network at a time when its becoming harder than ever to keep up with the big players, especially without an academic medical center to attract leading physicians.

If you’re a smaller organization trying to figure out how to compete without those advantages, branding, presumably, will be the least of your concerns.

This article appeared in the March edition of Capital magazine.