UAB football went 2-10 last season, ranking 122nd among Football Bowl Subdivision teams in scoring defense. The Blazers gave up an average of 43.8 points a game.

At the end of the season, head coach Garrick McGee bolted his post to become offensive coordinator at Louisville, a willful, backwards step down the job ladder.

UAB football owns a .433 all-time winning percentage, going 112-147-2 in its 23 long, painstaking years as a football program.

A short drive from campus, you can find two dozen high school football programs with better facilities than UAB’s.

If you were to fire one of those t-shirt guns into the stands at a home game, you would have to employ a Navy seal sniper to hit somebody.

Want good game day parking? Drive right up to the shadows of the stadium, 8-minutes from kick-off. And park for free.

Obamacare will work long before UAB football ever will.

I once attended a game with a friend who had blind devotion to the program, when they were giving away UAB visors to everyone in attendance. As we left after the loss to UTEP, I wish I had taken a picture of the boxes and boxes and boxes of visors stacked up at the entrance, unopened.

Sum total, UAB football needs to die. There is absolutely no reason whatsoever to continue this experiment. It has failed. It has not worked. It will not work. People will not come watch the product the Blazers put on the field opposite Alabama and Auburn each Saturday. Try any minor league baseball gimmick in the book, but it still isn’t happening.

The only thing that would work would be winning, and a lot of it. Not an occasional game, but a couple of seasons of winning football, something the Blazers have never managed. They’ve been to but one bowl game in their 23 year history, and (surprise) lost.

So why UAB took the head coach of a respectable program (Jacksonville State) only to sentence him to coaching death, or why Bill Clark agreed to come, one will never know.

Only this is for sure. UAB had a chance to do the right thing after yet another football season ended in utter failure. And yet again, UAB blew it.

UAB football is like that old dog you know, hobbling around on an infected, bad leg, whose owners should’ve put it down two years ago, yet inhumanely refuse.

And now, like a wayward woman on her 5th marriage, UAB has hired another coach…failing to take advantage of a perfect opportunity to let it all just go away. And the train wreck continues…



(Follow ITK on Twitter for Bama news, commentary and smack.)

Share this: Email

Google

Facebook

Twitter

Reddit

LinkedIn

Tumblr

Pinterest

Print