Covered California Executive Director Peter Lee speaks during a tour stop in Los Angeles November 14, 2104. The nine-day, 21 city bus tour hoped to spread the word about the opportunity for millions of Californians to buy affordable health insurance beginning November 15, 2014. File/Andy Holzman/Staff Photographer

Many said that for the Affordable Care Act to succeed in America, it must be a success in California, where 5.5 million people who qualified were uninsured.

So when the state’s health insurance exchange opened for business in October 2013, many watched it carefully.

Called Covered California, the exchange offers various plans for different prices. Most people qualified for tax subsidized care. Others found the plans expensive. But by the end of the first enrollment period in March, 1.2 million people had signed up for a health care plan through Covered California and an additional 2 million had qualified for Medi-Cal.

That means of the 10 million total who enrolled in Obamacare nationwide, California’s totals played an important part and the Golden State managed to reduce its uninsured rate from 22 percent to 11 percent.

That’s the largest rate reduction in the nation, said Peter Lee, executive director for Covered California.

But once the plans kicked in 2014, those on Medi-Cal, the state’s version of Medicare, seemed to struggle the most.

Some recipients were told there were not enough physicians or specialists. There also were delays in processing Medi-Cal applications and some people were unable to see doctors. The result was a lawsuit.

Those who were deemed qualified for Medi-Cal, such as former foster care children, were unable to gain coverage through Covered California as promised. And Medi-Cal recipients who were sick also were noticing that their procedures and devices were being increasingly being denied under an insurance term known as “medical necessity.”

Those who purchased regular health coverage plans outside Medi-Cal also saw changes to their coverage. Some who thought they could go to any cancer center, such as City of Hope, were no longer eligible. In addition, some insurance carriers listed on Covered California were under investigation for promising providers that were never part of the plans.

Meanwhile, as the second enrollment period began on Nov. 15, Covered California focused on a new population and goal: to enroll 500,000 new people by the Feb. 15, 2015, deadline. They hoped to reach the thousands who have adapted to what Lee and others called a culture of coping without health coverage.

Armed with $95 million in community outreach funds and a promise that there would be better customer service, members of Covered California visited 21 cities statewide to get the word out about enrollment, especially among Latinos with mixed immigration status within the family. The goal was to reach those who qualify for Covered California insurance and state subsidies because they are U.S. citizens, but who may step back in fear because their family members are undocumented.

Advertisement

So far, the campaigns seems to be working. More than 592,000 people have either sought coverage and were determined eligible for private health insurance and eligible or likely are eligible for Medi-Cal in the first month of open enrollment, Covered California and the California Department of Health Care Services announced this month.

“This is further proof of the great demand that Californians have for quality, affordable health care coverage,” Lee said in a statement.