President Barack Obama was quick to bring up religious freedom on Wednesday during his first visit to a mosque as president and again Thursday morning during his speech at the National Prayer Breakfast.

“We pray for God’s protection for all around the world who are not free to practice their faith, including Christians who are persecuted,” Obama said Thursday, according to The Hill. “And just as we call on other countries to respect the rights of religious minorities, we, too, respect the right of every single American to practice their faith freely.”

But Obama’s words contrast sharply against his actions as president. Numerous religious groups have been forced to take legal action to protect their religious freedoms from mandates and other orders handed down by the Obama administration.

The Little Sisters of the Poor, a Catholic religious order, is scheduled to appear in front of the U.S. Supreme Court on March 23 to ask the nation’s highest court to ensure they do not have to comply with Obamacare’s abortion mandate. The mandate compels religious groups to pay for birth control and drugs that may cause abortions.

Previously, the Supreme Court ruled that the Christian-run Hobby Lobby doesn’t have to obey the HHS mandate that is a part of Obamacare that requires businesses to pay for drugs that may cause abortions in their employee health care plans.

SIGN THE PLEDGE: I Pledge to Vote for a Pro-Life Candidate for President

Seemingly ignoring these cases, Obama praised religious groups on Thursday for the humanitarian work that they are doing across the globe.

“Think about the extraordinary work of the congregations and faith communities represented here today,” Obama said to attendees at the prayer breakfast. “Whether fighting global poverty or working to end the scourge of human trafficking, you are the leaders of what Pope Francis calls ‘this march of living hope.’”

But these, too, were empty words. Earlier this year, the Obama administration hindered religious groups that help victims of human trafficking by demanding that they provide the victims with abortions, LifeNews reported. The only groups that will be eligible for federal grants under the new Obama administration rules are the groups willing to victimize women again by pushing abortion if they become pregnant.

In California, the Obama administration also is ignoring the pleas of religious groups that are being forced to fund abortions through their health insurance plans. The troubling situation began in 2014 when the California Department of Managed Health Care reclassified abortion as a “basic health service” under the Affordable Care Act and ordered all insurance plans in the state to begin covering surgical abortions immediately. Even churches are not exempt from funding abortions.

The federal Weldon Amendment should protect California religious groups in this case, but the Obama administration has not enforced the law.

Obama told the prayer breakfast attendees on Thursday that he prays “that our differences ultimately are bridged, that the God that is in each of us comes together and we don’t divide.”

“Just as we call on other countries to respect the rights of religious minorities, we, too, respect the right of every American to practice their faith freely,” he continued. “This is what each of us is called on to do, to seek our common humanity of each other.”

Yet, he has allowed his almost religious devotion to the abortion industry to trample on the religious rights of millions of Americans. Obama’s actions are dividing the nation and discriminating against religious groups. The president’s speeches about religious tolerance and freedom may sound pretty, but they mean nothing unless they are backed up by actions.