Analysis NIH boost masks GOP cuts elsewhere from Obama's budget

House Republicans rolled out a giant $153 billion spending bill Tuesday that tries to put a kinder, gentler — some say smarter — face on what are still deep cuts from President Barack Obama’s domestic budget.

More than in the past, there are clear winners led by the National Institutes of Health together with the Centers for Disease Control and modest new investments in education initiatives targeted to early childhood, disadvantaged minority students and the disabled.

Story Continued Below

But the GOP’s generosity here only adds to the squeeze on other priorities, which would be cut by close to $6 billion below current funding. As in the past, Republicans seek to defund implementation of the Affordable Care Act but the casualty list also includes a 27 percent cut from the National Labor Relations Board, the elimination of 19 programs within the Education Department and the termination of the entire Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.

Indeed, the total package represents a $14.55 billion or 9 percent cut from Obama’s budget request for health, labor and education appropriations for the new fiscal year that begins Oct. 1. More than any single domestic spending bill, this is where the rubber-meets-the-road in the larger debate over how to address the tight spending caps set by the 2011 Budget Control Act.

Thus far, the GOP has opted to keep the caps in place even as it has happily gone around them by using a time-worn budget ploy to boost defense spending by $38 billion. At some point, the two sides will have to negotiate, and the real import of the House bill now is it represents the opening bid of where a Republican-controlled Congress would invest if a deal can be reached.

“It’s a good starting point. I always see an initial bill as the opening round of a negotiation,” said Rep. Tom Cole (R-OK.), the new chair of the labor, health and education panel on the House Appropriations Committee. “We’re just trying to show: here are areas where we can agree. Let’s put some resources there.”

“I always call this bill catnip for Democrats,” Cole added. “They love everything in it. Nothing can be cut. They have a very hard time prioritizing it. It’s sort of like us in defense. I get it. This is something they care deeply about, they are passionate about.

“They will like the places we plus up. But this is a place where we are freer to make priorities and choices. It’s easier for us,” Cole concluded.

The emphasis on NIH and biomedical research goes back to an old tradition for centrist Republicans, and all signs are that the Senate will tilt even more in this direction when Republicans write their own version of the same bill. For the time being, Cole is satisfied with a $1.1 billion increase, just $100 million over Obama’s request. And this leaves him more resources for other priorities including a $192 million increase for Head Start, of which $150 million is a down payment toward coming to a deal with the president on early childhood education.

“If we have a deal down the road, early childhood is a place I would be looking to add more,” Cole said.

Other increases include a $500 million increase for special education grants to states. Impact aid, a federal program to help local communities offset the cost of educating the children of military families on tax-exempt federal property, gets a modest increase over Obama’s request. Taking advantage of the improved economy and reduced pressure on the Pell Grant program, the bill is able to increase the maximum grant for low-income college students from $5,775 to $5,915. And the bill leans in favor of colleges with historically black or Hispanic student enrollment.

Perhaps the biggest new development about the bill is that there is even a bill at all.

Among all the 12 annual appropriations bills, the giant labor, education and health budget measure is always the hardest for Republicans to move across the House floor. And since taking over the chamber in 2011, the GOP has frequently used it as a bank to fund other bills and never even attempted to come up with the draft of its own.

The continued stand-off over the BCA still makes the task difficult. But House Appropriations Committee Chairman Hal Rogers (R-Ky.) has tried harder this year to allocate enough money to make the bill doable. And Cole is a much more centrist Republican who is able to reach out to Democrats and has been helped by the addition of some moderate Republicans on his panel.

He remains confident he can get the measure out of subcommittee this week and into a full Appropriations committee markup. And the package includes a host of policy riders that should help garner some support from conservatives — who are otherwise opposed to the total spending in the bill.

The financial industry — a big source of campaign funds for the GOP — stands to gain from language targeting the Labor Department’s effort to craft a tougher set of “fiduciary” regulations to protect workers and retirees from getting conflicted advice about managing their 401K plans. Cole himself is promoting language that would limit the ability of the NLRB to insert itself in employee disputes within Native American tribal businesses — a big issue back home in Oklahoma.

Nonetheless, the numbers are crushing without some relief from a deal down the road. Cole begins from a starting point that puts him $3.7 billion in the hole even before he starts to add money for winners like NIH or CDC. This is why the required offsets grow so fast, and there is only so much Republicans can credit to defunding Obama’s ACA legacy.