ENLARGE Jack Kirkman, director of production at Lincoln Center in New York City. Photo: JOHN TAGGART for The Wall Street Journal

On Thursday evening, Lincoln Center will hold an official ceremony to rename Avery Fisher Hall, home of the New York Philharmonic, David Geffen Hall. Mr. Geffen, the entertainment mogul, contributed $100 million toward the hall’s coming renovation.

One of Lincoln Center’s current employees who recalls Philharmonic Hall’s previous renaming—for Avery Fisher in 1973—is Jack Kirkman, director of production.

Indeed, Mr. Kirkman, 81 years old, remembers the neighborhood before there was a Lincoln Center. “When they started building this complex I was working at Don Allen Chevrolet, making adjustments on carburetors,” he said.

He was referring to a car dealership in the neighborhood that was going to be torn down to make way for the arts complex. “I was so against building this place. I thought I’d lose this job.”

Seeing little future in car repair, Mr. Kirkman managed in 1963 to land a job at Lincoln Center as an artist’s assistant. In fact, the position was created for him.

“I absolutely loved that job,” he recalled as he sat one afternoon last week in Avery Fisher Hall’s Green Room, where conductors and soloists greet friends and fans after performances. “I would meet the conductor when they arrived. I would collect their mail and any flowers and gifts.”

If anything, Mr. Kirkman may have been a bit too conscientious. Such as the time he grilled the great classical pianist Arthur Rubinstein about the length of his performance. “He said, ‘Listen, young man. I’m playing a concert. I’m not driving a train.’ ”

Artists have their idiosyncrasies. But Mr. Kirkman, who grew up in North Carolina, dreamed of being a dancer and studied acting with Lee Strasberg, was a sympathetic spirit.

ENLARGE A 1965 exterior view of Philharmonic Hall, as it was then known, at Lincoln Center. It was renamed Avery Fisher Hall in 1973, and is now being renamed David Geffen Hall. Photo: Associated Press

At a Richard Tucker gala one year opera singer Kathleen Battle refused to perform until roses decorating the foot of the stage were removed. “She had the most beautiful shoes” that she wanted the audience to enjoy as much as she apparently did, Mr. Kirkman explained. “We didn’t do it quick enough, so she started removing the roses.”

A new pair of shoes also proved singer Ella Fitzgerald ’s undoing after their slippery soles sent her careening into the drums. At his first opportunity Mr. Kirkman handed them off to the Philharmonic’s engineers, who sanded the bottoms.

“We became quite good friends after that,” Mr. Kirkman remembered. “I’d always come early and she would come early. I’d give her tea and she’d read the tea leaves.”

One of his saddest memories is of Judy Garland during a 1968 tribute concert to Harold Arlen. The frail Ms. Garland had trouble remembering the lyrics to “Over the Rainbow.”

“The audience got wind of what was going on and they came forward; some came on the stage just to be near her,” Mr. Kirkman remembered. “I went out there and took her off the stage.”

On the other hand, he served as bartender to Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton during one evening’s performance.

The box closest to and overlooking the stage used to be screened in, Mr. Kirkman explained, hiding celebrities so that they could enjoy the performance without their presence disrupting it.

“One of the things I did was sit with Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton, pouring vodka” as they polished off the better part of a bottle, he recalled.

The Burtons seemed as pleased by Mr. Kirkman’s performance as by whatever was transpiring onstage. “She said as she was leaving, ‘You pour a hell of a drink.’”

Perhaps Mr. Kirkman’s richest professional relationship was with conductor Leonard Bernstein, with whom he traveled during the Philharmonic’s trips abroad.

During a concert in Switzerland, Charlie Chaplin invited Bernstein to lunch. “Bernstein knew I was trying to be an actor and studying with Lee Strasberg,” Mr. Kirkman said. “He asked me if I wanted to go. It was a delightful afternoon.”

ENLARGE Ella Fitzgerald belts out a song at Avery Fisher Hall in 1987. She and Lincoln Center Director of Production Jack Kirkman became good friends. Photo: ASSOCIATED PRESS

He encountered Mr. Chaplin again when the actor returned to New York in 1972, after two decades of exile in Europe. He was being honored by the Film Society of Lincoln Center.

Mr. Kirkman was designated to protect Chaplin from the huge crowds that swarmed Lincoln Center. “When it was over he got back in the elevator, hugged me, and said, ‘I love you, America. It’s good to be home.’”

Mr. Kirkman has been slowed by a stroke and uses a walker to get around the hall these days. But he wanted to take me backstage where, for many years, he has instructed the lighting engineers to “take the house down” when the conductor or soloist gave him the signal that he or she was ready to go.

“Don’t you get a great feeling when you stand here,” he said as he walked to center stage. “It’s so beautiful.”

—ralph.gardner@wsj.com