DREW HARRIS: In his film, “Annie Hall,” Woody Allen recounts an old joke about the two ladies complaining over their dinner at a Catskills Mountain resort.

One says, “Boy, the food at this place is really awful.”

“Yeah, I know,” says the other, “And such small portions!”

This basically sums up the U.S. health-care system: poor quality and not much to show for it. Other nations keep their people healthy at a much lower price. There is much we can learn from them.

In 2013, the U.S. spent over $9,000 to provide health care for each man, woman and child—one-third more per person than any other wealthy nation. Thanks to the recession and the early impact of the Affordable Care Act, expenditures are growing by the slowest rate since 1960. However, we’re leveling off at a very high-cost plateau—$2.9 trillion dollars.

Unfortunately, like those resort diners, we’re not getting much value for our money. The U.S. ranks at the very bottom of advanced health systems. Our lives are shorter, our infants die more frequently and we suffer more from treatable disease. Despite the Affordable Care Act, many families continue to struggle to pay health-insurance premiums and unreimbursed bills. Having the knowledge that you will get care when needed is still a luxury.

Surprisingly, citizens of similarly situated nations actually visit the doctor more frequently. These countries have more hospital beds, more doctors and patients have longer hospital stays. Despite this excess care, which can arguably be described as wasteful, they spend less for it. Part of the reason they get more for their money is the lower price they pay for each service. Another critical distinction is the mix of services. We far exceed our peers in high-tech diagnostics and care. We do more MRI and CT scans, bypass more coronary arteries and replace more knees. More Americans go to the ER because the lack of adequate coverage discourages prevention and early treatment.

Specialty treatment is more expensive and so are the medical and surgical specialists who provide it. The U.S. has a very high specialist-to-primary care provider ratio when compared to other countries, but the evidence suggests that greater use of primary-care physicians (and non-physician primary-care providers such as nurse practitioners and physician assistants) results in better health outcomes. The outcomes difference is not likely the result of what primary care providers do as individuals, but rather the improved patient care coordination that comes with having a regular source of care—a medical home.

Overuse of specialists is generally not conducive to good health because key information is lost in the handoff from one provider to the other. Unfortunately, while more primary care may be better for the patient, the incentive for debt-burdened U.S. medical-school graduates is to train for higher-paying specialties with better work-life balance. Specialists order and perform (and bill for) more tests and procedures. This is how money is made in a health system that is still largely fee-for-service.

Other nations with their subsidized medical schools and highly regulated health systems have fewer specialists and more primary-care providers. While the result may not always be the very best or most efficient care for every patient, there is much we should emulate. The Affordable Care Act took a small step in that direction, but we have a long ways to go.

Dr. Drew Harris (@drewaharris) is director of health policy at Thomas Jefferson University’s School of Population Health in Philadelphia, where he focuses on the complex interplay between public health, medical care and public policy.

Read the latest Health Report.