Our Mission: The Mission of Women's Health (Boulder Valley Women's Health Center) is to provide accessible, confidential and comprehensive gynecological and reproductive health care, including sexual health services and education.

We Serve: We serve adults and teens, regardless of income, insurance, immigration status or gender. We accept insurance and Medicaid, and make reproductive health care accessible to low-income and uninsured patients by offering family planning services on a sliding fee scale, which slides to $0 for those below 100 percent of the federal poverty line. We serve youth under age 20 in our confidential Teen Clinic. We provide specialized outreach to Latina women and monolingual Spanish speakers. Men can receive information, condoms, vasectomies, and STI/STD testing and treatment. We also provide first-trimester abortion services and hormonal services for transgender patients.

Brief History: In 1973, a group of committed men and women formed Boulder Valley Clinic, the first abortion clinic in Colorado. Over the years, our name changed as we expanded our services to include family planning and comprehensive gynecology. In 2006, we opened a second clinic location in Longmont. Throughout our 40-year history, we have remained a locally-focused nonprofit organization meeting and responding to the reproductive and sexual health care needs of our local communities.

Proudest Accomplishment: Women's Health is proud to have been the first health care provider in Colorado and the only provider in Boulder County to participate in the Colorado Family Planning Initiative. This privately funded initiative provided IUDs and implants at no cost to low-income women and teens, resulting in a remarkable 48 percent drop in the state's teen birth rate and abortion rate.

Advertisement

Greatest Need: Our greatest need is for financial support, so that we can continue to serve as a safety net provider for those in need in our community. While more and more people are finally gaining access to health insurance or Medicaid coverage thanks to the Affordable Care Act, over 40 percent of Women's Health patients are still uninsured, ineligible for insurance, or are hesitant to use their insurance because of high deductibles or confidentiality concerns. There will always be a need for clinics like ours that offer health care services on a sliding fee scale, and Women's Health depends on donor support to provide those services.

Future Plans: Women's Health is a medical home for our patients, including those who are insured. As such, we will continue to meet the needs of our patient population through innovative programs, insurance enrollment and working collaboratively with other health care providers to ensure that our patients receive comprehensive care. In 2016, we hope to add in a social worker to coordinate a broader range of support for patients facing complicated medical issues.

Contact: 303-442-5160, info@bvwhc.org

Website: boulderwomenshealth.org