While Christmas trees and Santa Claus get all the attention this time of year, Rabbi Yossi Korik and his wife, Malkie are quietly sharing the Jewish faith with Jews as well as those interested in the culture and traditions.

The couple, who left their homes in Brooklyn, New York to open the Chabad House in Granite Bay nearly a decade ago, decided while they were still in college that they wanted to make humanitarian causes their life’s work.

“After we were married we decided that we wanted to commit our lives to this calling,” Rabbi Korik said. “But our schooling our whole lives has been oriented to this path.”

The Rabbi’s post-graduate education was focused on rabbinical studies, including attending rabbinical college.

Malkie’s background included teaching at a Jewish school.

In addition, the couple has volunteered in the community, including volunteering with Folsom Prison chaplaincy, hospital chaplaincy and with various hospice groups.

Today the Rabbi, a soft-spoken, bearded man with a quick smile, said both he and his wife work 24/7. And that’s no exaggeration when you look at what they have accomplished in recent years.

The place they now call their professional home was once a fire station on Douglas Boulevard. Today the garage that housed fire trucks serves as both a synagogue and an area where youth are taught Jewish customs and heritage through classes as well as a daily pre-school.

The concrete and bricks are gone, replaced by finished walls, wood flooring and a large portrait of the Rebbe, the man who died 20 years ago and is credited with starting Chabad (a Hebrew acronym for wisdom, knowledge and understanding).

“We were inspired by the Rebbe, the Hebrew term for Grand Rabbi. He’s the founder of Chabad worldwide, from Kathmandu, Nepal to South America,” Rabbi Korik said. “His idea to reach out to communities that may have nothing in the way of a formal Jewish presence really affected us.”

Today there are, by the Rabbi’s estimate, about 3,500 Jewish residents in the South Placer area, and seven Chabad Houses in the greater Sacramento region.

The couple chose South Placer after meeting with a Sacramento Chabad leader while they were still in New York. Their eldest son, Mendel, was just seven weeks old. Today Mendel is 10, and he has 5 brothers and sisters, all of whom the Rabbi calls wonderful blessings.

Chabad House offers all manner of services, including a Jewish pre-school, funeral services, weddings and more. But the organization offers outreach to those in need, regardless of faith.

“As a humanitarian group, Chabad is inspired to be there for all people, not to proselytize. We are here for anyone who needs help, be it hunger, homelessness, addiction – whatever the problem that someone might have,” he said. “Chabad has drug rehab and homeless shelters all over the world.”

The Rabbi and his wife place importance not only on being a presence for Jews, both in the area and to those who are considering relocation to South Placer, but also to educate those who may be of Jewish descent but do not know anything about the culture as well as those who are merely curious about the religion.

“Maybe they know that they have a great grandparent who was Jewish. We help them explore what their heritage is about and how it can impact their lives,” the Rabbi said. “And because it’s human nature to create stereotypes or notions about others, certainly we encounter questions. People are curious. They may assume some things incorrectly and we see this as an important opportunity to break those stereotypes.”

Granite Bay resident Melissa Neumann was thrilled to relocate her family to a community where her kids could attend a Hebrew school.

“We moved here in 2012 and I enrolled the boys in the school to learn Hebrew and their heritage,” Neumann said. “Tradition and culture are what give us a connection to our ancestors and help us develop our own sense of Jewish identity.”

The center offers weekly prayer service on Saturday, the Jewish Sabbath. They also offer classes for adults and children, including a Torah class that is held in a private home in Lincoln.

The center’s Yiddish club is popular, teaching Jews and non-Jews the language and culture, including songs, arts and foods. There’s a religious Sunday school for kids and a religious pre-school on weekdays.

Of course, the center celebrates Jewish holidays with the community and offers social events and even a program about the Holocaust in spring.

The center will host their 10th annual Chanukah event, including Menorah lighting on Tuesday, Dec. 16 at Roseville Galleria. Visit Jewishroseville.com for details.