Upstate CEOs oppose Obamacare for different reasons Business owners say benefits are scarce, complications plentiful

Upstate business owners want their employees to have good health coverage.

At least those who spoke to the Times Union said providing health benefits helps retain workers, and is the right thing to do.

But local business owners don't like the federal law, known as Obamacare, intended to make health care more accessible and affordable. Their reasons are different and it's unlikely the law is the only cause for their complaints, such as rising insurance premiums. But nearly three-quarters of upstate and Capital Region CEOs surveyed by Siena College Research Institute at the end of last year said the law is having a negative impact on their business. The survey was sponsored by Gramercy Communications, The Business Council of New York State and Ostroff Associates.

"The introduction of the Affordable Care Act has complicated things and increased our costs," said John O'Connor, senior vice president of Mohawk, an 84-year-old family-owned paper maker in Cohoes.

Business executives grumble about suffering from a chronic headache brought on by efforts to keep up with changes to Obamacare. But for O'Connor, the real fear is that the law may require Mohawk to trim its rich benefit package. He's worried that if the company maintains benefits at current levels, it will be penalized.

At issue are a 40 percent tax on so-called "Cadillac health plans" — those with premiums over $10,200 for individuals or $27,500 for a family — beginning in 2018 and a cap on the percentage of workers' income that can be spent on health insurance.

"We have to possibly take a defensive position and reduce our benefits in order to fit inside of the Affordable Care Act box of 'affordability,'" O'Connor said. "That kind of goes against what historically our position has been, to attract and retain employees."

More Information

At Albany Mechanical Services, a Green Island-based heating and cooling company, employees are paying more for their own health care this year, because the company switched its plan, Controller Marina Migliore said.

In the past, the 54-employee company has avoided big spikes in health insurance costs by comparison shopping and changing carriers. This year, all the insurers' rates headed skyward, Migliore said; the company faced a 30 percent rate hike to keep similar coverage.

Insurance carriers told Migliore the increases were needed to cover costs associated with Obamacare rules.

So Albany Mechanical reluctantly switched to a health insurance plan that requires employees to pay a high deductible, Migliore said. To soften the blow of workers' increased out-of-pocket costs, the company reimburses employees for the first half of their expenses that go toward the deductible.

There's been an upside to the change, she said: Employees have a better sense of medical costs and are learning to manage their care better.

At Repeat Business Systems in Albany, moving employees to a high-deductible plan wasn't an option for owner Dawn Abbuhl. Some of the company's workers earn just $12 an hour, and meeting a high deductible would be too great a burden, she said.

With fewer than 50 workers, the company could have saved money by directing employees to get their own coverage through the state's online market, NY State of Health. It chose to absorb a 12 percent increase in premium rates instead. NY State of Health plans were inferior to what Repeat offered, and the deductibles were too high, Abbuhl said.

Employee wellness is important to Abbuhl. The company buys desks that workers can stand at and ball chairs to sit on. It offers a smoking cessation program and organizes competitions to encourage workers to lose weight. Once a year, one employee gets a wish fulfilled from "bucket lists," like a dream vacation.

Abbuhl's gripe with Obamacare is that she doesn't see its benefits.

"I don't think it's going to give people the type of care they're going to need," Abbuhl said.

chughes@timesunion.com • 518-454-5417 • @hughesclaire