It seems the Libertarian Party may be the biggest winner in the GOP primary. On Wednesday, the Washington Examiner reported that registration in the Libertarian Party (LP) doubled in less than 24 hours after Donald Trump won a Pyrrhic victory in Indiana, becoming the presumptive GOP nominee.

Many conservative supporters of Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, feel they cannot support Trump and believe the Republican Party no longer represents their views. Worse yet, Trump has angered many with below-the-belt attacks on Cruz's wife and father. He has also adopted liberal positions on issues like raising taxes, North Carolina's "bathroom law" and the minimum wage. As a result, conservatives are turning to the one party that still believes in the concept of a small, limited government that operates within the confines of the Constitution.

Wes Benedict, Executive Director of the Libertarian Party, said conservatives are rightly "scared" of Trump, who, he added, "sounds like an authoritarian." He also expressed concerns over Trump's claim that he would be a "deal-maker" with liberal Democrats like Nancy Pelosi.

"We don't need a secret deal-maker," he told the Examiner. "We need more transparency, and a smaller, less intrusive government that provides a level playing field for all and has fewer deals for special interests."

Ashe Schow said the official Libertarian Party membership report through April showed a "drastic increase in new donors as the primaries started and it became increasingly clear that Trump would be the nominee." By comparison, the party only signed 106 new donors in April 2015.

Libertarian Party candidates are also using the GOP rift to attract new supporters. Former New Mexico governor Gary Johnson, a candidate seeking the LP nomination for president, specifically reached out to Cruz supporters.

"With millions of Americans now feeling politically 'homeless', a two-term governor who balanced budgets, cut taxes, cut regulations and truly reduced the size of government may offer the home they are seeking," he said. Austin Peterson, another LP candidate for president, reached out to Cruz supporters in a Facebook video.

Benedict also reached out to Cruz supporters while including a caveat. "Republicans who liked Cruz's fight against Obamacare, opposition to ethanol subsidies, and opposition to spying on Americans, will find a home in the Libertarian Party," he said. "Some Cruz supporters will have to learn that legalizing marijuana also reduces the size of government, but we'll teach them."

Writing at RedState, Caleb Howe said that while the number of new registrations is relatively tiny, the sentiment is something that is being seen across the GOP, as growing numbers of voters say they will not support Trump. The bottom line, Howe said, is that despite the numbers Trump has garnered, a majority of GOP voters have rejected the real estate mogul many see as anti-capitalist on issues ranging from taxes to anti-trust to trade.