'Mentally I am just transported to some place different'

Holiday performances give dancer Holli Towers her ticket to a part of herself that feels like another country when compared to the rest of her life.

"Once the (Nutcracker) overture starts, mentally I am just transported to some place different, some place very emotional," Towers, 16, of Longmont, said. "... And I am a really shy person. I'm not big on expressing myself. But that's what dance is all about, and it's the only place where I feel really comfortable doing that."

If you go What: 10th annual "Nutty Nutcracker" performed by Airborne Gymnastics & Dance Where: Vance Brand Civic Auditorium, 600 E. Mountain View Ave., Longmont When: 2 p.m. and 7 p.m. Saturday, Dec. 13 Cost: Free To reserve tickets: Call 303-651-1456. What: Longmont Chorale's "Joyful and Triumphant Concert" with the St. Vrain Singers, Apollo Chamber Brass, and the 2014 Vocal Competition Winners Where: LifeBridge Christian Church, 10345 Ute Hwy., Longmont When: 3 p.m. Sunday, Dec. 7 Cost: Adults, $16; seniors, $14; students, $12 Information: Visit www.longmontchorale.org or call 303-651-7664 What: St. Vrain Singers Christmas concert Where: CENTRALongmont, formerly Central Presbyterian Church, 402 Kimbark St., Longmont When: 7 p.m. Monday, Dec. 22 Cost: Free Information: Visit www.centralpres.net or call 303-776-6833 What: "Scrooge, Bah Humbug!" Where: Jesters Dinner Theatre & School for the Performing Arts, 224 Main St., Longmont When: Runs between Dec. 5 - Dec. 28 Information: Vist www.jesterstheatre.com or call 303-682-9980

For months, 98 Longmont area children and youths have spent upwards of 12 hours a week at Longmont's Airborne Gymnastics & Dance rehearsing for the 10th annual "Nutty Nutcracker" — a perennially original show written and directed by Sara Calabrese, Airborne's dance director. Each new show introduces a twist on Tchaikovsky's classic "The Nutcracker" ballet, and this year that twist works in story lines from "How the Grinch Stole Christmas" by Dr. Seuss.

The format invites young dancers to explore the dramatic and comedic while preparing for two performances on Dec. 13 at Vance Brand Civic Auditorium in Longmont.

More than that, it gives them an opportunity to celebrate the gift exchange that happens year round across the performing arts when dancers, actors and musicians take the choreography, the script, or the score to another level through artistic interpretation, said Lee Smoot, director of The St. Vrain Singers youth choir and the music ministry director at CENTRALongmont, formerly Central Presbyterian Church.

"There is always a story to tell (in the arts). The talent is in learning to tell it well, which allows young and old to give something to themselves while giving something of themselves," she said.

Kaitlyn Jessee, 17, dances during rehearsal for the 10th annual "Nutty Nutcracker." (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

The stillness at the center

Kaitlyn Jessee, 17, of Longmont, wore green fingernail polish and gaudy green eye shadow to get in the mood to play the Grinch during a late November Nutty Nutcracker rehearsal.

Although, finding her place in ballet is not hard, especially when everything else is.

She started dancing at age 2. By age 7, when her parents divorced, she understood dance as doorway.

"Dance allowed me to leave darkness in life behind, to be that normal kid," she said. "...When I walk through the (studio) doors, they are like an eraser. And I am a completely different person when I dance then when I am at home or at school because I am completely myself."

From that still center, the willowy Kaitlyn brings a certain synergy to dance — a sense of internal connection with herself and the work, her team, and the audience.

Fellow dancer Kiley Winkelhake, 15, of Longmont, plays Clara Lou Who in this year's Nutty Nutcracker. She, too, views the art of dancing as "a process of integration" — an artistic way of bringing body, soul and mind together despite flubbed steps, missed cues and a lower back injury.

Pressing on to perform well rewards a dancer, especially after a sparkling performance, Kaitlyn added.

"The sweet spot is thinking it's not going to happen, and then it's there," she said. "And the bigger I make things (for the audience), the bigger they make things, and then the bigger I want to make things for them."

High hopes for holiday audiences

Like her counterparts in the local young dance scene, Annabelle Butcher, 12, of Longmont, called her place in the performing arts as a first soprano "home."

"I like how it sounds, how it paints a picture in my head," she said. "And singing lets me let go of drama in my life. ... For every dramatic thing that happens at school, which happens every week, I'm make up a different song to sing about it."

Besides singing alone about school drama or singing pop tunes with her friends or singing anything that comes to mind as she walks to pick her sisters up after school, Annabelle sings in five different choirs. Her choir membership includes a spot with the St. Vrain Singers, which will perform in holiday concerts at LifeBridge Church with the Longmont Chorale on Dec. 7 and Central Presbyterian Church on Dec. 22.

Already she looks forward to the holiday performances because of what the audience brings in the door: applause, post concert compliments, and even vows to sing more themselves.

"When a little girl comes up to me afterward and says, 'I want to sing like you when I grow up,' that's really awesome. I love it when my singing gets someone else singing," Annabelle said.

Then there are the young actors.

Many have performed in the annual "Scrooge" production that debuted at Jesters Dinner Theatre in 1987, said co-owner Scott Moore.

For the past four years, Tanner McGarr, 10, of Loveland, has played Tiny Tim.

"It's pretty easy," he said. "You go on stage, act like you have a broken leg and look cute."

Nevertheless, staying in character comes with its challenges.

Once, he felt nauseated on stage and quietly got sick behind a table there.

"For some reason, my pants survived. I did have to get rid of the scarf and the shirt and clean my shoes. But I was back out on stage after the intermission," he said.

Since Tiny Tim's lines are limited, Tanner relies mostly on physical expressions to connect with audiences.

"I just have a passion for entertaining people," he said. "And since I am not the first one on stage, I can tell that if they laugh at little things, they will crack up at big things. ... Probably my favorite thing is to improvise."

Even Holli, the shy Nutty Nutcracker dancer playing the Sugar Plum Fairy this year, has high hopes for holiday audiences.

"When I dance, I force my smile a lot. But when there's applause, I just feel so happy that it just naturally happens," she said. "It's nice to go out and put your absolute best into it and feel it coming back to you."

Pam Mellskog can be reached at p.mellskog@gmail.com or at 303-746-0942.