Press Release EAGLE BUTTE, SD (March 31, 2014) — On April 11-12, the Cheyenne River Youth Project® will host its eagerly anticipated springtime basketball tournament fundraiser to support its youth programming and services in Eagle Butte. The tournament will begin at 6 p.m., on Friday, April 11, in the Cokata Wiconi teen center’s gymnasium and will run into Saturday, April 12.

“We’re always excited to host fundraising basketball tournaments here at Cokata Wiconi, because each event is so much more than a fundraiser,” said Tammy Eagle Hunter, CRYP’s youth programs director. “It’s a special occasion for the community to get together, have fun and support the greatest cause that we all share in common — Cheyenne River’s children.”

According to Eagle Hunter, CRYP’s fundraising basketball tournaments are known for drawing large crowds of youth and community members alike. In addition to raising much-needed funds for the not-for-profit, grassroots youth organization, they have a reputation for raising an overflow of community spirit as well.

“We’re always deeply affected by the intergenerational community bonding that takes place during these events,” said Julie Garreau, CRYP’s executive director. “Our guests are always so generous and supportive, and they understand why we’ve gathered together. We all love basketball, but this is about more than just basketball… this is a community lifting itself up in support of its children.”

Eagle Hunter agreed. “It’s a day of unity and friendly competition for a great cause, and everyone comes out a winner in the end.”

Youth ages 11-14 are welcome to participate in the intramural basketball tournament. Each eight-player team must include two girls and may participate for a $30 sponsorship fee. Prizes will be awarded to first, second and third place.

Registration closes at the end of the business day on Wednesday, April 9.

For more information, call the CRYP offices at(605) 964-8200, send an email to Eagle Hunter at Tammy.Cryp@gmail.com, or visit the CRYP campus on East Lincoln Street in Eagle Butte.