Buy Photo Voters will elect three members to the Lee County School Board in districts 1, 4 and 5 during the primary on Aug. 26. (Photo: Andrew West /news-press.com)Buy Photo

A review of The News-Press primary election endorsements that appeared this week.

We also offer our positions on two key amendments before voters during the general election on Nov. 4

We encourage all registered voters to cast ballots through absentee voting, early voting and on election day on Aug. 26.

Benacquisto for senate

Lizbeth Benacquisto, 46, receives The News-Press endorsement for the state Senate seat representing District 30, which includes parts of Lee and Charlotte counties.

Her influential role in the Senate as majority leader and positions on the powerful Appropriations and Rules committees, her ability to use that position for the benefit of critical projects for Southwest Florida, and her community involvement, are the main reasons Benacquisto receives the endorsement over Michael Dreikorn.

Although she holds the conservative party line on most issues, including a repeal of the Affordable Care Act, what has been refreshing to see from the Republican over the last year is her ability to step out of the shadows and take credit for funding directed to local projects, especially those dealing with water quality as well as economic development. In the past, she has steered the credit to others.

Her leadership over the next four years is important because she must work with congressional members to make sure there is a strong pipeline of federal funding to continue with Everglades restoration work, as well as returning a natural flow way south from Lake Okeechobee, redirecting polluted water out of area basins.

State representative Caldwell for District 79

Matt Caldwell receives The News-Press endorsement for state representative in District 79, which includes North Fort Myers and Lehigh Acres.

Caldwell, 33, is a House veteran. He understands the workings of the Legislature, and now that he has been in office four years, he is securing key committee appointments, such as his role on the agriculture committee.

The North Fort Myers resident has shown a willingness to work closely with his colleagues in the Southwest Florida delegation and get key legislation passed and funding secured for water quality projects and economic development efforts, such as the Emergent Technologies Institute at FGCU. We like his position on getting government out of the way of businesses that may want to come to Southwest Florida, but face obstacles because of costly and lengthy permitting regulations.

Eagle in District 77

Dane Eagle receives The News-Press endorsement for state representative in District 77.

We also endorsed the Florida native in 2012, when he sought the seat for the first time. We acknowledged his appreciation for state history, his knowledge of state government, gained mostly from serving as Charlie Crist's deputy chief of staff, his love for Southwest Florida and his tireless work ethic. Nothing has changed in the past two years to weaken our position on any of those qualities.

We do, however, expect the 31-year-old from Cape Coral to not only support and fight for policies that improve the quality of life for those he represents but to be honest with the constituents. We believe he failed in accomplishing that earlier this year when he was arrested on a charge of driving under the influence while in Tallahassee. That charge was later lowered to reckless driving, a common change for first-time DUI offenders.

Lee County Commission

Pendergrass in District 2

Cecil Pendergrass receives The News-Press endorsement for Lee County commissioner, representing District 2.

Pendergrass, 51, has been an effective leader, communicator and community steward. He has lived up to many of his campaign promises of two years ago. He wanted to be part of a consensus building and not a divided five-member commission. To this point, the board is finding common ground on many issues, including the current budget process and how the Conservation 20/20 program should move forward. He has pushed for a robust economic development strategy, which is taking shape with a revised incentive program, and cutting impact fees.

He has been part of a board that has hired a new county manager, attorney and assessor, and rebuilt the public safety department after the Medstar emergency flight scandal. He has worked tirelessly in the community, attending 60 events a month. We applaud his involvement as a key measuring stick to the effectiveness of any commissioner.

Smith in District 4

Sawyer Smith receives The News-Press endorsement for Lee County commissioner, representing District 4.

His ideas for "rebranding" the area economy, focusing on urban development for areas throughout the county and encouraging a comprehensive audit of all county services help make him our choice over incumbent Brian Hamman and former Commissioner Andy Coy.

We agree with Smith's innovative and energetic approach to infusing new life into the economy with attractive urban areas that appeal to a younger demographic and encourage companies offering good-paying jobs in the area of technology.

Lee County School Board

Fischer in District 1

Mary Fischer, 71, receives our endorsement for Lee County School Board, representing District 1.

She has experience, finishing her first four years on the board, including a year as chairwoman. She wants answers when there are allegations of wrongdoing against school administrators or teachers as evidenced by her call for an investigation into the sudden resignation of Cypress Lake Principal Tracy Perkins, who alleged she was being bullied.

We like her focus on preparing students for service industry jobs and the importance of strengthening our school district academies that allow students to earn certificates for service industry jobs, particularly those in health care.

We urge her to push for a reassessment of school choice.

Teuber in District 4

Steve Teuber receives The News-Press endorsement for the Lee County School Board in District 4.

He has an extensive background, having served on the board from 2002-10, and at a time when new policies were approved to create job-specific academies at the high schools.

He has specific ideas on how to address shortcomings in students. He doesn't believe graduating seniors are prepared for the next academic or professional challenges. He wants to improve basic skills to help them on job interviews. He wants them better prepared as public speakers, especially with presentations in the classroom. He wants them better prepared on how to write a business plan.

Teuber, 51, wants a different set of metrics used to determine the progress of students, including equipping each student with a binder to chart their improvement in various subjects.

LaRiviere in District 5

Pam LaRiviere receives The News-Press endorsement for the Lee County School Board in District 5, replacing Thomas Scott, who decided not to seek another term, originally citing health concerns.

LaRiviere, 58, brings a unique perspective to the board, with extensive experience in the classroom, having served as a district teacher for 31 years.

Her classroom views should assist the board in the areas of curriculum development, evaluating the performance of students and assisting in building programs that strengthen the ability of students to function at a high level once they enter the workforce.

We like that she wants a committee of community members to help set a "road map" for the district. We support her push to achieve a balance of diversity in the classroom among all the schools in the district.

Yes on Amendment 1

We support the Legacy Amendment, which appears on the Nov. 4 ballot. If passed, 33 percent of the state's real estate transfer fee would go toward water and land conservation. It is not a new tax, but a way to reallocate more funds to protecting the health of our environment.

The transfer fee or stamp tax is paid when real estate is sold.

No on Amendment 2

We remain opposed to Amendment 2, which would make medical marijuana legal in Florida for those diagnosed with debilitating medical conditions. We understand the need to help people get relief from great suffering, but we believe this bill is too vague and will create a free-for-all run on the drug.

What is troubling about the proposal is a key section of the amendment, which starts with a list of debilitating conditions where medical marijuana could be authorized but ends with "other conditions for which a physician believes that the medical use of marijuana would likely outweigh the potential health risks for a patient."

"Other conditions" gives the physician free rein to authorize its use to a patient complaining of any kind of pain or any type of illness. This law is in a physician's control, if the doctor believes the benefits of the use of marijuana outweighs the risk.

Vote early

Early voting for the Aug. 26 primary continues in Lee and Collier counties through Aug. 23.

Lee County

Poll hours are 10 a.m.-6 p.m. at these locations:

Lee County Elections Center, 13180 S. Cleveland Ave., Fort Myers

Terry Park, 3406 Palm Beach Blvd., Fort Myers

Rutenberg Park, 6490 South Pointe Blvd., Fort Myers

North Fort Myers Recreation Center, 2021 N. Tamiami Trail

Cape Coral Public Library, 921 SW 39th Terrace

Northwest Regional Library, 519 Chiquita Blvd. N, Cape Coral

Cape Coral elections office, 1031 SE 9th Place, No. 3

East County Regional Library, 881 Gunnery Road, Lehigh Acres

Veterans Park Recreation Center, 55 South Homestead Road, Lehigh Acres

Estero Recreation Center, 9200 Corkscrew Palms Blvd.

Bonita Springs elections office, 25987 S. Tamiami Trail., No. 105

Collier County

Poll hours are 10 a.m.-6 p.m. at these locations:

Everglades City Hall, 102 Copeland Ave. N.

Golden Gate Community Center, 4701 Golden Gate Parkway

Immokalee Community Park, 321 N First St.

Library headquarters, 2385 Orange Blossom Drive

Marco Island Library, 210 S Heathwood Drive

Norris Center at Cambier Park , 755 8 th Ave. S.

North Collier Regional Park , 15000 Livingston Road

Supervisor of elections office, government complex, 3295 Tamiami Trail E.

Election Day

Tuesday, Aug. 26: Polls will be open from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. at precincts throughout both counties. Go to the Lee County supervisor of elections website at leeelections.com or the Collier County supervisor of elections site at colliervotes.com to find out your precinct.

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1oF8hIg