See the “Steve Malzberg Show” on Newsmax TV each weekday live by clicking here now.

A letter written by 11 state attorneys general warning President Barack Obama that his numerous tweaks to the Affordable Care Act are illegal is just the beginning of a long legal battle to restore the backbone of the Constitution, Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott says."We are escalating our fight," Abbott told "The Steve Malzberg Show" on Newsmax TV."You're going to see more people really for this cause because Americans . . . are incredibly frustrated by how the president keeps changing and altering the goal post and the Obamacare law."What we have seen time and time again is the president incapable of living within the confines of the heavy-handed law imposed on its fellow Americans and efforts to try to extricate itself from a political bad situation," Abbott said Monday.The Dec. 26 letter to Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius is signed by the attorneys general of Texas, West Virginia, Alabama, Georgia, Idaho, Kansas, Louisiana, Michigan, Nebraska, Oklahoma, and Virginia.It criticizes Obama's executive order that allowed insurance companies one more year to offer health plans that had been canceled for not meeting the standards of the Affordable Care Act."We support allowing citizens to keep their health insurance coverage, but the only way to fix this problem-ridden law is to enact changes lawfully: through Congressional action," the letter says."[Obama] is a president who is unconstrained by the law and is acting more like a king than he is president, because it is only the Congress of the United States of America that can make laws," Abbott told Malzberg."So, here it's the president who's making up the laws as he goes along . . . The rule of law in the United States of America is becoming as wishy-washy as it is in some of these Third World countries."I don't know of any other president in the history of the United States of America who has disregarded the constitutional structure more than this president. And, as a result, that is why these state attorneys general, including myself, are now pushing back."