The most common chronic disease of early childhood is tooth decay — five times more common than asthma.

Despite being largely preventable, tooth decay continues to plague children, especially those in lower-income families, even more in this last decade than before. At least 4 million U.S. preschoolers suffer with it.

In Colorado, 40 percent of kindergartners have had cavities, according to a 2012 report of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment.

So before your children head off to fill bags, buckets, pillow cases and totes with sugar-laden substances, here are some things to consider.

Some dentists actually recommend that kids are better off gorging on their Halloween haul than rationing it over days or weeks, according to LiveScience.

The slow snacking keeps teeth awash longer in enamel-eroding acid, the byproduct of bacteria feeding on sugar and other carbohydrates, writes Christopher Wanjek, LiveScience Bad Medicine columnist.

Wanjek says that candy isn’t the worst thing for your teeth. The most harmful factors are stickiness and acidity, so potato chips and fruit chews or leathers are actually worse than chocolate. Among candies, sour gummies are the worst for teeth, he says.

Pediatric dentist Dr. Elizabeth Shick with the CU School of Dental Medicine at the Anschutz Medical Campus agrees sticky or sour candies, or hard candies that stay in the mouth a long time, are the worst for teeth.

Besides the obvious recommendation — always brush before bedtime — Schick says set aside a special treat time each day so that children have a limited exposure instead of all-day candy eating. Consider having treat time shortly after mealtimes, she says, because saliva production increases during meals and helps neutralize bacteria production in the mouth and rinse away food particles.

Some things to consider year-round:

Even baby teeth cavities need to be filled, according to ChildrensDentalHealth.com. Untreated cavities can lead to pain, abscesses, spreading infection and long-term dental sensitivity. Baby or primary teeth that are healthy and present help with proper chewing and nutrition, speech development and they serve as better guides for erupting permanent teeth, the site says.

Really? Little tiny caries in teeth that are going to fall out anyway. Kids have to have all those filled? They do, according to Professor William Bailey with the University of Colorado School of Dental Medicine, who is he Delta Dental Endowed Chair in Early Childhood Caries Prevention.

“It’s important to get them fixed. They (caries) are easy to fix when they’re small,” Bailey said. Otherwise, if tooth decay really takes over, it could require later oral surgery. And early decay in children is the leading predictor of future decay.

Oral health is so important, Bailey said, that pediatricians and primary care physicians are all checking on it during the first well-child visit, which should happen by age 1.

Don’t be afraid to take your child to the dentist.

“Dental materials have improved. Dental practices have improved,” Bailey said.

The Affordable Care Act expanded dental coverage, and among the services that must now be covered at no cost by all health plans are: oral-health risk assessments by a pediatrician and application of fluoride varnish for children through age 5, which Bailey also recommends.

The act also gives state Medicaid programs the option of receiving a 1 percent increase in federal matching funds if states provide all the ACA services at no cost to patients. Colorado is one of 10 states that had chosen this option as of September.

While many insurers, including state Medicaid programs, might limit paid preventive care to dentist visits every six months, some children need more frequent care, according to the Children’s Dental Health Project, an independent nonprofit dedicated to stamping out cavities.

To design state Medicaid programs that provide pediatric dental benefits in a way to improve oral health while potentially reducing costs per kid, the project and studies suggest, care should be tailored to each child’s individual needs rather than traditional schedules that limit services to high-risk patients.

Aggressive preventive treatment combined with intensive follow-up for cavity-prone kids could reduce cavities by 27 percent and return 76 cent to 88 cents for every dollar spent, according to the Children’s Dental Health Project’s fall 2014 policy brief.

Delta Dental of Colorado Foundation funds projects and grantees across the state and has a major campaign with advertising, Cavities Get Around, to raise awareness of the negative impact sugar from juice can have on kids’ teeth and of the importance of baby teeth.

The American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry recommends that children, ages 6 months to 5 years, at high risk for tooth decay should receive topical fluoride treatments or fluoride varnish more frequently than twice a year.

“Fluoride varnish is most cost-effective when (targeting) the highest-risk children ages 2-5 years, generating a return of 65 cents for every dollar spent,” the project’s policy brief says.

Mothers and other caregivers usually transmit to infants the most common source of tooth decay in humans, Streptococcus mutans. But a mother can reduce the risk by decreasing bacterial concentrations in her saliva, according to the Children’s Dental Health Project. A mother chewing Xylitol gum could reduce cavities in children by 34 percent over a 10-year period, the project says.

The project also supports community water fluoridation and investing in toothbrushing lessons through early childhood education programs, such as Head Start.

Many studies credit water fluoridation with massive reductions in tooth decay and support its safety at appropriate levels, yet some communities remain opposed to it.