Frontiers’ Gay-Friendly Health Care Guide for Southern California

Finding a doctor who understands the differences and similarities between queer and straight health care can be difficult, but we're here to help

The numbers are stark. Gay men are twice as likely to report alcoholic behavior than their straight counterparts, according to The Kaiser Foundation. Two-thirds of new HIV infections are comprised of men who have sex with men, despite being a small fraction of the overall population. Out of every group, transgender individuals report the lowest confidence in their overall health—two-thirds, as opposed to four-fifths for the rest of the LGBT community.

Queer health care is filled with unwanted and unbelievable facts—most startlingly, a majority of gay men are not even out to their doctors, a sobering but understandable fact. This author has been among the guilty, worried what a physician would say or do if he mentioned he was in a committed relationship with a man. My reasons are personal, and others have their own, but the results are the same—delayed or nonexistent HIV testing, an underreporting of sexual assault and domestic violence, a vibrant community at risk.

Vallerie D. Wagner, Director of Education at the AIDS Project Los Angeles, summed up the problem gay patients experience best. “Individuals are worried a provider’s personal values could come into play,” she says. “They could say or do something inappropriate, or insensitive.”

This anxiety, in turn, leads to poorer health care. Wagner stresses that health, for every person, looks the same—adherence to medical advice, good nutrition and regular exercise—but finding a doctor who understands the differences and similarities between queer and straight health care can be difficult. No matter whom you see, though, being out is important.

The Medical Director of the Los Angeles LGBT Center, Dr. Robert Bolan, emphasizes the need to be open and undeterred when dealing with a doctor. “Coming out is a difficult experience for anyone, but being frank and open with a medical provider can be a life-saving decision,” he says. “There are many health issues that affect the LGBT community—HIV/AIDS, crystal meth addiction, meningitis—that may help doctors make a proper diagnosis. The duty of a medical provider is exactly that—to provide the best treatment that will keep people healthy, strong and alive.”

A good doctor/patient relationship is crucial. From HIV testing to tobacco usage, the needs of gay, transgender and bisexual individuals varies from the rest of the population in key ways, and an informed provider will know what to emphasize and how not to stereotype.

Poor medical treatment can stem from either doctor or patient. To help, we have compiled this list of local gay-friendly health care providers. Being a good patient is complicated, but it begins with finding the right provider or insurance and includes being open, honest and trusting with your doctor. From addiction help to enrolling in Obamacare, we’d like to make sense of something confusing and scary. Our community’s health—and yours—is at stake.

Go to Page 2 for General Practitioners listings

Go to Page 3 for HIV Services listings

Go to Page 4 for Dentists listings

Go to Page 5 for Help Navigating Obamacare

This guide was created from reader-generated nominations and research that included information from the Gay & Lesbian Medical Association, the Southern California Lambda Medical Association and the American Academy of HIV Specialists. While we haven’t covered alternative medicine, psychology, mental health or senior services, we welcome suggestions and updates for this ongoing online directory and for future print editions. Please email us at [email protected] with any potential additions.

Pages: 1 2 3 4 5 »