When Bernie Sanders announced last week that his campaign raised a record $44 million in March, people immediately began to wonder how much Hillary Clinton raked in and if it would be enough to blunt her insurgent challenger heading into a key string of primaries.

On Monday the Democratic frontrunner’s campaign announced she raised about $29.5 million and began April with $29 million cash on hand. The former secretary of state also hauled in $6.1 million for the Democratic National Committee and state parties last month, with the quarterly total around $15 million.

Related: Sanders’ Fundraising Surges Again as the Candidates Get Testy

"By making smart investments and beating our first quarter fundraising goal by nearly 50 percent, we've been able to build a nearly insurmountable pledged delegate lead and earned 2.5 million more votes than our opponent," campaign manager Robby Mook said in a statement.

Using language similar to that of the Sanders camp, Mook added that the Clinton campaign has “seen a surge of grassroots support across the country and are thrilled that we now have more than 1 million contributors to this campaign, most of whom have given less than $100."

All told, Clinton raised nearly $75 million in the first quarter of 2016, easily beating her campaign’s stated goal of $50 million.

While Clinton brought in about $15 million less than Sanders for the month of March, the Vermont lawmaker has yet to release his cash on hand figure.

Even though Sanders has outraised Clinton in recent months, he has also outspent her, leaving him with a smaller war chest.

Legally the two campaigns didn’t have to release their fundraising totals until April 20, but once Sanders announced his record haul, Clinton had little choice, especially before Tuesday’s primary in Wisconsin.

Related: Here’s the Map That Shows Why the GOP Is Freaking Out About Trump

Sanders leads Clinton by around 3 points in Wisconsin before Tuesday’s primary contest there, according to the latest RealClearPolitics average of polls.

A win the in Badger State would give the democratic socialist serious momentum before the next primary in Clinton’s home state of New York on April 19.

“Between you and me, I don’t want to get Hillary Clinton more nervous than she already is,” Sanders said during a campaign stop in Janesville, Wisconsin.

“If there is a large voter turnout, we will win here, and if we win here, we’re going to have a bounce going into New York State, where I think we can win,” he added. "Don’t tell her this, but if we win here and we win in New York, I think we’re on our way to the White House.”