It's not true the Chinese aren't doing anything about pollution. Their reasons just happen to be more domestic than global.

A projector screen shows a real-time air quality app that monitors pollution levels hourly in 190 cities in China. (Photo: Andy Wong, AP)

With the scientific evidence of human-caused climate change growing stronger all the time, advocates of inaction have turned to another argument: It's pointless for the U.S. to limit emissions of greenhouse gases, they say, because increases from other nations — particularly China — will overwhelm any U.S. reductions.

REP. WHITFIELD: America's pain is China's gain

It's true that unilateral U.S. action can't save the planet. The United States accounts for about 16% of the world's carbon dioxide emissions. By itself, the Obama administration's controversial plan to cut emissions from existing power plants, unveiled in June, would barely make a dent in the global total.

China, meanwhile, surpassed the U.S. in 2006 to become the leading emitter of carbon dioxide. It produces 29% of global carbon dioxide emissions and burns half the world's coal.

That makes China's coal consumption the most important factor in setting the world's thermostat. To keep any hope alive of limiting the global temperature rise to 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit), scientists say, China's carbon emissions must peak by the mid-2020s.

There's no guarantee that will happen. Energy-hungry China has been gobbling up worldwide coal reserves to fuel its economic growth. But it's not true, as the do-nothing crowd in the USA argues, that the Chinese have no interest at all in reducing their dependence on coal. Their reasons just happen to be more domestic than global.

For one thing, coal burned in power plants and elsewhere is a main source of the smog that frequently shrouds Beijing and other cities. Chinese authorities regard air pollution as a major problem that threatens public health and invites social unrest.

Thanks to a popular new mobile phone app developed by Chinese environmentalist Ma Jun, people can now monitor pollution levels hourly in 190 cities. In several cities and provinces, China is already experimenting with carbon-pricing schemes that resemble the "cap and trade" systems the U.S. Congress has refused to approve. China is also making big bets on solar panels and wind turbines — again, not primarily because of global warming, but because it sees renewable energy as a growing sector that it wants to dominate.

Taking a long view, Chinese leaders see the threats posed by rising sea levels, droughts and other effects of climate change.

For all these reasons, China is considering its first mandatory cap on coal use. Whether that will happen, or be sufficient, remains uncertain. Sustaining economic growth that has lifted a million people out of poverty remains China's overriding priority. Signals of its intentions could emerge at climate talks next month in New York, in December in Peru and next year in Paris.

That's where the United States comes in. As the two biggest emitters of greenhouse gases, China and America hold the key on global warming.

If the U.S. acts to curb emissions, it puts pressure on China to go along. If it doesn't, it gives China an excuse to delay. Thanks to the Obama administration's plans, White House counselor John Podesta says, during the latest discussions with the Chinese "we didn't have to hear lectures about what we weren't doing."

USA TODAY's editorial opinions are decided by its Editorial Board, separate from the news staff. Most editorials are coupled with an opposing view — a unique USA TODAY feature.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1s2RdgK