This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

the more detailed analysis of the very important Supreme Court case was argued yesterday ... that challenges subsidies for states ... and tore apart member Joe radio joins me now John Thompson said states should set the federal government said the federal government essentially that the basic issue in this case Scott King versus Burwell ... it is one along limited subsidies to reach the insurance exchanges established by the state ... is in fact limited those subsidies to the States ... and not the thirty six exchanges run by the federal government now this is ... this is a matter of plain ... ordinary statutory interpretation it's only ... a real legal question because they're such political stakes involved with with with that in withdrawing the subsidies ... from two thirds of the country so did the justices focus on the plane and ... legal question on the plane Tax Topalov will it was an interesting oral arguments because it spun off in common an unexpected and and provocative direction ... the the discuss an issue that the government has never viewed the challengers never argued ... and it was about federalism it was he was saying ... essentially ... that you need subsidies to offset certain regulations that artificially raise the cost of insuring sound these these are ... rules that are ... meant to reduce your paper redistributing income there it there in the name of social equity ... of but but they pay raise the cost of insurance of the subsidies ... essentially offset ... those increased costs they've they've made policies artificially cheap ... which ... the regulations might artificially expense a sobering that Justice Anthony Kennedy out the put upon the screen from him he he says ... to from the standpoint it dynamics of federalism or something very profitable point ... than challengers art and is accepted the states are being told either create your own exchange ... for will send your insurance market ... into a death spiral the job in cleaning glitch ... insisting that if the states didn't get the subsidies ... Obamacare would blow up their insurance market and therefore ... they had to provide substance right that that what what with ... the Justice Kennedy was suggesting he's he's very much a federalism that very much a separation of powers that ... he was suggesting is that the choice that was present to the States ... may in fact the unconstitutional ... but ... here's the thing if ... it really isn't a choice if you have ... ups and federal subsidies and state subsidies on the other hand it it's not help federalism works ... and what you really need to do is this is an incentive this is the tradeoff that governors are suppose to make ... and this is what ... makes them accountable for their choices now when you have all these governor saying ... making ... an affirmative decision ... we want no part of this we do not want to participate ... that's a very powerful ... indication under federalism and that's really the the the issue that has to say Kia Peng while ... the five point six to the law is clear bring us that the politics are not a ... good way of putting editorial board member Joe rego things you very much