× Republican presidential candidate Marco Rubio: You Decide 2016

Campaign ended: March 15, 2016

Current position: U.S. Senator from Florida

Career: U.S. Senate 2011 to present, Florida House of Representatives 2000 to 2008

Hometown: Miami, Florida

Family: Married to Jeanette Dousedebes with four children

Religion: Roman Catholic

On the issues:

Economy: Rubio would push for line-item veto power, oppose corporate welfare and ban pork-barrel earmarks. He calls for an updated tax code in a detailed plan on his website.

Education: The junior senator says much of our current education system is outdated. He opposes Common Core and supports more parental involvement. “Our higher education system is antiquated and broken in multiple ways. It is too expensive, too time consuming, and too inflexible for busy single parents and working adults,” Rubio says.

Environment: Like many other Republican presidential candidates, Rubio supports the Keystone XL pipeline. He’s been outspoken in his opposition to regulation that prevent growth in the energy industry.

Gun control/rights: Rubio says he believes in the right to bear arms. He also thinks that we need to examine why people become violent and address mental health.

Health care: He opposes Obamacare in favor for a reform that would reduce health care costs and expand access to affordable care. He is against abortions.

Immigration: He supports a merit-based immigration system. According to his website, it would help immigrants assimilate, encourage foreign college students to stay in our country and make the U.S. more competitive.

National security: Rubio wants to grow the size of the Navy, invest in Air Force intelligence and expand missile defense. To defeat ISIS, he would build a multinational coalition of countries, increase airstrikes of Syria and Iraq, and provide arms to Sunni and Kurdish forces. Rubio says he will re-impose sanctions on Iran on his first day in the White House.

Social issues: He believes that marriage is between a man and a woman, but also says we should honor the Supreme Court ruling. He says he believes some businesses should be able to refuse service to gay customers.

Social:

Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/MarcoRubio

Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/marcorubiofla

Twitter: https://twitter.com/marcorubio

Website: https://marcorubio.com/