It is long overdue that a woman and person of color be honored our nation’s banknotes. No one is more deserving of the distinction than Harriet Tubman. Yet why was Andrew Jackson depicted our $20 in the first place? How did average Americans perceive him? Why was he relevant?

One-time New York Mayor Phillip Hone called Jackson “the most popular man we have ever known.” Famed 19th century biographer James Parton confirmed Jackson was once the most famous man in America:

“His faults were such as a majority of Americans could easily forgive. His virtues were such as a majority of Americans could warmly admire. It is this fact that renders him historically interesting. Columbus sailed. Franklin lived. Washington fought. Jefferson wrote. Fifty years passed, the population of the country quadrupled, and the result was that the people of the U.S. arrived at the capacity of honoring Andrew Jackson before all other men.”

In recent comparison, Jackson’s celebrity would be like mixing John Kennedy with Ronald Reagan, and adding Dwight Eisenhower because he was a world-famous war hero. Jackson saved America in one of its most desperate hours: the Battle of New Orleans, ending the War of 1812, was the last time our country was invaded by a foreign army. Jackson was an icon. Americans never worshiped Alexander Hamilton like they worshiped Jackson. He was our first American idol.

A young New York senator, Martin Van Buren, saw potential in Jackson’s political capital: “His election as the result of his military services … would be one thing. His election as the result of a combined political party … might be another, far different thing.” Van Buren was the producer who nudged Jackson onto the stage. Thus the Democratic Party was born. Our political traditions, our two-party system, our contested primaries, caucuses and conventions, were unwittingly created.

Nothing we are witnessing in this 2016 election is new. It seems new to us, but it’s not new to our country. Our lives are just too short, too hectic to notice this eerie, repeating pattern. Life is cyclical. The same characters and scenarios keep reappearing on our political stage as our nation evolves. In 200 years, technology has changed; human nature has not.

Amid this $20 debate, Tubman and Jackson have become rallying symbols for liberals and conservatives alike. These two people have been reduced to labels, their stories spun for today’s political arguments.

Jackson is labeled a villainous monster, an evil slave owner, and a cruel, inhumane Indian killer. In 1833, attorney Philo Goodwin published a biography of Jackson saying that “no man’s character” has been more misunderstood. “Many, on becoming acquainted with him, have admitted their previous opinions” of Jackson were a “mistake.”

Jackson owned some 150 slaves. Yet George Washington owned approximately 318 slaves, Thomas Jefferson over 600, James Monroe between 30 and 40, and James Madison nearly 100. Even Hamilton’s ledgers show slave purchase records “for himself and others.” Does owning one slave or 600 make slavery any more or less a sin?

Native American removal is one of the most dreadful, despicable stains on America’s story. Jackson’s name is on the Indian Removal Act, but it was not his idea. Van Buren helped execute the law. Presidents John Tyler and James K. Polk voted for the bill while in Congress, and although James Buchanan abstained, he did not vote against the bill.

Indian removal is the fault of multiple generations, our own forefathers and foremothers. While president, Thomas Jefferson actually wrote Jackson in 1803 about Indian removal, saying the Louisiana Purchase “will open an asylum for these unhappy people (the Indians), in a country which may suit their habits of life better than what they now occupy, which perhaps they will be willing to exchange with us.”

Most Americans, at that time, wanted the Indians removed. This does not make the Indian Removal Act excusable to us today, but it is the awful truth. That was America 1830; it’s not America 2016. In fact, Jackson was reelected in 1832, after the Indian Removal Act, by a greater percentage of the popular vote than Barack Obama was reelected in 2012 after the Affordable Care Act.

Jackson’s story, and the struggle of his generation, is relevant, because featuring both Tubman and Jackson on our $20 bill is a step toward social justice, toward the promise of fulfilling our national belief “that all men are created equal.”