On Media Blog Archives Select Date… December, 2015 November, 2015 October, 2015 September, 2015 August, 2015 July, 2015 June, 2015 May, 2015 April, 2015 March, 2015 February, 2015 January, 2015

New Hampshire Republicans ask Fox, RNC to change debate criteria

A group of prominent New Hampshire Republicans has written an open letter to Fox News and the Republican National Committee, urging them to reconsider the criteria for the Republican primary debates on the network.

The letter, signed by 56 Republicans, including former governors, members of Congress, state legislators and delegates, warns that the current criteria threaten to “undermine the very nature of our process and the valuable service that states like New Hampshire provide to voters across the country."

Under the criteria for the first Fox debate on Aug. 6 in Cleveland, candidates must place in the top 10 of an average of the five most recent national polls, as recognized by Fox News, leading up to 5 p.m. Aug 4, in order to get a spot onstage. More than 10 candidates could be onstage, depending on ties in polling.

But the group of New Hampshire Republicans says the criteria are “unnecessarily narrow” for the first debate and risk leaving out “potentially viable candidates based on unreliable national polling.”

“Any metric used to select the top ten candidates based on public polling this early in the nominating process would make it impossible to ensure fairness. Indeed, the margin between the tenth candidate and those that don’t qualify will almost certainly be statistically insignificant,” the letter states.

The letter is signed by some prominent Republicans in the state, including James and Chris Sununu, Andy Sanborn, Charlie Arlinghaus, Rich Ashooh, Fergus Cullen, Marilinda Garcia, Dan Innis, Ovid Lamontagne, Doug Scamman and Stella Scamman.

Ever since criteria for the debates were announced, there has been concern that candidates such as Donald Trump, who polls well due to name recognition, would beat out other, perhaps more serious candidates, such as Carly Fiorina, for a spot on the debate stage. As a result, candidates might be spending more time trying to gin up publicity and name ID across the country in order to boost their poll numbers, instead of speaking to early-state voters directly in New Hampshire and Iowa.

“The first televised debate of the 2016 election cycle should place all candidates on even footing and allow each to make their case directly to the voters and your viewers,” the letter states. “Anything less would prematurely suppress the candidate field, and arbitrarily elevate candidates who benefit from preliminary notoriety and fundraising.”

The group suggests a new format that would include two panels that appear back-to-back, taking the top six candidates in public polls and randomly splitting them into the two panels, with the remaining candidates randomly split evenly among the other spots.

This setup is somewhat similar to how CNN is setting up its primary debate on Sept. 16. It will feature two panels, one with the top 10 candidates according to public polling, and another with the remaining candidates who meet a minimum threshold of 1 percent in public polling.

We’ve reached out to Fox News and the RNC for comment and will update here accordingly.

Read the full letter here.

UPDATE (3:15p.m.):

RNC spokesperson Sean Spicer sends a statement via email:

"We are very pleased that both CNN and Fox will give all candidates over one percent significant exposure."

UPDATE (4:30p.m.):

Stephen Duprey, chairman of the RNC 2016 Debates Committee, who also happens to hail from the Granite state, emails to explain the RNC's thinking behind the criteria, and why CNN and Fox News chose not to incorporate early state polling:

"Our various media partners were all receptive to our suggestions as to how to determine who got into the debates and what the criteria should be. However, those same media partners made it clear that they, as the holders of the FCC licenses, got to make the decision on criteria,” Duprey said. “Further, there are legitimate concerns that if the RNC set the criteria that would create an illegal campaign contribution to those who our criteria allowed in to a debate.”

Duprey said the committee has worked to improve the debates from previous cycles and that the various media partners were all receptive to their suggestions. The RNC suggested that media partners use early state polling results and current office holders as part of their criteria for entry, Duprey said, but that Fox and CNN chose not to. Other media partners who haven’t set out their criteria yet may choose to incorporate early state polling. That being said, Duprey did note that Fox and CNN have their criteria out earlier than ever before in primary history.

"There is no perfect set of criteria. The criteria used in these first two debates will likely be different from that used in others We anticipate there will be further refinements and adjustments as this process moves forward," Duprey said. “Criteria and formats will continue to evolve and adjust.”

Hadas Gold is a reporter at Politico.

Authors: