Photo

WHO is a person? How do you qualify for basic human rights? What is required for you to be able to speak or worship freely or to be free from torture?

Throughout American history, the Supreme Court has considered and reconsidered the criteria for membership in the club of rights, oscillating between a vision limiting rights to preferred groups and another granting rights to all who require protection. These competing visions have led to some strange results.

Corporations (as well as unions) can spend on political speech to further their group interests as though they were individual political actors. Corporations can assert religious rights to gain legal exemptions from laws that would otherwise apply to them. Muslim detainees at Guantánamo Bay, however, have none of these rights.

As a corporate litigator who has also spent more than a decade defending Guantánamo detainees, I have been trying to figure out why corporations are worthy of court protection and Muslims held in indefinite detention without trial by the United States at a naval base in Cuba are not.

The direction of the Supreme Court under Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. over the past decade has been anything but consistent. As the court readies itself for another term, it may not be possible to speak of a Roberts court jurisprudence at all. Even within the conservative and liberal blocs there are a range of views on the limits of executive power, the relationship between the federal government and the states, the protection of politically expressive speech and the applicability of the Constitution abroad. But the bulk of the most controversial cases come down to 4-to-4 bloc voting, with Justice Anthony M. Kennedy’s worldview defining the court’s path.

Photo

But we are not completely in the dark about who is likely to be granted legally enforceable rights and who is not. This term the court will consider whether Arkansas can force a Muslim prisoner to shave his beard, whether a Muslim woman who wears a head scarf can get a job at Abercrombie & Fitch, and whether Alabama can cram African-American voters into a few districts to dilute their political impact.

The Roberts court has already charted a course in which rights are extended to those who have real clout in American society and denied to those who are more marginal. In two critical cases, Citizens United and Hobby Lobby, the court decided by a 5-to-4 vote that corporations had broad rights of speech and of religion, which left corporate owners in a position to trumpet their political and religious views while diminishing or even silencing other voices.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In Citizens United, the court held that corporations had the right under the First Amendment to spend unlimited amounts on election advertising. The court evaded the issue of whether corporations were legal “persons” with rights, finding that the political process was always improved by more speech rather than less. Justice Kennedy, writing for the court, found that corporate spending contributed to the dissemination of information and ideas that “the First Amendment seeks to foster.” He rejected the argument that corporations should be limited “simply because such associations are not ‘natural persons.’ ”

But Congress limits speech all the time. Foreign nationals, for example, even those who live legally in the United States, are not permitted to make campaign contributions or expenditures. They may be “persons,” but for First Amendment purposes, they are not legitimate speakers. Unless, of course, they own shares in corporations.

The Supreme Court’s decision said nothing about the interests of the corporation or the identity of its stakeholders. Chinese or Russian shareholders could gain control of an American corporation and use shareholder funds to influence elections in the United States. According to the court, money is speech, and once it is corporate money, it is laundered of its foreign taint.

In Hobby Lobby, the court considered whether corporations had the right to deprive employees of contraceptive coverage required under the Affordable Care Act, based on the religious objections of their controlling shareholders. The court applied the Dictionary Act, an obscure statute from 1871 that says that a reference in a given statute to a “person” includes corporations “unless the context indicates otherwise.” Normal dictionaries do not define persons to include corporations. Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr.’s opinion takes a “just folks” view of the matter: “A corporation is simply a form of organization used by human beings to achieve desired ends.”

This inability to make the distinction between individual corporate stakeholders and the legal fiction of the corporation is not only weird, it is bad corporate law. Whatever else corporations may be, they are not the sum of their people. In her dissent, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg cited Chief Justice John Marshall’s two-centuries-old observation that a corporation is “an artificial being, invisible, intangible and existing only in contemplation of law.”

The modern corporation is a brilliant invention of 19th-century capitalism that creates a separate entity — a legal “person” — that can enter into contracts, borrow money, sue and be sued without exposing its shareholders to personal liability. The shareholders are not the corporation; directors, executives and employees aren’t either. Shareholders, executives and employees do have religious rights — as individuals. Hobby Lobby does not expand anyone’s religious rights. What it does do is allow the religious beliefs of the owners of a company to trump the beliefs of its employees.

The Supreme Court did not declare Hobby Lobby a person with religious rights because it was confused about whether a corporation could pray or have a bar mitzvah. The court chose to allow business owners to retain the powerful protection of limited liability while awarding them the further benefit of an exemption from the financial obligations of the Affordable Care Act. The majority took one definition of a legal person and used it as a hook to impose its own views about the importance of religion and business in American public life. When she was asked recently which court decision during her tenure would be most significant 50 years from now, Justice Ginsburg noted the strangeness inherent in the court’s reasoning: “Well,” she said, “I think 50 years from now, people will not be able to understand Hobby Lobby.”

IN holding that corporations had religious rights, the Hobby Lobby decision sat in contrast to a case I brought under the same statute in 2004, in which the court found that Muslims at Guantánamo Bay were not persons and had no religious rights.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

That case, Rasul v. Rumsfeld, alleged that Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld and the chain of command had established a regime at Guantánamo that systematically humiliated and abused detainees when they tried to practice their religion. In an attempt to break these people, guards threw Qurans in the toilet bucket, blasted rock music to interrupt prayers and forced prisoners to pray with their genitals exposed.

To me, the case seemed open-and-shut. The Religious Freedom Restoration Act (R.F.R.A.), which was passed in 1993, prohibits the government from “substantially” burdening “a person’s exercise of religion” unless it serves some important government interest that cannot be accomplished in any other way. My clients were “persons”; throwing Qurans in the toilet bucket certainly made it difficult for them to worship; and it served no governmental interest to humiliate people who were praying.

The Federal District Court in Washington, which first heard the case, agreed that “R.F.R.A. expressly protects the religious exercise of ‘persons,’ a broadly applicable term, commonly including aliens.” But the government appealed and the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit held that, as aliens held outside the United States, these men were not “persons” after all. The Bush administration had put them offshore precisely to ensure this.