Shelagh Collins says Gov. Tom Corbett’s frustration over Medicaid is nothing compared to her back and hip pain.

The 56-year-old Pittsburgh woman, unable to find consistent work since the recession, says a $20,000 retirement account prevents her from qualifying for federally-funded health care available in states including Ohio, New Jersey and New York since Jan. 1.

She was among a crowd of people and advocates from around the state who assembled in Harrisburg on Monday to call attention to Corbett’s refusal to carry out the expansion called for in Obamacare, or the Affordable Care Act.

Corbett is willing to expand coverage. But he is seeking federal approval for his own version, which would use private insurance and impose some conditions and restrictions that aren’t part of Obama’s version. Corbett has said his intention is to give people an incentive to work and take better care of themselves, and also give them health plans that are similar to those of most people who get coverage through work.

Twenty-six states and the District of Columbia have already expanded, and federal officials recently said more than 3 million people recently began receiving Medicaid or CHIP, which is for children.

On Monday, advocates said Corbett’s decision has cost Pennsylvania $500 million in federal funds in 2014 that could be providing health care for 500,000 people. The said money also would give a financial boost to hospitals and local heath care providers, and eventally create upwards of 35,000 jobs. The federal government will pay 100 percent of the cost of the expansion for several years, before the federal share eventually drops to 90 percent.

“Pennsylvania is now an island of the uninsured,” one speaker said.

They also took Corbett to task for recent comments in which he said he is growing frustrated in his dealings with the Obama administration as he seeks the federal approval that’s required for his proposed changes to the Obamacare Medicaid expansion.

Both Corbett’s plan and the Obamacare Medicaid expansion would cover people earning from about $16,000 for a single person to about $32,000 for a family of four. These are people who earn too much to qualify for the existing Medicaid program, but not enough to afford the health plans being sold on the Obamacare health insurance exchange.

Collins, the Pittsburgh-area women, said she is in the exact circumstances targeted by the Medicaid expansion.

She said she was living in the Chicago area when she was laid off after many years as an administrative assistant in 2007. She eventually returned to Pittsburgh to be near her mother.

She said she wants to work full-time but has been unable to find work. “Administrative assistants are nowadays a dime a dozen,” she said.

Collins said she developed back trouble about eight years ago and more recently fell and injured her hip. She receives some medical care at a clinic where she pays on a sliding scale, but she can’t afford some of the services, including physical therapy, she says she needs to be fully healthy and pain-free.

She says her pain and inability to get adequate care makes it still harder for her to find work. “If I had a heart attack I’d be screwed,” he said.

Corbett recently told federal officials he is willing to back off on his proposal that would require able-bodied people gaining expanded coverage to be involved in a job search. He suggested a “pilot” program instead, according to the Philadelphia Inquirer.

Corbett had hoped to have his version in place by the beginning of 2015.

Corbett has argued that Medicaid is a poorly-run and financially-unsustainable program which he refuses to expand without changes. His proposal, called “Healthy PA,” would charge premiums to some people with higher incomes, although they could reduce them by half by meeting wellness and job-related incentives.

In a message aimed at Corbett, Eileen Warner of Erie, who said she is a home health worker and has multiple sclerosis, said “We see your Health PA for what it is, a way to make cuts on people like us.”