Topics: 2014 elections, Alison Lundergan Grimes, Climate Change, Coal, Global Warming, Kentucky, Media Criticism, midterm elections, Midterms, Mitch McConnell, Washington Examiner, Politics News

The Kentucky Senate race continues to be a depressing affair with two candidates fighting hard to see who can have the worst record on coal and the environment. The coal industry in Kentucky, long a central part of the state’s economy and key to state politics, is dying. Instead of having a debate over how the state can best transition itself away from dependence on a failing industry, the campaign between Mitch McConnell and Alison Lundergan Grimes is instead a fight over who can pander the hardest to coal interests and establish their undying support for a dirty fuel that destroys the environment and makes people sick.

McConnell is proving especially adept at demonstrating his fealty to coal – something you’d expect from a guy who’s been winning statewide elections in Kentucky since the mid-1980s. Last month, after it was revealed that McConnell’s wife serves on the board of a philanthropy that funds a high-profile and successful anti-coal group, his campaign vigorously denied that she had any involvement in making any decisions to grant money to anyone trying to stop the profitable burning of sweet, sweet anthracite.

And yesterday, McConnell wrote an Op-Ed for the Washington Examiner attacking the Obama administration for its anti-coal agenda that up and killed all the coal jobs in Kentucky. As the would-be Senate majority leader sees it, Kentucky would be lousy with coal jobs were it not for the “war on coal” perpetrated by misguided ideological warriors at the Environmental Protection Agency. “Thanks in no small part to this administration’s endless regulations and threats, Eastern Kentucky is today suffering through an economic depression,” McConnell writes. “Thousands of jobs have been lost, and thousands more are in jeopardy. Eventually, coal production could be driven out of the United States for good, with untold consequences for Kentucky and the broader national economy.”

To drive the point home, McConnell tells the story of a young Kentucky man who wants to work as a coal miner, but came of age “just in time for the start of the president’s war on coal”:

This young American and others like him have become collateral damage in an ideological crusade that is doing little to help the environment, even as it threatens to ship well-paying jobs overseas, splinter our manufacturing base and increase Kentucky’s traditionally low utility rates. Already, more than 7,000 coal-related jobs have been lost in Eastern Kentucky since this administration took power — a sad contrast to the Bush years when coal jobs increased.

In a sense, McConnell is correct; the coal industry in Kentucky is indeed under siege. But his effort to link the decline of Kentucky coal to the Obama administration is garbage. What’s really killing the coal industry in Kentucky? Economics.

First, there’s the economics of the coal industry itself. As the Washington Post reported last year, Kentucky saw a decline of over 21,000 coal industry jobs from 1983 to 2012. So when McConnell writes that coal jobs increased during the Bush years, he’s obscuring two important facts: First, the increase was preceded by nearly 20 years of steady declines; and second, the “increase” itself was very modest, as you can see from the Washington Post’s chart here.