One objective of the Affordable Care Act was to increase access to primary care and curb visits to emergency rooms. Now the president of the American College of Emergency Physicians says the approach is not only misguided, it's also not working.

The president based his assessment not only on his experience but also on results of an ACEP survey that found ED volumes up since implementation of the ACA.

The survey was mailed to almost 26,000 current ACEP members on March 16, 2015, and 2,099 members -- 9% -- sent responses, for a margin of error of ±2.1% (P=.05). The highest response rates were in California, Texas, New York, Michigan, and Pennsylvania.

Forty seven percent of the emergency physicians responding said that the volume of emergency patients had "increased slightly," and 28% said the volume had "increased greatly."

Another 17% of respondents said the volume had stayed the same. Only 5% of physicians saw a slight decrease.

For Michael Gerardi, MD, President of the American College of Emergency Physicians, the take-away was clear.

"People really are conscientious about using resources, and now that they have an insurance card, they're not going to wait as long to come in for what they think is an emergency," he said.

The survey findings parallel those of the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment, a randomized, controlled trial, where individuals received Medicaid insurance or didn't, based on a lottery.

Gerardi stressed that pushing patients away from emergency departments to reduce health spending was "folly."

"People need to come to emergency departments. They don't come here because they have nothing better to do on a Friday night," he said.

He referenced a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2011 report that said 76% of patients seen in emergency departments are treated for true emergencies or urgent needs that should be addressed within several hours or a day.

The survey also found that 64% of members spent more time coordinating patient care after an ED visit, and 47% said they struggled to find or arrange "timely follow-up" with primary care physicians or specialists.

"So you see people come into the emergency department. We stabilize them. We make the diagnosis. We try to get them follow-up care. They go out into the wilderness again and nobody will open their door because they have Medicaid."

Gerardi cited the example of a 5-year-old girl who was seen in the ED for a broken arm and returned again because she could not find an orthopedist who would accept Medicaid.

Sherry Glied, dean of New York University Robert F. Wagner School of Public Service, said most research on Medicaid patients suggests they have "pretty good" access to care. "It's not as good as Medicare but it's not as bad as people believe it might be."

She cited a study from the Urban Institute that found only a "relatively small minority" of Medicaid patients had difficulty accessing primary care for reasons related to affordability, and a study from the Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery which found that 59% of orthopedic practices offered Medicaid patients an appointment within 2 weeks.

"But there's also the reality of what it's like if you're an emergency room doctor and you've got people coming in and they're sick and you can't find [providers]. That's very scary."

In addition to an influx of Medicaid patients, Gerardi said another reason for the increases emergency physicians are seeing in their departments is the nation's aging population. With 10,000 people turning 65 each day, a packed ER shouldn't surprise anyone.

"The older our population gets the more likely they are to have survived cardiac disease or cancer or other medical problems. So they're a complex patient population."

Lastly, he said, ED volumes are high because of boarding problems. Because of 30-day readmission fines,"[t]here's incredible pressure not to admit patients," he said, but this drives up time spent in observation.

Boarding problems can also exacerbate a crisis like a flu pandemic or an Ebola scare.

"There's so many different paths and forces we've got to deal with that any increase in volume scares us a little bit because we don't know that we have the capacity to handle them."

When Gerardi speaks with members of Congress this week his message will be simple.

"Our [emergency departments] are at capacity and maybe under capacity. We're getting more and more patients, we're being asked to do more and more things, and we need your support."

Analysts Weigh In

Health policy experts questioned the usefulness of survey data to assess ER volumes.

Ed Haislmaier, a senior research fellow at the Heritage Foundation said he was reluctant to read too much into the results of the report.

"This is a survey of the impressions of the emergency doctors. The better measure for what is actually happening would be actual data on ED visits," he said.

"I think, basically, what a lot of this probably reflects is that the bulk of the expansion is in Medicaid and that is a population that is most likely to use the ED as a source of primary care."

He was intrigued to know 28% of physicians cited increased resistance to readmitting patients as a reason for difficulty in care coordination. He said he suspected that it might relate to fines imposed on hospitals with high readmission rates, and that he'd like to see more research in this area.. He said the report would have been more useful if it included comparisons between states that expanded or didn't expand Medicaid.

Jason Hockenberry, PhD, associate professor of health policy at the Rollins School of Public Health at Emory University in Atlanta, noticed that some survey responses appeared to conflict.

While the majority of physicians surveyed said that the volume of emergency room patients has increased "slightly" or "greatly" since the Affordable Care Act took effect, 42% also said that ED visits would increase if federal subsidies for health insurance for low-income patients on the federal exchanges were eliminated. (In other words, if the Supreme Court sides with the plaintiff in King v. Burwell.)

"[T]o think that whether we give people insurance or we take it away, both of those would drive up demand for emergency departments. It can't go both ways. It defies economic logic," he said.

Gerardi countered that when patients lose their subsidized plans, people will have nowhere to go but emergency departments. Since emergency departments can't turn anyone away. Regardless of the trial's outcome, the aging population is still going to increase emergency department volumes.

Hockenberry found it interesting that some physicians reported an increase in the acuity of their patients. This might be related to "pent-up demands" for care during the economic downturn. "So people have been delaying care and now, all of a sudden, some of those conditions they've been needing care for are coincidentally rearing their head around the same time we're expanding insurance."

Choosing the Right Target

Stephen Zuckerman, a senior fellow and co-director of the Health Policy Center for the Urban Institute, said, "I think that the objective of trying to reduce the number of ED visits, especially the ones that are clearly unnecessary and that patients should be able to recognize as unnecessary, is an important objective."

The patient-centered medical home and other reforms aim to do just that. "Whether or not it's possible to do this is an open question," he said.

Glied was less certain. Many individuals who don't have sick leave must wait until after normal primary care hours have ended to access care. "Trying to keep people out of the emergency room might not be the best strategy especially for low-income people," she said.

Stakeholders should carefully weigh the incentives they use to keep people out of the emergency rooms, she said. "That's a big focus of policymakers, but we really should be thinking very hard about what the effects are. This group of doctors certainly doesn't think they're a good idea."