Buy Photo Dr. Elizabeth Walz, right, a neurologist at Fairfield Medical Center, and registered nurses Jennifer Mitchell, right, Emergency Department Clinical Educator, and Laura Garrett, center, neuro coordinator, talk about the machine hospital staff use to connect to neurologists at Ohio State Medical Center to evaluate stroke patients when Walz is not available. (Photo: Matthew Berry/Gannett Ohio)Buy Photo

Video conferencing allows a neurologist at a metropolitan hospital to examine a stroke patient in rural Ohio — saving time and, potentially, the patient's life.

The use of technology, from emailing electronic records to video chatting with burn patients, called telemedicine or telehealth, is growing in Ohio as hospitals seek innovative ways to serve patients and avoid costly penalties for readmissions built into the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

Telemedicine advocates say the technology can improve access to care as the number of family physicians is expected to drop 39 percent by 2020 and fewer specialists are interested in moving to rural Ohio, said David Chmielewski, telehealth coordinator for the Louis Stokes Cleveland VA Medical Center.

"We can't hire in these remote areas anymore, but we have patients in those areas," Chmielewski told people assembled for the Health Policy Institute of Ohio's telehealth Leadership Summit on Tuesday.

But widespread use of telemedicine in Ohio faces several hurdles, including billing for services, safeguarding the system from abuse and simplifying which doctors can work across state lines.

"Unfortunately, in the state of Ohio, no one wants to pay for telemedicine unless you're 50 miles or more away from a hospital," said Paula Meyers, system director of the OhioHealth Stroke Network, which connects 22 hospitals to neurologists in Columbus.

Treatment of the future

When a patient arrives at Marion General Hospital with symptoms of a stroke, such as sudden numbness in his arms and legs or dizziness and headaches, emergency department staff will connect via video conferencing with a neurologist in Columbus, said Gail Loadman, director of emergency services and clinical excellence for the hospital.

Teleconferencing allows the specialist to talk with the patient and view scans to determine if clot-busting medication is required, Loadman said. The first few hours after a stroke are critical to prevent permanent damage.

From there, the patient is either treated locally or sent to an OhioHealth hospital. If the patient doesn't need to be transported or isn't actually having a stroke, that saves inconvenience and money. The service is especially helpful because Marion General Hospital does not staff a neurologist 24/7.

"This really makes so much sense. Everybody can't have a full component of neurologists," Loadman said.

Most hospitals are using telemedicine in some way, whether for burns or neonatal care or behavioral health issues, said Aly DeAngelo, director of health economics and policy with the Ohio Hospital Association.

Coshocton Hospital is one of several that coordinate stroke assessments with the Wexner Medical Center at Ohio State University in Columbus, in part, because the closest neurosurgeon works about 35 minutes away, said Mark Nelson, a registered nurse in the emergency department. They used the technology for stroke victims about 15 times last year and recently started consulting on burns as well.

"The benefit is the timeliness in getting to speak to someone who is an expert in that field," said Janet Weaver, nurse manager in the emergency department at Galion Community Hospital. Avita Health Systems' hospitals also coordinate with Ohio State's specialists.

Emergency room physicians are hesitant to administer clot-busting drugs without a neurologist's approval because using the drugs when they aren't needed can cause bleeding on the brain and even death, said Dr. Elizabeth Walz, a neurologist at Fairfield Medical Center, which joined Ohio State's stroke network about two years ago.

One reason for the growth of telemedicine use is the lack of neurologists and neurosurgeons across America, Walz said. Some are put off by the lower pay in hospitals, and others are dissuaded because of the difficulty, she said.

"Some think it's hard," Walz said.

Genesis HealthCare System in Zanesville faced a similar problem. The hospitals used to partner with OhioHealth for teleneurology services, but now contract with a Miami-based business called NeuroCall. One neurologist is based in Zanesville, but he can't see patients 24/7; finding additional candidates was challenging, said Dr. Dan Scheerer, Genesis' chief medical affairs officer.

"We just can't get candidates. Oftentimes, they want to specialize in tertiary care or not go to a hospital. They might resign and do office practice. It's a growing trend," Scheerer said.

Barriers to use

For all its benefits, there are serious hurdles to implementing the technology across Ohio. The biggest one is few payers want to cover telemedicine, advocates said.

Twenty-one states and Washington, D.C., have mandated private insurance companies cover telemedicine services, but Ohio is not among them, according to the American Telemedicine Association. Last year, Sen. Charleta B. Tavares, D-Columbus, introduced a bill to require private insurers to pay for telemedicine, but she was the sole sponsor and the bill has gone nowhere.

"Payment is a big issue. There is no requirement on private insurers to pay for telehealth and telemedicine services," said Reem Aly, director of health care payments and innovation policy at the Health Policy Institute of Ohio.

Because of that, Ohio stroke network providers aren't billing for consultations. But Gary Capistrant, senior director of public policy for the American Telemedicine Association, said hospitals are compensated in other ways — healthier patients, shorter hospital stays and fewer readmissions, which can result in hefty financial penalties.

Many private insurance companies offer telemedicine for minor health concerns. Dr. Mia Finkelston, who practices in Maryland, uses WellPoint's LiveHealth Online to treat patients with colds, coughs and sore throats. She recently consulted with a woman camping in a tent who had an ear infection, which Finkelston diagnosed via the patient's cellphone video conferencing.

Public payers aren't much better. Medicare is a meager payer of telehealth, with only 20 percent of beneficiaries covered and most of those are in rural areas, Capistrant said at a telehealth summit Tuesday.

That might change as the Affordable Care Act pushes Medicare toward bundled rather than fee-for-service reimbursements, but that would take time, Capistrant said. Under bundled services, a cardiac patient might be reimbursed for treatment of depression, which is common after surgery, and telemedicine might be useful in that regard, he said.

Earlier this year, Ohio passed a law requiring Medicaid to cover some telemedicine services. Ohio Department of Medicaid officials hope to have the rules approved and in place by January, spokesman Sam Rossi said.

Under the proposed rules, telemedicine use by physicians and psychologists at medical offices, hospitals and federally qualified health centers would be covered if the other site was 5 or more miles away.

"We think it's a great start. It doesn't limit conditions. It started with a greater mileage, but now it's a 5-mile radius. We're excited about it," said DeAngelo, with the Ohio Hospital Association.

Once Medicaid starts paying for telemedicine, private payers will fall in line, DeAngelo predicted.

Another roadblock can be licensing and credentialing. The State Medical Board of Ohio requires every out-of-state physician using telemedicine in Ohio to obtain a telemedicine certificate. Since 2003, 277 certificates have been issued, according to the board.

Finkelston, who diagnoses colds from Maryland, holds 19 state licenses, and the cost of those applications adds up, she said.

"For now, it adds cost to the whole process. We've been able to overcome it," said John Jesser, vice president and general manager of LiveHealth Online. He would support a license that works nationwide.

But medical board officials argue it's important to know who is practicing medicine and doling out prescriptions in the state, especially in light of Ohioans struggles with prescription drugs.

"We need to make sure we give the correct care under the correct circumstances," said Dr. Krishnamurthi Ramprasad, president of the state medical board.

jbalmert@gannett.com

740-328-8548

Twitter: @jbalmert

New telemedicine licenses issued in Ohio

Year New telemedicine licenses 2003 16 2004 11 2005 29 2006 40 2007 22 2008 12 2009 33 2010 22 2011 31 2012 31 2013 30

Source: State Medical Board of Ohio, only out-of-state physicians practicing in Ohio must be licensed to perform telemedicine

Telemedicine use around Ohio

Coshocton County: Coshocton Hospital is a member of the stroke network at the Wexner Medical Center at Ohio State University. Teleconferencing also is used in burn situations.

Crawford County: Avita Health Systems' hospitals coordinate with the stroke network at the Wexner Medical Center at Ohio State University. Specialists in Columbus consult on signs of strokes and burns.

Fairfield County: Fairfield Medical Center has been a member of the stroke network at the Wexner Medical Center at Ohio State University since Dr. Elizabeth Walz, a neurologist, suggested the partnership about two years ago. The technology allows emergency room personnel to consult with specialists in Columbus to determine whether a patient should be transported or treated locally.

Licking County: For two years, Licking Memorial Hospital has been a member of the OhioHealth Stroke Network, connecting with neurologists in Columbus to determine whether clot-busting drugs are required. The hospital also has been using telemedicine to interpret radiology, such as CAT scans, during the night for 10 years, said Debbie Young, LMH's vice president of patient care services.

Marion County: Marion General Hospital has been using telemedicine to diagnose strokes since 2011. It was a guinea pig at the time, but now is one of 22 hospitals that coordinate neurological services through OhioHealth, said Gail Loadman, director of emergency services and clinical excellence for the hospital.

Muskingum County: Genesis HealthCare System in Zanesville uses Miami-based NeuroCall to consult on neurological conditions from strokes and seizures to blackouts and headaches. Emergency room personnel have used the out-of-state service since March and decreased the number of patients sent to Columbus dramatically, said Dr. Dan Scheerer, chief medical affairs officer for Genesis.

Ottawa County: Magruder Hospital is partnering with the University of Toledo Medical Center Stroke Network. The technology is installed in the emergency department. The hospital has made limited use of it to date, but expect that to increase, Todd Almendinger, Magruder's president and CEO, said in a statement.

Richland County: MedCentral uses OhioHealth's Stroke Network to consult with neurologists in Columbus. The U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs uses telemedicine with the Mansfield Community-Based Outpatient Clinic to coordinate care so patients do not have to drive to Cleveland for every appointment, said David Chmeilewski, telehealth coordinator for the Louis Stokes Cleveland VA Medical Center.

Ross County: Adena Health Systems coordinates with the Wexner Medical Center at Ohio State University and Nationwide Children's Hospital in Columbus for treatment of strokes and high-risk pregnancies.

Sandusky County: ProMedica Memorial Hospital in Fremont has coordinated stroke symptom consultations with specialists in Toledo since July. The program helps to determine whether patients need transported to Toledo or can be treated locally.

Signs of a stroke

People who suspect a person has suffered a stroke are encouraged to act using the FAST method. Clot-busting drugs must be used within four and a half hours of initial symptoms to be effective.

• Face: Check to see if their smile droops to one side or the other.

• Arms: See if one arm drifts downward when the person lifts both arms.

• Speech: Listen for slurred speech or inability to repeat simple phrases.

• Time: Call 911 immediately because time is limited to use certain drugs.

Source: Dr. Elizabeth Walz, a neurologist at Fairfield Medical Center, and stroke symptom literature

Read or Share this story: http://ohne.ws/1tuoa3J