Challengers to the Texas Republican establishment have scored impressive victories in the last few election cycles, knocking off several state senators and House members, including a few veteran North Texas lawmakers.

But as the insurgency takes hold in state government, the Republican congressional delegation has been largely untouched.

Most incumbents have easily beaten back challenges from the tea party and other segments of the grass-roots movement, even as their counterparts in state government have suffered humbling defeats.

Activists outside the GOP establishment, successful in smaller legislative districts, haven’t figured out how to operate in a larger, more expensive arena that heavily favors incumbents.

“It’s a steeper climb,” said North Texas tea party leader Ken Emanuelson. “You’re seeing a lot of challenges on the congressional incumbents, but the reality is most of them will make it back to their seats.”

But tea party activists and libertarian-leaning hopefuls say it’s important to keep trying to break through. And they are encouraged by the 2014 victory of John Ratcliffe over longtime incumbent Ralph Hall in a Rockwall-based district and the downing of former House Majority Leader Eric Cantor of Virginia in a primary last year.

Emanuelson is supporting Dallas businessman Russ Ramsland’s challenge to Republican Rep. Pete Sessions in the 32nd District in Dallas and Garland.

Sessions, chairman of the powerful House Rules Committee, will also have to fend off Iraq war veteran Paul Brown, Jeff Tokar and Cheri Myint Roughneen.

In 2014, Sessions easily beat tea party activist Katrina Pierson, now a spokeswoman for presidential candidate Donald Trump.

“There’s a certain amount of good fortune that has to come in order to win,” Emanuelson said. “In order to benefit from good fortune, you have to be on the field.”

Incumbents’ advantages

Several candidates hope for such luck in the March 1 primary.

In North Texas, five incumbents face challengers. Among them is Ratcliffe, who has little time to enjoy his 2014 upset of Hall.

None of those races, at this point, has worried much of the political establishment. But Republican incumbents who have watched their colleagues in the Legislature lose to upstarts are not taking chances.

They have clear advantages.

Strict limits on federal campaign contributions favor incumbents, who have much more fundraising experience and typically start with sturdy campaign funds.

A rookie grass-roots candidate often has difficulty raising money. Self-financing is an option, but only for the wealthy.

Another problem is that the grass-roots movement is spread thin. Just as activists push hard in legislative races, it becomes difficult to pivot to federal races with different issues and large districts.

What’s more, at the state level, groups like Empower Texans, largely financed by Midland oilman Tim Dunn, can form a strong coalition with activists. Few such groups play on the federal level.

“It may [only] be harder to take down a sitting president than a sitting member of Congress,” said Mark Davis, a conservative radio talk show host for KSKY-AM (660).

Davis said that doesn’t mean conservatives are happy with the entire GOP delegation, but it indicates the differences between state and federal politics.

Conservative activists have hard feelings about Congress’ failure to overhaul immigration policy or repeal the Affordable Care Act, but they don’t make incumbents pay at the ballot box.

“In the North Texas congressional delegation, there are feelings of acceptance and frustration,” Davis said.

Many congressional voters, however, understand the nuance of politics, and establishment Republicans, particularly the chamber of commerce types, rely on experienced incumbents to push legislation that helps their business-friendly agenda.

Getting to the runoff

But grass-roots activists are implementing different strategies to help challengers score upsets in congressional races.

One tactic is to flood a race with several candidates, hoping to push the contest into a runoff. In a second round, voter turnout is smaller and operatives can get more hard-core conservatives to the polls. And with fewer runoffs, the grass-roots can focus on specific races.

Such was the case in 2012, when the once-unknown Ted Cruz took David Dewhurst, who had won three statewide races, into the runoff to replace U.S. Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison. Dewhurst, the former lieutenant governor, got 47 percent of the vote against multiple challengers, including former Dallas Mayor Tom Leppert.

But in the runoff, staged July 31, Cruz’s grass-roots support overwhelmed Dewhurst. Cruz is now a GOP presidential front-runner, and Dewhurst is out of office, having lost again in 2014 to another conservative challenger — Dan Patrick.

It’s similar to a scenario that unfolded in a major 2014 North Texas state Senate race, when incumbent Bob Deuell won the first round against multiple candidates but lost a low-turnout runoff in to Bob Hall.

Activists now call the practice of running several candidates against a sitting officeholder “Deuelling” the incumbent.

All of the North Texas Republican incumbents facing opposition in the coming primary — Joe Barton, Michael Burgess, Sam Johnson, Ratcliffe and Sessions — have multiple challengers.

And while Ratcliffe beat Ralph Hall in 2014, such victories are rare. The ever-changing core of the Republican Party, which is increasingly more conservative, could make Congress the next frontier in numerous political upsets.

“It’s a hard fight, but it’s important for us to keep trying,” Emanuelson said.

On Twitter:

@gromerjeffers