Republicans and conservatives spend no small amount of their time preaching that America is a Christian nation, or trumpeting their own Christian bona fides at every opportunity to whomever is unfortunate enough to have to listen to them. For any reasonable human being who has rudimentary knowledge of the Christian religion and more specifically the teachings of the faith’s namesake Jesus Christ, it is an abomination that people that are innately cruel and inhumane would have the temerity to claim they are followers of a historical figure who preached to do anything possible, including selling all their belongings, to care for other human beings.

That idea of compassion, or humanity for other human beings, particularly American human beings, has become anathema to Republicans and conservatives over the past six years and of all the various ways it has been made manifest is a burning desire to deny basic medical care to tens of millions of Americans. On Thursday after the Supreme Court ruled that about 8 million Americans can continue getting pathetically-minimal tax credits to help purchase health insurance, Americans were treated to the true measure of Republican and conservative inhumanity and cruelty towards American citizens.

Last week when comedian Marc Maron interviewed President Obama, an interview worth the time to listen to in its entirety, the President spent a fair amount of time heralding the basic goodness and humanity of the American people. Although the President was fundamentally correct that ‘most’ Americans are kind-hearted and generous toward other Americans, he should have at least noted there are plenty of Americans that are cold-hearted and intrinsically cruel, and that they are Republicans in Congress, state legislatures, and governors’ mansions as well as paid by conservative media and belief tanks to spread their hate as commentators and pundits. No matter how one assesses the conservative lust to abolish the Affordable Care Act and deny Americans affordable healthcare insurance policies, it is remarkable that the attacks on the ACA are not borne of opposition based on policy, but on sheer cruelty and inhumanity.

The case that should have never made it to the nation’s High Court was the result of four cruel conservatives obsessed with denying millions of Americans affordable healthcare insurance. How obsessive? The plaintiffs in the case against the government had to comb through over 900 pages of the verbose healthcare law to find four words they concluded were enough to take healthcare insurance away from 8 million Americans and leave them without medical care.

Such a task is not only obsessive, it represents the level of inhumanity endemic to Republicans and conservatives of all stripes. However cruel those four conservatives’ intention in suing the government over four words of text in a 900-page law were, the response from conservative pundits and Republicans, especially Republican presidential candidates, after the ruling was announced revealed the extent of the deep-seated inhumanity that pervades the conservative movement.

It is not worth reiterating every single raging response from Republican politicians and conservative pundits, or even one of them, to the High Court’s ruling; there are scores of articles and commentary about the hatred for other Americans conservatives directed at one specific member of the Supreme Court.

Of all the Republican and conservative hatred going around yesterday for all things “Obamacare,” including the Supreme Court, it is a true mystery why Chief Justice John Roberts became conservatives and Republicans ultimate persona-non-grata over even President Obama. It is a mystery because apparently that while Republican and conservative pundits’ heads were exploding right off their bodies over the ruling, they failed to hear, or read, that the ruling was decided by a 6 – 3 vote in the government’s favor.

What that means is that even if Chief Justice Roberts agreed with the inhumane plaintiffs and joined the three cruel conservative Justices, the Court still would have upheld the legitimacy of the law by a 5 – 4 vote. However, Republicans particularly, and conservatives generally, are so angry that they missed a golden opportunity to deny upwards of 8 million Americans access to affordable healthcare insurance, that not only did they lose their ability to read the final vote count, but they revealed their true colors and lashed out at a truly staunch conservative who helped give them victories in Citizens United, Hobby Lobby, Christian prayers at government meetings, the legal right to harass women seeking family planning assistance, and abolished the Voting Rights Act; rulings they never thought to label judicial tyranny like they have the Affordable Care Act ruling announced on Thursday. If nothing else, based on John Roberts opinion in writing for the majority, it is relatively obvious to even his harshest liberal critic that the man does not harbor the same base inhumanity apparent in his Republican and conservative detractors.

It is nearly impossible to quantify inhumanity, or cruelty for that matter, because taking pleasure in human beings’ suffering, or worse, crusading to perpetuate their suffering by denying something as fundamentally basic as medical care is immeasurably cruel. It is true that none of the Republican outrage aimed at the Supreme Court ruling on Thursday even mentioned how disappointed cruel conservatives were they failed to deny medical insurance to 8 million of their fellow Americans they wanted to see sick and dying.

However, after 50-plus attempts to destroy the Affordable Care Act, five years’ worth of lies and misinformation about the healthcare law, and an angry conservative movement decrying “judicial tyranny” because 8 million Americans still have medical insurance, the only reasonable conclusion is that the entire conservative movement is exactly what many Americans have learned is true; a tragic number of Americans are inherently cruel and inhumane towards other Americans.