Rush Limbaugh

Limbaugh says the president has a lot of nerve lecturing Americans about “income inequality”: “You got Barack Obama, who is a multimillionaire because of books and whatever else he’s been able to do, sitting in the White House. He’s in the lap of luxury, his own Boeing 747, and in Kenya his brother is living in a hut. You want to talk about income inequality? Barack Obama has family members living on less than a dollar a day, one of them in a six-by-nine-foot hut. … That’s income inequality, wealth inequality” (Free audio).

After decades on the air, Limbaugh remains a powerful force in talk radio, so much so that his show is shifted to struggling stations to help turn their fortunes around. In a major shakeup, Clear Channel will be switching stations in three of its biggest markets over to conservative talk in January, with Limbaugh’s program serving as the anchor.

Michael Savage

Dr. Savage declared that “in a sane country, [Facebook founder] Mark Zuckerberg would be under arrest” for aiding and abetting illegal aliens. The Silicon Valley billionaire is one of many wealthy Americans pressuring Congress to pass an amnesty bill, Savage said, in order to keep wages down (Free audio).

However, unlike many other conservative talk show hosts, Savage is not entirely opposed to raising the minimum wage.

“Times have changed,” he acknowledges. “Teenagers aren’t the only ones working minimum wage jobs anymore. Today they don’t work at all. They all either have bipolar disorder or gender identity issues and stay home sucking their thumbs.”

Having said that, Savage added that the unions pushing for this wage increase are exploiting the workers they pretend to care so much about. Instead, “the unions just want to fatten their leaders’ pensions and pockets” (Free audio).

Aaron Klein

During a time when major news organizations select their “newsmakers of the year,” Klein invited listeners to vote for the “Worst Person of 2013”: the person who’s done the most damage to the United States during the last 12 months.

He also explores the previously unheard of connection between “global warming” and Obamacare, then talks about explosive new revelations about what was going on at the Benghazi compound just before the attack. Finally, Klein reveals David Axelrod’s shocking plans for Israel’s Temple Mount (Free audio).

Laura Ingraham

This week, Ingraham’s guests include Congressmen Jim Sensenbrenner and Mo Brook talking about America’s descent into “a surveillance society” and the security flaws built into the Obamacare website (Free audio).

Texas Congressman Ted Poe also joined Laura to talk about the latest developments on the amnesty front. Poe says he is “not one of those people who supports a pathway to citizenship.”

Mark Levin

Levin came under fire from MSNBC’s Chris Matthews this week. Matthews made the bizarre claim that Levin had compared Obamacare supporters to Nazi storm troopers – a blatant misrepresentation of Levin’s description of the president’s public appearances as “propaganda” (Free audio).

“The way you unleash prosperity is to embrace prosperity,” Levin declared later this week, whereas “Obamacare is about redistributing wealth” (Free audio).

Glenn Beck

Beck recommended two books to his listeners, both designed to inspire and elevate.

He recommended “a book you can read in an hour that will change your life,” the 1902 “self-help” classic “As a Man Thinketh.”

“There is power in words,” Beck said. “There is power in ideas. Real power. The right words lift up. The wrong words destroy you. May I urge that if you have never read ‘As a Man Thinketh,’ please do” (Free audio).

Beck also read a poem by 19th century novelist Josiah Gilbert Holland entitled “Give Us Men.” It is featured in a recently released anthology called “Mansfield’s Book of Manly Men: An Utterly Invigorating Guide to Being Your Most Masculine Self,” by Stephen Mansfield.

“I think this is a game-changing book,” Beck said. “[A] really, really powerful book. … It is time to be a man, and stop waiting around for, you know, the icon man to drop out of the sky and show you how to be a better dad … show you how to be a man. Just do it” (Free audio).