Pineapple RM, Anoka, announced it has promoted Cassie Roman to assistant account executive. … Exponent, Minneapolis, said it was named a finalist for four 2015 Insight and Innovation (In2) SABRE Awards, and declared a winner in a fifth category.

ARCHITECTURE/ENGINEERING

Southview Design, Mendota Heights, won two awards for Excellence in Landscape Design from the Minnesota Nursery and Landscape Association last month. The properties are in Vadnais Heights and Edina. … Survey and engineering services provider Westwood Professional Services, Eden Prairie, announced that Dustin Petters has joined the firm’s Human Resources department as corporate safety manager. It also announced it has opened an office in Dickinson, N.D. … Shawn Goetz, senior associate and project manager at Hanson Professional Services‘ St. Louis Park office, recently celebrated 20 years of service with the firm.

CONSTRUCTION

The Next Generation Ultimate Double Hung from Warroad, Minn.-based Marvin Windows and Doors was selected at the 2015 International Builders’ Show as the winner of the prestigious Best of IBS Award, given by the National Association of Home Builders. … Big-D Construction announced the hiring of Calleigh Brown to operational assistant at its Minneapolis office. … Ryan Cos. US, Minneapolis, announced that Anders Pesavento has been promoted to vice president, capital markets. … Knutson Construction, St., Louis Park, said Target Field Station in Minneapolis received two of the top awards from the Minnesota Concrete Council in the Transportation Infrastructure and the Architectural Flooring or Hardscape categories, and that the Highway 610 and Noble Parkway Park and Ride received an award from the Minnesota Construction Association in the New Project Total Under $10 million category. … James Ericson of Kraus-Anderson Construction, Minneapolis, has been named a Project Manager of the Year by the Minnesota Subcontractors Association.

DESIGN

Flagship Recreation, a St. Louis Park playground design company, has named Chris DesRoches president. Former president Grant DesRoches will retain an active role working on future growth initiatives.

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Joel Akason, director of business investment for Greater MSP, has been selected as a winner in the economic development profession’s 40 Under 40 awards by Development Counsellors International.

FINANCIAL SERVICES

Advantus Capital Management, St. Paul, has added Michael Fraser and David Serposs as regional sales vice presidents. Both joins Advantus Capital from Minnesota Life Insurance Co.; both companies are subsidiaries of Securian Financial Group. … GWG Holdings, Minneapolis, said Regional Director Bill Servis, recently won Financial West Group‘s Wholesaler of the Year award.

HEALTH CARE

RedBrick Health, Minneapolis, announced it has earned Wellness and Health Promotion certifications from the National Committee for Quality Assurance. … Beauterre Recovery Institute announced it is opening a residential addiction treatment and recovery program in Owatonna, Minn.

HONORS

Deluxe Corp., Shoreview, was recognized by the St. Paul Area Chamber of Commerce‘s Celebrate Business Success program. … Law firm Winthrop & Weinstine, Minneapolis, said attorney Martha Engel was named “Young Engineer of the Year” by the Minnesota Federation of Engineering, Science and Technology Societies.

HOSPITALITY

U.S. News and World Report has named The Saint Paul Hotel the top hotel in Minneapolis/St. Paul., as well as Minnesota.

LAW

Nilan Johnson Lewis, Minneapolis, has named Careen Martin, Veena Iyer, and Sejal Winkelman shareholders, effective Jan. 1. … The Minnesota State Bar Association has announced that Charles L. Hawkins, Kassius O. Benson, Bryan J. Leary and John C. Conard have been named MSBA Board Certified Criminal Law Specialists.

NONPROFITS

The Minnesota State Fair Foundation, Falcon Heights, has elected new officers to serve on its board of directors. Board Chair: Mitch Davis, St. Peter, Davis Family Dairies; Vice Chair: Patty Smith, Wayzata, Elizabeth Charles Corp.; Treasurer Jeff Hawkins, Inver Grove Heights, Anchor Bank; board members: Dave Mona, Edina, Mona Meyer McGrath & Gavin public relations (now Weber Shandwick) (retired); Michael Sullivan, Edina, Gray Plant Mooty. … The Minnesota Council on Foundations elected new board officers and directors. Officers elected for 2015 are: Chairman: Brad Kruse, Hugh J. Andersen Foundation; Vice Chair: June Noronha, Native Nations Team, Bush Foundation; Secretary JoAnn Birkholz, Medica Foundation; Treasurer Steve Joul, Central Minnesota Community Foundation. … Former Illinois Commerce Commission Chairman Doug Scott has joined the Great Plains Institute, Minneapolis, as vice president for strategic initiatives.

OPENINGS

Cliff Lake Centre, 1960 Cliff Lake Road, Eagan, welcomes Wag N’ Wash Pet Food and Bakery.

REAL ESTATE

CBRE, Bloomington, announced that Brandon Megal, CBRE’s senior vice president in the Occupier Services Practice Group, has been named one of 2015 40 Under 40 winners by the Minneapolis/St. Paul Business Journal. … CBRE announced that seven individuals have received honorary title changes last month: Jim Freytag, senior vice president, office services; Daniel Swartz, senior vice president, industrial properties; Brian Wasserman, senior vice president, office services; Jack Tornquist, first vice president, industrial properties; Emily Nicoll, vice president, occupier services; Josh Johnson, vice president, occupier services and Tom DeSautel, senior associate, occupier services.

TECHNOLOGY

WEA Trust, a not-for-profit insurance company in Wisconsin, has chosen the Affordable Care Act reporting technology solution of Minnetonka-based Convey Compliance Systems.

EMAIL ITEMS to businessnews@pioneerpress.com.