More large employers are starting to offer high-deductible plans, just as employees—especially millennials—are opting for those plans over traditional ones in greater numbers, according to a new report out from Benefitfocus Tuesday.

First introduced as an insurance option by the Affordable Care Act, high-deductible plans offer smaller monthly premiums but higher caps on out-of-pocket health expenses.

In the third year of the health care law, those plans, though still not the norm, were increasingly prevalent, with half of large employers surveyed offering at least one such option, according to the report, which looked at participation periods between Sept. 1 and Jan. 1.

Of those offered a non-traditional option, about 41% opted for a high-deductible plan. Adoption rates were highest among millennials, at 44%, and lower among older generations.

But though high-deductible plans appear to be making inroads in the health care landscape, the report found that employees are under-utilizing health savings accounts, which accompany high-deductible plans and allow for tax-exempt savings earmarked for medical expenses.

Those with high-deductible plans put aside less than half of the maximum amount in their HSAs, even though HSA dollars carry over to the next year, unlike with flexible spending accounts.

Both younger and older users saved less than they could in HSAs, but the trend was particularly acute for millennials: the average individual 25-year-old only put aside 22% of the 2016 limit.

The report found that few large employers, only 6%, offered solely high-deductible plans, an unexpected trend given predictions that employers would offer only high-deductible plans to keep costs down

The research also found that a minority of large employers using the Benefitfocus platform, or 36%, offered at least one voluntary benefit to employees, and an even smaller percentage of employees—14%-- actually enrolled in that benefit.

Such benefits—which include critical illness, hospital indemnity and accident insurance—are paid for by employees, but employer participation allows for lower rates than employees could access on their own.

The Benefitfocus report pulled from more than 700,000 employee records across about 500 large employers in 2015, only using data from those who enrolled through the company’s online benefits enrollment platform. The companies studied bridged various industries, including education, health care, pharmaceuticals and biotechnology and manufacturing.

Subsequent reports will examine the small and midsize markets, as well as industry-specific health care benefits.

More from MarketWatch