Sweat, stun guns and pepper spray: Five Longmont cadets tough it out through police academy Recruits spend 22 weeks at Adams County academy before undergoing 14 weeks of field training

While fighting off the effects of being pepper sprayed in the face, police cadet Kyle Zulauf listens to commands and punches a bag held by Adams County Sheriff's Deputy Marcellino Ortiz during police academy in April. Zulauf has since graduated the academy and is doing his field training in Longmont. (Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer) Related Longmont police cadets

Police rookies enter force in time of changing technology, public scrutiny Pepper spray training Five Longmont officers who recently graduated from police academy got a face full of pepper spray as part of their training. These were their reactions: Cooper Arvisais: "It was probably one of the worst things I've experienced in my life. The Taser was bad, but the pepper spray lasted a good hour or two before I felt I could see or fully function again." Jocelyn Plascencia: "That was rough. That was not a fun day at all." Jina Pollock: "Pepper spray was probably the worst experience of my life. It felt like hot asphalt. It was just miserable. Lasted a day and half. I could feel the burning in my eyes." Chris White: "I've been pepper sprayed before, and it is not fun. I'd rather get Tasered. It completely takes me out. It screwed up my eyes." Kyle Zulauf: "That was pretty horrible. I'm not going to lie." Thirty-two police cadets from across the state — including five joining the Longmont force — stood in a covered firing range on a chilly April morning, trying to cheer one another on as they waited their turn to face the canister of misery. Each cadet took a liberal dose of pepper spray to the face and tried to answer a random question posed by an instructor. "What's the tallest mountain in Colorado?" one instructor bellowed. "Sir, I don't know," the grimacing cadet answered. Advertisement The answers weren't important, the questions just a way to make recruits think on their feet once their eyes began to water and the stinging, burning pain set in. The sweating, partially blinded, red-faced officers in training then powered through a series of drills, hitting dummies with batons, kicking or punching training bags, firing simulated ammo at paper targets and handcuffing mock suspects as instructors yelled out demands. Longmont police officer David Bonday, left, talks with new recruit Chris White during a call on Antero Drive on Tuesday. White graduated last month from police academy and is now undergoing 14 weeks of field training. (Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer) Afterward, they stood near a dumpster outside, spitting, turning their faces toward the gentle breeze and light snow, muttering the occasional curse word. The five Longmont police cadets graduated in June from the 22-week police academy at the Flatrock Regional Training Center, a sprawling 399-acre facility in rural Adams County run by the Adams County Sheriff's Office. There was a lot to learn. "Courts, laws, firearms, victims, victims advocates, constitutional law, civil law, traffic accidents, DUI," said Kyle Zulauf, a recruit who now moves on to field training in Longmont. "There's a billion things, and they have to cram in as much as they can." And the pepper spray wasn't the only harsh exercise. Cadets endured a shot from a Taser stun gun to learn about the effects of the device if they have to use it on someone, as well as how to use it properly, according to Adams County Sheriff's Office Cmdr. Rick McNair. Longmont police recruit Jina Pollock said the Taser was unnerving, causing her entire left leg to pulsate with electricity. Still, she said, "I would get tased over being pepper sprayed anytime. Once the Taser's cycle is done, the pain stops." Cooper Arvisais, another Longmont police recruit, said the stun gun wasn't the worst pain he's ever felt, but it was enough to be incapacitating. "The best way I can describe it is the worst Charlie horse you have ever had while putting your hand in a light socket." Longmont police recruit Jina Pollock fires simulated ammunition at paper targets while still reeling from pepper spray during a police academy training exercise in Adams County this spring. (Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer) 'You have to think on the fly ' A four-hour class taught the 32 recruits about applying laws governing use of force in chaotic situations. Rick Benson, professional standards division chief, threw out seemingly cut-and-dried scenarios, then added details that changed everything. He also warned recruits they must control their adrenaline so they can do their jobs effectively in high-intensity scenarios. Longmont police recruit Chris White said instructors set up scenarios designed to make cadets understand how to react in dangerous situations, such as entering a building where an officer and a suspect have both been shot. "We had to rush in and secure the suspect," White said. "You can't make rash decisions. You have to slow it down and do what you need to do." Longmont recruit Jocelyn Plascencia said the scenario training wasn't all life-and-death situations, adding that it instilled into recruits the realization that they must go into any situation with a plan but be ready to improvise. "You do a traffic stop," she said. "You've got your spiel you're going to say, but the driver says he's not going to do that. You have to think on the fly but still have a plan." 'Everyone is depending on you' Pollock said she became more aware of her surroundings after going through the academy, where she learned never to be complacent and to observe people's body language. The academy training was entirely new to her because she did not have any prior law enforcement or military experience. She said the instructors were very supportive. "It was a challenge at first," she said. "Once you grasp what the instructors want and the basics, everything clicks." Arvisais said the academy pushed him harder than he had ever been pushed in his life but taught him that he can fight through more than he ever expected he could. "Everyone is depending on you and your actions," he said. "Nobody calls 911 because they can fix a problem on their own." Instructors let the students know that officers can never give up: To surrender means a violent suspect is now armed with their weapons. "The biggest thing I learned was to never give up, no matter what you are faced with," Arvisais said. "There's a massive guy and you've got it in your head you're going to lose, you're going to lose. You keep fighting through it." Zulauf has military experience and said the academy was somewhat similar to military training — except going home at 5 p.m. — because he was able to bond with other cadets. "You always find your way back to people in your own agency," he said. "But there was bonding with people from other agencies. There are two people with Boulder County Sheriff's Office, and you will cross paths with them." White said he still hangs out on weekends with some of the people he met at the academy. "You can always fall back on them," he said. "They know what you are going through, and you can always call them up." 'Still a lot to learn' Zulauf said instructors at the academy — veteran police officers, some in the service for more than three decades — issued the caveat that they are still learning every day, and the instruction never ends. "My impression was they know you aren't going to retain all of it, but they want you to get your feet wet," he said. "You're not going to get good at it until you have more training and exposure." A judge swore in the five Longmont recruits last month, and they are now undergoing 14 weeks of field training. Once they finish the training, they will officially become police officers, hired to replace retiring officers or fill anticipated vacancies. Recruits from the Boulder County Sheriff's Office and one from the University of Colorado also went through the program. Longmont police Cmdr. Jeff Satur said the department's recruits — who range in age from 24 to 34 — will hit the streets with various field training officers who will show them how Longmont police operate. "There's still a lot to learn," Satur said. Satur said police officers are never done training, and an officer can expect to rack up thousands of hours during his or her career honing the skill set that's required and learning new methods. He added that the department encourages officers to obtain college degrees, not necessarily in law enforcement-related areas. "It's good to go out and take courses not related to your career," he said. "It helps you get different perspectives. Not everybody sees life the same as a police officer." John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@timescall.com or twitter.com/johnbearwithme