Just yesterday, NM Telegram wrote that Udall kept his string of positive ads going.

Today, Udall broke that string with an ad that that says Weh’s agenda, including repealing the Affordable Care Act, would cut “Medicare and Social Security to pay for tax breaks for CEOs and millionaires like himself.”

The ad refers to Weh’s support for repealing the Affordable Care Act and for putting a hard cap on government spending, not allowing the federal government to go into debt. The ad also talks about Weh’s support of a “flat tax” which proponents say would be more fair while allowing everyone to contribute and critics say would slash taxes on the wealthiest Americans while increasing taxes on Americans with less money.

When it comes to the Affordable Care Act, Udall’s ad says repealing the law would result in nearly 190,000 New Mexicans losing their health insurance.

“As a multi-millionaire CEO, Allen Weh seems to be looking out for himself and CEOs like him instead of New Mexico families. Otherwise he would know that his Tea Party strategy of revoke and deny would be disastrous for New Mexico,” Udall campaign manager Daniel Sena said in a statement. “Allen Weh is just wrong for New Mexico. According to Weh’s own ad, he wants to turn back the clock to a time when insurance companies could kick you off your health insurance plan if you got sick – when being a woman was considered a pre-existing condition. He even supports a plan that would cut Medicare and Social Security so millionaires like him could pay less in taxes.”

Tom Udall: I’m Tom Udall, and I approved this message. Voice Over: 190,000 New Mexicans would lose their health insurance. That’s what Allen Weh is calling for. And if you have a pre-existing condition, insurance companies could drop you again. Allen Weh also supports a plan that cuts Medicare and Social Security to pay for tax breaks for CEOs and millionaires like himself. Allen Weh would destroy Social Security and Medicare … for a tax break? Allen Weh: Way wrong.”

Transcript as provided by Udall’s campaign: