Just five days prior to the Nevada Democratic Caucus on Saturday, Presidential Hopeful Hillary Clinton hit the campaign trial hard in the Silver State. She started off Monday, President's Day, campaigning in Elko. Just after lunch was stopped at UNR for a round table discussion on women's health issues. Late in the day she held a rally at Truckee Meadows Community College.

The Secret Service said more than 800 people went through security scans at TMCC to attend the rally. Clinton is trying to get Democrats to caucus for her on Saturday, February 20th at 11 a.m. Clinton used the backdrop of the community college to talk about her plans for making community college and college in general more affordable. She said if elected President, this would be one of the issues she would work toward.

Clinton also hit hard in attacks against Republicans. She said she supports equal pay for women and Republicans don't. She also said she will support and work to strengthen unions adding "there needs to be a balance of power."

Clinton defended President Barack Obama and his record. She said, "The Republicans handed him a mess. President Obama kept us from going into a depression and doesn't get the credit he deserves." She also said, "They want to sell you trickle down economics, which we know does not work." She added, "Under their watch, they did not regulate Wall Street and they crashed the economy. That is what happened and it is not some theory."

The former U.S. Senator from New York and former Secretary of State made some comparisons between her and her Democratic opponent Bernie Sanders. Clinton said, "I will not support any new taxes on the middle class which has not recovered from the Great Recession." Clinton said that unlike Sanders, she is revealing the costs of her plans. She said, "I want that information to be known because I want to be held accountable."

Clinton said she would defend the Affordable Care Act. She said, "This is a lengthy fight we won." She admitted the program needs improvement but vowed to work towards making it more affordable." Clinton said, "The Republicans want to repeal it, " adding, "They won't tell you what they will replace it with because they don't have a replacement plan." She said she would also work to bring premiums and prescription costs down.

Clinton said she would not only defend same sex marriage but would work to end discrimination against those in the LGBT community. She said "It's not right that you can get married one day to your same sex partner but fired the next day at your job because you are gay." She said, "This isn't gay rights, it's a human rights issue."

She also vowed to protect and defend a woman's right to choose as well have access to reproductive health care. She said she supports Planned Parenthood as twenty percent of American woman have used the services of Planned Parenthood. She said, "The Republicans are trying to kill Planned Parenthood in every which way, but I won't let them."