Not only men intimidate women

Manhattan: At this point we’ve all seen or at least read about the woman walking around New York City over a 10-hour span and getting catcalled over 100 times. My honest first reaction was that 10 times an hour is getting off extremely easy.

I lived my first year in New York in Harlem, and guess what? It was fine. If anything, I had more trouble with the women giving me nasty looks and even nastier remarks. Many women on the street looked me up and down in the same manner that men did.

Sure, one is generally done out of perversion and the other out of negativity or hate. But where do we draw the line?

Look at it this way: You choose to live in one of the biggest cities in the world. You put up constantly with complete baloney. You do so because you find it worth it; I know I do. I’m not saying you can’t complain that it sucks. But we are in a melting pot of people of different classes, moral codes and economic levels.

There are bad people everywhere. The larger the city, the larger the number of bad people. Raise the next generation to be better and call it a day. Lauren Overpeck

A vote for the old machines

Brooklyn: I went to my voting site at 7:15 a.m. on Election Day. Not one scanner was working. I was told to fold my ballot in half and put it in a large manila envelope marked “emergency ballots,” which I did. But the envelope was not sealed. Once a ballot is folded, it probably cannot be scanned. As I left, a worker near the door was more concerned about giving me a sticker saying I voted than all the confusion going on at the site. This new system is for the birds. Amelia C. Petagna

Taxing truth

Mineola, L.I.: Voicer Robert Kralick has no need to worry about the statement on his W-2 leading to taxation of his health insurance. This rumor was started right after the Affordable Care Act passed and was almost immediately debunked by Snopes.com, as well as the Huffington Post, The New York Times and the IRS. Greg Wiley

Who’s in charge?

Woodside: Is Bill de Blasio the mayor of New York City, or is it Al Sharpton or Chirlane McCray? Why did Sharpton have to get a personal phone call from the mayor concerning the resignation of Philip Banks? Just wondering. Jean Hampsas

Putting safety first

Manhattan: Re “A tower of evasion” (Nov. 4): Safety measures instituted by the Port Authority at the World Trade Center site set the standard for large-scale New York construction projects. These safety measures result from strong partnerships with labor unions and represent our joint commitment to the safety of men and women working around the clock to rebuild Lower Manhattan. When the PA WTC construction department assumed construction oversight in 2006, it immediately implemented strict safety protocols to reduce accidents and incidents. The PA continuously monitors contractors to ensure they follow guidelines protecting employees from accidents. We collaborate with the Building & Construction Trades Council of Greater New York, which invests millions of dollars training and upgrading skills of workers that are vital to the safety of everyone working on the site. The WTC redevelopment is one of the largest and most complex projects in history. Its safety record is extraordinary in light of its enormity. Pat Foye, Port Authority, Gary LaBarbera, BCTC

Bill of particulars

Westfield, N.J.: It’s interesting that Julian E. Zelizer’s op-ed (“Obama’s long fall,” Nov. 2) left out the biggest reasons the President has been such a disappointment to many Americans. These are the things that come to mind: the stonewalling by his administration during hearings about the IRS and Benghazi scandals and Fast and Furious; the botched rollout of Healthcare.gov and the “you can keep your doctor, period” statement; increased federal debt; abolition of work requirements for welfare; no welfare or Social Security reform: disclosures of National Security Agency secrets; bad foreign policy that puts America in a weakened position with Syria and Russia; not leaving a fighting force in Iraq; ignoring Islamist terrorists marauding across Syria and Iraq and the beheading of foreigners and Americans; the release of five senior Taliban terrorists for Bowe Bergdahl; and the poor handling of the Ebola virus in the United States. Not enough leadership, too much golf. Molly O’Neil

Just say “nope”

Wappingers Falls, N.Y.: The Daily News reached a new low with the front-page headline “Nope” (Nov. 5). This is so disrespectful. No wonder other countries do not respect us — we don’t even respect our own President! Shame on you. JoAnne Wolf

Reality check

Briarwood: Now that the Republicans have taken over the Senate, there are legitimate questions as to what will happen going forward (“Grand Old Rout,” Nov. 5). Will they pass bills that will protect and grow our once-great country? Good question. But when pundits speculate that President Obama must now sign these bills or work with Republicans on compromise, I wonder who they’ve been watching the last six years. This is a “my way or the highway” President. How anyone believes he’ll now change from a rigid, ideological, left-wing radical to a fair, compromising and pragmatic President is beyond me. Glen Belekis

Welcome to leave

Lake Peekskill, N.Y.: To Voicer Reba Shimansky: George W. Bush did not inherit peace and prosperity. He inherited time bombs — like the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, mortgages given to people who should not have had them and Bill Clinton’s failure to kill Osama Bin Laden when he had the chance. Also, unemployment is down because the work force is smaller, and debt is at record highs. So get your facts straight, and consider moving to Cuba or China. You would be much more at home. Gene Luicci

Where the buck stops

Jackson Heights: Voicer Reba Shimansky is unbelievable. She is trying to put the blame on ex-President George W. Bush for this disastrous administration. I can only assume her head has been stuck under the sand for six long years. Tina Ulloa

The President’s mess

Valley Stream, L.I.: Voicer Reba Shimansky is one of those people who will never see the light of day. The reasons Democrats are fleeing from President Obama are too many to list, so I will summarize. His foreign policies are in shambles. The unemployment rate is down only because a large percentage of people have stopped looking for work. I do not have to mention the worst piece of legislation since Prohibition, which the President calls “affordable care.” Then look at all the scandals he’s had. Little wonder why the Democrats ran for the hills after supporting this man for six years. Larry Bernard

Not so bad

Forest Hills: Voicer Helen Borenstein claimed that Obama’s presidency is “as bad as it gets.” Well, maybe if you consider ending two wars, bringing unemployment down to 5.9%, saving the U.S. auto industry, killing Osama Bin Laden and passing the Affordable Care Act to be “bad.” I think you may be confusing this President with George W. Bush. Now that was as bad as it gets! Libby J. Gurgis

Right makes might

Rosedale: To Voicer Maryanne McCauley: Did it ever dawn on you that the Cuomo camp (as you put it) was telling the truth about Rob Astorino? I believe Gov. Cuomo & Co. I’m so glad your candidate lost and Cuomo came out the victor. Carol Matson

Registering ignorance

Bronx: I was shopping in Yonkers, and when I got to the checkout counter, there was a high-school girl there working part-time. We got to talking about school, and I asked her how she was doing in math. She said, “Good.” Next I asked her how much 6 times 8 was. She said, “Wait a second, let me get my calculator.” I said, “That’s cheating.” She said that was how she was taught. Jimmy Durda

Come on in

Ozone Park: This country must have immigration to thrive. We need immigrants to prevent whole neighborhoods from turning into urban ghost towns. We need them to manage Subway shops and Dunkin Donuts, drive taxis, etc. If they obey laws — and I think more of them do than white people, at least in my area — they are welcome. Ray Hackinson