The following is a letter to the editor that was sent to the Kalamazoo Gazette.

Essie Adrian, Plainwell

On June 30, 2014, with a stroke of their pens, five Supreme Court Justices violated the freedom of religion and separation of church and state provisions of our Constitution. They ruled that the owners of Hobby Lobby do not have to provide contraceptive coverage for their employees on the grounds that it violates their religious beliefs.

This ruling allows certain for-profit companies to impose their religious beliefs on their employees. This ruling not only violates women — it violates families. Having children you cannot afford affects everyone in your family. I see this as another political plot to pick apart benefits under the Affordable Care Act and it opens the door for other companies to follow suit.

I read recently that 1 in 6 people already suffer from hunger. Due to the Supreme Court ruling, how many more children will be born to the 123,000 employees of Hobby Lobby and how many of those will go hungry? Do we really think these employees can afford to pay extra for contraceptives when so many of young families struggle to provide food and shelter for their families?

I don’t know what God the Greens worship but mine says that we are supposed to feed the hungry and care for the sick and elderly. Is Hobby Lobby going to dip into their billions of dollars in profit to help take care of these families?

What next? Will gays and lesbians be denied employment or treatment of HIV or AIDS because it violates someone’s religious beliefs?

These Supreme Court justices no longer rule for the good of the people or upholds the Constitution. They represent big business.

Ladies, it is time to fight back and put an end to our rights being taken away. We can win this war without firing a shot. We win it at the ballot box. If candidates don’t support our rights and the rights of the others, we don’t vote for them.

Quite frankly, I will no longer do business with Hobby Lobby. I hope you will join me in this fight. We need to stand up for ourselves.

For more Kalamazoo Gazette opinion pieces and letters, visit http://www.mlive.com/opinion/kalamazoo/. To submit a letter to the editor, email kznews@mlive.com. Readers are also encouraged to discuss this letter in the comment section below.