Last week an Inspectors General report showed the Transportation and Security Administration failed to prevent 96 percent of terror attacks during undercover tests.

Now, another IG report shows that not only has TSA failed to detect fake bombs, weapons and other explosives nearly 100 percent of the time, but also people with terrorism ties working at airports across the country. More from Fox News:

The results of a new audit show that -- while the agency keeps a robust system for screening commercial airport workers -- it still failed to flag 73 airport workers "linked to terrorism."



According to TSA data, the people in question were working for major airlines, airport venders and other employers.

The culprit? Government bureaucracy of course.

Apparently, TSA does not have access to all the terror watchlist information it needs to make those judgments.



“The TSA did not identify these individuals through its vetting operations because it is not authorized to receive all terrorism-related categories under current interagency watch-listing policy,” the June 4 Inspector General report stated.



According to the report, the TSA had been unable to find 73 individuals "linked to terrorism" because the information the TSA received from the Department of Homeland Security Watchlist Service and used for vetting did not contain the terrorism "codes" associated with the 73 individuals. In other words, TSA did not have the entire terror watchlist.



Last week White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest told reporters President Obama still has confidence in TSA.

"The President does believe the American people should feel confident in traveling airports all across the country because there are security measures in place to protect the traveling public," Earnest said. "The President does continue to have confidence that the officers of the TSA do very important work that continues to protect the American people and continue to protect the American aviation system."

Acting Administrator Melvin Carrawa was reassigned by Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson last week after revelations of TSA failures were reported.