Conrad Sipa of Colts Neck has been charged with murder in connection to the death of Richard Doody. A funeral for Doody is scheduled for Tuesday. (Photo: Courtesy of the Ocean County Prosecutor's Office.)

A retired New York City Fire Department lieutenant who was found dead in his Barnegat Light home last week will be remembered at a funeral service in New York on Tuesday.

Richard P. Doody, 60, of Barnegat Light and the Tottenville section of Staten Island, was found slain on Monday inside his Barnegat Light home by Long Beach Township police. Authorities entered Doody's locked home and found his body after a relative grew concerned after not hearing from him.

According to the Staten Island Advance, Doody, who worked for 29 years with the Fire Department of New York and taught probationary firefighters at the Randall's Island Fire Academy, will be remembered at a Mass at 10:30 a.m. Tuesday at Our Lady Help of Christian Church in Tottenville, Staten Island. His funeral will follow at Bedell-Pizzo Funeral Home, also in Tottenville, according to the newspaper.

Doody spent weeks working at ground zero after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, and he founded the "9-11 Sticker Fund" to help raise money for widows and children of fallen firefighters, according to the Advance.

Colts Neck resident Conrad Sipa has been charged with murder in connection with Doody's death. An autopsy determined Doody suffered blunt-force trauma to his head and slash wounds to his neck, according to the Ocean County Prosecutor's Office.

Doody is survived by his wife, Virginia, two sisters, and 15 nieces and nephews, according to the Advance.

Amanda Oglesby: 732-557-5701; aoglesby@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1HylJZ3