Buy Photo Sally Habets, a ward clerk at the Marias Medical Center in Shelby, looks at a patient chart in the 25-bed hospital. (Photo: TRIBUNE PHOTO/LARRY BECKNER)Buy Photo

Nearly a year after a prominent Shelby doctor’s access to the county hospital was revoked, the actions taken against Dr. Robert Clary continue to provoke strong opinions on both sides of the controversy.

On Dec. 17, 2013, board members of Marias Healthcare Services Inc. voted to terminate Clary’s contract with the clinic amid allegations the veteran doctor had repeatedly threatened, intimidated and berated staff, creating a hostile and unsustainable workplace environment at the Shelby physician’s clinic.

Seven weeks later, the county-owned hospital, Marias Medical Center, revoked Clary’s hospital access privileges based upon similar allegations.

Over the past year, Toole County and Marias Medical Center have been named as defendants in at least two Clary-related lawsuits. Clary has established a private medical clinic that now diverts a substantial percentage of former patients away from the financially distressed Marias Medical Center.

The hospital’s chief executive officer has resigned, Marias Medical Center’s board of trustees has been dissolved and on Wednesday, the Toole County Clerk and Recorder’s Office certified 407 signatures on a petition to recall Toole County Commissioner Allan Underdal. All of it has come as result of the controversy surrounding Clary.

Due to his involvement in ongoing litigation, Clary was advised by his attorney not to comment for this story.

County Commission Chairman Ben Ober said the dispute has alienated neighbors and divided families. Several Marias Medical Center trustees have resigned over the past year — either because they received a threatening phone call or because their business was losing customers. Ober said Clary’s supporters are responsible for most of these retaliatory acts.

“We had a trustee from Sunburst who has a fertilizer/chemical business,” Ober said. “He had several people call and cancel their business for the next year. It was a substantial amount of money that he was losing, so he just said ‘I can’t take any more of this. I’m getting off the board.’”

Support for doctor

The fierce loyalty of many of Clary’s patients was demonstrated early on at a Jan. 10 town meeting in Shelby. Roughly 400 people packed into a middle school auditorium to confront the Marias Medical Center board of trustees. The large majority of them expressed outrage that the hospital would even consider revoking Clary’s hospital privileges.

“Dr. Clary has served our community for 30-plus years, and I am appalled at the shabby way he has been treated,” an emotional Barb Kohl told the trustees.

No one has alleged Clary is incompetent or that he has neglected his patients. The sanctions against him are based upon an alleged pattern of abusive and disruptive behavior stretching back many years. Matters came to a head in December 2013 when Clary reportedly told a young, female hospital employee that he would “kill her” if she didn’t fix a problem with a new electronic medical records program. The threat was allegedly witnessed by several other staff members.

Many of Clary’s supporters argue that while the doctor was undoubtedly angry, the threat was never intended to be taken seriously. Some suggest the criticism of Clary is rooted in a generational divide.

At the time of Clary’s dismissal, several veteran nurses spoke publicly in his support. Some of these have now left employment at Marias Medical Center, citing co-worker intimidation as the reason for their departure. Months later, when it appeared the hospital board was edging toward fully reinstating Clary’s hospital access, a group of approximately 12 health care professionals threatened to take legal action to prevent that eventuality. Most of these were significantly younger than Clary, who is now in his mid-60s.

The implication is that the younger generation of health care professionals lack the dedication and work ethic of Clary’s generation and are too thin-skinned to accept pointed criticism.

“I truly believe that these ones who were threatening the lawsuit — Clary was on their case to make them better,” former hospital board trustee Rick Aschim said. “I had several reports from the gals that were leaving — they admitted that they had been chewed out by Clary, but it was always for the right reasons. It just seems like that newer generation isn’t willing to do that. If it’s shoveling a sidewalk that’s one thing, but if you’re working with meds and things like that and you screw up, that’s life and death.”

“We didn’t grow up in the warm and fuzzy world where you’ve got to be kinder in the way you say things,” said Dwaine Iverson, a Clary supporter who is also in his 60s. “We’re blunt and to the point, and doing that offends some people. If you could do it over you probably would have said it differently, but in the heat of the moment it’s what you do. To criticize Clary for that, I think is inappropriate.”

But comments from several of Clary’s former colleagues belie the argument that only younger health care professionals were offended by his behavior. Most declined to be quoted directly, but Drs. Delmar Williams, Dan Raush, Patsy Vargo and advanced practice registered nurses Lori Oltz and Dave Tafford all said they left their practices in Shelby, to a large degree, because of the hostile work environment created by Clary.

“I think this is probably one of the reasons why the clinic (Marias Healthcare Services Inc.) decided to fire him,” Ober said. “They had this known history of former employees, and when they asked them why they left, several told them ‘I left because I couldn’t stand to be with Dr. Clary.’”

Financial health

Staff retention has been a long-standing problem at Marias Medical Center. William Hartley, interim chief executive officer for the hospital, said Marias Medical Center has had 23 different doctors over the past 12 years, and of those only one has chosen to stay in Shelby.

Hartley did not suggest that all those departures were due to Clary, but he did say the lack of staff retention was one of a number of factors that has led to a reported $1.5 million deficit at Marias Medical Center.

“You have got to adapt and be able to work with people — that’s a constant change we’ve all got to deal with,” Hartley said. “In any business you’re going to have to deal with that. The younger generation are the ones who are going to be working into the future, and we’ve got to figure out how we are going to bring them forward.”

Critics of the hospital’s dismissal of Clary attribute a large part of Marias Medical Center’s burgeoning financial problems to the doctor’s departure, and the large volume of patients who followed him to his newly established clinic and admissions at Northern Rockies Medical Center in Cut Bank.

Several Toole County officials, including Ober, Aschim and Iverson, attribute 40 percent to more than half of Marias Medical Center’s past patient admissions to Clary, and question how the hospital can recover from such a dramatic decline in paying customers.

“When 40 to 50 percent of your admissions are coming from one doctor, I don’t see how you can cut that out of your system and still make the money,” Aschim said. “It will take a long time I think — if it’s going to happen at all.”

But Hartley said the percentage of billable procedures attributed to Clary has been grossly overstated.

According to Hartley, a more accurate figure over the past three or four years is that Clary was responsible for 20 to 30 percent of hospital income, and that Marias Medical Center’s financial problems have more to do with national trends in health care, such as the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, changing community demographics, new Medicare and Medicaid reimbursement formulas and the high cost of new electronic health record systems.

Though he did not provide specific financial details, Hartley said the greatest drain on Marias Medical Center’s financial health has been losses incurred by Toole County’s long-term care facility, the Marias Heritage Center.

Hartley said at least $600,000 in the hospital’s long-term debt load is attributable to the Marias Heritage Center, and that the figure may be closer to $1 million. Toole County commissioners are now considering contracting with a nursing home specialist corporation to assume the lease or management of the county-owned facility.

“The nursing home here has lost money for at least the past four or five years,” Hartley said. “If we can get that out from under the hospital’s umbrella, to the point where someone else is managing it — we think that’s a big piece in the financial turnaround.”

From a broader perspective, Hartley said Marias Medical Center cannot depend upon the fortunes of a single doctor to determine its long-term financial viability.

“The whole other part of this thing that I’ve told people is — how old is he?” Hartley said of Clary. “How much longer is he going to practice? This isn’t only about the fact that there was a battle with Dr. Clary and he left — but what happens five, 10, 15 years down the road? We were always going to have to get along without him one way or another. I don’t think it’s as simple as, ‘Dr. Clary comes back and everything’s fine.’”

That future was thrown into greater uncertainty on Oct. 6 when the Toole County commissioners voted to dissolve the Marias Medical Center board of trustees.

In a prepared pubic statement issued at the regularly scheduled October meeting, Commissioner Debbie Brandon said the vote to dissolve the board was made in response to “the emotional toll” many board volunteers had experienced.

“I had hoped that the public pressure on you as board members would lessen over time, but I no longer believe that is the case,” Brandon said, “and thus my decision.”

“That was just an excuse,” Iverson said. “None of the board members requested it be done.”

Iverson was a primary force in the creation of the hospital board 23 years ago, and served as board chairman during the first six years of its existence.

Problems resurface

According to Iverson, the hospital board was established in 1992 in response to a situation nearly identical to the one Marias Medical Center is confronted with again today. The hospital was operating under a heavy debt load, and Toole County commissioners were engaged in a bitter conflict with one of its doctors — the same Dr. Robert Clary.

“Lee Gibbs, Larry Bonderud and I sat down with the commissioners and Dr. Clary, and the board was formed at that time as a solution to the thing,” Iverson said.

The seven-member board was empowered to set hospital policy and to draft and oversee the hospital’s annual budget. Iverson said it was also intended to encourage greater community involvement, and to establish a layer of separation between hospital operations and the politics of the Toole County commissioners’ office.

That separation is now gone. The Toole County commissioners have assumed all the past authority once held by the board of trustees, and there is little doubt the dissolution of the board was prompted, in part, by the likelihood that newly installed trustees would vote to reinstate Clary’s access to the hospital.

“I was going to make a motion to restore full and unrestricted privileges to the hospital,” Aschim said of his intended future actions. “I think they fully knew we were going to bring it to a vote so we could see where they stood.”

Underdal does not dispute that the commission was at odds with trustees over the continued discussion of Clary’s status.

“I told them at least a half a dozen times — and I was really straightforward about it — we’re not going to talk about this at the hospital board meetings,” he said. “But that’s all we talked about. Every meeting we talked about the same things.”

Marias Medical Center is fully owned by Toole County. Both the hospital and the county were named as defendants in a lawsuit filed by Clary, seeking injunctive relief to re-establish his privileges at Marias Medical Center.

It is Underdal’s position that only Toole County can respond to any legal liabilities incurred by the hospital, and that the county commissioners were obligated to put an end to the possibility the board of trustees would vote to restore Clary’s access to Marias Medical Center.

“When you get sued and they name Toole County, the Toole County commissioners are the only ones who can settle or deal with that issue,” Underdal said. “We can’t hand that off to somebody else. By law there are some things you just can’t delegate, and we, as elected officials for Toole County, are responsible for anybody that sues us.”

“I didn’t really want to dissolve the board, but I think we were forced to,” he added. “We would have had a lot more trouble now than we would have, had we not done that.”

Underdal said the yearlong controversy over Clary has been a costly distraction from the efforts to re-establish Marias Medical Center’s financial health. However, he said the commission and hospital administrators are making advances, and he hopes 2015 will offer some degree of resolution to the swirling controversies.

“We’re serious about staying in business, and we think we have a good chance of doing that,” Underdal said. “Tomorrow, we’re not going to be in the black and everything is just great, but I think we’re moving forward, and we’re going to get past this.”

He also questioned the motivations of that vocal segment of Clary supporters.

“For some people it’s the ‘Chicken Little’ approach,” Underdal said. “I really hate to say it, but for some people, they’re hoping the sky does fall because they want to be right. We have some good doctors and we have a good plan there. Clary’s supporters were saying, ‘He’s the only good doctor, the other doctors are terrible. The hospital’s terrible now because he’s not there.’ That’s not the case, and that really makes me upset. It’s a bad deal, and it’s not true.”

Read or Share this story: http://gftrib.com/16EuEXx