Freshman Congressman Ryan Costello, R-6th Dist., second from left, is surrounded by family and colleagues as he is sworn into office Tuesday with newly re-elected House Speaker John Boehner of Ohio, third from right. (Tom Kelly IV — Digital First Media)





So said freshman Congressman Ryan Costello, who was sworn in to his seat representing the 6th Congressional District Tuesday alongside the 245 other Republicans and 188 Democrats of the 114th Congress.



Tea party-backed Reps. Ted Yoho of Florida and Louie Gohmert of Texas had thrown their hats into the ring as challengers to Boehner, and at least 10 Republicans had announced they would oppose Boehner.



“It’s either a vote for the status quo or a new direction for the Republican Party,” Yoho told CNN in an interview Tuesday morning. “This is the time for a new beginning. It’s time for new leadership.”



But Costello said as challenges go, there wasn’t much there.



The entire Pennsylvania Republican delegation backed Boehner, Costello said.



“There wasn’t even a coordinated effort” to unseat Boehner, Costello told Main Line Times sister paper The Mercury in a telephone interview after the vote.



“I didn’t see anyone else with a legislative agenda, or a plan to move the country forward. I think it was really more a form of protest,” Costello said. “I’m not really interested in things like that, I’m here to be productive.”



He may get his chance given that the Republicans have the largest House majority they’ve had in 70 years and many pundits say they now have to prove to the American voters that they can get things done if they want to hold on to it.



They hit the ground running Tuesday. 1

2

3

See Full Story WASHINGTON >> Although John Boehner faced some drama in his successful bid to be reelected to Speaker of the House Tuesday, none of that drama came from Pennsylvania Republicans.So said freshman Congressman Ryan Costello, who was sworn in to his seat representing the 6th Congressional District Tuesday alongside the 245 other Republicans and 188 Democrats of the 114th Congress.Tea party-backed Reps. Ted Yoho of Florida and Louie Gohmert of Texas had thrown their hats into the ring as challengers to Boehner, and at least 10 Republicans had announced they would oppose Boehner.“It’s either a vote for the status quo or a new direction for the Republican Party,” Yoho told CNN in an interview Tuesday morning. “This is the time for a new beginning. It’s time for new leadership.”But Costello said as challenges go, there wasn’t much there.The entire Pennsylvania Republican delegation backed Boehner, Costello said.“There wasn’t even a coordinated effort” to unseat Boehner, Costello told Main Line Times sister paper The Mercury in a telephone interview after the vote.“I didn’t see anyone else with a legislative agenda, or a plan to move the country forward. I think it was really more a form of protest,” Costello said. “I’m not really interested in things like that, I’m here to be productive.”He may get his chance given that the Republicans have the largest House majority they’ve had in 70 years and many pundits say they now have to prove to the American voters that they can get things done if they want to hold on to it.They hit the ground running Tuesday. Continued...





“This is something I’m going to have to get used to. When I was a county commissioner and a township supervisor, I had more control over my schedule,” Costello said. “I’ve never served in a legislative capacity before.”



The bill that required his attention, and which he supported, is called “Hire a Hero” and would encourage small businesses to hire veterans by not having them count toward their employee total under the provisions of the Obamacare health insurance law.



“We got the legislative agenda last week, so I had time to get familiar with the bill before I voted and that’s something I want to focus on, making sure I am always familiar with the bills I am voting on,” Costello said.



He is also interested in his committee assignments.



Costello said he has been assigned to the Transportation & Infrastructure Committee as well as the Veterans Affairs Committee.



“We’re waiting for the Democrats to populate those committees so we can get our sub-committee assignments,” he said. Costello has a particular interest in the sub-committees that oversee safety on pipelines, railroads and hazardous materials.



He also has an interest in education, even through he has not been appointed to that committee.



“I’ve already spoken to the chairman of the Education and Workforce Committee about the re-authorization of the No Child Left Behind bill,” Costello said.



“My father was a schools superintendent, my mother was a teacher, my brother is a teacher and I am a great believer in the value of public education,” Costello said. 1

2

3

See Full Story “I have a reception right now with 100 people from the district who I grew up with, my family, people who worked on my campaign, people who I represented as a lawyer, people from Owen J. Roberts, and people I went to college with at Ursinus and I had to leave them all to go vote,” the former East Vincent township supervisor and former Chester County commissioner said with a laugh.“This is something I’m going to have to get used to. When I was a county commissioner and a township supervisor, I had more control over my schedule,” Costello said. “I’ve never served in a legislative capacity before.”The bill that required his attention, and which he supported, is called “Hire a Hero” and would encourage small businesses to hire veterans by not having them count toward their employee total under the provisions of the Obamacare health insurance law.“We got the legislative agenda last week, so I had time to get familiar with the bill before I voted and that’s something I want to focus on, making sure I am always familiar with the bills I am voting on,” Costello said.He is also interested in his committee assignments.Costello said he has been assigned to the Transportation & Infrastructure Committee as well as the Veterans Affairs Committee.“We’re waiting for the Democrats to populate those committees so we can get our sub-committee assignments,” he said. Costello has a particular interest in the sub-committees that oversee safety on pipelines, railroads and hazardous materials.He also has an interest in education, even through he has not been appointed to that committee.“I’ve already spoken to the chairman of the Education and Workforce Committee about the re-authorization of the No Child Left Behind bill,” Costello said.“My father was a schools superintendent, my mother was a teacher, my brother is a teacher and I am a great believer in the value of public education,” Costello said. Continued...





When you walk the marble halls of the Capitol and enter the House chamber “you really become aware of the history and the sense of duty incumbent on anyone in a Constitutional position like this one.”



Referring to those waiting for him back at his reception, Costello said “all those people have helped me in one way or another to get where I am right now, and now I represent them in Congress. I want to make sure I do that as well as I possibly can.” 1

2

3

See Full Story He said arriving in Washington and learning his way around, then being sworn in, “was both exciting and humbling, and I don’t use those words lightly.”When you walk the marble halls of the Capitol and enter the House chamber “you really become aware of the history and the sense of duty incumbent on anyone in a Constitutional position like this one.”Referring to those waiting for him back at his reception, Costello said “all those people have helped me in one way or another to get where I am right now, and now I represent them in Congress. I want to make sure I do that as well as I possibly can.”