When Kikkan Randall skied to the starting line for the women’s cross country sprint event at the Sochi Olympics, the hopes of America’s small but growing cadre of nordic enthusiasts went with her. No American had won a gold medal in cross country. Randall was the favorite and reigning world champion.

It was a lot of weight to carry for the slender 5-foot-4 Alaskan, an inspiration to fans of the sport.

“First, I was excited by it,” Randall said earlier this month after speaking at a meeting of U.S. Ski Team trustees in Vail, where she solicited greater financial support for cross country. “I was so excited to be able to put cross country on the map, get people excited. We got a little extra media attention going into the Games. I tried to embrace that spotlight and use it as fuel and motivation, but it was new territory, and a lot of nerves going into the race.”

Randall didn’t win that day, didn’t even get out of the qualifying rounds. Bill Koch is still the only American to medal in cross country at the Olympics, earning a silver in 1976.

“It was a heavy blow for her, getting knocked out in the quarterfinals,” said Luke Bodensteiner, USSA’s vice president for athletics. “You could (visualize) the celebration, you could see what it was going to do for the sport, and it was shocking for everybody. It was hard on her, for a long time.”

Randall, 32, is taking this season off because it’s the one year out of four that has no Olympics or world championships, and she wasn’t willing to put off starting a family until after the 2018 Olympics. She is 22 weeks pregnant and plans to return next season.

In the meantime, she is campaigning for something that could be a boon for U.S. cross country, and she made her pitch to the trustees during the Beaver Creek World Cup.

In cross country, the art and science of ski preparation is crucial. Different temperatures and snow conditions require different waxes, and getting it right often determines results.

In recent years, cross country superpowers such as Norway — with 14 times the budget of the U.S. cross country program and three or four times as many wax technicians— have built elaborate mobile waxing facilities in semitrucks. The U.S. transports hundreds of skis in a cargo van.

Randall is promoting an effort to get a waxing truck for the U.S. for next season, which will cost more than $500,000. The effort already has more than $300,000 in pledges.

“The Norwegian truck is two stories and has pullouts on both sides,” Randall said. “Inside, they have waxing stations, state-of-the-art ventilation systems. They can store all the skis, all of the wax inside the truck. The advantage these trucks give you is that when you show up at a venue, you pop out the sides and you’re ready to go. They also provide ventilation that keeps the wax technicians much healthier.

“Our guys have to unload everything. Then they’re waxing in small trailers with no ventilation.”

In Sochi, Randall and her coaches didn’t time her physical peak right, which is critical in endurance sports at major events. She was the best sprinter in the weeks before and after the Olympics — she won the World Cup season title that season — but when she tried to kick to the finish at Sochi, her legs didn’t respond.

But her skis weren’t right that day, either, and that was part of the problem.

“It wasn’t the only reason, but it certainly played a major part,” Randall said. “When we’re talking about medals at Olympics, where you get one day, one shot, skis have got to be as good as possible. They’ve got to be competitive, because it doesn’t matter what kind of shape we’re in — if the skis aren’t there, we can’t win medals.”

And winning medals can help a sport that promotes wellness and fitness.

“Health is such a big topic with our obesity problem, and cross country skiing is such a great fitness activity the whole family can enjoy,” Randall said. “We actually finally have heroes to follow. When we’re having success on the World Cup, that gets people excited and gives kids something to dream about. It’s the perfect opportunity to really grow the sport right now.”

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or @johnmeyer

U.S. cross country waxing truck campaign

Donors interested in contributing to the U.S. Ski Team’s campaign to raise funds for a waxing truck for the cross country World Cup can donate or get info at: foundation@ussa.org