The circumstances of the shooting were not immediately available. (Source: Jeff Van Sant, KPHO/KTVK)

Police were responding to a call of "unknown trouble" in the neighborhood north of 17th Avenue and Buckeye Road. (Source: Jeff Van Sant, KPHO/KTVK)

Phoenix police have arrested a man who they say accidentally shot his 12-year-old nephew while showing the boy a handgun.

Robert Chavez, 29, is facing charges of aggravated assault and misconduct involving weapons, according to Sgt. Jonathan Howard with the Phoenix Police Dept. Chavez is not allowed to possess a gun because he has a felony conviction.

The shooting happened at a home near 19th Avenue and Buckeye Road.

The boy was taken to a hospital in critical condition after being shot Sunday night. His prognosis is improving, Howard said.

According to Howard, officers found the boy when they responded to a call of "unknown trouble" at a home in the area just north of 17th Avenue and Buckeye Road.

A police report on the incident stated that Chavez has the firearm holstered on his hip. The victim asked to see the gun and Chavez took the gun out of the holster.

Chavez told police he thought the gun was unloaded and pulled the trigger. A round was still chambered and the bullet struck his nephew in the chest.

Chavez said he bought the gun approximately one week ago and said he knew it was illegal for him to have it.

The boy's mother, Chavez's sister, was at the home when the shooting occurred.

"I just ended up hearing a gunshot and ran outside and saw my son was laying on the floor," Erica Canto said. "Neighbors just said that basically my brother was showing a gun off and, you know, it ended up discharging while in its holster."

Canto went on to say that she is mad at her brother.

"I'm disappointed. I'm upset. I'm hurt, you know, confused and lost. I love him. I have older kids and he had always been in our life."

Canto said her son was still in surgery on Monday afternoon and he was in critical condition.

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.