Interns run across the plaza of the Supreme Court yesterday to hand the decided opinions to television correspondents, an event sometimes referred to as “the running of the interns.” Friday is another big decision day at SCOTUS. (AP Photo/Jacquelyn Martin)

THE BIG IDEA:

— Mark Meadows getting his gavel back highlights weakness of and division within House GOP leadership: It fell under the radar yesterday because of the Supreme Court’s health care decision, but a North Carolina congressman regained control of his subcommittee after losing it one week ago as punishment for crossing party leaders on a procedural vote related to trade. Under pressure from conservative members and outside groups, Oversight committee chairman Jason Chaffetz (R-Utah) announced that Meadows will again lead the panel on government operations. John Boehner had defended the choice to remove Meadows at a private conference meeting just one day earlier.

The drama showcases ideological divisions within leadership that no one has fully reported out yet. “Boehner allies, including Republican Conference Chairman Cathy McMorris Rodgers (R-Wash.), were seen confronting Chaffetz during floor votes Thursday morning, a sign to observers that the desire to reinstate Meadows was not unanimous in leadership circles,” Elise Viebeck reports. Chaffetz and Majority Whip Steve Scalise have trouble cracking down sometimes because they were once the Meadows of the conference, in one way or another. McCarthy, the Majority Leader, is a pal to many of the most ideologically pure conservatives. He texts with them and sympathizes with the pressure they’re under from the base back home.

“Boehner allies, including Republican Conference Chairman Cathy McMorris Rodgers (R-Wash.), were seen confronting Chaffetz during floor votes Thursday morning, a sign to observers that the desire to reinstate Meadows was not unanimous in leadership circles,” Elise Viebeck reports. Chaffetz and Majority Whip Steve Scalise have trouble cracking down sometimes because they were once the Meadows of the conference, in one way or another. McCarthy, the Majority Leader, is a pal to many of the most ideologically pure conservatives. He texts with them and sympathizes with the pressure they’re under from the base back home. No matter what the full backstory is, the botched retribution will only embolden outside groups and up-and-coming back benchers to buck leadership. This will make it harder for Boehner to help advance the portions of President Obama’s agenda he agrees with in the final 18 months. “As the Speaker has said, there is a family conversation ongoing, and that conversation will continue,” emailed Boehner spokesman Kevin Smith.

— John Roberts will never get credit for this, but the Chief Justice helped Republicans avoid a Category 5 mess with his King vs. Burwell decision. Top operatives had been panicking that Republicans would be like the dog that caught up with the truck if they “won” in King vs. Burwell. Now they can publicly decry the decision but not need to worry about finding a way to get subsidies for more than 6 million people. One of the biggest winners might be Scott Walker; the Wisconsin governor would have been under immense pressure to help 166,000 of his citizens get coverage. “It is a nearly ideal course of events for Walker,” as University of Wisconsin-Madison political science professor Barry Burden told a columnist for the Madison paper. “He can continue to complain about the law without suffering much in the way of effects.” Watch to see how Roberts votes in the gay marriage case, likely dropping today or Monday. It’s possible he could join Anthony Kennedy in another 6-3 decision. But he could also be on the losing side of a 5-4 decision.

— Internal poll shows Perry rising in Iowa, Walker the clear favorite of GOP caucus-goers: Glen Bolger, a leading Republican pollster, recently conducted a survey of Iowa Republicans for Opportunity and Freedom PAC, a super PAC allied with former Texas Gov. Rick Perry, to gauge the response to the group’s television ads, which went up this month in the Des Moines and Cedar Rapids markets. It’s conclusion: Perry, still rebuilding his image with voters after his rocky 2012 White House run, remains in the middle of the GOP pack, but he has strikingly high favorability (70%), comparable to the current Iowa front-runner, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker (74%). The poll also shows movement for Perry in overall standing, in particular in comparison to his rivals on the right. While lagging behind bigger names, he’s slowly catching up to former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee and retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson, who have strong followings in Iowa and among conservatives nationally. You can read Bolger’s 2-page memo here. — Scoop via Robert Costa

— The State Department is trying to lower expectations of getting a final Iran deal before June 30. John Kerry and Ernie Moniz are en route to Vienna to try locking down specifics. Unnamed senior U.S. administration officials told reporters yesterday that negotiators are going to be “close” to an agreement by a deadline next Tuesday, but that they may “miss it by a short bit” to get a good deal — if they “can get there at all.” Talks were described as “extremely tough,” including the pace of sanctions relief for Iran and “details about access and transparency,” per a Voice of America report. The chief of Iran’s Atomic Energy Organization, meanwhile, is skipping the sessions because of health issues, which could also add another layer of complexity.

First in 202: A national poll conducted for Secure America Now, a hawkish 501(c)(4) nonprofit, finds pervasive, bipartisan concerns about Iran getting nuclear weapons. The joint survey of 2016 likely general election voters, run by Democrat Pat Caddell and Republican John McLaughlin from Thursday through Tuesday, offers a handy rundown of what the most effective messaging will be domestically against any deal. Among the top-lines: 68 percent believe that if Iran attains nuclear weapons they would arm terrorists who would use them to attack at the United States. 70 percent believe that if Iran attains nuclear weapons, they would use these weapons against the United States and its forces in the Middle East. 80 percent believe that, if Iran is allowed to. It’s worth caveating here that the Obama administration says this deal will stop Iran from getting the bomb. Read the poll’s findings here.

The joint survey of 2016 likely general election voters, run by Democrat Pat Caddell and Republican John McLaughlin from Thursday through Tuesday, offers a handy rundown of what the most effective messaging will be domestically against any deal. Among the top-lines: 68 percent believe that if Iran attains nuclear weapons they would arm terrorists who would use them to attack at the United States. 70 percent believe that if Iran attains nuclear weapons, they would use these weapons against the United States and its forces in the Middle East. 80 percent believe that, if Iran is allowed to. It’s worth caveating here that the Obama administration says this deal will stop Iran from getting the bomb. Read the poll’s findings here. D.C. foreign policy elites express concern that the U.S. is about to make too many concessions. “Five former members of President Obama’s inner circle of Iran advisers have written an open letter expressing concern that a pending accord to stem Iran’s nuclear program ‘may fall short of meeting the administration’s own standard of a ‘good’ agreement’ and laying out a series of minimum requirements that Iran must agree to in coming days for them to support a final deal,” the New York Times reported yesterday.

“Five former members of President Obama’s inner circle of Iran advisers have written an open letter expressing concern that a pending accord to stem Iran’s nuclear program ‘may fall short of meeting the administration’s own standard of a ‘good’ agreement’ and laying out a series of minimum requirements that Iran must agree to in coming days for them to support a final deal,” the New York Times reported yesterday. Who signed the letter? Dennis B. Ross , who oversaw Iran policy at the White House during the first Obama term; David H. Petraeus , the former C.I.A. director; Robert Einhorn , a longtime State Department proliferation expert who helped devise and enforce the sanctions against Iran; Gary Samore , Obama’s former chief adviser on nuclear policy; and Gen. James E. Cartwright , a former vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Stephen J. Hadley , George W. Bush’s second-term national security adviser, also signed.

, who oversaw Iran policy at the White House during the first Obama term; , the former C.I.A. director; , a longtime State Department proliferation expert who helped devise and enforce the sanctions against Iran; , Obama’s former chief adviser on nuclear policy; and Gen. , a former vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. , George W. Bush’s second-term national security adviser, also signed. On the Hill, this could give fodder to Iran hardliners pushing to extend sanctions ahead of the deadline. Sens. Mark Kirk (R-Ill.) and Robert Menendez (D-N.J.) stepped up their calls for a 10-year extension of the Iran Sanctions Act, currently set to expire at the end of 2016.

Sens. Mark Kirk (R-Ill.) and Robert Menendez (D-N.J.) stepped up their calls for a 10-year extension of the Iran Sanctions Act, currently set to expire at the end of 2016. A pro-Marco Rubio outside group is about to spend more than $1 million on ads highlighting his opposition to the Iran deal. The ad campaign will include cable TV, radio and online components. “President Obama is negotiating a bad deal with Iran. Senator Marco Rubio is fighting to stop it,” a narrator says. The effort is from the Conservative Solutions Project, a nonprofit organization established by J. Warren Tompkins, who is also running the pro-Rubio super PAC. Watch the 60-second spot, first reported by Sean Sullivan.

WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING:

— There was an apparent terror attack in southeastern France: “French authorities have opened a terrorism investigation after an attack and explosion at a gas factory that left one person decapitated and several wounded,” per the AP. “Banners with Arabic inscriptions were found near the body, an official said … Details of the attack were sketchy but two French officials said it began mid-morning in the Isere region when two men crashed a car into the entrance of the factory and into gas canisters, touching off the explosion. One attacker was arrested, they said.”

— Caving to violent protests, the French government shut down Uber’s non-luxury service: The interior minister ordered a ban on the low-cost car-sharing service after a day of nationwide protests by taxi drivers, the BBC reports. “Bernard Cazeneuve said the service was ‘illegal’ and ordered police and prosecutors to enforce its closure.” The wire is full of images like these from the anti-Uber protests:



Striking taxi drivers burn tires in Marseille. (REUTERS/Jean-Paul Pelissier)



French riot police push an overturned car as striking French taxi drivers demonstrate at the Porte Maillot to block the traffic on the Paris ring road during the anti-Uber protest.REUTERS/Charles Platiau

— “The Israeli army says it has shot a Palestinian after he opened fire at Israeli soldiers at a military checkpoint in the West Bank,” per the AP.

— Nine people on an Alaska cruise died when their sightseeing float plane crashed into a granite rock face. “The bodies of the nine dead remained at the crash site overnight as rain and wind battered the remote and gloomy expanse of rock … Officials have not identified the aircraft’s pilot and eight passengers, all tourists on a week-long Holland America cruise that left Seattle on Saturday.”

GET SMART FAST:

Hillary Clinton leads Bernie Sanders by just 8 points, 43-35, in a WMUR/CNN poll of New Hampshire. [The sample is only 360 likely Democratic voters.] The State Department cannot find in its records all or part of 15 work-related emails from Clinton‘s private server that were released this week by the House panel investigating Benghazi. (AP) Hillary canceled a Philadelphia fundraiser so she can attend the Charleston memorial service today. Chris Christie will formally announce that he’s running next Tuesday, per WNYC. Marco Rubio‘s campaign reserved at least $4.3 million in choice TV advertising time for the early states, starting November 24 in Iowa, sources tracking the air war tell The Daily 202. This will put pressure on other campaigns to start making advance reservations so that they can get the most desirable times.

POWER PLAYERS IN THE NEWS:

Bristol Palin, 24, is pregnant again. The National Republican Senatorial Committee will run internal polls to test how Larry Kudlow would perform in hypothetical match-ups against New York Sen. Chuck Schumer and Connecticut Sen. Richard Blumenthal as part of a far-fetched recruiting play to expand the 2016 map. The conservative commentator owns homes in both states. (National Review) Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan (R) “gave tentative approval to a slimmed-down version of the Purple Line, setting aside his own long-standing skepticism of costly transit projects to support a 16-mile light-rail line that backers say will rejuvenate inner-suburban neighborhoods in Montgomery and Prince George’s counties.” Virginia Gov. Terry McAuliffe (D) seized on the King v. Burwell decision to announce that he’s going to try to expand Medicaid again next legislative session. His effort to do so during his first year failed disastrously. Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) officially retired from the Air Force Reserve with a ceremony at the National Guard Memorial Museum in D.C. Graham retired as a Colonel after 33 years of service. Bob Beckel, a longtime co-host of “The Five,” has departed Fox News. He’s been off the air since February, reportedly related to back surgery, but the cable channel’s public statement yesterday suggested an acrimonious break-up. “We tried to work with Bob for months, but we couldn’t hold The Five hostage to one man’s personal issues,” Bill Shine, head of programming, told TVNewser in a statement. “Juan Williams and Geraldo Rivera will be among those rotating on the show for the near future.” Maine Gov. Paul LePage (R) said he’d like to shoot the cartoonist for the Bangor Daily News, according to the Huffington Post, “a joke that fell flat in light of the January shooting that killed five Charlie Hebdo cartoonists in France.” Sen. Amy Klobuchar (D-Minn.) told Glenn Kessler last night that she’s going to now have every statistic in her speeches footnoted as a result of a recent fact check he wrote. Ex-Sen. Scott Brown (R-Mass.) is now promoting dietary supplements on his Facebook page, drawing widespread mockery among his former Senate colleagues.

WAPO HIGHLIGHTS:

“As eulogizer in chief, Obama invokes the nation’s ‘common creed,” by Steven Mufson: “On Friday, President Obama will use his presidency as a pulpit in a more conventional and solemn sense, delivering a eulogy for at least the 15th time while in office, this time for South Carolina state Sen. Clementa Pinckney…Yet unlike a conventional pastor…Obama has used these different occasions…to preach the American gospel, the secular catechism of beliefs that he thinks tie the nation together.” That gets a little harder with each of these moments. On Friday, President Obama will use his presidency as a pulpit in a more conventional and solemn sense, delivering a eulogy for at least the 15th time while in office, this time for South Carolina state Sen. Clementa Pinckney…Yet unlike a conventional pastor…Obama has used these different occasions…to preach the American gospel, the secular catechism of beliefs that he thinks tie the nation together.” That gets a little harder with each of these moments. “Lone wolf extremists like Dylann Roof are easy to develop but hard to track,” by Marc Fisher: “The rise of the self-taught extremist has put investigators in a bind: White racist groups are less capable of producing organized violence, but the attacks that do develop come mainly from solo actors whose paths to violence are far more difficult to track.” “The rise of the self-taught extremist has put investigators in a bind: White racist groups are less capable of producing organized violence, but the attacks that do develop come mainly from solo actors whose paths to violence are far more difficult to track.” “OPM director survives congressional inquisition, for now,” by Joe Davidson: In a series of scathing hearings about the cyber-theft of data belonging to 4 million current and former federal employees “Archuleta also told senators about ‘new steps’ she is taking, including the hiring of a cybersecurity adviser who will work with the agency’s chief information officer (CIO) to manage the current crisis, mitigate future incidents and ensure the security of OPM’s information technology.” In a series of scathing hearings about the cyber-theft of data belonging to 4 million current and former federal employees “Archuleta also told senators about ‘new steps’ she is taking, including the hiring of a cybersecurity adviser who will work with the agency’s chief information officer (CIO) to manage the current crisis, mitigate future incidents and ensure the security of OPM’s information technology.” — “Democratic civil war ends, for now, as House approves final trade measures,” by Paul Kane: “Clinton was dragged into the debate while campaigning in Iowa. She sounded as though she was supporting Pelosi, but on the actual vote at hand, she declined to take a position, and Sanders pounced. How did Clinton comport herself? ‘Not well,’ said Rep. Marcy Kaptur (D-Ohio), a fierce opponent of trade. Kaptur attended a Monday meeting of northern Ohio party activists. ‘I was never asked about her once,’ she said of Clinton. ‘You know who people asked me about? Bernie Sanders.'” “Clinton was dragged into the debate while campaigning in Iowa. She sounded as though she was supporting Pelosi, but on the actual vote at hand, she declined to take a position, and Sanders pounced. How did Clinton comport herself? ‘Not well,’ said Rep. Marcy Kaptur (D-Ohio), a fierce opponent of trade. Kaptur attended a Monday meeting of northern Ohio party activists. ‘I was never asked about her once,’ she said of Clinton. ‘You know who people asked me about? Bernie Sanders.'”

SOCIAL MEDIA SPEED READ:

— ZIGNAL VISUAL — Ted Cruz is (by far) the 2016 candidate most mentioned in conversations about King v. Burwell. On a day when the Supreme Court dominated the political headlines with its 6-3 decision, health care filtered into the presidential discussion as well. But some stats from Zignal Labs, our campaign analytics partner, illustrate how questions about the future of Obamacare are more closely associated with some candidates than others.

Ted Cruz was most outspoken yesterday in his criticism of the court decision. He employed some memorable rhetoric, including this paragraph: “For the second time in just a few years, a handful of unelected judges has rewritten the text of Obamacare in order to impose this failed law on millions of Americans. The first time, the Court ignored federal law and magically transformed a statutory ‘penalty’ into a ‘tax.’ Today, these robed Houdinis transmogrified a ‘federal exchange’ into an exchange ‘established by the State.’”

This sort of rhetoric helped ensure that one of every three media mentions of Cruz also mentioned the decision. Those numbers were about one in five for Marco Rubio, who has also been an outspoken critic. But other candidates, including Jeb, Walker and Hillary Clinton showed that they were less impacted or connected to the decision. Here’s an illustration of this point. This is Clinton’s word cloud for Thursday:

This is Cruz’s:

–WHAT EVERYONE IS TALKING ABOUT:

Picture of the day:

A shot of the Washington Monument from Cory Booker:



The moon at The Washington Monument. ( corybooker

And a Throwback Thursday picture from the Bernie Sanders campaign:



Thick-rimmed black glasses on Mayor Sanders in the 1980’s. Classic. #tbt ( berniesanders

Tweets of the day:

Rep. Jim Himes (D-Conn.) had some fun with people on Twitter who confused his Twitter account with that of an NBA draftee:

Some people think @jahimes, not @JahlilOkafor, is going to the 76ers. That’s why he’s called the Basketball Congressman. #CT04 #NBADraft — Miles Halpine (@MilesHalpine) June 26, 2015

@jahimes getting picked next #NBADraft — colby jones (@JColby97) June 25, 2015

Nope. Still staying in CT. Still have 18 months left on my two year contract. https://t.co/lNgeKpcoPR — Jim Himes (@jahimes) June 26, 2015

@jahimes welcome to the @Sixers — Isaac (@ikegeez3) June 25, 2015

Really?!? But I’m even worse at hoops than the average tight white guy! https://t.co/FiJUA0GV0S — Jim Himes (@jahimes) June 26, 2015

Instagrams of the day:

Jason Chaffetz shared an X-ray:



10 years ago I fell and broke my heel bone in six pieces. I still have 14 screws in my foot. Amazing medicine so I can still walk somewhat properly, although it feels like I have a permanent sprained ankle. This x-ray is looking up from the bottom of my foot. I’m pretty sure I got the screws at Home Depot. #tbt (jasoninthehouse)

Jay Nixon found a fan:



Man in corn suit excited about Missouri Gov Jay Nixon’s comments on the Renewable Fuel Standard. ( ryangop

And Mike Huckabee shared his love of boots while campaigning in Iowa:



Who can name this type of exotic skin boot? Found at Long Creek Outfitters – Leon, Iowa. ( govmikehuckabee

GOOD READS FROM ELSEWHERE:

— The State, “Was accused SC racial church killer Roof planning bigger death spree?”: “A Columbia police officer reported March 13 that he found part of an AR-15 assault rifle and six 40-bullet banana-style ammo clips in Roof’s car during a routine encounter in a downtown Columbia park. Roof told the officer he wanted to buy an AR-15 … An AR-15 is the semi-automatic civilian version of the U.S. military’s M16 fully automatic assault rifle. Such a weapon, loaded with a 40-bullet ammo clip, could allow someone to shoot several dozen people without reloading and from a greater distance than the .45 Glock handgun Roof is accused of using in the June 17 church killings.”

— Los Angeles Times, “California Assembly approves one of the toughest mandatory vaccination laws in the nation,” by Patrick McGreevey and Rong-Gong Lin II: The legislature moved on Thursday “to end exemptions from state immunization laws based on religious or other personal beliefs. It “would require more children who enter day care and school to be vaccinated against diseases including measles and whooping cough…It is unclear whether Gov. Jerry Brown will sign the measure, which grew out of concern about low vaccination rates in some communities and an outbreak of measles at Disneyland that ultimately infected more than 150 people.”

— The Wrap, “Trump Dumped! Univision Drops Miss USA Pageant over Mexican Immigrant Remarks,” by Tony Maglio: “The broadcaster ‘will not be … working on any other projects tied to the Trump Organization,’ the entertainment group continued — that includes no longer airing the July 12 Miss USA pageant as planned.”

— Page Six, “Monica Lewinsky Gets Standing Ovation at Cannes,” by Liz Smith: “Lewinsky won a standing ovation from the creative elite at Cannes Lion after telling them in emotional speech to join her mission to ensure ‘public shaming as a blood sport must stop.’ Said Lewinsky: ‘Like me, at 22, a few of you may also have taken wrong turns and fallen in love with the wrong person, maybe even your boss … Unlike me, though, your boss probably wasn’t the president of the United States of America.”

— Military Times, “Military is okay with Confederate flag – for now,” by Oriana Pawlyk and Andrew deGrandpre: Following a wave of decisions by retailers and politicians to remove the Confederate flag from stores and official buildings, “The Defense Department, which enforces strict policies prohibiting hate speech, inappropriate tattoos and the display of offensive material, is making no such gestures, a spokesman told Military Times.”

BUZZING AT THE CAPITOL:

— The Hill, “Dems accuse GOP of playing race card in contentious hearing,” by Kevin Cirilli: “House Democrats accused Republicans of using race discrimination allegations to weaken a government agency during a contentious House Financial Services subcommittee hearing Thursday. The panel’s Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee, chaired by Rep. Sean Duffy (R-Wis.), has had four hearings looking into reports of racism, sexism and ageism at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB).”

HOT ON THE LEFT

Hillary’s newest consultant was a major Keystone lobbyist. From Huffington Post: “The newest hire for Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign is a longtime strategist who played a key role in her 2008 primary defeat while working for then-Sen. Barack Obama. He’s also a Washington lobbyist who lobbied the State Department — led, at the time, by Secretary of State Hillary Clinton — on behalf of the company seeking to build the controversial Keystone XL pipeline. Clinton’s new consultant, Jeff Berman, has followed, in many respects, a well-worn path for those in Washington D.C.”

HOT ON THE RIGHT

More minority children than whites, census finds. From Breitbart: “New population estimates released Thursday reveal a striking shift in the composition of America’s population as racial and ethnic minority births are also outpacing minority deaths … Non-Hispanic whites are experiencing negative population growth, seeing 61,841 more deaths than births between 2013 and 2014.”

DAYBOOK:

–What’s happening today on the campaign trail: Seven GOP presidential hopefuls will be in Denver for the Western Conservative Summit, including Ben Carson, Rick Perry and Rick Santorum. Ted Cruz will make a series of stops in Iowa. Hillary Clinton will attend the Charleston, S.C. funeral for Rev. Clementa Pinckney and speak at the Virginia Jefferson Jackson Dinner in Northern Virginia. Martin O’Malley delivers a foreign policy speech in the District.

–At the White House: President Obama and Vice President Biden will travel to Charleston, S.C., for the funeral of Rev. Clementa Pinckney. Obama will deliver the eulogy.

QUOTE OF THE DAY: “I think the media is giving Bernie a pass right now. I very rarely read in any coverage of Bernie that he’s a socialist … Bernie is too liberal to gather enough votes in this country to become president … It’s not unusual for someone who has an extreme message to have a following.” — Sen. Claire McCaskill (D-Mo.) on MSNBC

NEWS YOU CAN USE IF YOU LIVE IN D.C.:

— “Any showers today, probably few and far between most of the time, will look tame compared to tomorrow’s potential downpours and even severe weather,” says the Capital Weather Gang. “We can probably eke by some of our outdoor plans today. But you may consider rescheduling Saturday activities to either be indoors or move them to Sunday.”

— The Nationals swept the Braves, winning 7-0 last night.

— “Nearly 30 people have been killed inside The District since May 1, double the number during the same period last year, and 14 have been killed in the past 17 days. This year’s homicide count stands at 64, compared with 53 at this time last year.”

VIDEO OF THE DAY:

A pro-Hillary group trying to create the “Obama Girl” of 2016 parodies the 2003 song “Stacy’s Mom” from Fountains of Wayne: