Attorney General Eric Holder announced his resignation Thursday afternoon. Holder is the first black U.S. attorney general and in his six years of service, his impacts on the nation include challenging Texas’ voter ID law, striking down the Defense of Marriage Act and opening discussion on racial tensions and police violence in Ferguson after Michael Brown’s murder.

"I have loved the Department of Justice ever since, as a young boy, I watched Robert Kennedy prove during the civil rights movement how the department can – and must – always be a force for that which is right," Holder said in his resignation speech. "I hope that I have done honor to the faith that you have placed in me, Mr. President, and to the legacy of all those who have served before me."

Holder will stay in office until he is replaced, a process that could last until the end of the year or even longer if his successor cannot be confirmed in the lame duck session of Congress.

On the heels of the announcement administration officials have discussed some names for Holder’s successor.

Massachusetts Governor Deval Patrick has long been discussed as a likely candidate for the job. He was appointed the U.S. assistant attorney general for the Civil Rights Division in 1994 under President Bill Clinton. Patrick also shares Holder’s views about racialized police violence and support of LGBT rights. However Patrick on Thursday said that the job was not for him “right now.”

California Attorney General Kamala Harris also said that she's not interested in the job. “I am honored to even be mentioned, but intend to continue my work for the people of California as attorney general,” she said.

[MORE: Cartoons about Congress]

Another widely discussed potential successor for Holder is former White House Counsel Kathryn Ruemmler, who Obama appointed in 2011. During her work in his administration, Ruemmler consulted with Obama on national security and both domestic and foreign policy issues. Her work with him also includes pushing the Affordable Care Act to fruition. The president has described her as one of his “most trusted advisers over the past few years.”

Another potential candidate close to the president is Solicitor General Donald Verrilli Jr, who succeeded Elana Kagan in that position. Verrilli is a seasoned lawyer and served as editor-in-chief for the Columbia Law Review. He worked for the law firm Jenner and Block for 20 years before joining the administration. Notoriously known for his nervous defense of the Affordable Care Act, Verrilli has been nonetheless considered the leading candidate to succeed Holder.

[SEE: Cartoons on the Budget and Deficit]

Loretta Lynch, nominated by both Presidents Clinton and Obama as U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of New York, has also been floated as a possible candidate. She is known for her work overseeing Abner Louima’s case, United States v. Volpe, et al., one of the most infamous police brutality cases of the 1990s.

So, what do you think? Who should replace Attorney General Eric Holder?