Topics: "I Have a Dream", blackface, Editor's Picks, Martin Luther King, Race, Racism, Rosa Parks, Teachers, Politics News

I became a teacher because of my favorite teacher. One of only three black academic instructors I ever encountered prior to college, Beatrice Gaulden was a passionate, flamboyant and challenging fourth grade teacher, who faithfully drank eight tall glasses of water a day, and once showed up to our class in neon green Hammer pants. It infuriated me that she often wrote in a conduct grade on our report cards, because though I was an A student academically, my penchant for keeping up constant chatter with anyone who sat near me always netted me a B- or lower for conduct.

Despite her hipness, Mrs. Gaulden was fundamentally old school. She kinda reminds me of that line from the Common Sense joint: She was old school, when I was just a shorty, never knew throughout my life, she would be there for me.

I know it’s a tribute to first loves, but Bea Gaulden made me fall in love with learning. She was the first teacher who I felt was for me, and the lessons she taught have been there as a constant reminder of who I am and can be. She wasn’t my first good teacher. Even my “bad” teachers – ones not particularly welcoming of black students– were great instructors. But she recognized what it meant to be a stalwart advocate for a precocious black girl in a sea of white children.

She first recognized that I was a natural skeptic, prone to question all the information that she shared from her perch on a grey metal stool in the front of the room. Rather than seeing those questions as a challenge to her authority, she pulled me to the side one day and said, “Do you question your white teachers like this?” I thought about it and realized that even at 8 years, I mostly accepted what all my white teachers had to say without question. When I answered her honestly, “No,” she said simply, “Never stop questioning.” To this day, I am relentless about asking questions, and as a student leaving her class, I never again accepted easy answers or attempts by instructors to dismiss or silence me.

She is the first teacher who nurtured my passions. So when I showed up one day reading a juvenile biography of Martin Luther King that my aunt had purchased for me, Mrs. Gaulden asked to see what I was reading. They had suggested in the back of the book that turning it into a play might be a good supplemental learning activity, and I asked if we could.

She enthusiastically said yes, and then shepherded my class through the process of putting on a play, which we performed for the third-, fourth– and fifth–graders during Black History Month. I starred as Rosa Parks, in our reenactment of the Montgomery Bus Boycott.

On the day it came time to choose the classmate who would play Martin Luther King, Mrs. Gaulden asked for volunteers. Two students raised their hands, a white girl (let’s call her Cindy) and a black boy named Bruce. Cindy raised her hand first, and in fairness, Mrs. Gaulden dutifully wrote her name on the board beside the role of MLK.