Local retailers: Who needs Black Friday?

Redding Mesinger, 1, looks at holiday lights while shopping with his mother, Ayeisha, at McGuckin Hardware in Boulder on Friday. ( David R. Jennings / Daily Camera )

The weather might not say Christmas, but to the hundreds of Boulder County retailers participating in Small Business Saturday, it spells Christmas shoppers.

"To us, every day is 'small business Saturday,'" said Louise Garrels, marketing manager for McGuckin Hardware, which has operated in Boulder for nearly 60 years. "But the (post-Thanksgiving time frame) is a really big, important holiday for us."

McGuckin is one of hundreds of area businesses participating in American Express' promotion, the counterpart to Black Friday and Cyber Monday that encourages shoppers to support locally owned brick-and-mortar shops in their community.

Peter Steele, one of the founding members of pARTiculars artist cooperative gallery at 401 S. Public Road in Lafayette, fully expects Saturday to be the shop's biggest day of the year.

Business was extremely strong last year, and "that's why we're projecting this year is going to be the same, if not better," he said.

Based on the foot traffic Friday in Louisville, Lia Cooley, owner of Found Above Ground men's consignment store at 901 Main St., said she's optimistic for a busy holiday shopping season. Both Cooley and her mom, who runs the 10-year-old Found Underground Consignments directly below, plan to offer sales Saturday to bring in additional traffic, she said.

Advertisement

"Today's actually been pretty steady," Lia Cooley said Friday. "I'm so proud of the people shopping us small folks."

Business also buzzed Friday in downtown Boulder, where the Pearl Street Mall sported a bustling atmosphere akin to the summer tourist season. Complemented by 70-degree temperatures, throngs of people walked along the bricks of the outdoor mall.

Olivia Reamer, 8, and her sister Ella, 11, pluck the strings on Nancy Brace's harp at McGuckin Hardware on Friday. (David R. Jennings / Daily Camera)

Just off the mall, a half-dozen people milled about the Goorin Bros. hat shop, 943 Pearl St., trying on fedoras, newsboy caps and bowlers. The store — which had a blue Small Business Saturday doormat at its entrance and a sale sign announcing 50 percent off select hats — attracted a good flow of customers throughout the day, said merchant Abbey Bergh.

"People are out looking for cool things to buy for Christmas," she said. "It's nice to have steady traffic."

Elizabeth Rose, who opened Nod & Rose Storehouse at 1220 Spruce St. with her husband in November 2012, said she was pleasantly surprised with the downtown activity Friday.

"It's been good, and tomorrow should be amazing," she said Friday. "Last year was strong, and I feel like in a town this small, people are going to get out and support local businesses."

Best Small Business Saturday yet?

With springlike weather in the forecast, some Longmont business owners believe it could be their best Small Business Saturday to date.

"We've been very busy today," Jensen Guitar co-owner Sandy Farnsworth said Friday as she worked the register.

Farnsworth said she expects a good turnout Saturday. Her shop, at 350 Main St., will take 20 percent off everything in the store.

Next door at the Used Book Emporium, the owners will raffle a gift certificate and will be one of the Longmont Downtown Development Authority's gift-wrapping stations, supporting the Longmont Theatre Co.

"We are very involved with this," said Linda Uhrich, who, with her sister Debbie Karle, owns and manages the Used Book Emporium at 346 Main St.

As the big-box stores do on Black Friday, small downtown shops intend to draw in shoppers with special bargains.

Over at one of Longmont's newer businesses, Crystal Joys rock shop at 360 Main St., customers can expect a special flash sale from 10 a.m. to noon, with 20 percent off everything in the store. Across the street at Old Town Outfitters, small business supporters will find 30 percent off everything.

The LDDA's job is to provide atmosphere.

Ice carvers will create an interactive downtown photo opportunity in St. Stephen's Plaza from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. And from 1 to 4 p.m., costumed characters wandering around downtown might reward shoppers if they catch them shopping at participating small businesses.

Holiday carolers will be strolling around downtown Longmont from 4 to 6 p.m.