If you go What: Steve Hackman conducts his "Bartók v. Björk" in the first CMF Mash-Up concert of the season When: 7:30 p.m. Tuesday, July 7 Where: Chautauqua Auditorium, 900 Baseline Road Tickets: $25-$45 Info: 303-440-7666, comusic.org Etc.: The concert will be preceded by a 5 p.m. guided hike at Chautauqua Park and a 5:30 p.m. mixer featuring food and drink samples from Boulder restaurants, breweries and specialty food shops. The mixer is free for concert ticket holders.

In his third year conducting and curating the Colorado Music Festival's Mash-Up series, Steve Hackman returns to his signature concept — creating large, nearly hour-long new compositions through the fusion of classical masterpieces with songs of chosen contemporary popular artists. Those artists are typically high-concept performers of sophistication.

Following up on "Brahms v. Radiohead" and "Beethoven v. Coldplay," both heard at the CMF, Hackman is set to premiere his latest project, "Bartók v. Björk," on Tuesday in this season's first of three Mash-Up events at Chautauqua Auditorium.

It is actually his fourth endeavor with the concept. His first, Copland + Bon Iver, will be heard at the second Mash-Up concert on July 21. But using Bartók's "Concerto for Orchestra" — an incredibly challenging work even on its own — as a basis might be his most ambitious undertaking yet.

"For me, it's about furthering the technique," Hackman told the Camera. "I want to challenge myself and the audience by discovering how much is possible with this kind of musical marriage. I don't want to restrict myself just because pieces are more challenging."

Hackman said the Icelandic star was a perfect match for the Bartók because of her technical virtuosity, her creativity and the emotional extremes in her music. He said that while Björk always has had elements of "classical" technique in her music, those became more pronounced in her later work, more avant-garde, indeed more like the 20th century Hungarian composer himself.

But wanting to explore the seeds rather than the fruit of that development, Hackman has chosen 11 songs from Björk's first three albums, Debut, Post and Homogenic. The latter, he said, is often considered her finest work.

He said that while the Bartók remains the basis — necessary key and meter changes are usually applied to the songs, not the concerto — his goal is more of a "total synthesis" this time as opposed to the more obviously episodic nature of the previous works.

"I set myself a challenge to extend Bartók's music and even recompose some of it," Hackman said. "That means creating new Bartók-like material to accommodate the Björk songs. At times, I want it to be unclear whether this is unadulterated Bartók, pure Björk, or neither."

The basic structure underlying other pieces will apply — all five movements of the "Concerto for Orchestra" will be used nearly in their entirety. Hackman explained that the score itself is a kind of synthesis, with the use of folk melodies combined with strict compositional techniques such as fugue. That makes the work a prime choice for this sort of treatment.

"The sections based on folk melodies were the first obvious target," he said. "Those are already ripe for combination with the human voice. But more challenging and fulfilling were abstract portions like the night music in the third movement, where it is purely Bartók's own voice.

"Finding the right songs to match that made for some of the most stunning moments in the piece, but they are also the most challenging to listen to."

Singers for the Björk portions are Malia Civetz, Carla Kihlstedt, and Kristin Slipp.

On the July 21 concert, the mash-up of Copland's "Appalachian Spring" with songs of indie folk band Bon Iver will be a new version of a piece that preceded Hackman's CMF work.

"I've added new pieces reflecting the technique I've developed in the years since first creating it," he said. The program also includes special guests SHEL, a folk/pop band of four sisters from Fort Collins. They will present an opening act on their own preceding Hackman's work, then close with orchestral arrangements made for them by Conor Brown.

The third and final Mash-Up concert, on Aug. 4, is a more traditional "pops" style program featuring Portland-based singer and performance artist Storm Large, known for her collaborations with the crossover ensemble Pink Martini.

"She's an amazingly arresting, entertaining, captivating performer," Hackman said.

Her thematic program of standards from the Great American Songbook in orchestral arrangements is titled "The Crazy Arc of Love."

Meanwhile, Hackman has taken a resident position with the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra as director of the FUSE series, similar to the CMF Mash-Up series. The future of the latter is to be decided.

"It was originally a three-year project," Hackman said, "and the board and I will re-evaluate whether it's a worthwhile endeavor the CMF wishes to continue."