Topics: Affordable Care Act, congressional republicans, Conservatives, health insurance reform, Healthcare Reform, Obamacare, Republicans, Ted Cruz, Politics News

One of the biggest criticisms of the GOP when it comes to healthcare reform is that, for all their blustering and fulminating against the Affordable Care Act, they just can’t seem to put together a coherent plan of their own. The Washington Post’s Greg Sargent leafed through his calendar this morning and discovered that Republicans have promising to unveil their big Obamacare replacement for 50 months, a gestation period that is about twice as long as that of actual, real-live elephants.

Instead of substantive plans, they give us vague notions of plans spelled out in newspaper Op-Eds. Typically they don’t progress much further beyond gauzy promises of cheap, comprehensive health coverage rooted in “freedom” and “patient-centered reforms.” In the past couple of weeks alone we’ve seen healthcare “plans” put forward by former Sen. Phil Gramm (the “freedom option”), a trio of Republican senators (“freedom and flexibility” for the states), and a trio of House Republicans (“an off-ramp out of ObamaCare toward patient-centered health care”). It’s all the same non-specific prattle we’ve heard countless times over the past five years, and it’s intended to give the impression that the GOP is finally, finally, finally getting serious about healthcare reform.

Now we have a brand new entrant into this discussion: Ted Cruz. The junior senator from Texas unveiled his very own healthcare plan this week and actually managed to put his determinedly vague colleagues to shame by crafting an actual piece of legislation that you can hold in your hands. Make no mistake: his proposed bill is a pile of hot garbage that will screw over countless people. But hey, at least it’s a plan!

Cruz has long been adamant that every single word of the Affordable Care Act should be repealed, but his proposed legislation only takes out part of the ACA. It would immediately repeal Title I of the Affordable Care Act, which would eliminate the individual and employer mandates, the state-based exchanges, subsidies for purchasing insurance, the protections for people with pre-existing conditions, the requirement that kids can stay on their parents’ plans until age 26, the prohibition on capping lifetime benefits – basically most of what people love and hate about the ACA. Simply put, Cruz wants to strike down most of the policies the ACA put in place to protect consumers from the worst abuses of the insurance market, and in their place he’d put… nothing.