Denver City Council runoff candidate Sean Bradley says he will fix any campaign finance reporting problems cited by a rival campaign’s complaint, including unreported expenses.

“If we made a mistake, I’m going to correct it,” Bradley said.

The campaign manager for Stacie Gilmore, one of Bradley’s four opponents in far-northeast Denver’s District 11 race, filed the complaint with the Denver Elections Division last week on Election Day. Gilmore and Bradley made it to the June 2 runoff, with Gilmore outpolling him 38 percent to 24 percent.

Bradley called the complaint “an old political tactic.” But Gilmore campaign manager Magen Elenz said her concern was for transparency.

Her complaint cited a litany of potential violations, including repeated filing of finance reports a day or two past deadlines. She provided photos of items including a yard sign lacking a required disclosure that Bradley’s campaign paid for it; three ads in the Urban Spectrum newspaper that she said were not listed as expenses on his reports; and a picture of a storefront office for which the expense also did not seem to be disclosed.

“Mr. Bradley’s repeated and blatant violation of the law makes a mockery of campaign finance in Denver,” Elenz wrote, “and further undermines the trust Denver citizens place in our government.”

Of a half-dozen finance complaints the Elections Division has received this cycle, a spokesman said, Bradley’s is the only open one against a runoff candidate. Some of Elenz’s allegations are typical, but the breadth of violations alleged against Bradley is unusual.

Bradley declined to discuss specifics in an interview Monday.

“We’re still reviewing it,” he said. “I’m not going to get into the weeds of all that stuff.”

Denver elections director Amber McReynolds wrote in a notice to Bradley on Thursday that he had 10 days to correct any violations and avert the appointment of a hearing officer to investigate them. That could lead to legal proceedings and penalties, but candidates usually file amended reports to avoid such steps.

Jon Murray: 303-954-1405, jmurray@denverpost.com or twitter.com/JonMurray