If have been on the edge of your seat since December, as our government decided whether or not it should be legal for you to unlock your phone and take it to a carrier of choice, you can sit back and relax. Patrick Leahy, a senator from Vermont, announced today that the House “unanimously passed bipartisan legislation that would restore the ability of consumers to more easily transfer their cell phones to other wireless carriers, just one week after the Senate approved the same measure.” That’s good news! In even better news, President Obama has already confirmed that he will sign this bill. So yep, this is a done deal.

With that out of the way, I should remind you, as I did in December, of a couple of things here.

First, “unlocking” in this situation has nothing to do with the bootloader of your phone. We are talking about SIM unlocking your phone, so that you can take it from one carrier to another and see it connect properly to the new carrier’s network. Again, this has nothing to do with bootloaders. Yo, bootloaders – not the issue here. Bootloaders, nope, nothing doing in bootloader land here. Umm, did you know that this has nothing to do with bootloaders? Well, it doesn’t…have…anything…to…do…with…bootloaders.

OK, not that we are settled there, let’s talk the second point.

As I mentioned when this situation got really wild, this doesn’t mean that you can freely unlock anything you feel like unlocking and then take it from carrier to carrier. There are still restrictions here. Remember, the CTIA (a group that represents the carriers in the US) struck a deal with the FCC that still made unlocking a process that the carriers have control over. In other words, you need to fulfill your contract or pay your phone fully off, follow the procedure set forth by your particular carrier to get an unlock code, etc. But hey, unlocking being legal is still a major step in the right direction. Just know that this doesn’t include tablets just yet. That is still an issue on the table.

Freedom. ‘merica. Friday. Happy hour.