WASHINGTON – Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge, unveiled new legislation Thursday (May 21) he says would allow states to pull out of the Affordable Care Act and access federal block grants to establish health savings accounts for residents.

Cassidy said his bill would give more options for patients, and "If the patient has the power," the system will respond to his/her needs.

The bill, which he expects to formally introduce in two weeks, would be implemented only if the Supreme Court rules in favor of plaintiffs seeking to invalidate income-based subsidies in at least 34 states, including Louisiana. Those states declined to establish state marketplaces and instead rely on federally established exchanges. A ruling is expected at the end of June.

At issue is language in the Affordable Care Act that established subsidies for state-created marketplace health insurance purchases. The plaintiffs argue that the provisions makes subsidies illegal in states that don't operate their own marketplaces. The Obama administration said other provisions in the law make it clear Congress intended the law's subsidies to be available for enrollees in both state and federal marketplaces.

Cassidy said Congress must be ready for a ruling against the Obama administration. Efforts to repeal the law, which Cassidy supported, could never make it past a certain veto by President Barack Obama.

"I will tell you if you think the option is to do nothing and everything will work out, that is not an option," said Cassidy, a physician, during a talk Thursday (May 21) on his "Patient Freedom Act at the conservative Hudson Institute.

If the Supreme Court rules residents of states without state-run marketplaces can no longer qualify for subsidies, Cassidy's bill could kick into play. Of course, it would first need to pass both the House and Senate, avoiding a likely Democratic filibuster in the Senate and then win the signature of President Obama. Many consider that unlikely, though Cassidy believes key elements of his bill can be enacted if all sides negotiate in good faith.

His bill would give governors and legislators in the 34 states, possibly 37, depending on how the High Court rules, three options if Affordable Care Act subsidies for their residents are outlawed.

Louisiana and other impacted states could establish an Affordable Care exchange, opt out of the president's signature health law and accept the provisions of Cassidy's legislation, or do nothing and leave most of their residents -– those without Medicaid or Medicare -– without help getting health coverage.

Cassidy said his bill, unlike the Affordable Care Act, would not mandate that businesses with over 50 full-time workers provide insurance coverage to employees, or that most individuals without employer coverage obtain insurance.

Instead, he said, his bill would send the same funding provided their residents under the Affordable Care Act subsidies to states so the money could be direct deposited into individual and family health care accounts. Consumers can use the accounts to purchase health insurance or medical services.

The government's payments to health savings accounts would not be means tested, meaning the same payments to low income and higher income people, a provision Democrats are likely to oppose. The Affordable Care Act's subsidies vary based on income. Cassidy's bill begins to phase out payments for health care accounts to individuals and couples when reach a tax rate of 25 percent. For single adults, that's income ranging from $90,000-$100,000.

As a condition for getting federal block grant money, states would be required to establish affordable high-deductible policies, with prescription drug coverage, for low-income residents.

Cassidy said his bill is designed to "give people control over their health care decisions."

Cassidy maintains his proposal would produce significant savings over the Affordable Care Act by eliminating specific coverage requirements -- such as coverage for maternity services -- even for people who don't need or want it.

Still, there's likely to be arguments by others that insurance would be higher under Cassidy's plan because, unlike with the Affordable Care Act, people would no longer be required to get health insurance -– a provision designed to expand insurance pools with younger, healthier people. And by not requiring all plans to provide minimal levels of coverage – such as yearly physicals -- critics will no doubt argue that people will wait to see a doctor until they are suffering from expensive-to-treat health problems that could have been avoided with earlier diagnosis.

Cassidy said his plan builds in savings by giving patients immediate to prices charged by health providers for different procedures and tests. He hopes an enterprising person will create a phone app – so patients quickly can determine medical providers providing the "best prices and quality" – something he says is routine for most products and services, but not generally health care.

Cassidy also said his plan is not likely to result in a significant drop off of people buying insurance because the system would be "opt out," meaning a person would need to say he/she doesn't want coverage. Some studies show most people won't go the trouble of refusing coverage, the freshman senator said.

Cassidy said his plan, like the Affordable Care, would bar insurers from denying coverage based on pre-existing conditions. All patients, male and female, would be charged premiums based only on their age, not their sex, or on their current health, he said.

Cassidy said his bill will be simultaneously introduced by Rep. Ralph Abraham, R-Alto., a physician, like Cassidy, probably in two weeks.

Cassidy said it's designed to work hand and hand with other Republican bills -- in case the Supreme Court invalidates subsidies in states without their own marketplaces.

Some of the bills, for instance, would continue the subsidies for all states, through 2017 so that other options –- Cassidy hopes it's his bill, or something close to it –- can be implemented.