Urgent care, health centers growing as lower-cost option to ERs

Outpatient center growth also can be seen in physician-owned urgent care centers and federally qualified health centers.



Medicaid expansion and federal subsidies for individuals to purchase private health insurance in Michigan has added several hundred thousand people to the mix of patients seeking physician, specialist, outpatient and inpatient hospital care.



As a result, since 2012, Michigan's uninsured rate has dropped to 8 percent from 13 percent.



Over the past five years, the Affordable Care Act has provided $11 billion to federally qualified health centers to expand care to more than 20 million additional patients.



Michigan's 40 health centers and more than 250 clinic locations have received $385 million and have treated more than 21 percent more patients and hired more than 900 employees during that period, said the Michigan Primary Care Association.



Last year, health centers also saved $16 million for the state Medicaid program because of their lower per-patient treatment costs, the association told Crain's.



"We have created more space for uninsured folks with a 26 percent increase in Medicaid (revenue for enrollees treated at health centers) under Healthy Michigan," said Kim Sibilsky, the association's president.



Sibilsky said Medicaid enrollees increased at health centers to 319,905 in 2014 from 261,526 in 2013.



Moreover, providing uninsured patients with medical homes and regular access to doctors and nurses helps everyone, Sibilsky said.



"We are seeing patients getting increased access to specialists and diagnostic tests like colonoscopies and mammograms," she said. "We are anticipating much lower experience in those avoidable conditions by virtue of people getting tests they were before unable to do."



Looking ahead, Sibilsky said continued federal health center funding has been assured by Congress through fiscal 2017. But funding for new sites or capital expansion would have to be appropriated by Congress, she said.

Clinic competition

There has been an explosion in the past several years of private urgent care centers to match the growth of insured patients.



In Southeast Michigan, experts estimate there are an estimated 125 urgent care centers, a 25 percent increase from 2012. More than 300 are in Michigan overall, said the Urgent Care Association of America.



Physician-owned urgent care centers include 10-center Michigan Urgent Care Centers; DocNow Urgent Care, which operates centers in Waterford Township and Rochester Hills; and Premier Medicine with centers in Livonia, Canton Township, Dearborn and Detroit.



Another major player in urgent care in the region is Addison, Texas-based Concentra, which operates 16 centers in Southeast Michigan and 300 nationally in 40 states.



Nationally, urgent care clinics have been increasing the past few years to about 8,000, said the American Hospital Association. About 54 percent are physician owned, 25 percent are hospital owned and 18 percent are corporate owned, said the Urgent Care Association.



In 1990, internist Mohammed Arsiwala, M.D., founded Livonia-based Michigan Urgent Care with a business plan designed to support primary care physicians instead of directly competing with them.

"We are focused on sending patient information to the patient's primary care physician," Arsiwala said. "We want to make sure primary doctors get that information because it helps coordination of care and it should be part of the medical home."



Arsiwala said he has signed business services agreements with several primary care groups to offer their patients access to urgent care after hours and on weekends.



"This helps keep patients out of ERs for unnecessary visits, and it counts toward" keeping medical groups certified with Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan for patient-centered medical homes, Arsiwala said.



Arsiwala's centers, which are staffed by board-certified physicians and physician assistants, are in Grosse Pointe, Livonia, Canton Township, Novi and Dundee, plus five in Detroit.



Another four are expected to open next year, including centers in Bloomfield Hills and Wyandotte, Arsiwala said.





Related Links