Facebook, Google and Twitter are trouncing everyone else when it comes to selling mobile ads. But they may also deserve credit if publishers, ad brokers and other online services start to see more traction in their mobile businesses, industry executives say.

According to estimates from eMarketer, Google attracted nearly 37% of all U.S. mobile ad spending in 2014, the majority of which came from search advertising. Facebook, meanwhile, attracted 18.5% of overall ad spending, and in third place was Twitter, which accounted for 3.6%.

The online giants have been a headache for publishers, making it hard for them to compete for mobile ad dollars.

And yet, Facebook and others have done something that will help everyone: they have gotten marketers comfortable with mobile as an advertising channel.

“Companies like Facebook have done a phenomenal job getting the message out about mobile… It’s been awfully helpful. The relentless focus they’ve put on it has made a difference,” said Curt Hecht, chief global revenue officer at Weather Co., publisher of weather.com.

New York Times Chief Revenue Officer Meredith Kopit Levien, had a similar view. “Facebook and Twitter – Facebook especially – deserve an enormous amount of credit for moving the market to mobile,” Ms. Levien said.

Facebook and Twitter have inadvertently helped publishers through their efforts in mobile video. The platforms offer auto-play in-feed video ads across their services and ad networks, which have been well-received by marketers. That’s given publishers the opportunity to do the same.

News and gossip site Daily Mail says it plans in September to launch a new mobile-ad format to allow marketers to place auto-play video ads across its properties, for example.

“We’re jumping on the video bandwagon. It’s one area where demand exceeds supply,” said Jon Steinberg, Daily Mail’s North America chief executive.

As a result, some industry observers predict the balance of mobile ad spending is about to shift. According to eMarketer forecasts, for example, Google’s share of U.S. mobile ad spending will drop from 37.9% in 2014 to 32.4% by 2017. Facebook’s share, meanwhile, will dip from 18.5% to 15.1% over the same period, eMarketer said.

Overall mobile ad spending is expected to grow drastically by 2017 — so both Google and Facebook are expected to see their revenues grow — but the pair will be less dominant, said eMarketer analyst Cathy Boyle.

“There’s so much new money coming in that Facebook and Google will continue to rake in a lot of money, but we see other groups steadily gaining share,” Ms. Boyle said.

Some ad buyers say they would welcome that shift, too. The more advertising inventory and data the two companies control across the ecosystem, the more powerful they become, the thinking goes.

Rob Norman, chief digital officer at WPP’s ad buying division, GroupM, said the current situation could result in an “oligopoly” if it carries on.

“My general thesis is that add Google, Twitter and Facebook, and you get a tripartite dominance of inventory, data and transactions,” he said. “Three companies worth half a trillion dollars now overwhelmingly dominate the space. The implications are interesting and it seems to me that there is a widening moat between this group and the [rest of the] market.”