Natalie Jones of Manahawkin. (Photo: STOCKTON UNIVERSITY PHOTO)

POMONA (Galloway Township) Stockton University alumna Natalie Jones of Manahawkin, is returning to the Stockton stage, this time as the guest director bringing to life a childhood classic. A Year with Frog and Toad will run in the Performing Arts Center on Stockton University’s main campus from Thursday, April 9 through Sunday, April 12.

The program runs at 7:30 p.m., Thursday, Friday and Saturday; 2 p.m., Saturday and Sunday; and a special school matinee at 10:30 a.m. on Friday. Tickets are $10 for general admission and $8 for students and seniors with ID; ticket orders can be made online at www.stockton.edu/pac or by calling the Box Office at (609)-652-9000.The Stockton Box Office is open Monday through Friday from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. and 90 minutes before each performance.

Of this experience, Jones says, “My four years at Stockton were some of the most enjoyable and fulfilling of my life; I'm so proud to call myself an alumna. To be invited back as a guest director is an honor, and getting to produce a show with a story as sweet, genuine and beneficial to its audiences as this one is truly a joy. I hope attendees will enjoy their entrance into the endearing world of Frog and Toad as much as the cast, production team and I have!”

A Year with Frog and Toad is a musical adaptation of the popular children’s books by Arnold Lobel. With music by Robert Reale and book and lyrics by Willie Reale, the musical follows the woodland adventures of two amphibious friends, a worrywart toad and a perky frog, with their assorted colorful hopping, crawling and flying companions, over the course of a year.

The production features a five-person cast which includes John Wisienski of Jackson, NJ as Frog; Michael Farr of Marlton, NJ as Toad; Emma Reynolds of Burlington Township, NJ as Woman #1; Nicole Clark of Pine Beach, NJ as Woman #2; Christian Jimenez of Vineland, NJ as Man; and Cassandra Herzig of South Brunswick, NJ will serve as the stage manager.

“Stage managing A Year with Frog and Toad is really unlike any other project that I have done before because there are so many different elements to the show,” explained Herzig. “As a larger scale show with a small cast, it is really amazing to be directly involved in each of those elements. Working with such a talented creative team and cast is special because it has really put emphasis on the fact that theater is a collaborative art. Each person involved with this show amazes me in what they can do, and as a stage manager, it has been my job to keep these different parts of the show going.”

An important aspect of A Year with Frog and Toad is the educational outreach that is being done by both the creative team and the cast members. All of the educational outreach for this production is being coordinated by Angie Confredo of Toms River, NJ.

“As outreach coordinator, I am responsible for bringing the passion of our craft into local elementary schools to give young students the opportunity to experience theater in a friendly, hands-on way. I have been corresponding with each school to bring our cast members to the students to participate in workshops, as well as experience some performance aspects of the show through audience participation,” explained Confredo. “Through our program, we are able to take the Frog and Toad characters that the students know and love from the books, and bring them to life before their eyes. We also provide supplemental materials correlating to the various themes in the show, including friendship, problem solving, animals and life sciences.”

For our patrons with special needs, the Stockton Performing Arts Center offers wheelchair accessible seating, large type programs, and listening assistive devices. Please identify any needs you may have when making a reservation.

The Stockton Performing Arts Center, the Jersey Shore’s Center for the Arts, is located on the campus of Stockton University, on Vera King Farris Drive, just off Jimmie Leeds Road, in Galloway Township. Just 12 miles west of Atlantic City, the center is easily accessible from the Garden State Parkway and the Atlantic City Expressway.

This program has been funded in part by the NJ State Council on the Arts/Department of State, a partner agency of the National Endowment for the Arts, through the Local Arts Grant administered by the Atlantic County Office of Cultural and Heritage Affairs.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1yjblzS