“He’s been buried!”

The Missoula Valley recorded near-record snowfall in February, burying the city, building up substantial snowpack in the nearby mountains and sending skiers and snowboarders out to take advantage of all the powder. On Feb. 28, however, excitement about the wintery weather turned suddenly to tragedy when a snowboarder on Mt. Jumbo set off an avalanche headed straight for the Lower Rattlesnake.

click to enlarge Cathrine L. Walters

Friends, neighbors and members of the Sigma Nu fraternity remove snow and uncover the personal belongings of avalanche victims Fred Allendorf and Michel Colville three days after a Feb. 28 slide demolished their home. Colville later died from her injuries.

As the wall of snow shot down the mountain, it buried two children and two adults, and destroyed four houses, an apartment building and several vehicles before coming to a stop. One of the children dug herself out quickly, but the three other people were declared missing.

“I heard a woman screaming, ‘My son, my son! He’s been buried! He was in the backyard! He’s gone!’” said David Berkoff, whose car was caught in the slide.

Emergency personnel and neighbors, armed with shovels and probes, responded almost immediately. After about an hour, the second child was found alive but unresponsive. Later in the afternoon, the other missing residents—Fred Allendorf and Michel Colville—were found alive but seriously hurt.

“Within five minutes, there were 50 people on the scene,” said Berkoff, who also helped in the search. “I can’t believe how many people were on site so quickly.”

Both children and Allendorf survived. Colville died from her injuries on March 3.

News of the avalanche quickly spread beyond western Montana. The buried children, Phoenix and Coral Scoles-Coburn, appeared on NBC’s “Today” show with their parents, describing their harrowing experience and acknowledging the debt owed to the neighbors and first responders who came to their aid. Various other media outlets, from CBS News to the BBC, also covered the story of how Missoulians banded together, providing immediate aid and long-term relief to those who were affected. As for the snowboarder who triggered the slide, no charges were ever filed.

Love wins

By 11 a.m. on Nov. 20, Kileen Marshall had already married eight same-sex couples on the Missoula County Courthouse steps.

“I now pronounce you bride and bride,” Marshall told two women, as a white sedan drove by honking its horn in support. “You may kiss your wife.”

This marriage and the others conducted on the courthouse steps came on the heels of a lawsuit filed by four same-sex couples and the ACLU in May that argued Montana’s 10-year-old ban on gay marriage unlawfully denied same-sex couples rights granted to their married heterosexual peers.

In a historic ruling, U.S. District Judge Brian Morris agreed with the plaintiffs in Rolando v Fox. “The time has come for Montana to follow all the other states within the Ninth Circuit and recognize that laws that ban same-sex marriage violate the constitutional right of same-sex couples to equal protection of the laws,” he said in the decision.

Angie Rolando, who along with her partner, Tonya, served as lead plaintiffs in the ACLU lawsuit, blogged about the significance of Morris’ decision.

“Today, I get to show my child and my extended family that all families have value,” Rolando wrote, “that living an authentic life is a quality we all should hold dear and that equal rights are not special rights.

“Love won today.”

While Rolando’s thoughts mirrored those of many, not everyone was pleased. Hours after Morris struck the ban, Montana Attorney General Tim Fox appealed the decision. Opening briefs in that case are due to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals on Feb. 27.

As of press time, 94 same-sex couples from 18 Montana counties had been married.

Water fight

The city of Missoula’s battle to control its local water supply took more twists and dips in 2014 than the world’s longest Slip ’N Slide.

In April, the city filed its lawsuit against the Carlyle Group, one of the world’s biggest investment firms with more than $200 billion in assets. The suit seeks to forcibly acquire the local water system from the global equity firm through the city’s power of eminent domain.

The dispute started in 2011, when Carlyle Group bought Park Water, which owns Missoula’s water company, Mountain Water, and two other California utilities. In court filings, Missoula argues that before closing on its purchase, Carlyle promised the city first dibs to buy the utility when it again went on the auction block. In exchange, Missoula supported Mountain Water’s sale to the Carlyle Group before state regulators.

Rather than selling to the city, however, the city argues Carlyle pulled a “classic bait and switch” and reneged on its promise. Carlyle disagrees, saying it has honored its agreement to consider in good faith any offers from the city.

Further complicating the issue, Carlyle announced in September that it intends to sell the Missoula water system and the two California utilities to Algonquin Power and Utilities. Algonquin is a Canadian firm with a $3.6 billion portfolio that holds interest in hydroelectric, wind and thermal energy facilities across North America. The pending $327 million deal between Carlyle and Algonquin would constitute a significant markup from the $102 million Carlyle paid for the three utilities in 2011.

As of press time, Missoula’s legal bills for the dispute hovered at roughly $1 million, more than twice the total costs anticipated at the onset of the city’s legal filing. Missoula Fourth Judicial District Court Judge Karen Townsend has set a March trial date for the dispute. Carlyle is asking to postpone that date.

Can’t do it alone

Kalispell physician’s assistant Susan Cahill told the Independent in April that among the most horrifying aspects of having her All Families Healthcare clinic destroyed was the perpetrator’s apparent attention to detail. He used what appeared to be a claw hammer to gouge faces out of family photos, she said.

While Cahill had cured sore throats and stomachaches, performed Pap smears and delivered babies for nearly four decades in Kalispell, she and other pro-choice advocates believe it was her work providing abortions that made her office a target.

Prosecutors say the perpetrator is Zachary Klundt. Zachary is the son of Twyla Klundt, who for years served on the board of Kalispell’s local crisis pregnancy center, Hope Pregnancy Ministries, an anti-abortion organization. In February, Cahill had been evicted from her previous office building after it was purchased by Hope Pregnancy Ministries Executive Director Michelle Reimer. Those connections fueled suspicion that Cahill’s new clinic was destroyed as part of a concerted effort to limit abortion access in the Flathead Valley.

Klundt pleaded not guilty in Flathead District Court to three felony charges related to the destruction of All Families Healthcare—burglary, theft and criminal mischief. He’s slated for a spring trial.

With Cahill’s practice closed, women from Browning seeking an abortion are now left to travel some 200 miles to Blue Mountain Clinic in Missoula. Cahill recently told the Independent she’ll be making an announcement in the new year regarding whether she’ll open another medical practice, but declined to elaborate.

“I’m planning my next move,” Cahill said. “There’s a few things in the works.”

Bad Kaarma

On April 27, a teenager was shot and killed in a Grant Creek garage. Ever since, details about the shooter, the deceased and the circumstances that brought the two together have been slowly released, stoking controversy and raising questions along the way.

The deceased was Diren Dede, an unarmed 17-year-old German exchange student allegedly trying to take advantage of an open garage door to look for beer. The shooter was Markus Kaarma, a young husband and father who had been the victim of two previous burglaries in his garage. The next day, police arrested Kaarma and charged him with deliberate homicide.

click to enlarge Cathrine L. Walters

In early May, students and community members held a vigil at Big Sky High School for Diren Dede, the 17-year-old German exchange student killed in a Grant Creek garage.

Seven months later, on Dec. 1, Kaarma’s trial began in front of a packed courtroom. The prosecution sought to show that Kaarma, with the help of his common-law wife, had deliberately lured Dede into the garage and “executed” him. The defense argued the killing was an act of self-defense, the justified action of a man who’d been victimized by burglars and left by police to fend for himself.

After more than two weeks of court proceedings and nearly 10 hours of deliberation, a jury of eight women and four men returned a verdict of guilty. The courtroom broke out in cheers, while relatives of both Kaarma and Dede broke down crying. Though the decision provided some measure of closure, it also helped foment ongoing debate about the state’s castle doctrine law. Kaarma’s sentencing is set for Feb. 11, 2015.

Caught copying

The year started out with a bang for Max Baucus. Hardly a week had passed in 2014 before President Barack Obama nominated the then-retiring senator as the next U.S. ambassador to China, prompting Baucus to leave office months ahead of schedule and requiring Gov. Steve Bullock to name a replacement. The man Bullock chose was Lt. Gov. John Walsh, the Iraq veteran and former adjutant general already running for Baucus’ vacated seat. Walsh transitioned into the Senate in February and leveraged a few short months of legislative work into a Democratic primary victory in June.

Walsh’s subsequent race against Republican Rep. Steve Daines didn’t last long. After receiving a tip from the National Republican Senatorial Committee, The New York Times published an exposé in July claiming Walsh had plagiarized substantial portions of a research paper while obtaining his master’s degree from the U.S. Army War College in 2007. Walsh admitted as much, and bowed out of the race in August. That left the Montana Democratic Party to hold a historic nominating convention in Helena to select a replacement for the fall ballot. State Rep. Amanda Curtis, a 34-year-old schoolteacher from Butte, emerged from that event as the party’s unlikely new candidate.

As Walsh served out the remainder of his term, Curtis attempted to rally a campaign capable of defeating Daines. But pundits and pollsters claimed it was too late and their forecasts came true. Daines won by a wide margin and Republicans reclaimed a Senate seat they hadn’t held in more than a century.

Midterm madness

From crowded primaries to last-minute local write-in campaigns, 2014 brought with it a flurry of intense midterm election activity in Montana.

Near the top of the ticket, former Republican state Sen. Ryan Zinke fended off repeated attacks in his race for the U.S. House, with critics on both sides of the aisle proclaiming him a flip-flopper on issues like abortion and gun control. Democratic candidate John Lewis likewise found himself under fire as a former staffer of Sen. Baucus, and lost to Zinke by nearly 25 points at the polls.

The effects of redistricting became a dominant factor in several legislative campaigns in the Missoula area, making for close races for a number of incumbents. Democratic Rep. Kim Dudik snatched a narrow victory from Independent Gary Marbut in the duo’s second electoral bout. Sen. Diane Sands defeated Republican challenger Dick Haines only after a recount. Kirsten Pabst sailed through the general election for Missoula County attorney unopposed, having bested Josh Van de Wetering in the primary. Missoula voters also chose Democrat Cola Rowley over Republican Vicky Gordon as new county commissioner, and overwhelmingly supported a $42 million parks and trails bond that included $38 million for implementation of the Fort Missoula Regional Park Master Plan. Meanwhile, a statewide ballot initiative seeking to end same-day voter registration went down in flames.

The campaign for Missoula County sheriff proved to be the most contentious locally. In spite of a resounding victory in a Democratic primary punctuated by mud-slinging, Detective Sgt. T.J. McDermott found himself once more deflecting personal and professional allegations when Undersheriff Josh Clark re-entered the race as a write-in candidate. Clark’s efforts failed and McDermott won, again.

Prescription for change

In a year when the Affordable Care Act dominated national health care news, a proposed sale stole local headlines. The nonprofit Community Medical Center announced March 28 that it will be purchased by Billings Clinic and the for-profit Regional Care Hospital Partners of Brentwood, Tenn. The Independent reported more than two weeks earlier that Community’s board of directors had been considering either a deal with Billing Clinic or one with St. Patrick Hospital, Missoula’s other, larger hospital.

While opponents and supporters of the sale have been at odds since the announcement, both sides agree on one thing: the transaction stands to significantly shape the area’s future physical and economic health. Community employs more than 1,100 staffers and has an annual payroll of more than $38 million. The hospital admits nearly 6,000 patients annually.

“I think the for-profit motive is going to result in the owners looking at the services a little bit differently,” retired Community Medical Center physician Philip Barney told the Independent in September. “They’re going to be looking at the services more from the standpoint of whether they can make a profit or not, more the bottom line.”

The pending $74 million sale is currently being vetted by Montana Attorney General Tim Fox, who must approve the transaction before it goes forward.

While locals questioned the deal, the Community board argued that it’s necessary amid a changing health care industry. Declining federal reimbursements and hospital admissions are making it increasingly difficult to operate independently, according to board president Scott Stearns.

“We don’t have a pot of money that we can go to,” Stearns said last month. “We can’t just hold a bake sale here in Missoula and have that be enough for people to be happy with the health care services that we have.”

On Dec. 17, the board released its long-anticipated decision on where it intends to place proceeds from the transaction. By law, revenue generated from a nonprofit sale must benefit charity. The board proposes placing roughly $62.5 million into the newly created Community Hospital Legacy Foundation, which will fund organizations and projects committed to improving western Montana health care. Another $10 million will be allocated to the University of Montana Foundation to create a “Community Hospital Legacy Fund” used to expand initiatives within the College of Health Professions and Biomedical Sciences.

Days before the board’s latest announcement, hospital attorneys wrote an email to Fox stating that if the attorney general does not issue its decision by the end of the year, Community “reserves the right to reconsider and re-submit the terms.” That email is posted on the attorney general’s website along with the state’s response.

“We are soliciting meaningful public input,” Deputy Attorney General Ed Eck wrote. “Given the holidays, we think that a December 31, 2014 deadline is insufficient.”

More News In Review:

The Missoula County Attorney’s Office finally reaches a settlement agreement with the Department of Justice over how it handles sexual assault cases • Northside residents investigate a persistent and mysterious odor • Sens. Jon Tester and John Walsh and Rep. Steve Daines introduce a sweeping and “historic” public lands package • Despite protests, Missoula hosts its first naked bike ride • A district court judge rules in favor of Dunrovin Ranch, but not before admonishing Missoula County over its long legal battle with the small business • Three Montanans represent the U.S. at the Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia • Ravalli County places Treasurer Valerie Stamey on paid administrative leave before eventually suspending her without pay after an audit shows the county’s accounts were $31 million short • After a two-day, 22-mile hike through the Bob Marshall Wilderness and a 1,629-foot descent, cavers confirm Tears of the Turtle as the deepest limestone cave in the country • The University of Montana hires new football coach Bob Stitt to replace Mick Delaney, who retires after three seasons. Meanwhile, Travis DeCuire takes over the basketball program, making him the athletic department’s first-ever African-American head coach • After months of debate, a Missoula City Council ban on sleeping and lying on sidewalks goes into effect • The Poverello Center homeless shelter moves into its new, expanded home on West Broadway