House and Senate Republicans recently released a draft plan to extend funding for the Children's Health Insurance Program. This is a positive development, since funding for the program is set to expire at the end of this fiscal year (Sept. 30). But advocates and policy analysts say the plan may do more harm than good.

Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Fred Upton (R-Mich.), health subcommittee Chairman Joe Pitts (R-Pa.) and Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin G. Hatch (R-Utah) released the draft at the end of February. They said the draft would extend CHIP funding, but they left the length of an extension open for stakeholder feedback.

The Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission (MACPAC), which advises Congress, recommended renewal of CHIP for a transitional period of two years and then reassessment of whether it should be extended further. In any case, all stakeholders agree congressional action is needed quickly, especially because many states haven't made any contingency plans if funding runs out.

House and Senate Democrats have already introduced separate bills that would extend CHIP through 2019. The Republican plan isn't a bill, yet-- it's just a draft policy. But it differs from the Democrats' bills by quite a lot. The Democrats' bill was essentially a straight extension, without much policy involved. The Republican plan includes numerous policy changes, and that makes advocates nervous.

“We're worried about politics,” Edwin Park, an analyst at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, told me recently. “CHIP enjoys bipartisan support. The hope is this won't be a huge sticking point.”

Congressional leaders will most likely be gearing up to fight budget battles at the end of the summer, and “we wouldn't want CHIP folded into that debate,” Park said.

Park said the policies that have him most concerned are the elimination of the maintenance-of-effort (MOE) provision; imposition of mandatory waiting periods before children can enroll; and elimination of the federal match rate for children with family income above 300 percent of the federal poverty level.

The MOE is a provision under the Affordable Care Act that requires states to keep the same eligibility levels for children in Medicaid and CHIP until 2019. If a state violates this requirement, it will lose all federal matching funds for Medicaid until it corrects the violation.

Eliminating the federal match and the MOE essentially cuts funding for CHIP and then makes it easier for, and even encourages, states to roll back their CHIP programs, Park said. Ron Pollack, the executive director of Families USA, said the draft proposes several "ill-advised changes to CHIP that would undermine the program’s success and add unnecessary confusion for families."

Still, having a plan is better than not having one, and Park and Pollack expressed hope that lawmakers can work out their differences and pass an extension before it’s too late.

Stay on top of new developments in health law and regulation with a free trial to the Health Law Resource Center.