LONDON (CNN) – Tuberculosis and other potentially-deadly diseases are making a comeback in Britain. In London alone, some neighborhoods have higher TB rates than poorer parts of the world.

Scurvy, tuberculosis, scarlet fever may conjure up images of a Charles Dickens’ tale. However, diseases of the Victorian Era are re-emerging in modern day Britain.

24 year old Josie Garrett is nearing the end of intensive treatment for TB. She’s studying for a Masters degree, but a year ago, was isolated in hospital.

“I contracted TB from my boyfriend. He caught TB from his friend in south east London, his friend contracted TB from his dad, his dad first was diagnosed TB in the 90s after traveling to India. And it basically re-emerged as a drug resistant form of the disease. Up until this point I wasn’t able to work, wasn’t able to socialize, I wasn’t able to kind of live a normal life,” said Garrett.

TB is one disease often synonymous with poverty, affecting the most vulnerable. However, health officials warn strains of the disease lie undetected in all parts of modern society and could break out in the future.

“The bacteria in Tuberculosis can infect and stay in your body for a long time. And it becomes re-awakened again and manifests itself as a disease where something happens to your immune level,” said Dr Onkar Sarhota, London Assembly.

Tuberculosis was one of the deadliest diseases in the modern era, killing 1 in 4 people at one point. Of course, the situation isn’t as bad today but there are parts of London where TB rates are higher than they are in Rwanda or Iraq and a recent study by Britain’s National Health Service found that other disease common in the 19th century are making a comeback.

“Notably there has been a huge rise in Scarlet fever, 14,000 cases in the last year, the highest since the 1960s. We have seen a rise in the cases of tuberculosis, we’ve seen a rise in cases of whooping cough, we have seen more measles in the last 10 years than in the last ten years before that,” said Dr. Nuria Martinez-Alier, Guys’ and St Thomas’ Hospital London.

In fact, over the last five years in England, cases of scarlet fever have risen 136%, scurvy by 38% and cholera by 300%, though for scurvy and cholera the numbers are very small.

So why the resurgence?

“Reduced vaccine uptake for example with measles, reduced population immunity for example with whooping cough, increased poverty as well as an influx in migration and malnutrition,” said Dr. Martinez-Alier.

Two hundred years later, age old afflictions: malnutrition, poverty and lack of access to health care contributing to the rise of Victorian-Era diseases today.

Copyright 2015, CNN. All rights reserved.