SAN FRANCISCO (AP) - The ongoing deluge of storms in Northern California has swelled lakes and dams, boosting the prospects for outdoor recreation but likely falling short of ending the drought.

Heavy rain hit the region north of San Francisco on Thursday with four inches expected by Friday, the National Weather Service said. In Santa Rosa, the storm caused a partial roof collapse at a Kmart store. No injuries were reported.

Flash-flood warnings were issued for swelling rivers and streams in Marin and Sonoma counties north of San Francisco. In the East Bay, at least one train was delayed for track inspections on the same commuter line where a fallen tree caused a train to derail amid heavy rain earlier this week.

The water level at Loch Lomond Reservoir in Santa Cruz County, which had been closed for the past three years, rose so fast that the lake was reopened for the weekend, the San Francisco Chronicle reported (http://bit.ly/1YBO0BJ).

The lake was about 85 percent full and climbing.

In Marin County, Lagunitas, Bon Tempe, Alpine, Kent, Phoenix, Soulajule and Nicasio lakes are 100 percent full.

Of the big reservoirs, Shasta rose three feet last weekend and is 63 percent full. The water in Lake Oroville has climbed 20 feet in the past week after hitting a near-record low in December.

“We were down in the mud, Oroville Marina general manager John Prieto told abc10 (http://bit.ly/21X7yGa). “We became the face of the drought. So people on the one hand got to hear about Lake Oroville, hear about where it was and why it was so important. Hopefully they’ll come back now that the water’s here and see it in a whole new light.”

Water was released from Sugar Pine Reservoir after the latest storm. A body was recovered Wednesday from a car that plunged into a rain-swollen creek south of the reservoir.

Workers have opened Folsom Dam’s three floodgates for the first time since 2012.

Still, nearly all the state’s major reservoirs hold far less water than average for this time of year, the Department of Water Resources said.

In Southern California, the sun was shining Thursday, but rain was expected by Friday. In addition, a Pacific storm system was headed for Central California. The snow level was expected to drop to around 5,000 feet in the mountains.

In the Sierra, winds on Thursday were gusting up to 80 mph ahead of a winter storm expected to bring more than 2 feet of snow to the highest elevations west of Reno this weekend.

The National Weather Service issued a winter storm watch Friday for the Lake Tahoe area effective Saturday afternoon through Monday morning.

Water experts have said that one wet year won’t be enough to end the drought, given the water deficit from the driest four-year period on record.

Story Continues →