RIVERSIDE COUNTY: Supervisors approve $195,000-a-year contract to market hospital Share Pin It 1 of 2 More Galleries Riverside County will pay an Orange County advertising firm $195,000 a year for up to five years to promote Riverside County's hospital in Moreno Valley. TERRY PIERSON, FILE PHOTO Related article » HEALING THE HOSPITAL Here's a breakdown of what Riverside County has spent to stabilize and improve Riverside County Regional Medical Center's finances. $26 million: Contact with Huron Healthcare to identify cost savings and revenue opportunities. $1.9 million: What Huron stands to earn for providing follow-up services to its original work. More than $681,000: Salary and expenses paid to interim CEO Lowell Johnson, a specialist in helping troubled medical centers. Roughly $345,000: The salary of new hospital CEO Zareh Sarrafian. $195,000: The annual payment to Johnson Gray Advertising for website and marketing services. The contract could pay the firm $975,000 if renewed annually over the next four years.

An Orange County advertising firm stands to earn almost $1 million from Riverside County to market the county-run hospital to patients who now have more treatment options through Obamacare.

The Board of Supervisors on Tuesday approved a contract with Johnson Gray Advertising to provide website and marketing services for Riverside County Regional Medical Center. The contract worth $195,000 can be renewed annually for up to four years, making the deal potentially worth $975,000.

“This is a very important part of our plan moving forward, to realign the Riverside County Regional Medical Center to make it more competitive,” said Supervisor Marion Ashley. The contract was approved 3-0 with Supervisor John Benoit absent and a vacancy on the board due to Jeff Stone’s election to the state Senate.

The contract calls for Johnson Gray to revamp the website and conduct a marketing and re-branding campaign for the 362-bed hospital in Moreno Valley and the county’s network of outpatient clinics. The hospital network also includes 77 beds at a psychiatric facility in Riverside.

The campaign could involve re-naming the hospital and clinic system “to better reflect their roles as a quality patient centered institution that is supported by prestigious and long standing academic affiliations,” the contract read.

UC Riverside, Loma Linda University and Western University of Health Sciences in Pomona send medical students to train at the hospital.

Johnson Gray’s bid was not the lowest; other bids ranged from just under $68,000 to $1.45 million, according to a county staff report. Johnson Gray won because “the lowest bids did not include website design and/or the bidder had insufficient healthcare/hospital marketing experience,” the report read.

Johnson Gray’s website lists Loma Linda University Medical Center, Irvine-based St. Joseph Health System and UCLA Medical Center among the company’s clients. Representatives of Johnson Gray did not return a phone call seeking comment.

Riverside County hospital CEO Zareh Sarrafian defended the contact in remarks to supervisors. Traditionally, the county Hospital has been a safety net for those who can’t afford care elsewhere.

The Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, provides health insurance to those who previously lacked it. As a result, county officials have said the hospital will have to compete for patients.

With an annual operating budget of roughly $442 million, the hospital is recovering from a rocky financial period. At one point last year, its budget shortfall exceeded $50 million.

To lure patients, the hospital will have to promote itself, Sarrafian said.

“We don’t have that expertise in-house,” he told supervisors. “And we need to do this sooner (rather) than later and try to catch up with the rest of the hospital community, who have been doing this for a very long time in establishing their brand in the community.”

After the meeting, Sarrafian said the hospital is sensitive about spending taxpayer money. But the hospital’s marketing efforts are a fraction of what other, for-profit medical centers spend, he said.

“The growth of our institution depends heavily on our ability to have our region be aware of the quality of care and scope of services” the county hospital provides, Sarrafian added.