Imagine if President Obama and his policies never left office.

Imagine if the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) was free to target conservatives at will for their political beliefs. Imagine if the IRS could single out families who chose to adopt children in need for intrusive and abusive audits.

Imagine if the Veterans Administration (VA) could pick and chose which of our nation’s war heroes receive desperately needed medical care and which ones died, neglected by the nation they fought to protect.

Imagine if the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) could mandate that nuns and Christian business owners alike provide abortion pills in direct violation of their firmly held religious beliefs – the very foundational principles on which they base their lives and livelihoods.

Imagine if the IRS could create new federal subsidies out of thin air for the largest new federal program in decades, ObamaCare, ignoring duly enacted federal law to the contrary.

Imagine if the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) could decide not to deport illegal aliens and instead grant them permanent legal status in America, in clear contravention to U.S. law.

Imagine if the Department of Justice (DOJ) could manufacture or “piece together” charges against patriotic Americans, using the federal law enforcement apparatus as a political weapon.

This is the reality we face in America today.

Even when President Obama does leave office, each of these policies remain. They’ve been implemented and are guarded by the partisan progressives that make up the federal bureaucracy.

The bureaucracy controls nearly ever aspect of government. Left unchecked, it will continue to erode and destroy the freedoms we hold dear.

In short, we face a perpetual Obama presidency.

Our constitutional Republic is in shambles, but there is hope.

At the ACLJ, we’ve been at the forefront of many of these legal challenges. But court decisions alone will not reclaim our Republic. It will take “We the people.”

Number 1 New York Times Bestselling Author and acclaimed Supreme Court attorney Jay Sekulow has written a brand new book (due out May 19th) called “UNDEMOCRATIC: How Unelected, Unaccountable Bureaucrats are Sealing Your Liberty and Freedom.”

Here’s how he explains to problem:

While Americans have been robustly engaged in political debates—and participating in vast numbers in elections—a new branch of government has been growing in the shadows. A branch that is elected by no one, ignored by the media, protected by the courts and by a complex web of laws and regulations: with job security so great that some federal employees are more likely to die on the job than they are to be fired. . . . Imagine if Congress wrote and enacted far more laws than it does now, but you could never vote the lawmakers out of office. You don’t have to imagine it. It’s happening. Imagine if congressmen were systematically corrupt, abused their power, and demonstrated rank incompetence, but by law they never had to face the voters. That’s our bureaucracy. Imagine if a congressman, once in office, was allowed to hold power until death or retirement, whichever came first. That’s our bureaucracy. Imagine if elections mattered less and less because there existed a permanent, partisan political class that continually pushed the nation to the Left regardless of who occupied the White House or who held the House and Senate. That’s our bureaucracy. We are at a constitutional tipping point. If we wait much longer to introduce democratic accountability to the encroaching, vast federal bureaucracy we’ll lose the America we know, and our electoral politics will become a sideshow, a meaningless spectacle that entertains the masses while the anonymous but powerful bureaucrats do the real work—governing the United States of America.

The threat is ominous, but it can be overcome. As Jay Sekulow explains in the book, “You need to learn how America is actually governed, how your freedom is threatened, and how your tax dollars are wasted or misused by a bureaucracy that is increasingly corrupt and partisan. You are paying for the permanent political class that is disrupting and endangering our constitutional republic.”

You can learn more and get “Undemocratic” at Amazon, Barnes and Noble, iBooks, or wherever books are sold.

We can resist the abuse, reform the broken system, and restore our Republic. We can ensure that our kids and our grandkids do not have to endure a permanent Obama presidency. We can, and we must.

Get the new book from #1 New York Times bestselling author Jay Sekulow: UNDEMOCRATIC

This article is crossposted on Red State.