Please enable Javascript to watch this video

GREENSBORO, N.C. -- Heather Fullagar says it started with a cough five years ago. It was a symptom that revealed a serious illness for her husband, Lou. It’s a genetic disease called Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency. His doctors in Greensboro determined he needed a lung transplant.

Fullagar told FOX8, “Our physician has said it’s an emergency. It’s very urgent.”

The Fullagars bought an insurance policy through the Health Insurance Marketplace set up by the Affordable Care Act. They researched their options carefully to make sure that all of the specialists and hospitals were covered in-network.

When it came time for the insurance company to approve the lung transplant, the approval came with a caveat. The insurance company informed Lou Fullagar that he was not approved for a transplant at Duke, UNC or any other hospital in North Carolina. Instead, the insurance company would only cover the transplant if it was done at one of two hospitals. Neither of them is in the state. This was a problem because it would require them to move hundreds of miles away. Transplant recipients must live within a certain distance from the hospital.

It was all because of something called a narrow network of coverage. The Fullagars say they had no clue that the policy they purchased through the Marketplace had this kind of limit on it. But it’s not uncommon.

An analysis published by the University of Pennsylvania found “39 percent of networks in plans offered in the marketplace to be narrow.” It basically means fewer doctors and hospitals are covered in your insurance network.

Jade Osborne with the Health Insurance Store says it’s something we should expect to see more of. Osborne told FOX8, “We are going to see an evolution in care. Today’s policies are being more geared toward medical efficacy than paying a fee for services.”

But for families like the Fullagars, it was a life or death situation. That’s why they fought the insurance company’s decision and won. Fullagar told us, “They’ve made an exception to go ahead and cover my husband.”

An exception that means this husband and father can get the life-saving treatment he needs.