Despite Labour Day celebrating the introduction of an eight hour working day, 50 per cent of Aussies reported they are still working more hours

The website also revealed a list of occupations that were made redundant thanks to new technologies, including lamp lighters, and dunny men

Research by Ancestry.com.au found that one in six Australians are working in a job which didn't exist 20 years ago

As the average Aussie enjoys their Labour Day long weekend, they have also been invited to celebrate a range of careers that thankfully no longer require employees.

In tribute to the introduction of an eight hour working day more than 60 years ago, Ancestry.com.au has also revealed that one in six Australians are working in a job which didn't exist 20 years ago.

The website's senior content director, Ben Mercer, told Daily Mail Australia that technology has largely led to the change in career opportunities.

Ancestry.com.au has released a list of Australian occupations that no longer exist to celebrate the Labour Day long weekend. Pictured: Ice delivery men were replaced by domestic fridges in Australia in the 1950s

Lamp lighters (left) would manually light, fuel and extinguish street lamps until the introduction of electrical streetlights in Sydney in 1904. Knocker uppers (right) were hired to wake people up in the morning using sticks or pebbles until alarm clocks became affordable in the early 20th century

'Interestingly in the past you had a lot of individuals employed in certain trades that don't exist now,' Mr Mercer said.

'Jobs in communications such as a social media manager, or in technology, that didn't exist 10 or 20 years ago...we are now seeing a digital revolution.'

The 'revolution' can certainly be admired when remembering the role of the iconic Australian Bullocky who was employed to take food and station supplies to isolated country areas in the 19th century, or even the lamp lighter whose nocturnal life was ruled by his role to manually light and fuel street lamps before extinguishing them at sunrise.

But it was some of the other formerly necessary jobs - such as the trade of the ice delivery man, who were finally replaced by refrigerators in the 1950s in Australia, or the dunny man, who would ensure your outhouse was empty by morning - that are certainly not missed by Australian workers today.

The iconic Australian Bullocky took food and station supplies to isolated country areas in the 19th century

During the industrial revolution, rat catchers were paid a small fee for each dead rat they handed in to help stem the threat of infections. They used traps or specially bred terrier dogs but were made redundant after the invention of rat poison in the early 1900's

Drovers were employed to drive livestock from horseback over long distances. It became less and less common as trains were used to move livestock in the 1860’s, almost completely disappearing after trucks began moving livestock in 1960s

Be they inviting career paths or not, research by Ancestory.com.au found that more than 20 per cent of the 1000 Australians that were surveyed admitted that they or their siblings have chosen to work in the same occupation as their parents or grandparent at some stage in their life.

For that reason, the website has provided free access to over 117 million records until the end of the long weekend for those who are interested in the occupations of the people in their family tree.

'So many people come to us to talk about what their grandmother or grandfather did for a job,' Mr Mercer said.

'The research asked 1000 ordinary Australians how they feel about their jobs. A significant percentage said they still work in the same job (as their ancestors) but we found a lot of people (67 per cent) wouldn't encourage the same career path as their children.'

Switchboard operators used to connect calls until as recently as the 1960s by inserting a pair of phone plugs into the appropriate cell. Today this is done digitally

Town husbands were people employed by the parish to collect money from the fathers of illegitimate children for their upkeep

'I think it is a real desire in parents to see their kids do what they want to do.'

Despite the holiday still being widely celebrated with an extra day off of work each year, Mr Mercer revealed that 50 per cent of Aussies reported they are still working more than eight hours a day.

'Labour Day originally started as a protest to the 10-12 hour day, 6 days a week in the 1850s, 60, 70s. In 1948 it was reduced to 5 days a week,' he said.

'Now we are seeing a total turn around again - everyone is working 10-12 hours.'

More often a role taken on by children, chimney sweeps (left) clearer chimneys to prevent pollution and household fires. Phrenologists travelled the country focused on the measurements of the human skull (right) to indicate customer's personalities and temperament