Baseball: Burlington Central opens with win

hello

Burlington Central senior pitcher Anthony Larson isn't sure where he fits into the pitching plans of coach Kyle Nelson.

One thing is for sure -- Nelson won't be afraid to use the hard throwing left-hander in relief.

Relieving starting and winning pitcher Craig Schuring in the fifth inning, Larson struck out 4 while blanking Crystal Lake Central on 2 singles during his 2-inning stint.

Kyle Creadon pitched a scoreless seventh to earn the save as the Rockets started the 2016 campaign on a positive note with a 6-3 win over Crystal Lake Central in nonconference action in Crystal Lake Saturday morning.

"We have 12 arms and our starters will be on a pitch count to start the season," said Nelson. "I am not sure where Anthony will fit in our pitching plans but he will pitch a lot. He came in the game and we had only a one-run lead and pitched great.''

Larson doesn't care where he fits into the Rockets' pitching plans.

"Yes, I would like to be in the starting rotation but I just want to help the team win," said Larson. "Whatever my role is I will accept it. It was good to get on the mound and throw. I felt strong and I had good velocity on my fastball."

The Rockets jumped on Crystal Lake Central starter Luke Tevyaw for 4 runs in the first inning. The key hits for the visitors were a 2-RBI double from Ryan Knowlton and a run-scoring double by David Lauber.

The Tigers (1-1) responded with 2 in the bottom of the inning on RBI singles from Tevyaw and Adam Wittenberg.

Crystal Lake Central sliced the Rocket lead to 4-3 with a run in the third on a run-scoring single by Wittenberg.

Burlington Central, benefiting from 3 Tiger walks. scored 2 insurance runs in the sixth on a 2-RBI single by Jonathan Murphy.

Tevyaw, the loser for the Tigers, allowed 4 unearned runs on 4 hits in 5 innings of work. He struck out 7 with 2 walks. Crystal Lake Central was hindered by 4 errors.

"We have to catch the ball better and not allow so many walks," said Crystal Lake Central coach Tom Mueller. "Luke allowed 4 unearned runs and deserved better. Burlington Central is so good fundamentally. They are so disciplined and it is like watching a clinic."