By PETER WHORISKEY and DAN KEATING, The Washington Post

The two drugs have been declared equivalently miraculous. Tested side by side in six major trials, both prevent blindness in a common old-age affliction. Biologically, they are cousins. They're even made by the same company.

But one holds a clear price advantage.

Avastin costs about $50 per injection.

Lucentis costs about $2,000 per injection.

Doctors choose the more expensive drug more than half a million times every year, a choice that costs the Medicare program an extra $1 billion or more annually.

Spending that much may make little sense for a country burdened by ever-rising health bills, but as is often the case in American health care, there is a certain economic logic: Doctors and drug makers profit when more costly treatments are adopted.

Genentech makes both products, but reaps far more profit when it sells the expensive drug. While Lucentis is about 40 times more expensive to buy than Avastin, the cost of producing the two drugs is similar, according to scientists familiar with the drugs and the industry.

Doctors, meanwhile, may benefit when they choose the more expensive drug because under Medicare repayment rules for drugs given by physicians, they are reimbursed for the average price of the drug plus 6 percent. That means a drug with a higher price may be easier to sell to doctors than a cheaper one.

In addition, Genentech offers rebates to doctors who use large volumes of the more expensive drug.

"Genentech continues to maintain that Lucentis is the most appropriate medicine," the company said in a statement, adding that it costs "significantly" more to make and is tailored for use in the eye.

Many ophthalmologists, however, are skeptical that it provides any added value over the alternative.

"Lucentis is Avastin -- it's the same damn molecule with a few cosmetic changes," said J. Gregory Rosenthal, a Toledo, Ohio ophthalmologist who co-founded a group called Physicians for Clinical Responsibility to protest its use. "Yet Americans are paying a billion dollars every year for no good reason -- unless you count making Genentech rich."

MEDICARE HELPLESS

The story of Genentech's two drugs, Lucentis and Avastin, began with a scientific marvel -- a breakthrough that, thanks to the vast budgets of U.S. entitlement programs, has produced enormous returns.

Those profits yield benefits. By paying for drugs without regard to cost, Medicare has helped stimulate investment in research.

But the flow of cash also pushes up health care costs. Medicare has been powerless to do anything but pay up, critics say, because despite pleas from the Food and Drug Administration and doctors, Genentech has maintained barriers that make it harder to use the cheaper drug.

Avastin was not originally intended for use in the eye, and the company has refused encouragement from the FDA to seek official approval for using it to treat eye ailments, according to internal FDA documents. This forces doctors to use it "off-label," or in ways not specified on the medicine's label.

The company also packages the drug, approved for cancer in 2004, in doses far too big for use in the eye. So the drugs must be repackaged, raising the risk of contamination.

In a statement, the company explained that it has not sought FDA approval of Avastin for use in the eye because it has already developed Lucentis for wet age-related macular degeneration, or wet AMD.

"Genentech continues to maintain that Lucentis is the most appropriate medicine for wet AMD as supported by clinical and other scientific data," the statement said. "The two medicines were designed for different purposes and, we believe, may have different systemic and ocular safety profiles when used in the eye."

Most doctors prefer to use the cheaper drug. Despite the company's position, U.S. doctors have been using Avastin in about 56 percent of such cases, according to Medicare data analyzed by The Washington Post. In the most recent survey by the American Society of Retinal Specialists, about 61 percent of doctors preferred using Avastin for macular degeneration.

Because so many doctors continue to use Lucentis, Genentech has rung up more than $1 billion in U.S. sales of the drug for four years running. Roughly 80 percent of U.S. sales are paid for by Medicare and its beneficiaries.

It's often difficult, of course, to know when two drugs are equivalent. When the debate over the two drugs and their pricing erupted more than six years ago, Genentech asserted that its expensive new drug was superior. At the time, no one had tested them in side-by-side comparisons.

Since then, six randomized clinical trials involving more than 3,000 patients have found the drugs to be largely equivalent.

Yet in 2012, the Medicare program and its beneficiaries spent $1.2 billion on Lucentis, according to the Post's analysis.

Medicare officials said they have no choice but to pay the bill when a doctor prefers to use Lucentis.

"We do not have the authority to dictate treatment based on cost," Tami Holzman, a spokeswoman for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, said in a statement. "Under current law, Medicare must cover treatment that is deemed reasonable and medically necessary by a physician or other provider."

MIRACLE DRUG

What's the right price for a miracle? Every year, about 200,000 people in North America are diagnosed with wet AMD, a disease characterized by abnormal blood vessels that leak into the retina.

Sufferers lose clarity in the center of their field of vision, and among older people it has long been the leading cause of blindness.

Then came Avastin and Lucentis. Both are the outgrowth of pioneering work done by Napoleone Ferrara, a Sicily-born molecular biologist.

Ferrara joined Genentech in 1988. First assigned to the company's efforts to develop a hormone called Relaxin, Ferrara devoted his discretionary research to a theory that blood vessel growth could cause cancer and other illnesses.

Over several years, Ferrara and his collaborators identified a protein called VEGF that causes blood vessel growth. They then linked that protein to cancer and macular degeneration. Finally, they developed an "anti-VEGF" drug that would halt harmful blood vessel growth.

The first anti-VEGF drug was Avastin, which won approval from the FDA in 2004 for the treatment of colorectal cancer.

Lucentis followed. It is a stripped-down version of the same molecule. It won FDA approval in 2006.

"People weren't sure that VEGF would prove particularly important, but sometimes in science, you just follow your own ideas," said Ferrara, now a distinguished professor at the University of California at San Diego School of Medicine. "The magnitude of the benefit of these drugs far exceeded our expectations."

A LUCKY HUNCH

After the development of Lucentis in the early 2000s, it seemed to be in a class by itself. But Philip Rosenfeld, a Miami ophthalmologist, made a discovery.

Rosenfeld was lead investigator on some Lucentis trials, and he recognized how effective it could be. After reading research that some Genentech scientists had published, he realized Avastin and Lucentis were derived from the same antibody and thus were functionally equivalent.

"I realized they would perform in the same way," he said.

Under a university-approved research program, he'd also learned that Avastin, injected into a patient's arms, had the same effects as Lucentis. He calculated that a much smaller dose injected into the eye would be just as effective.

In May 2005, Rosenfeld had a patient who was quickly losing her vision. A retired nurse in her 60s, she'd lost the use of one eye already. No available remedy could slow the progression.

Rosenfeld knew Lucentis could help her, but it would be a year or more before FDA approval. With the patient's permission, he injected her eye with a small dose of Avastin.

"We were astounded by the results," he said.

The billion-dollar drug Lucentis was about to be beaten to market, by one of Genentech's own products.

In July 2005, Genentech held what amounted to a coming-out party for its new drug. At the annual meeting of the American Society of Retinal Specialists, with hundreds of ophthalmologists crowded into the room, speakers for Genentech described the marvel of Lucentis.

"Our jaws were on the floor," recalled Daniel Martin, chairman of the Cole Eye Institute at the Cleveland Clinic.

Right after, Rosenfeld presented his Avastin experiment on one patient.

"Phil showed one case report -- no animal studies, no randomized trials," Martin said. "But after this meeting, every ophthalmologist on the planet was injecting it. The therapeutic effect was so powerful."

When Lucentis did go on sale, Genentech told doctors that Avastin was not approved by the FDA for use in the eye -- Lucentis was. They reminded doctors that if the repackaging firms cutting Avastin into smaller doses were careless, infection could be introduced. And despite a lack of conclusive evidence, they said Avastin patients might suffer more adverse events.

Eventually, after ophthalmologists strenuously objected to Genentech's move to limit Avastin sales -- they even threatened lawsuits -- Genentech backed down and continued to provide the drug to repackaging firms.

At the same time, Genentech asked the FDA for permission to change the Avastin label to say it was not for eyes. The FDA said there was no evidence to support such a change.

The FDA believed "there was no safety-related basis adequately justifying that labeling change," according to an internal email, and the label was not changed.

Today, millions of doses of Avastin have been administered successfully. Six randomized clinical trials around the world have found its effectiveness equivalent to that of Lucentis.

THE PACKAGE DEAL

There is one danger to using Avastin, however, one that has attracted a lot of publicity in recent years.

The fact that the drug needs to be repackaged into smaller doses introduces an element of risk because it opens the possibility that the drug could be tainted during the repackaging process. Indeed, in three cases that made the news -- in South Florida, Nashville and Los Angeles -- just such a problem has arisen. Several patients reportedly suffered vision loss as a result.

"I've never used Avastin because of the potential for contamination," said Warren Herron Jr., a Pensacola ophthalmologist after a morning in which he did 11 eye injections. "Is it a rare thing? Yes, it's a rare thing. But I can't stand the idea of ever telling my patients that they can no longer see because I used a tainted drug.

"Besides," he said, "I don't think the extra money being spent for Lucentis is totally wasted because it's going into research and development."

John Thompson, president of the American Society of Retinal Specialists, said most doctors use Avastin, and even more would if the company packaged it in appropriate doses.

"If Genentech decided to get FDA approval and make Avastin available in small quantities for the eye," he said, "the American Society of Retinal Specialists would applaud."