By Katie Newburn, senior political science major

It has been a long, long time since the U.S. has seen such a polarizing political landscape. On opposite sides of the party spectrum, U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump have emerged as unexpected front-runners in their respective parties. But should anyone really be surprised?

Both have collected supporters whose opinions long held a degree of unpopularity. Whether this is because those opinions are considered intolerant or because “socialism” is such a dirty word in America, the far right and the far left have found champions in these two candidates. Bernie has the potential to continue the progressive legacy of Obama’s two terms. He would spend his term fighting our Republican-led Congress to enact the revolutionary reforms on which he has based his campaign. He calls not just for action but for an overhaul of massive systems like education and criminal justice, demolition and reconstruction that would be disruptive and uncomfortable, and time can only tell if it would work. His unwillingness to compromise is appealing to his supporters, but these are not easy undertakings, politically or logistically.

I’m skeptical that he could turn those ideas into policy. If he did, I’m skeptical that we could endure the surely turbulent execution long enough to see results — four years is not a long time for his “political revolution.” Still, it would be refreshing to see a first-term presidency that is not spent dismantling everything the last president did, which brings us to Trump.

Trump is exactly the candidate that the Republican Congress needs in the White House to sign off on the conservative-pleasing policies its drooling to enact. Repealing “Obamacare,” defunding Planned Parenthood, banning Muslims — whatever sounds good.

However, more important than positions on domestic policy (a job for the legislature, not the executive), our head of state needs to be a strong representative of our country’s interests beyond its borders. Neither of these candidates seem well-suited for that job. Sanders’ campaign has largely ignored foreign policy, and Trump’s has already been destructive abroad. Neither abstinence nor inflammation are acceptable attitudes for a commander in chief.

As Trump’s lead in the primaries compounds, and Sanders continues to be a serious challenger against Hillary Clinton, it becomes more and more frustrating to be somewhere in the middle. The loud support for these two extremes makes it seem useless to be moderate on either side.

Whether it comes down to a Sanders-Trump race or not, this election has demonstrated just how polarized our country is, if not dividing us even more. It’s unsustainable, making political what doesn’t need to be and obstructing action.