As a new model of Medicare looms on the horizon, doctors in the United States have a problem on their hands – their own numbers are shrinking, while the number of elderly patients is only going up.

“Physicians are retiring earlier. They are leaving Medicare, not participating in it,” said Dr. John Vitarello, of Cardiovascular Specialists of Frederick. “And the patients are left on the lurch, without a physician to take care of them.”

On Wednesday night, more than 100 physicians in the Frederick area gathered together to hear from the regional head of Medicare, Dr. Barbara Connors, about what the new program will mean for them. The law will go into effect in 2019.

“CMS (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services) has many more rules that we have to abide by in caring for patients, yet they’re looking to pay us less and less,” said Carole Grissom, executive director of Glade Valley Center in Frederick.

Michael Rifkin, a former gastroenterologist in Frederick who was in attendance, even left his practice two years ago because of increased regulations, which he said got in the way of providing good care.

“I don’t think it’s going to get better, I think it’s going to get worse,” he said. “And I think you’re going to see worsening of patient care, unfortunately.”

Dr. Vitarello also said the Affordable Care Act has brought in more patients that otherwise wouldn’t see a doctor. However, he explained that it has had unintended consequences, such as spreading an already low amount of doctors too thin.

“Who’s going to be there to take care of us? What’s the quality of care going to be like when we’re senior citizens?” Rifkin added. “Everybody’s afraid.”

“It’s a perfect storm in the next couple of years when we break the system in 2025,” Dr. Vitarello said. “We’ll be 90,000 doctors short, and 60 new million Medicare patients, baby boomers. It’s a doomsday scenario.”

Dr. Vitarello said that fellow physicians will have until June 20 to submit their comments and feedback to Andew Slavitt, the acting adminstrator of CMS.