Topics: Comedy, Entertainment, jenny slate, sara silverman, Saturday Night Live, snl 40, Entertainment News, News

NBC had a hard enough time packing its star-studded alums into a reasonably sized time slot — finally settling on 3 1/2 hours — for tonight’s “SNL 40″ broadcast. Now, imagine how much longer that program might have been if it included all the comedians Lorne Michaels gave the axe to throughout its 40-year run.

The 70-year-old exec has notoriously given it straight to many featured performers on the show — and tonight, while the “SNL” family romps around the stage celebrating Michaels’ brainchild, others will surely be tuning in from afar and regarding their brief stints on the show as a small hiccup in an otherwise wildly successful career.

Here’s to all the celebs who didn’t need Lorne Michaels, anyway.

(Honorable mentions go to Lisa Kudrow, Stephen Colbert and Steve Carell who weren’t even fortunate to make it through the audition phase of the show.)

Damon Wayans (1985-86)

After rising tensions over his sketches not being selected for the show, Wayans decided to take matters into his own hands. During the sketch “Mr. Monopoly,” in which Wayans was asked to play a hard-nose cop, he went off script and played it as effeminately as possible. Reflecting on this decision, he told The Weekender in a recent interview:

“They didn’t let me do what I wanted to do on ‘SNL,’ which I came to learn was Lorne Michaels’ way of protecting me from looking like I was trying to be the next Eddie Murphy. It was right after Eddie Murphy left the show and they weren’t letting me do things that he would do. So, I went against the script. That was my frustration.”

Needless to say, Michaels was not pleased with the creative license he took and fired the actor after that night’s taping.

Jenny Slate (2009-10)

What with a critically acclaimed indie under her belt, a recurring role on “Parks & Recreation,” and the runaway success of her “Marcel the Shell” character, it’s fair to say that Slate is doing pretty OK for herself — even after her terribly tragic (but kind of metal?) slip-up on “SNL.” During Slate’s big debut alongside Kristen Wiig, Slate dropped an F-bomb on live television and was asked to leave. On Jesse Thorn’s podcast, “Bullseye with Jesse Thorn,” Slate noted that Lorne Michaels had a very diplomatic and gentle way of letting her go from the show. Recapping what went wrong on live television, Slate said:

“I was so used to being a stand-up comedian, and I had written that sketch. I never thought of it as something I could make a mistake at. I knew all the rules and everything. It just it never crossed my mind that I would make a mistake.”

Joan Cusack (1985-1986)

The 11th season cast of “SNL” wasn’t a tremendously lucky bunch. (Indeed, most were not asked to return the following year.) Among them, Joan Cusack, now twice nominated for an Academy Award, was widely known as the Chicagoan alt-girl who just didn’t find “Out of Africa” that funny. During her brief stay, she filled the role of “Selina” the awkward girlfriend to Jon Lovitz’s character, Biff.