Story highlights Journalist Steven Brill has written a new book about our dysfunctional system of health care

Theresa Brown: Many view Obamacare as a government intrusion into individual lives -- but they are mistaken

Theresa Brown, RN, is a clinical nurse and the author of "Critical Care: A New Nurse Faces Death, Life and Everything in Between." The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of the author.

(CNN) Journalist Steven Brill has written a new book about our dysfunctional system of health care and it's getting a lot of attention. In "America's Bitter Pill: Money, Politics, Backroom Deals, and the Fight to Fix Our Broken Healthcare System," he describes the various struggles to implement the Affordable Care Act and dissects the ongoing opposition to the bill.

As a nurse, I've always supported the ACA as a way for more Americans to get needed health care. But many people, including many nurses, view Obamacare as a government intrusion into individual lives. I can see their point of view, but I believe it's mistaken. The ACA does not allow government to interfere in our lives; it compels government to keep us as safe and healthy as possible.

Theresa Brown

For the record, the Affordable Care Act was based on "Romneycare," the market-based health insurance reform that Republican Mitt Romney put in place when he was governor of Massachusetts. The ACA, like Romneycare, prohibits insurance companies from excluding patients due to preexisting conditions, requires all individuals to buy insurance (since otherwise only the sick would sign up for coverage and the system would quickly become insolvent) and offers subsidies to middle-class and low-income families to make higher-quality coverage affordable.

Despite its Republican provenance and utilization of private insurance companies, though, the "government takeover" label stuck to the ACA. And that was intentional. In his book, Brill explains that the phrase "government takeover of health care" came from conservative pollster Frank Luntz and became a rallying cry for the enemies of the Affordable Care Act who said Obamacare would deny Americans free choice over health insurance.

"Free choice" is a tricky phrase here, because the ACA does curtail insurance choices, in that it disallows low-cost policies that don't provide anything close to real coverage of health care costs. But the only Americans who really had free choice over their health care prior to the implementation of Obamacare were those with excellent insurance or unlimited funds of their own.

Read More