By of the

By any measure, retail sales on the Internet are growing.

Web sales topped $300 billion for the first time in 2014, showing double digit growth for the fifth year in a row, according to Internet Retailer's analysis of U.S. Commerce Department data.

Global e-commerce sales made using mobile devices are expected to top $638 billion in the next three years, according to the Global Powers of Retailing report produced by Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Ltd. with STORES Media.

None of this is lost on Brandon Nelson, co-founder and chief investment officer at Timpani Capital Management LLC, Milwaukee. He believes there remain pockets of traditional retail sales that will continue to do well.

"E-commerce is taking over the world, but here are two brick-and-mortar consumer companies that are insulated from it," Nelson said.

Lithia Motors Inc. (LAD, $116.66), Medford, Ore., sells new and used vehicles, provides parts and services, and offers related financing.

Many potential buyers use the Internet to search for vehicles, but would prefer to buy them in person, Nelson said.

Lithia has 129 dealership locations in 14 states, mostly in the western half of the U.S., and one of the best management teams in the industry, he said.

"Management has really got its finger on the pulse of their business; they're quick to identify underperforming areas and fix them," Nelson said. "I give management an A+."

The company has the potential to increase earnings per share at an annual rate of 15% or more over the next several years, he said. That's partly because a gradually improving economy is boosting auto sales.

Drivers logging more miles because of low gas prices and an older fleet of cars on the road are helping parts and service businesses, Nelson said.

Also, Lithia operates in a fragmented industry where the top 10 auto dealers only have a 7% share of the market, he said.

Nelson says management has identified another 2,500 dealership locations it could potentially acquire.

And legendary investor Warren Buffett's first auto dealership acquisition late last year adds credibility to the business and Lithia's strategy, he added.

The biggest risk is the possibility that the economy could contract again, hurting overall auto sales, Nelson said.

But Lithia just needs a benign, not a booming, environment to be successful, he said.

These shares have a 52-week range of $63.05 to $122.01. They could reach as high as $170 in the next 12 to 18 months, Nelson said.

Jack in the Box Inc. (JACK, $90.17), San Diego, Calif., operates and franchises Jack in the Box quick-service restaurants and Qdoba Mexican Grill fast-casual restaurants.

Restaurants provide a consumer experience and convenience that can't be replicated by e-commerce, and the company had 2,249 Jack in the Box (1,838 franchised) and 659 Qdoba (339 franchised) restaurants as of July, Nelson said.

Tim Casey, who became Qdoba's president in 2013, has turned that part of the business around, driving growth in number of stores by about 13% a year, Nelson said.

Casey's tactics — menu innovation, along with use of data analytics and more focus on social media — are being used at Jack in the Box to spur growth there as well, he said.

One of the most underappreciated parts of this story is the annuity-like income the company receives from renting store buildings to franchisees — a business line that provides 30% of its cash flows, Nelson said. Jack in the Box management is also aggressively buying back shares, spending $177 million for repurchases so far this year, he said.

The biggest risk here is competitive, particularly if McDonald's were to stop struggling and its bleeding market share weren't so up for grabs, Nelson said.

Other risks include the possibility that the company's growing same-store sales might slide into the low single digits, or that gas prices would rise, potentially hurting traffic, he added.

These shares have a 52-week range of $55.14 to $99.99. They could reach as high as $140 in the next 12 to 18 months.

ABOUT THIS

The Journal Sentinel focuses on one Wisconsin money manager or analyst in this weekly feature, looking at a trend that helps investment pros make their decisions.