Topics: Editor's Picks, HBO, Lance Barber, Lisa Kudrow, Seth Rogen, The Comeback, TV, Valerie Cherish, Entertainment News

Spoiler alert: This post contains significant plot details for the episode of “The Comeback” airing tonight at 10 p.m. Eastern.

Tonight’s episode of “The Comeback,” “Valerie Is Brought to Her Knees,” is one of the most uncomfortably raw episodes of television I’ve seen in a while — a half-hour of such tension that when I wrote about “The Comeback” earlier this month, in anticipation of its second-season premiere, I called the show HBO’s sharpest critique — airing on HBO, no less. “Valerie Is Brought to Her Knees” brings a lot of unsaid tensions about women in the entertainment business front-and-center, mediated through the experience of fictional television has-been Valerie Cherish (Lisa Kudrow). It’s complex and fascinating, and engages with questions about the male entitlement to female bodies, and the female gaze challenging the male.

And, oh yeah: It’s about a blow job.

In case you haven’t been keeping up with the show: Perpetual wannabe Valerie Cherish has been cast in an HBO show called “Seeing Red.” Good news! Except that “Seeing Red” is an account of Valerie’s time on the sitcom “Room and Bored” — and specifically, her run-ins with its chauvinist, bro-y showrunner Paulie G — created, written and directed by, well, Paulie G. Some parts are fictionalized, barely. Others are told from a completely different point of view. And while Valerie is playing herself — “Mallory” — schlubby Paulie G is played by movie star Seth Rogen.

It’s already a situation with complicated dynamics, one where fact and fiction are being confused so much that no one is totally clear about what they’re doing truly means, or really depicts. And when I say “no one,” I mean the producers of the HBO show, the actors involved and even the audience; “The Comeback” draws everyone into the confusion of trying to adapt a “real” story into “authentic” television. (I have completely forgotten that Lance Barber’s slimy Paulie G is not a real HBO showrunner more than once while watching this show — the rest of the show feels so accurate.)

This lack of distinction between real and not-real is the major tension of the blow job scene. Paulie G writes and directs a scene where his character commands Valerie’s character to get on her knees and perform oral sex. It never happened in real life, Valerie keeps telling everyone; it didn’t even come close to happening in real life. But Paulie G is calling the shots, and Paulie G says it’s happening for “Seeing Red.”

It is incredibly disturbing. Paulie G has written a scene where a woman he worked with, and is still working with, sexually services him. As is made abundantly clear in “The Comeback,” Paulie hates Valerie — outright despises her. “Seeing Red” is a whole show mostly blaming her for his slide into heroin addiction. They’ve spent their entire working relationship at loggerheads, which has now spanned almost a decade. And he’s responding to that intense dislike by choosing to portray her as giving him oral sex — his way of ultimately humiliating her (which shows a depressing view of both Valerie and sex). Blow jobs aren’t inherently demeaning, but Paulie G intends for it to be demeaning. As he tells Valerie, from behind the camera, when she asks for notes: The entire scene came out of him angrily dismissing her opinions on the last show they worked together on. “When you said that shit, I’d think to myself: Blow me. Blow me, Valerie. Blow me.”

So, let’s recap. Valerie is being forced to act out something she didn’t do for someone who hates her. Every time she tries to elevate it to the level of art — because she is a performer, after all! — her boss makes it abundantly clear that the situation is just for her to be humiliated, as a character and a person. It’s justifiable, on some level, because it’s Paulie G’s show — his vision — his fantasy, which has gotten a lot of funding from HBO to be made “real.” And it has just enough of a veneer of make-believe — it’s all a show! None of it is real! — that it’s allowable.

The person who ends up interrogating Valerie is the woman behind our camera: her producer Jane, a woman, whose interpretation of “Seeing Red” is the female gaze responding to the male. Her interrogation takes the form of a literal question at the beginning of the episode, when the audience is introduced to the idea: “Paulie G wrote a scene where you blow him?” Valerie brushes her concern off. Actors often have to be out of their comfort zone. “I once played a brunette with migraines,” she says, with no trace of irony.

But the upcoming scene is clearly bothering her, and as it grows in her consciousness, it grows in the audience’s too; an oncoming train that can’t be stopped. Naturally, as we watch, everything keeps getting worse. Paulie G’s issues with Valerie are front-and-center in every high-pressure situation; at one point, Seth Rogen makes a joke about Paulie, and then has to step in to stop Paulie from taking it out on Valerie, who’s also in the conversation. Rogen is given free rein to liberally riff off his lines, but Valerie is held to every word, meaning that Rogen is essentially shouting more and more colorful abuse at Valerie while she stands there, mute.