All those Republicans who say they're going to undo the Iran nuclear deal within nanoseconds of becoming president, good luck with that. The U.S. hostages captured by Iranian militants in 1979 tried for decades to get Congress, the courts and the State Department to override Jimmy Carter's signature on an international accord that said if and when they were released, they could not sue Iran.

The hostages were returned after 444 days in captivity but they never prevailed in their effort, underscoring how hard it is to reverse the commitment of a U.S. president. And it should be. So what to make of presidential candidates who promise to instantly discard a deal negotiated by the United States, Iran, Britain, France, Germany, China and Russia? Once in office, wouldn't they think twice about alienating allies or setting the precedent that, as Marco Rubio puts it, there's nothing binding about agreements signed by U.S. presidents?

This week's Republican debate -- the whole GOP primary campaign, in fact – will likely be judged largely by stagecraft: colorful sound bites, time in the spotlight, points scored against front-running outsiders Donald Trump and Ben Carson. I'd like to propose a few other criteria. Which candidates make unrealistic promises? Which contradict history, facts or evidence? And which seem comfortable challenging party orthodoxy?

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

Let's start with that Iran deal. Trump, of course, boasts that he will make it much better. Scott Walker says he would "terminate it on day one" and Rubio says he would slap sanctions on Iran on day one. Ted Cruz says he would be "prepared to stand up on Jan. 20, 2017 and rip to shreds this catastrophic deal."

Jeb Bush, by contrast, says it wouldn't be "mature and thoughtful" to "tear up the agreement on the first day," before even talking to allies or naming a national security team. John Kasich also counsels patience. "We don't know what's going to happen in 18 months … and you got to be careful not to paint red lines that you can't keep," he said on Fox News Sunday. Will these realists repeat their sacrilege from the CNN debate stage on Wednesday night, and will they have any company?

Similarly, what will the candidates say Wednesday about the Affordable Care Act? Almost all Republicans in Congress have vowed in every campaign since 2010 that they would kill it – even though they knew President Obama would never let that happen. A new GOP president's pledge would have more credibility, and several hopefuls have advanced plans to replace the hated law.

Still, millions of people are covered through the law's Medicaid expansion and private insurance marketplaces, and Gallup reported in July that the percentage of uninsured adults was 11.4 percent – the lowest since it began measuring in 2008. A repeal would disrupt the market and end coverage for millions. Most candidates aren't saying too much about the health law. Let's hope that they are forced to in the debate, and that at least a few of them talk about gradual changes and improvements rather than immediate, wholesale repeal.

[SEE: Republican Party Cartoons]

Climate change and taxes are big-ticket items in the evidence-and-facts category. Carson said recently that there was "no overwhelming science" showing humans contribute to warming, prompting California Gov. Jerry Brown to send him a flash drive with a U.N. report documenting just that and a request to "please use your considerable intelligence to review this material." Just this week scientists released findings that the snowpack in California's Sierra Nevada mountains is at its lowest level in at least 500 years. That's directly related to the severe drought and wildfires plaguing the state.

Will the debate moderators press the candidates on climate change? Will any of these prospective presidents treat the issue with the deadly seriousness it deserves, or will they fall back on the old "I'm no scientist" dodge? This debate happens to be in California, at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley, so there will never be a more relevant opportunity to prod them for real answers.

Several candidates have tax plans that rely on supply-side tax cuts that they contend, or at least hope, will pay for themselves through economic growth. But history shows they do not pay for themselves, that in fact they can create huge deficits. Will any candidates acknowledge this, or say they don't care about deficits? Will they explain why it's okay that the plans advanced so far benefit the wealthy much more than anyone else? By one estimate, Bush's plan would save him roughly $800,000 on his own taxes!

[SEE: Immigration Cartoons]

Which leads us to the contrarian question: Trump gets points here for saying he would raise taxes on himself and other 1 percenters. ("I do very well, I don't mind paying some taxes.") Trump could also ruffle GOP feathers if he defends some aspects of Planned Parenthood or attacks the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the massive trade deal Obama and Republicans are trying to pass.

Kasich and Bush get contrarian points on Iran. Kasich could also defend his expansion of Medicaid in his state under the Affordable Care Act and, perhaps his immigration views. ("I don't favor citizenship but I wouldn't take it off the board," he said in April.) Bush also has maverick potential in his support for legal residency for undocumented immigrants and the Common Core education standards.