Controversy is brewing over a municipal election event held in Markham Sunday afternoon to which it appears only Cantonese and Mandarin speaking candidates were invited.

The event was sponsored the Chinese Canadian Civic Alliance and held at Market Village, near Steeles Avenue and Kennedy Road. (It was not sponsored by Fairchild TV, as earlier reported.)

The election gathering was very similar to an event organized by Fairchild TV that sparked controversy four years ago.

However this time it looks like those who were invited were making efforts to make the event more inclusive in response to the outcry.

According to community activist Marilyn Ginsburg, a few of the invited candidates were going to object to the forum and its lack of inclusiveness.

Regional Councillor Jim Jones, the lone non-Chinese speaking candidate who was taking part in the event initially, bringing his own interpreter, was inviting all candidates running for mayor, regional councillor and Ward 8 to come to the event and use his interpreter, according to Ginsburg.

Ginsburg said the issue is not only unfairness to the other candidates but unfairness to the Chinese residents of Markham who deserve to be educated voters just as much as every other resident of Markham. "This type of forum really short changes them which is not right," she said. "Their votes are worth just as much as everyone else's votes."



It appears at least one of the invited candidates, Alex Chiu, was not attending as a result of the controversy.

Several candidates contacted the Economist & Sun this weekend about the event.

"In 2010 there was a Cantonese only debate for Markham councillors where non speaking candidates were not invited," Ward 2 candidate David Papadimtriou said in an email.

"I was door knocking this morning (Saturday) when a concerned resident informed me it was happening again. This time I am the only non-Cantonese (speaking) competitor for Ward 2. It is extremely frustrating that after this occurred in 2010 my competitors apologized and agreed it was unfair. They said I should have been allowed to participate with an interpreter. But those were empty words, as both of them are participating in the same scheme this year.

"This would have been a perfect opportunity to join communities together, instead they will be divided yet again."

Papadimitriou is running against Alan Ho, Jim Kwan and Daphne Wong.

Others also voiced their concerns.

"In this day and age, and especially here in Markham, which the mayor labels as Canada's most diverse city, it's shameful if this is going on," Don Hamilton, the incumbent in Ward 3, said in an email. "These types of exclusionary tactics have no place in Markham."

"This is about more than giving a group of candidates an advantage over others, though that is serious enough on its own," Ward 6 candidate Dr. Cliff Redford said in an email sent to several media outlets.

Redford is running against Zach Armstrong, Amanda Yeung Collucci, Benson Lau, Raymond Miu, and Gin Siow.

This is a corrected version of an earlier article that neglected to mention Zach Armstrong is running in Ward 6. The original article also misidentified the sponsors of the event.