Bathroom scales and a stethoscope are shown. (Photo: Mark Wragg / Getty Images / iStockphoto)

WASHINGTON — Most of the Hoosiers using the federal exchange to buy health insurance this year are getting subsidies that have reduced the cost of premiums by an average of 73 percent, the federal government said Tuesday.

That's cut the average premium to $120 a month for the more than 191,000 Hoosiers who qualified for subsidized coverage under the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

But the reductions come from tax subsidies that are being challenged at the U.S. Supreme Court and could be invalidated by the court this summer.

Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell said Monday she's confident the subsidies will be upheld.

"The law is clear," she told reporters.

The legal challenge to the Affordable Care Act from Virginia — similar to one pending in Indiana — argues that the Obama administration is illegally interpreting the provision in the 2010 health care law that establishes the formula for calculating a subsidy. That provision refers to insurance purchased "through an exchange established by the state."

The challengers say that means subsidies should not be available in states like Indiana that deferred to the federal government to use its exchange. The law set up the federal website — HealthCare.gov — as a fallback for states, such as Indiana, that chose not to run their own exchange.

The exchanges were created for people who don't receive health care through an employer or a government program like Medicare or Medicaid.

The figures released Tuesday show 219,185 Hoosiers used HealthCare.gov to select a plan for 2015, although the federal government won't be able to say for a few more months how many have paid their premiums.

Half of the Hoosiers using the exchange are doing so for the first time. Of those who re-enrolled from last year, about one-third switched insurance plans.

A spokesman for the Department of Health and Human Services said the rate of plan switchers is much higher than in other insurance programs, such as the Medicare prescription drug benefit and employer-sponsored coverage.

That will keep health insurers on their toes, said HHS spokesman Kevin Griffis.

"It's not enough to simply be in the marketplace," he said. "If you want to win business, it's critical to compete on price."

The number of insurers selling plans in Indiana through the federal exchange increased from four last year to nine this year, the largest increase among states using the federal system.

That slightly reduced the average monthly premium for the second-cheapest "silver" plan — the level of coverage that the subsidy is tied to.

But the average subsidy in Indiana is still higher than the national average, which largely reflects the higher costs in Indiana compared to many other states.

Subsidies are available to those earning between 100 percent and 400 percent of the federal poverty level — about $11,770 to $47,080 for a single person.

Almost nine in 10 Hoosiers using the exchange qualified for a premium reduction.

And half also qualified for a second type of assistance. Those earning up to 250 percent of the poverty level can get help paying for deductibles, co-payments and other out-of-pocket costs.

The figures released Tuesday show that premium cost wasn't the only consideration for Hoosiers. Although 71 percent of those who qualified for tax credits could have selected a plan with a premium of $50 a month or less, only 26 percent did so.

The plans with the lowest premiums have higher deductibles and other forms of cost-sharing. In addition, they can have more restrictions on where consumers can get care and what medicines are covered.

"There are many other factors that go into people's plan choice apart from just premium," said Dr. Meena Seshamani, director of the department's office of health reform.

The regular enrollment period for 2015 coverage ended last month.

An exception is being made for consumers who realize while filing their taxes that they owe a fee for not signing up for coverage last year. Those people have between March 15 and April 30 to use the exchange.

People can also sign up throughout the year if they've had a big life change, such as switching jobs, moving to another state, or having a baby.

The tax penalty for not having insurance, which increases over time, was $95 per person last year or 1 percent of household income, whichever is greater. This year's penalty is $325 per person or 2 percent of household income, although exemptions apply.

Contact Maureen Groppe at mgroppe@gannett.com or on Twitter @mgroppe.

Indiana residents' use of HealthCare.gov

-- Number of Hoosiers who selected insurance coverage as of Feb. 22: 219,185

-- Share of 2015 enrollees who are using HealthCare.gov for the first time: 50 percent.

-- Share of 2015 enrollees who qualified for tax credits to reduce monthly premiums: 87 percent.

-- Share of 2015 enrollees who qualified for help with other out-of-pocket costs: 50 percent.

-- Average monthly premium for an Indiana plan before subsidies: $438.

-- Average monthly premiuim for an Indiana plan after subsidies: $120.

Source: Department of Health and Human Services

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1GoFYTd