Republican David Perdue, seen here arriving for his election night party on Tuesday, will take over Sen. Saxby Chambliss' Senate seat in Georgia. David Goldman/AP

Republican David Perdue sailed easily past Michelle Nunn Tuesday in the vote for the Senate, despite projections for months that the race would be among the closest in the country. The election – the most expensive in the state's history – closed another opportunity for Democrats to hang on to their majority in the Senate.

The win squelches all concerns that the election will continue into early next year and keep Senate control in limbo. Under state law, a candidate must win more than 50 percent of the vote to be elected. Perdue and Nunn also had to consider voters that went to Libertarian Amanda Swafford, which would have threatened their majority and would have caused the runoff to continue until Jan. 6, or three days after the new Congress is scheduled to convene.

[READ Obamacare Among Issues Voters Are Unhappy About]

Early on election night Perdue was far ahead of Nunn with a more than 20-point lead. The lead narrowed slightly later in the evening as votes continued to be counted, though it was far more significant than the 3-point lead experts had projected even as late as Monday.

Perdue's seat is among one of six that Republicans need to take control of the Senate. The victory brings Sen. Mitch McConnell from Kentucky one step closer to becoming Senate majority leader in place of Democrat Harry Reid of Nevada. Republicans haven't had control of the Senate since 2006, and if they seize the Senate by the end of the night, they could come into a standstill with President Barack Obama over immigration, health care and energy issues if neither party will compromise on policy.

Perdue, a first-time candidate, criticized career politicians and said he would work to repeal the Affordable Care Act, citing that his policy was canceled after the law took effect. Perdue is the cousin to former Gov. Sonny Perdue and was the CEO of Dollar General until 2007. He ran on his business experience, promising to increase job opportunities in the state and to lower the country's $17 trillion national debt. He is anti-abortion and has said he supports marriage between a man and a woman.

One of the biggest threats to Perdue's campaign came when Democrats said he had outsourced jobs during his career – an allegation he denied in the debates.

[READ: Rick Scott Inches Past Charlie Crist in Florida]

Nunn is the daughter of former Sen. Sam Nunn and former CEO of Points of Life, a volunteer nonprofit that was founded by former President George H.W. Bush.

To appeal to the largely conservative Peach State, Nunn attempted to affiliate her image with Bush, even featuring him in her first campaign ad. Bush later endorsed Perdue and asked Nunn to remove the ads.

Though she attempted to distance herself from Obama throughout her campaign, Perdue continued to tie them together, an effective narrative given the presidents low approval ratings. CNN exit polls based on interviews with voters showed that 55 percent of Georgians say they think that government is doing too much.

Nunn did not acknowledge whether she would have voted in favor of the Affordable Care Act if she had been in the Senate, but she has criticized the state's refusal to implement Medicaid expansion under the law.



She said she supported a woman's decision to an abortion and has said that the definition of marriage is a state-based decision. Georgia faced scrutiny throughout the election season for its voting laws, which critics said aimed to disenfranchise black voters.