Topics: Academy Awards, Billy Crystal, Editor's Picks, ellen degeneres, Oscar hosts, Oscars, Oscars 2014, Seth MacFarlane, TV, Video, Entertainment News

Up there with the vice-presidency, the job of Oscar host is one of the world’s most thankless.

The ribald Whoopi Goldberg (a four-time host, if you can believe it) and the dead-eyed David Letterman have both been mocked for their respective reliance on costumery and acerbic humor, but the more recent history is even more gruesome. Chris Rock and Jon Stewart, two of the sharpest wits out there, both seemed, at once, out-of-touch with the evening’s mood and slightly neutered. Hugh Jackman’s song-and-dance act was well-executed but light on jokes.

But jokes can be risky, too! Billy Crystal, fondly remembered for his many stints in the 1990s and early 2000s, came to rescue the 2012 ceremony after Eddie Murphy quit and got pilloried for blackface humor that might have been a little more widely accepted in the ’90s, or the ’20s. Crystal’s booking had been a reaction against the previous year’s show, when the academy had been trying to court a younger audience with hosts James Franco and Anne Hathaway (you may recall how that turned out); the year after Crystal, the academy tried to go young again with host Seth MacFarlane, whose tasteless humor seemed a deeply poor fit for the room.

This year’s host is unlikely to reprise MacFarlane’s “We Saw Your Boobs” number — it’s Ellen DeGeneres, the amiable daytime host who last had the gig in 2007. Oscar hosts are usually asked back, if they’re going to be, within only a couple of years, and it seemed a fair presumption that Ellen would keep dancing on daytime TV exclusively. But the seven years since DeGeneres’ perfectly competent gig have seen enough host-related tsuris that, finally, “perfectly competent” seems good enough.

In her first hosting turn, DeGeneres offended no one, though she did nothing exceptional. Her 2007 opening monologue had more truisms about what the Oscars are generally like than it did specific references to any of the year’s nominees, and as such felt both offensive to no one, and sort of soft. It perfectly matched DeGeneres’ real-life persona, one so familiar that it’s weird to call her “DeGeneres” instead of plain old “Ellen.” The talk-show host’s monologues lightly touch on the absurdities of life, and her interviews are even softer than her awards-show jokes. Her Twitter feed, which has some 25 million followers, is mainly her saying hi to celebrities or making wince-inducing puns like “It’s a beautiful (Daniel) Day (Lewis)! Only 3 more until the Oscars.”

DeGeneres has styled herself as the safest thing going: She’s not abrasive to the more sensitive of sensibilities, like Rock, Stewart or MacFarlane. She’s not liable to offend anyone as would Goldberg or Crystal. She’s very good at telling jokes, but those jokes are so inclusive as to be amiably unspecific.

But that may be exactly what the Oscars need. Even the most successful of awards-show hosts at other ceremonies — which is to say, the Golden Globes’ Tina Fey-Amy Poehler pairing — would likely seem mean-spirited on the Oscars’ stage. Whether the viewer takes the ceremony seriously or not, the ceremony takes itself seriously, and the pomp of the whole thing isn’t the sort that can be deflated by a sassy or snarky host. Instead, it tends to eat whole those hosts who don’t pay sufficient tribute to their surroundings. Whatever one may think of the Oscars, the ceremony is some eight decades old and has honored everything from “Casablanca” to “All About Eve” to “The Godfather.” You don’t have to like it, but to mock it from beneath the proscenium is a good way to look unimpressive by comparison.