A new study on health insurance literacy from the American Institutes for Research may seem like a blinding glimpse of the obvious. That doesn’t mean its historic significance should be overlooked.

The study found that Americans know perilously little about how health insurance works. Perhaps slightly more surprising (to me anyway) is the study's findings that people think they know more than they do. I actually thought everyone agreed that reading information about health insurance is like trying to read Sanskrit. I wonder if survey respondents had been shown one of those horrible “Explanation of Benefits” documents before taking the survey wouldn’t they have been really in touch with the fact that human beings with common sense can’t make heads or tails of that gobbledygook? It’s all circuitous logic, alphabet soup and statements that you owe money next to vehement assertions that “this is not a bill." Who among us mere mortals can unravel that mess?



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Obamacare]

I suspect this is what people – especially younger, healthier people – think they understand: Having health insurance means I can see the doctor without touching my credit card, debit card or check book. Except for copays, of course, I get that, too. And maybe deductibles. Kind of.

Unfortunately, none of that is hard and fast. In fact, under the Affordable Care Act, deductibles are rising significantly – a fact that will lead to a lot more reaching for our checkbook than many of us are used to.

Overall, it really isn’t surprising that Americans aren’t experts on how health insurance works or on how to plan for unexpected out-of-pocket costs (the other big takeaway of the study). After all, health insurance is a product that is more often purchased for us by the government or our employer. Even when we’ve had some choice in the matter, we’ve made the decision the way a novice better might choose a horse – sounds fine, I like the name, hoping for the best.



[READ: One More Wave of the Bloody Obamacare Shirt]

Even our doctors don’t seem to understand insurance half the time – they do their best to care for us, and let the paper pushers sort out the rest.

So here we are, America: About to be “given” the, um, opportunity to buy our own health insurance because our employers won’t want to offer it anymore. (And P.S., if we don’t have insurance we’ll be in violation of the law.) It’s the most expensive thing we’ll ever buy next to a home or a college education, and we are starting from scratch-level knowledge. How exciting!

In all seriousness, I believe we will look back on this latest study as the end of American ignorance when it comes to health insurance. I think that learning how this gobbledygook works might just be one of the unexpected benefits of the Affordable Care Act.



[READ: 5 Health Insurance Mistakes Costing You]