Did you mark the date? Thursday, November 6, 2014 is now part of Star Wars history, after the title, The Force Awakens was announced in the late morning hours.

Along with the title revelation came news that principal photography for Episode VII has concluded. As it has become a custom with many breaking news, the studio used its Twitter page to let everyone know about both things, becoming the first in the franchise to do so.

Star Wars: The Force Awakens has completed principal photography. #TheForceAwakens #StarWarsVII pic.twitter.com/qBhel6CDjr — Walt Disney Pictures (@DisneyPictures) November 6, 2014

While millions of fans all over the world — along with entertainment reporters — where processing the latest news, Disney was celebrating a big pay check for the fourth quarter of 2014. During the earnings call, CEO Bob Iger presented the staggering figures, which revealed that Disney posted $12.38 billion in revenue for the period.

But we are not here to talk about how much money Disney is posting during a particular time, since most fans are not really interested in finances. One of the most noteworthy bits that came out of the call was that Iger suggested a trailer for Star Wars: The Force Awakens could premiere on TV, according to The Hollywood Reporter.

“Some money has siphoned out of traditional media and into digital platforms. That said, there’s still huge value in the 30-second spot.”

Today, most big movies debut their trailers online, making them available to many people who may be in the middle of work or school when they are released. Iger hinted that for Star Wars: The Force Awakens, Disney may go the traditional route.

Talk was that a trailer could possibly be attached to the release of The Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies, the last installment in Peter Jackson’s Middle-earth productions. After IMAX first confirmed the rumor via Twitter, only to retract a few hours later, the thought is that the teaser for Star Wars: The Force Awakens could come with Big Hero 6 — the only November release — or with Into the Woods this December.

Iger also confirmed what we have heard from cast member Anthony Daniels, as previously reported by the Inquisitr. In simple words, fans will be very happy with Star Wars: The Force Awakens, according to Marc Glaser from Variety.

“Everything suggests this will be the movie ‘Star Wars’ fans have been waiting and hoping for.”

The Disney executive also stated that Star Wars: The Force Awakens “exceeded the expectations we had when we made the acquisition” of Lucasfilm. Are you as excited as Bob Iger about J.J. Abrams’ film?

[Image via Hdw]