AP/University of Florida In this Jan. 9, 2013 photo provided by the University of Florida, both male, left, and female Periplaneta japonica are shown.

When New Yorkers declared the city a beacon for the world’s huddled masses yearning to breathe free, this isn’t what they had in mind: a new species of roach discovered in a landmark of gentrificaton, High Line park. Two scientists from Rutgers University confirmed the invasion of a Japanese species in the Journal of Economic Entomology. Metropolis spoke with Jessica Ware, one of the paper’s three authors, herself an evolutionary biologist with a specialty in roaches and termites, which she calls “fancy cockroaches.”

WSJ: Is this the beginning of the end? Is this the Godzilla of roaches? The snakehead fish of roaches?

Ms. Ware: This was bound to happen. Humans are very good at moving insects around the world. None of the species in the city today are native. Some people think many came over from Africa on slave ships. This is going to happen anywhere you have foreign plants and food carts and human traffic and wilderness.

WSJ: Is that whole shaggy, let-it-grow-wild aesthetic of High Line partly to blame?

Ms. Ware: Absolutely not. This could have happened just as easily in a manicured lawn.

WSJ: What many people are focusing on is that this Japanese species is capable of surviving in extreme cold — in ice, in snow, outside — whereas the roaches we know need warmth and tend to stay indoors. It’s bad enough people talk about how roaches will always survive any nuclear war. Now they’re great at New York winters, too? In our dirty snow?

Ms. Ware: Roaches have been doing what they’ve been doing for 50 million years. That’s a lot of time to get really good at it. They will survive long after we’re gone. What this will do is make us rethink our pest control strategies.

WSJ: How?

Ms. Ware: What tends to happen is you spray an apartment at a time, so the roaches just move around the building. Now they’ll also be able to just wait outside, even if you spray the whole building at once.

WSJ: Your report makes roaches sound pretty horrible. It notes that 13 species of fungus were found on American cockroaches at a single hospital in Brazil. They add to asthma, to allergies, to pneumonia. Is there anything good that they do? Y’know, like spiders eat flies.

Ms. Ware: They scavenge. They help things decompose. A lot of what makes them carriers of all these bad things is because of the way we deal with them, with sprays that force them into pipes or dark places, where they might get molds or sewage or pathogens on them.

WSJ: You sound almost sympathetic. I get that you’re a scientist and this is exciting for you, but do normal people have anything to fear? The High Line snakes awfully close to people’s apartments.

Ms. Ware: Just do what you already do. Vacuum often. Use a dehumidifier, which damages their eggs. But mostly all this means is that you might see some roaches in the winter, whereas you mostly used to see them in the summer.

WSJ: And, I mean, who’s really on the High Line in January, anyway?

Ms. Ware: Exactly.

WSJ: Your report also says “ecological dynamics between [this species] and other cockroach species already present in dwellings are unknown” but also that your guess is that the genitalia between species are “incompatible.” Sometimes species hybridize and we get, say, a horse and a donkey making a mule, which can’t reproduce. But sometimes we get scary things like ligers, which are bigger than either lions or tigers. So it’s anybody’s guess?

Ms. Ware: It’s not like roaches are terrible. There are 4,500 species and only 2% are what we’d call nuisances or pests. We’ve seen some, in Guyana, Ecuador, Peru, Namibia, that are gorgeous: turquoise, pink, just beautiful.

WSJ: Ugh, why couldn’t we get one of those awesome species invading? I mean, that’d be great with all the art galleries there.

Ms. Ware: I know, right?