Addressing Alaska’s broken individual health insurance market will likely have to take place in special session of the Legislature, and in the meantime the state’s last provider has been given extra time to calculate its rate increase for 2017.

Premera Blue Cross — Alaska’s sole remaining individual insurance provider following the May 1 announcement by Moda Health that it will depart the market in 2017 — says it will stay in the Alaska market next year.

“Premera is committed to the Alaska market and will continue to offer individual coverage to Alaskans through the federal marketplace,” said Premera spokesperson Melanie Coon in a statement.

Premera was due to release a rate schedule on May 11, but the circumstances will push that date back to this summer, Coon said. Because Moda dropped from Alaska’s market, Premera, which covers 10,000 people in the state, has a new deadline to renew premium rate estimates to include the rates Moda charged its 14,000 customers.

“We’ve requested from the (Division of Insurance) Moda’s numbers so we can kind of sharpen our pencils,” said Coon. “We have until July.”

Two bills in the Legislature that attempt to address the problem, Senate Bill 206 and House Bill 374, stalled in the House Rules and Senate Finance committees, but officials say one will certainly pass.

In order to pass, though, nearly $60 million will have to be included in the operating budget for a statewide reinsurance plan.

Lori Wing-Heier, Director of the Division of Insurance, said she believes Gov. Bill Walker will call a special session in which legislators will pass one of the insurance bills. In order to pay for a reinsurance plan — which would spread sky-high individual insurance premium costs among all Alaska’s insured to lessen the financial burden for Premera — the House bill proposes to use money destined for the General Fund, potentially up to $55 million.

“It’ll come in the special session,” said Wing-Heier. “That’s the thought right now. It’s not dead. We’re still getting calls from both sides saying that it’s still being discussed. I fully expect this bill will pass in special session.”

The Legislature will reach is maximum session limit of 120 days on May 17. The session can be extended 10 days with a two-thirds vote of the House and Senate, but any time after that will have to be in a special session.

The bills

The proposed legislation attempts to solve an insurance industry crisis that has caused insurers to bleed money and eventually move out of state.

Under the Affordable Care Act, or ACA, insurers cannot deny coverage based on pre-existing conditions.

In Alaska, people with pre-existing conditions were previously insured in a special high-risk pool, operated by the Alaska Comprehensive Health Insurance Association, or ACHIA.

These high-risk pool plans were high-cost as well, and many people with pre-existing conditions left ACHIA for the lower rates in the federal marketplace after the change in 2014. The small Alaska individual insurance market providers then ate the new costs from the high-cost patients no longer confined to the high-risk pool.

SB 206 and HB 374 would make changes to the Alaska Insurance Code to allow for a reinsurance program for the Alaska high-risk insured.

A reinsurance program, essentially, is the insurance version of a subsidy, spreading the costs of the high-risk insurance pool among the rest of the state’s insured instead of only in the individual insurance pool. ACHIA would administer this program.

Most of the medical and insurance industry agreed that reinsurance is the only way to keep premiums from spiking another 30 percent or more in 2017 — though it would only cut the inevitable rise by 15 percent to 18 percent.

Organizations including Moda Health, the Alaska Association of Health Underwriters, the Alaska Primary Care Association, and the Alaska State Hospital and Nursing Home Association all wrote letters of support.

Opposition, however, mounted against the bill in April due to how the state would fund the reinsurance.

Both bills originally suggested an “assessment” — a fee levied against all Alaska insurance plans. Estimates said the reinsurance plan would require $55 million of extra funds, which pencils out to a $20 assessment for each of Alaska’s 236,779 “covered lives.”

This assessment would stack up against stop-loss insurance providers, who underwrite insurance plans for organized labor. Labor unions and the Kenai Borough School District opposed the bills and the $20 assessment per month on each of their policies, said Wing-Heier.

During an April 16 House Labor and Commerce hearing, Rep. Kurt Olson, R-Soldotna, introduced an amendment that would allow the Legislature to appropriate funds from the state’s current insurance premium tax to pay for reinsurance, rather than a new assessment.

Wing-Heier said the idea has been roundly supported by virtually all groups, as it would evenly distribute costs and would leave the Division of Insurance fiscally unscathed; its $7 million operating cost runs on insurance licensing fees.

The state levies a 2.7 percent tax on every insurance premium in the state. The tax brings in roughly $60 million a year, Wing-Heier said, and is goes into the General Fund.

The bill was last referred to the House Rules Committee, but chances are slim that the Legislature will pass them before the end of the session. Legislative bandwidth is overwhelmed by the $4.1 billion dollar budget deficit, oil and gas industry tax credits and tapping Permanent Fund earnings to fill the gap.

Premera to stay

The individual insurance market, which insures those Alaskans not covered by either employee or government insurance, has reached a crisis point in the Last Frontier. The Affordable Care Act has created a nationwide situation where individual insurance premiums spike as insurers lose money, leaving several states with a precariously low number of insurance. Earlier this year UnitedHealth, the nation’s largest insurer, announced it was exiting the federal marketplaces in 2017 after absorbing hundreds of millions in losses in the last several years.

Alaska’s small population exacerbates the problem. Only one individual insurer, Premera Blue Cross, remains in the state after three others dropped out.

Simply put, high insurance rates still don’t recover the costs insurers undertake from being forced to enroll high-risk customers.

Rates rose approximately 37 percent and 39 percent in 2015 and 2016, but Premera still loses money. The company has lost roughly $13 million since 2014.

Premera’s average premium is $713 per person per month. Statewide, the average $700 per person per month is the highest in the nation, which averages $468 per person per month.

Other states have larger populations to spread the higher cost, but Alaska’s 736,000 residents is too small a pool to absorb them.

“In a very small sized market like Alaska, there are not enough healthy individual purchasers to offset the costs of enrollees with very high medical needs,” wrote Jerry Reinwald, a lobbyist for Premera, in a letter to the Legislature.

On May 1, Moda Health announced that it is leaving the Alaska individual market and its 14,000 customers. Moda officials said the company could no longer operate in Alaska without a substantial increase in insurance premiums, which had already increased by 29 and 37 percent in 2015 and 2016, respectively.

Both Alaska and Oregon had already suspended Moda Health from operation in February 2016 over its financial situation, though the states lifted the order weeks later after approving Moda’s plan to raise sufficient capital to continue service.

DJ Summers can be reached at daniel.summers@alaskajournal.com.