Watch video of key Governors Ball moments.

Governors Ball 2014 rolled on Saturday (June 7) with another beautiful day on Randall's Island as Jack White brought the rock (and the singsongs), The Strokes brought out crowd favorites, Skrillex fired up the mothership, Childish Gambino and Disclosure both welcomed cool guests, one member of Outkast enjoyed watching the show from the photo pit, and more.

GOVERNORS 2014 BALL FULL COVERAGE

GOVERNORS BALL PHOTOS

Here are 13 of the coolest moments (including video) that went down at Governors Ball on Saturday:



1:26pm: In the middle of frequent set closer “Ghost With a Boner,” Diarrhea Planet tips its garage rockin’ hat to the previous night’s headliner and gives the crowd an impromptu cover of Outkast’s “Hey Ya.” 1:32pm: RJD2 lures concert-goers in as soon as he begins his hip-hop heavy DJ set. His one hour on stage particularly comes alive because of his band: guitarist, drummer and a congas player.



2:33pm: Tanlines informs the New York City crowd that they are hard at work on a new album and go on to play a new song. “No one’s ever heard it — not even my own family,” admits percussionist Jesse Cohen. “That’s how close I feel to you all.” 3:40pm: Classix get their biggest ovation of the afternoon, as New York resident Nancy Whang joins them onstage, singing lead vocals on their highly dance-able “All You’re Waiting For.” 3:44pm: Ten minutes after the crowd packed into the Gotham tent chants his name, Chance the Rapper hits the stage in a Chicago White Sox jersey (over a Superman shirt) to perform his cult-following mixtape hits. 4:45pm: Disclosure brought in a flood of people towards the Honda stage. They kicked off their hour-long set with their Mary J. Blige single, "Fool For You." While Mary herself wasn't there, AlunaGeorge was in the house to perform on "White Noise" later in the set. Although sans Sam Smith, their closing song, "Latch," left concertgoers in a good, if not better, mood. 4:58pm: Broken Bells frontman James Mercer earns the crowd’s praise for breaking out the high notes for “The Ghost Inside,” off the band’s 2010 debut album. 7:04pm: Childish Gambino kicks off his set by singing to an acoustic "Centipede," but switches it up fast with the high-energy "because the internet single," "Crawl." He dances on stage through out the show, and surprises fans when a shirtless Chance the Rapper takes the stage for two of their collaborations: "Favorite Song" and "The Worst Guys." Who had one of the best "seats" in the house? Outkast's Andre 3000, who watched from the photo pit at the front of the stage.

Swag. RT @its_topp: Apparent Andre 3000 is a @DonaldGlover fan too. Caught him in the media pit watching the show. pic.twitter.com/gFGuZuyjCv — My Name Is My Name (@CoryTownes) June 8, 2014

8:12pm: The Strokes appear done — but wait! After leaving the stage following a performance of “Last Nite,” the quintet heads back out for a rousing performance of their “Is This It” United States b-side “New York City Cops.”

8:42pm: As Sleigh Bells’ set perfectly transitioned the party into sundown, frontwoman Alexis Krauss shared that they had a lot of family and friends in the crowd, even her mom. She also reflected on their first ever gig. "We played our first show at Union Pool in Brooklyn and we played this song - it's our dance party song", she shared launching into the track “Demons,” her raging vocals blaring on the repeated line “Take it down, take it down, take it down.”



9:21pm: Spoon earns its biggest ovation of the night for a rousing rendition of “The Underdog” from its 2007 album, “Ga Ga Ga Ga Ga.”

9:35pm: Skrillex feeds a flood of ragers with an hour set of dance-inducing tracks, all while DJing in his spaceship booth, the Mothership. 9:42pm: “Y'all feelin all right. If you wanna sing along I'm not gonna get mad at you!" Jack White joked to the crowd, before launching into fan favorite “Hotel Yorba,” a White Stripes song. The southern ditty gave the crowd a sing along, with fans offering a “One, two, three, four” yell in unison each time it hit, hands punching the air.

Billboard's Governors Ball 2014 Video