Jonathan Wainwright and Laura Gray portray an unlikely couple confronted with the results of a one-night stand in Milwaukee Chamber Theatre’s production of “The Good Father.” Credit: Mark Frohna

By ,

"Like if you picked the most opposite type person that someone like you would want to have a kid with, you'd probably pick me."

So says Tim (Jonathan Wainwright) to Jane (Laura Gray) early in Christian O'Reilly's "The Good Father," a two-person play receiving its Midwest premiere at Milwaukee Chamber Theatre, under C. Michael Wright's direction.

Jane shrugs, but she doesn't disagree — even though, thanks to a drunken one-night stand after a party in their native Dublin, she's told Tim he is indeed an expectant father. Now 32, still single and hearing the ticking of the biological clock, Jane has decided to go ahead and have the baby.

Given the class differences between Jane and Tim — she's a lawyer and he's a house painter — Jane assumes she'll be raising the child alone.

She assumes wrong. "Let yourself see that maybe this was meant to happen," Tim urges. "Give me a chance."

If you're rolling your eyes about now, you've got company in Jane herself. "God, you are so corny," she tells Tim, as she continues to resist his plea. And while Jane isn't all wrong, that doesn't mean she's right.

When both the world and the stage are filled with so much ironically cool snark, a quest like Tim's — or the moving and equally quixotic efforts of a band of misfits to save the soul of a damaged war veteran, as in Next Act Theatre's just-opened "Welcome Home, Jenny Sutter" — may indeed seem corny.

But such journeys can also be revolutionary. And when this one is buoyed by onstage chemistry of the sort delivered by Wainwright and Gray — married in real life — it also feels satisfying and right.

Smart, witty and good with words, Jane knows all about snark; an overworked subplot involving an ex-boyfriend has left her bitter and disappointed.

But as Gray has done before — her beautiful portrait of Sally in Chamber's 2008 "Talley's Folly" comes to mind — she also conveys the poignant, love-starved need of a closet romantic, hoping that life might offer her more even as she resigns herself to less.

Tim knows that Jane is clever in ways he'll never be; O'Reilly captures the mix of taciturn shyness and its obverse — nervous rambling volubility — in a man self-consciously aware of his limitations.

Hence Tim's cane, added in this production after Wainwright recently experienced an injury but barely used: It's a crutch, giving Tim something to do with his hands.

Wainwright not only channels Tim's awkwardness and his bluff efforts to hide it, but also the underlying vulnerability of a man softer and more easily hurt than he lets on, which makes one ache for him as he clumsily reaches out, heart in hand.

No wonder Jane is tempted to grab hold.

But even if she does, will the two of them find the strength they'll need to hold on?

That question gets answered after intermission, in a second act that includes two plot twists involving the baby; both come suddenly and the second feels particularly improbable.

Both unwittingly confirm what this beautifully acted production makes clear: The vital and believable conception in this play involves this odd couple's own inspiring struggle to grow together.

IF YOU GO

"The Good

Father" continues through Oct. 12

at the Broadway Theatre Center's Studio Theatre, 158 N. Broadway. For tickets, call (414) 291-7800 or go to milwaukeechambertheatre.com.