We don’t choose our family and relatives, but we can choose our friends. Which is why the idiots are the closest to our hearts. They know all our secrets, they have seen our crazy, and still don’t judge us. Were it not for friends, life on earth would have been a rather drab job. And nobody defines friendships better than Bollywood. Larger than life, or complete jerks, friends are for ever. Nobody understands you better than than they do. Here are 12 Bollywood movies that taught us a thing or two about friendship.

1. 3 Idiots – College friends are for life.

Vinod Chopra Films

The friendships you forged in college are for eternity. You got into trouble together, you had your first smoke together, your heartbreaks – every life-changing experience you’ve had is shared with your college friends. The journey from being boys to becoming men starts here. Friends will do crazy things and will get you into trouble often. But they will also be the ones who will save your ass. They will not hesitate to get a plane to make an emergency landing or hijack somebody’s car in order to find their long-lost friend.

2. Yeh Jawani Hai Deewani – Real friends fight.

Dharma Productions

Only the best of friends can fight with each other. It’s because they know each other well, and are not afraid to confront each other. And that is how they improve each other and face their demons. As they say, you need to have one brutal fight with your friend in order for your friendship to become stronger than ever. Also, real friends stay in touch no matter how far they are.

3. Fukrey – Friends get into trouble together. When one is fucked, the other is too.

Excel Entertainment

A popular saying goes that real friends don’t let you do crazy things alone; they are your partners-in-crime. Getting screwed is a lot easier when you are in it along with your friends. We go down together. The gang of ‘fukreys’ in the movie are united by their helplessness and circumstances, and they stick together no matter what.

4. Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara – Friends help you understand yourself better.

Excel Entertainment

They sometimes know you better than you. They help you discover yourself, and force you to see things in perspective. And for the rest, there is Dr Fraud’s fraud game. Oh and never steal a friend’s bae. That is something strictly against the bro code.

5. Pyar Ka Punchnama – Friends are better than girlfriends.

Youtube

You doubt that? Just rewind the epic rant by Rajat where he vents out his frustration with the girlfriend brigade. A friend will never judge you, or expect too much from you, or hold a grudge if you are late, but a girlfriend will. Let’s face it, relationships suck, and friendships rock.

6. Wake Up Sid – Friends help you grow as a person.

Dharma Productions

Their friendship makes you a better person. Konkana’s friendship with Ranbir in ‘Wake Up Sid’ turns him into a more responsible person who is ready to take on life. He matures and becomes independent living with her, as both begin to understand each other. Yes, friends help you grow. Another thing we learnt from the movie was that real friends let you be. They will not hold a grudge against you if you are too busy in a discovering a new life. Ranbir’s old friends are sad that he has a new life, new friends now, but they don’t hold him back.

7. Dil Chahta Hai – Friends are for life. Even if they fight and separate, they will get together some day.

Excel Entertainment

One thing that we learned from this iconic movie about three friends was that true friends will remain friends no matter what. There will be misunderstandings; there will be fights; they will part ways. But they will always come back and reunite. Because when you realize someone can understand you like no one else, you want that person in your life and are ready to forgive him.

8. Rock On – Friends who share a passion, share a lifetime.

Excel Entertainment

Strong friendships are often formed on common grounds. Sometimes we share the same passion, sometimes the same outlook to life, sometimes the same neighbourhood or school. When passion brings together people, the equation is often bombastic. You get along like a house on fire, and you agree and disagree a lot. You get into ego battles, you even compete with each other. But there is no one else who understands your art like them. Not your parents, not your girlfriends, not your spouses. And once you get past the ego wars and enter a mature phase of friendship, there is nothing better than that.

9. Jaane Tu Ya Jaane Na – Friends can fall in love and end up together.

Excel Entertainment

Falling in love with your best friend, wouldn’t that be the best thing in the world? And that happens. For love to happen, you have to be friends with a person. We love our friends and there can be no one else who can understand us better. Jackpot if your friend is of the opposite gender and you two fall in love.

10. Andaz Apna Apna – If you work as a team, you can screw the whole wide world.

Youtube

The iconic movie was not only a laughter riot, it was a celebration of male bonding. The two heroes, Amar-Prem, take on the world together – busting a criminals’ gang, saving the day, and winning over the hearts of two women. And they can screw with each other in the process too.

11. Koi Mil Gaya – Friends are the best wingmen!

Filmkraft Productions

Isnt it? When Jadoo enters Hrithik’s life, he not only becomes smarter, he gets a girlfriend too! Before that, he was too dumb to be even noticed! Yes, friends up your coolness quotient like that! And they act as wingmen, whose sole purpose in life is to hook you up with women.

12. Sholay – Friends have each other’s back.

Youtube

At all times. They might be the biggest assholes in the world, but they will be loyal as hell to that one friend they adore, and will go to any lengths for him. No worries if they trick the other a little too often. It’s all for good.

Here's to friendship forever. Tag your friends and tell the jerks what they mean to you.