The Saucon Valley School Board says that its teachers union's contract proposal is at least $3.9 million more expensive than the board's best offer.

The school board and Saucon Valley Education Association both released their final, best contract offer this week ahead of a July nonbonding arbitration hearing.

RELATED: Saucon Valley School Board releases contract offer details

Late Tuesday evening, board labor attorney Jeffrey Sultanik said that while the district had not yet had time to fully analyze the teacher proposal, it is clear it is costly. The $3.9 million estimate doesn't take into account the union's health care proposal, which is more expensive than the board's cost sharing plan, Sultanik said.

The union took the board's withdrawn Feb. 26 contract proposal and modified that to formulate its offer. The board reverted back to a less generous October 2014 deal that does not include retroactive pay.

Teachers are seeking six years of pay raises, including retroactive increases, and less significant health care concessions than the board. All district employees, besides teachers, took a total salary freeze in 2012-13, but teachers are seeking a 1.5 percent raise that year.

RELATED: Saucon Valley teacher contract proposal seeks raises for all six years

The board withdrew its Feb. 26 offer after the union failed to vote on it by a board-mandated deadline. Teachers still voted to reject it after it was withdrawn.

"The association has formulated an enhanced February 26, 2015 proposal that will cost the taxpayers of the district significantly more dollars," Sultanik sad. "...The areas marked in blue on the association's proposal shows the areas where the union is gutting the board's withdrawn offer with substantially modified salary increases which would go to not only active employees, but teachers who retired three years ago."

Sultanik takes issue with the fact that the union is trying to find a middle ground between the defunct Feb. 26 "bottom line" offer and the new offer, rather than asking the arbitrator to make recommendations between each side's last, best offer.

"The arbitrator would have to increase the board's last best offer by at $2 million to find middle ground which would be completely unacceptable to the board," Sultanik said.

He notes that on top of salary raises, the union wants to seek 3 percent hikes in extracurricular payments starting in 2015-16.

Despite not giving raises in three years, the district is still very competitive in the hiring market and is retaining high-quality teachers, he said.

"This settlement would require the district to invade it's savings account to pay reoccurring salary and benefits costs, which most prudent financial planners advise against doing," Sultanik said.

The union also does not have to accept the inclusion of language about the Affordable Care Act's excise tax, a 40 percent penalty on Cadillac health care plans. The district is facing the tax in the final year of the proposed contract, Sultanik said.

He notes the association is still seeking retirees health benefits as well as the retirement bonus given to retiring teachers.