This was a relief. The last time I heard a president talking about a deal he'd cut with Iran, it was about selling them missiles and using the proceeds to finance illegal wars in this hemisphere. Hey, give us some credit. Over what is now almost 30 years, we've made a little progress in this regard.

"In those conversations, I will underscore that the issues at stake here are bigger than politics," Obama said of his forthcoming talks with Congress and other global leaders. "These are matters of war and peace." Obama also stressed that the final deal is not yet done and negotiators must work out specific details between now and June 30. "Nothing is agreed to until everything is agreed," he said. The president spoke after a formal announcement by negotiators in Switzerland that the United States, allies and Iran reached a general agreement in which the allies would end some sanctions on Iran if it gives up the means to make nuclear weapons.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

(Here's someone from Fox News drawing all the wrong lessons from history. Anyone who writes a story containing the words "Iran" and "Reagan," but not the words "TOW missiles" and "Manucher Ghorbanifar," deserves to be pointed at and mocked.)

Of course, the usual suspects are conducting seances all over various media platforms, trying to raise the useful ghost of Neville Chamberlain for one more lap around the old track. I expect the hysterics to reach full volume over the weekend, despite the fact that, by all the available evidence, this is a deal that has very real possibilities, if you assume that the reign of the mullahs in Iran is doomed by demographics and bluejeans, just as those same forces helped undermine the Eastern bloc. (There's your Reagan-and-the-Soviets parallel.) Hell, Iranian state TV carried the president's Rose Garden address live and uncensored.

Most Popular

As Garry Wills argued forcefully in his book Bomb Power, nuclear arms do not reduce paranoia in the nations that have them, they intensify it because of the metastatic secrecy that always surrounds those weapons and their production. If there is a generation of young Iranians who have grown weary of being governed by theocratic nutballs, and even Jen Rubin concedes that possibility, then they might well be encouraged by any movement away from Iran's being a garrison state.

Mr. Sick says he believes that a deal could begin a process of epochal change inside Iran. "If the sanctions are lifted, foreign companies come back in, the natural entrepreneurialism of Iranians is unleashed," he said, then Iran's political system will inevitably change, if slowly. "If you want regime change in Iran — meaning, changing the way the regime operates — this kind of agreement is the best way to achieve that goal," he said.

If nobody knows anything, then anything is possible. In any event, what we have here is a framework, one that most of our European allies seem to believe is worth going on with, which means that they must be overjoyed by the fact that one of the most prominent potential Republican presidential candidates already is committed to doing to this potential deal what he's already done to his state's economy and to its public universities. As Greg Sargent points out, the rest of the sheep in the pen will fall quickly in line. "Overturning the Iran deal" is going to replace "Repealing Obamacare" in this presidential cycle as what a Republican candidate must promise to do on Day One. Me? At least we're not selling them missiles any more. There's hope in that, too.