Buy Photo Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer addressed the Rotary Club at his annual State of the City address at the Galt House in January 2016. (Photo: John Sommers II, Special to CJ)Buy Photo

Building a more equitable Louisville is a "contact sport" and those who criticize development efforts to close gaps across the city's zip codes aren't helping, Mayor Greg Fischer said at an economic summit Friday.

"Anybody that's sitting on the sidelines is part of the problem and not part of the solution," Fischer said.

Those were just some of the remarks Fischer made during the wide-ranging discussion moderated by state Sen. Gerald Neal at the African American Initiative's annual conference, which was hosted at the Jefferson Community & Technical College campus in downtown.

Fischer told the more than five dozen attendees that in the post-recession economy the city has to fight the state for each and every dollar despite being Kentucky's economic engine. The city still wrestles with how to spend those limited resources, whether that be on extra policing, affordable housing, road paving or extending community center hours for youth during the summer.

"All of these things that seem kind of simple that are a no-brainer, there are arguments behind each and every one of these," he said.

Asked what Louisville needs most, the mayor said employers are desperate for a major influx of skilled workers. The struggle for cities such as Louisville, he said, is balancing how it attracts people to move here with growing the skills of current residents.

"Companies are dying to hire people who have skills," he said.

Pressed by Neal about specific accomplishments western Louisville residents can see, the mayor cited his administration signing an agreement for Seed Capital to begin working on the $56 million West Louisville FoodPort at 30th Street and Muhammad Ali Boulevard in the Russell neighborhood; extending River Road westward to encourage commercial development; and the creation of ChefSpace at 18th Street and Muhammad Ali Boulevard.

The mayor also addressed a stalled Wal-Mart project at 18th Street and Broadway, which is held up in litigation, saying the big-box retailer has decided to delay construction until the suit is settled. Fischer said Wal-Mart is committed to the site and that city officials hope construction will begin in the next year, but there is a risk the project could fall through.

"They said they're full steam ahead, but as we know in public companies those type of decisions can change," Fischer said. "Time is not our friend on this particular issue."

Neal told Fischer many are worried about being displaced or priced out by new development projects such as an ambitious federal grant application to revitalize the Russell neighborhood. The mayor said his economic development team understands people are fearful and it is looking at policies to help current residents, but he added that those housing efforts are not always a negative.

"We're seeing all over the country right now there's a lot of evidence gentrification kind of lifts all boats," he said.

But the Rev. David Snardon, pastor at Joshua Tabernacle Missionary Baptist Church in the Russell neighborhood, said there is a great deal of anxiety around gentrification given recent developments.

"For good reason," said Snardon. "The track record with the city and urban renewal and the Hope IV funds leave people less than trusting when it comes to new development."

Snardon said the city's economic development plans lack the connection between policies and how residents will benefit. He said bringing in new businesses that don't hire from the community has been just as much of a concern in western Louisville as the lack of better food choices or retail department stores.

"Neighborhood development has to involve investing in the people in the community and not just turning a profit for the business community, and that also includes productive schools that service our children," he said. " ... It is important that other west Louisville neighborhoods, including Russell, are developed in such a way that it is inviting to businesses and accommodating to both present and future residents."

Reporter Phillip M. Bailey can be reached at (502) 582-4475 or pbailey@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1RsaBMv