Although the British managed to snag a reputation as the world’s tea connoisseurs, it is enjoyed by citizens in nearly every part of the world. Tea is the second most widely-consumed beverage in the world next to water and can be found in close to 80 percent of U.S. households. Different types of tea hold different health benefits. Luckily for you, below we’ve provided a list of what four of the most popular tea varieties can do for your body.

Black Tea For Fresh Breath

Black tea is most likely what pops into your mind when you picture the brewed beverage. It’s the tea that was infamously thrown into the Boston harbor during the 1773 Boston Tea Party, and what most Brits are referring to when speaking of their ‘afternoon cuppa.’ Black tea, like most teas, is made from the dried leaves of a variety of evergreen trees called Camellia sinensi. Its use has dates back to China nearly 5,000 years ago.

Black tea is excellent for those needing an energy boost. One cup of black tea holds nearly as much caffeine as cup of coffee, but with the added plus of having antioxidants and vitamins as well. What is particularly interesting about this type of tea is its recent links to oral health. According to research by the Pacific College of Oriental Medicine, the polyphenols in black tea have been found to stop the growth or bacteria in the mouth. This causes reduced plaque buildup as well as fresher breath. A study by the National Tea Research Foundation of India found that these polyphenols may actually be able to even play a role in the prevention of oral cancers.

Ginseng Tea For Bedroom Energy

Ginseng tea comes in three different varieties: American Asian and Siberian Ginseng. Both varieties hold health benefits such as relief of menstrual pain, lowering high blood pressure, and stimulating brain cells. However, one particularly interesting health plus of ginseng tea is its ability to boost both male and female libido. "Ginseng, like a lot of herbs, is thought to work by helping the body make more nitric oxide -- as does Viagra," Dr. Christopher Saigal, assistant professor of urology at UCLA school of medicine told Webmd. The consumption of ginseng is also said to boost bedroom performance as well, Cosmopolitan reports.

Green Tea For Healthy Hearts

Green tea seriously lags behind black in popularity, making up for only about 20 percent of the world’s tea consumption, but this lack of enthusiasm is probably undeserved. Green tea is the least processed type of tea and has health benefits ranging from cancer prevention and improving mental health. A 2006 study published by the Journal of the American Medical Association concluded that tea consumption is associated with reduced mortality due to all causes including heart disease. The study followed over 40,000 Japanese participants for 11 years. Those who drank at least 5 cups of green tea a day had a significantly lower risk of dying from cardiovascular disease than those who drank only one cup a day.

Oolong Tea For Tiny Waists

Oolong tea is similar to green tea, differing only in the way the leaves are prepared before the brewing process. In traditional Chinese medicine, oolong tea has been recognized for its ability to decrease body fat and current science supports this ancient theory. According to Dr. Oz, the antioxidant catechin that is found in oolong tea helps the body to burn fast by speeding up the metabolism. Not only does oolong tea help to speed up your metabolism, but it also helps the body to burn fat more effectively and quickly. Although the results are not dramatic enough to be hailed as a miracle weight loss product, 25 percent of Chinese adults are classified as overweight, compared to the nearly 67 percent of American adults, so they must be on to something.