A new poll from Public Policy Polling finds Floridians strongly support the idea of expanding Medicaid in the state to capture federal money and close the coverage gap, an option the Legislature has resisted.

The poll also finds Floridians are OK with gay marriage, almost ready to adopt a medical marijuana Constitutional amendment, and open to moving gubernatorial elections to line up with presidential elections.

The poll also finds that those too-often-empty baseball stadiums in Miami and St. Petersburg are a symptom of a bigger issue. Neither the Miami Marlins nor the Tampa Bay Rays are the state's favorite baseball teams. The Atlanta Braves and New York Yankees are more popular.

It also finds that the University of Central Florida Knights are now tied with the Miami Hurricanes for the third-most popular college sports program in the state.

PPP, a North Carolina-based polling firm, surveyed 923 registered Florida voters, March 19-22. PPP says it has a margin of error of 3.2 percent.

The Medicaid findings may send a signal to the Florida Legislature, which is again considering a Senate proposal to expand the state's Medicaid program. But the Senate plan appears to not have enough support for approval in the House of Representatives.

The issue is tied to Obamacare -- because the federal Medicaid expansion plan was included in the Affordable Care Act. Medicaid expansion was offered to states as part of the Obama administration's strategy to expand coverage of uninsured people, but it also comes with a big federal price tag. In Florida it would provide health care coverage to more than 800,000 uninsured people, and bring in more than $51 billion in federal money over the next few years to pay for it, but would also start shifting those cost to Florida in the later years.

Like Obamacare, the Medicaid expansion has sharply divided the parties, and that shows up in the PPP poll too.

Overall, 58 percent of Florida voters said they would support the expansion, Only 26 percent of voters said they opposed the deal. Democratic voters overwhelming support it, 82 percent to six percent. Independent voters support it 57 percent to 29 percent. Republican voters oppose it 33 percent to 45 percent.

The poll found that 58 percent of voters would say yes to a medical marijuana Constitutional amendment being pushed for the 2016 ballot, while 35 percent would vote no. The support is roughly the same as the last attempt got, proposed Amendment 1, which failed to get the 60 percent needed for approval last November. However, the 2016 election, a presidential election, is expected to draw a bigger, younger and more Democratic vote, the pollsters note.

Gay marriage, legalized by court cases last year and initiated in January, appears OK with Florida voters even though they approved a statewide ban seven years ago. The poll found 81 percent said the marriage equality move either had a positive impact on their lives or no impact at all, with just 20 percent claiming that it's affected them negatively.

"Another initiative that could go on next year's ballot also starts out with a good chance at passage," the poll's press release states. It finds 49 percent of voters say they would support moving gubernatorial elections in the state to presidential election years, compared to only 27 percent in opposition. Democrats, by 57 to 21 percent, independents, by 51 to 28 percent, and Republicans, by 41 to 33 percent, all say they'd favor such a shift in when elections are held.

The Braves were the favorite team of 17 percent of Florida voters, followed by the Yankees with 14 percent, the Marlins with 12 percent and the Rays with 11 percent.

The college sports question rated the Florida Gators first, with 23 percent just ahead of the Florida State Seminoles with 22 percent. while UCF and Miami each drew 10 percent, followed by South Florida with 8 percent.