Getty Images A general view of the moats and walls around the imperial palace on Aug. 31 in Tokyo.

To mark the 80th birthday of Emperor Akihito on Dec. 23, the Imperial Household Agency will for the first time offer special visits to sections of the Imperial Palace that are normally off limits to the public. Whether these unprecedented, tightly managed public visits make the royal family seem closer to the people, or on another plane altogether, will be interesting to see.

“We will open places that have never been opened until now” to commemorate the emperor’s birthday, a Imperial Household Agency spokesman told JRT.

The tours will take place on the weekend of May 24 and 25, and on a Saturday and Sunday in early October yet to be scheduled. A total of 600 visitors will get the opportunity to visit the palace over the two weekends. There will be three tours on each of the four days, with 50 participants on each. The agency will provide the full details in mid-February, then accept applications from prospective participants by postcard.

The Imperial Palace is situated in the center of Tokyo on the former site of Edo Castle of the Tokugawa shogun — the samurai warlords who ruled Japan between 1603 and 1867. The eastern part of the site is open to the public as a park except on Mondays and Fridays. A huge wall that would have supported the main castle complex — which was destroyed by fire in the 17th century — still remains, along with other structures.

But the main palace building and other sections aren’t open to the public. The building can only be viewed by the public from the garden outside on Jan. 2 each year, and on the emperor’s birthday, when the royal family appears on the terrace of Chowa-den building, used for public appearances.

Built in 1968, the Imperial Palace occupies an area of 22,949 square meters. In addition to the Chowa-den, the special tours will allow the public to see places such as the Matsuno-ma chamber of the Sei-den building, where the most important ceremonies are held, including the emperor’s coronation and prime minister’s investiture, as well as the Homei-den building, used for state banquets.

For those who can’t participate in these visits, or who may simply want to see more of the imperial family’s inner world, the agency also opens the palace in the ancient capital of Kyoto in western Japan for several days a year in spring and autumn. The imperial family lived in the complex for about 1,000 years before moving to Tokyo in 1869.

And since last year, the agency has provided special public viewings of the ongoing repairs to the roof of the Shosoin treasure warehouse in the ancient western city of Nara. This Unesco world heritage site holds a large collection of art and craft works, including those associated with the royal family in the 8th century.