By Justin Katz | Watchdog Arena

“Insufficient scale to justify investment. Do not pursue.”

Such was the conclusion of a 2009 report funded by the Robert Wood Johnson’s State Coverage Initiative to investigate then-Lieutenant Governor Elizabeth Robert’s plan for HealthHub RI. This year, the first budget proposed by Rhode Island’s new governor, Democrat Gina Raimondo, provides proof that the study was right.

In 2009, the idea was to follow Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Washington in setting up a government-run health benefits exchange. The hope (at least as publicly expressed) was that an exchange would help the state expand access to insurance while lowering the cost of health care. Yet, members of the group conducting the study “were disappointed to learn that the development of a full exchange model, as established in Massachusetts, would not” accomplish their goals.

A few years later, with the help of the Obama Administration and a party-line vote in the U.S. Congress, creating the Affordable Care Act, otherwise known as Obamacare. Then following an executive order from Governor Lincoln Chafee, Rhode Island officials went ahead and set up exactly the sort of exchange that their report had warned them not to pursue, calling it HealthSource RI.

With the Affordable Care Act requiring federal funding to cease soon, Rhode Islanders are now finding out what “insufficient scale” actually means.

To pay for the exchange, Raimondo’s budget includes a brand new tax on health insurance. The governor’s spokeswoman has been explaining the “fee” as structured similarly to the one that the federal government charges for its exchanges.

Public perception is also being shaped to make the state-based exchange look as if it won’t cost much more than a federal exchange would. The powerful Speaker of the House, Democrat Nicholas Mattiello, has implied that he’d only support HealthSource at the federal price point, and he has called the budget “a good budget in light of difficult circumstances.”

Neither of these impressions of the new “fee” is accurate.

In order to fund a state’s use of its health benefits exchanges, the federal government charges a 3.5% fee on each premium sold in the exchange (calculated before federal subsidies are applied). However, because the law also forbids insurers from selling the same plan for different prices inside and outside of an exchange, insurers spread the total fees that the government charges across all members with identical plans.

The proposed Rhode Island health insurance tax, by contrast, does not impose a statutory tax rate on exchange premiums, but rather, it begins with the budget to fund HealthSource RI. That total is then spread out to every small group and individual health insurance premium charged in the state. The one nod to the concept of a “user fee” is that the rates charged in the small group and individual markets are proportional to those markets’ actual use of the exchange.

In the first year, with the federal government still funding about 80 percent of the exchange’s budget, the rates will be 1.0 percent for small group plans and 3.8 percent for individual plans. It would be much higher, however, if the rate were calculated in the same way as on federal exchanges.

In order to raise the estimated $11.8 million in the first year, the fee applied to plans sold through the exchange would have to be 9.1 percent. That’s more than two-and-a-half times the fee on the federal exchanges.

In the near future, when HealthSource RI has to rely entirely on local money, that rate will increase. During budget battles, last spring, the director of HealthSource at the time, Christine Ferguson, told legislators that she could get costs down to $17 million by stripping out some customer-service bells and whistles. That level of funding would require a fee of approximately 13.1 percent.

The consideration that makes HealthSource RI a political scandal, rather than simply a taxation scandal, is that the extraordinary step of imposing a brand new tax is not a reaction to unanticipated circumstances. Key figures behind the 2009 report were alongside the prior governor when Lincoln Chafee created HealthSource via executive order and are in the current governor’s administration, and they had every reason to know that a true user fee would not be feasible.

Instead of acknowledging this fact, however, they are manipulating the terminology and the math in order to sell the public something it didn’t request and would never have accepted if the policy had been presented alongside the costs.

The public, in other words, would have come to the same conclusion as the inside activists who wanted the exchange in 2009: “Do not pursue.”

This article was written by a contributor of Watchdog Arena, Franklin Center’s network of writers, bloggers, and citizen journalists.