A poll by the Glascock Group in Alexandria shows candidates for the 5th Congressional District would do well to avoid Gov. Bobby Jindal's support.

The poll showed 53 percent of voters were less likely to vote for a candidate whose campaign staff was associated with the governor.

Only 24 percent said they were more likely to vote for a candidate, and the remaining 23 percent didn't have an opinion.

The poll was first reported by Greg Hilburn at The News-Star. It polled 466 likely voters in the district and had a margin of error of plus-or-minus three points.

Pollster Darrell Glascock said he asked the question because he wanted to know how Jindal might impact the race for Republican candidate and "Duck Dynasty" relative Zach Dasher.

"I asked the question because during the campaign, one of the opponents is going to jump on [Dasher]. They need to know how to handle it," Glascock said.

Dasher has denied he is the governor's chosen candidate. However, Dasher has many campaign staffers, including Jindal's favorite consultant Timmy Teepell, that worked on state Sen. Neil Riser's ill-fated campaign for the same office last year.

Riser had the full backing of Jindal and the state Republican Party.

Dasher picked up 7 percent in the poll.

"Actually, Zach has never met Gov. Jindal, and he's not focused on chasing bizarre poll numbers," said Ryan Cross, Dasher's communications director. "He's discussing policies that promote job creation, balancing the federal budget and getting the federal government out of our everyday lives. We need to return to our founding principles and remind the elite politicians that their job is to defend our rights, not determine them."

Jindal's office declined to comment.

Glascock also asked about how support from the Robertson family of "Duck Dynasty" might influence Dasher's campaign. Dasher is the nephew of patriarch Phil Robertson. The poll showed most people (39 percent) didn't care, 32 percent were less likely to vote for Dasher, and 29 percent were more likely to vote for Dasher.

Dasher said previously the Robertson family would be heavily involved with the campaign. So far Dasher has raised at least $62,800 from the Robertsons and others directly associated with Duck Commander.

Glascock, who has polled the district for more than a year preparing for this race, said he was hired by lobbyists from Washington, D.C., and Baton Rouge who are interested in the race.

Beyond the toxic numbers for Jindal's support, incumbent Rep. Vance McAllister, R-Swartz, fell from leading the pack in previous polls to second place with 20 percent.

Republican Ralph Abraham, a doctor from Alto, took the lead with 22 percent. It's the first time McAllister has polled behind a candidate this race.

"We're excited about the poll, but we're going to keep running like we're in last place," Abraham said.

Abraham is a veteran of the Army Reserves and has worked on medical mission trips world-wide. He said he has a common-sense approach to fixing the bad parts of the Affordable Care Act while keeping the good, like allowing people to stay on their parents' insurance until they are 26 and allowing patients with pre-existing conditions to get insurance.

"Our message is good. We're socially conservative and constitutionally conservative. We believe -- without giving up our moral standards -- we can have a debate without devolving into shouting matches," Abraham said.

Glascock said he attributed McAllister's fall to Public Service Commissioner Clyde Holloway entering the race. Holloway polled at 9 percent.

Monroe Mayor Jamie Mayo, the lone Democrat in the race, fell to 15 percent. Glascock said McAllister is pulling some Democratic votes from Mayo, but he expects Mayo's numbers to grow as he campaigns more.

* * * * * * *

Cole Avery is a legislative and state politics reporter based in Baton Rouge. You can reach him on Twitter @cole_avery1 or email ravery@nola.com.