As the Republican presidential candidates prepare to do oratory battle in Wednesday's debate in Simi Valley, a question arises about the Affordable Care Act, a.k.a. Obamacare.

Herbert says he saw that Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker — one of the GOP candidates — said recently that, if elected president, he would "light a fire under Congress" to repeal the reform law by signing "an executive order that will pull back the special deal President Obama put in place for Congress."

That is, he'd make lawmakers get their coverage through Obamacare exchanges rather than take their insurance business elsewhere. Then, according to Walker, they'd see what a lousy program it is.

ASK LAZ: Smart answers to consumer questions

Herbert asks: "Doesn't Congress already have to live under the Affordable Care Act?"

Nope.

At least if they don't mind paying more for health insurance.

Members of Congress and their staffers can purchase coverage through the Obamacare exchange in the District of Columbia.

Caption Consumer Confidential: Protecting Personal Data, IRS Crackdown, Privacy Laws This segment aired on the KTLA 5 Morning News on December 22, 2015 This segment aired on the KTLA 5 Morning News on December 22, 2015 Caption Consumer Confidential: Protecting Personal Data, IRS Crackdown, Privacy Laws This segment aired on the KTLA 5 Morning News on December 22, 2015 This segment aired on the KTLA 5 Morning News on December 22, 2015 Caption Consumer Confidential: Gift Giving at Work, Celebrity Tweets Make Money This segment aired on the KTLA 5 Morning News on December 8, 2015. This segment aired on the KTLA 5 Morning News on December 8, 2015. Caption Consumer Confidential: BMW Lawsuit Fears, Facebook Artificial Intelligence This segment aired on the KTLA 5 Morning News on November 17, 2015. This segment aired on the KTLA 5 Morning News on November 17, 2015. Caption Consumer Confidential: TWC Affordable Services, Google Drone Delivery, Calorie Info. May Not Change Eating Habits This segment aired on the KTLA 5 Morning News on November 3, 2015. This segment aired on the KTLA 5 Morning News on November 3, 2015. Caption Consumer Confidential: GM Recall, REI Closing on Black Friday This segment aired on the KTLA 5 Morning News on October 27, 2015. This segment aired on the KTLA 5 Morning News on October 27, 2015.

However, that's not a requirement. If they choose, Congress members can buy their insurance on the open market — but they'll lose their federal subsidy if they do.

In March, Sen. Ted Cruz, another candidate, made a big deal of how he'd be obtaining coverage via Obamacare even though he's introduced legislation to repeal the reform law. He previously had been covered by his wife's insurance.

"I believe we should follow the text of every law, even laws I disagree with," Cruz said. "It’s one of the real differences. If you look at President Obama and the lawlessness, if he disagrees with a law, he simply refuses to follow it or claims the authority to unilaterally change."

If he'd read the text summarizing the Affordable Care Act, Cruz would have found this:

"Nothing in the final rule or the law prevents a Member of Congress or designated congressional staff from declining a Government contribution for him or herself by choosing a different option for their health insurance coverage."

So if members of Congress are like the rest of us and care about how much they pay for health insurance, they probably would have purchased coverage through the D.C. exchange and probably would have discovered that they got a pretty good deal.

The Census Bureau reported Wednesday that, thanks to Obamacare, the number of people without health insurance dropped last year by 8.8 million to 33 million.

It's a fairly safe bet that not one of those 33 million uninsured works for Congress.

If you have a consumer question, email me at asklaz@latimes.com or contact me via Twitter @Davidlaz.