State FFA president: Work to your full potential

On Sunday, May 18, members of the Caliche FFA Chapter gathered for their annual Awards Celebration. The celebration is to honor all the accomplishments of the members for the year.

To start the event the 2013-2014 officer team received their recognition while saying their opening ceremony speeches. The officer team consists of Wesley Meier, President; Jarrod Thompson, Vice President; Karah Karg, Secretary; Austin Yahn, Treasurer; Ryan Walther, Reporter; Seth Miller, Sentinel; Austin Zink, Parliamentarian.

Karah Karg introduced the guest speaker for the celebration, State FFA President Tim Stahley. Stahley's speech was about members working to their full potential to be successful in reaching goals. Stahley started his speech off by talking about some memories he had from when he showed cattle. He had one story in particular that he shared, about a very ornery cow. He described the struggle he had when the cow got loose and him having to chase it down. "Well, are you just going to stand there or are you gonna go after it?" Stahley used this phrase several times in his speech. This phrase came from his father, which he repeatedly said to Tim during their wild cow chase.

Advertisement

Members of the Caliche chapter were humored by this story, but they took something important from the speech. They realized that when they set their goals they can't just stand around waiting for them to be achieved, but instead have to chase after them to be successful in the end. Tim's speech was described as "genuine." He talked about his FFA experience from beginning to end and what he has gained from this organization.

The 2013-14 Caliche FFA officer team. From left; Austin Zink, parliamentarianm; Seth Miller, sentinel; Wes Meier, president; Jerrod Thompson, vice president; Austin Yahn, treasurer; Karah Karg, secretary; and Ryan Walther, reporter. (Courtesy Photo)

Next on the agenda, adviser Todd Thomas and student teacher Shannon Baylie gave the Greenhand degrees to: Codey Stumpf, Terrell Devie, Josh Walther, Kent Summers, Ebony Lester, Jackie Bright, Trent Marick, Kyle Strecker, Jazzmine Jaquez, Jailene Jaquez and Trent Chartier.

After Greenhand degrees were awarded, Chapter degrees were presented to: Wyatt Raile, Marissa Ritter, Kyle Etl, Isaac Schumacher, Zack Pesall, Karah Karg, and Blayne Stump.

The officer team then gave out proficiency awards to: Karah Karg in the Sheep Proficiency award area, Blayne Stump in the poultry proficiency award area, Wesley Meier in the diversified crop production placement award area, Kyle Etl, Austin Yahn and Jared Wagner (State Winner) in Diversified Ag Production Placement, Cody Manuello in the Swine Proficiency Award Area, Marissa Ritter and Tim Zink in the Agricultural Mechanics Repair & Maintenance Award Area, Jerrod Thompson in the Turf Management Proficiency Award Area, and Cade County in the Landscape Management Proficiency Award Area.

Baylie announced the State Degree Winners: Jerrod Thompson, Austin Yahn, and Cade County. The District and State CDE participants were then recognized.

The district and state gold meat judging team members are recognized at the Caliche High School FFA Awards Celebration, Sunday. From left; Whitney Meier, Karah Karg and Wesley Meier. (Courtesy Photo)

• Dairy Judging Team (Districts) First Placement — Marissa Ritter, Blayne Stump, Zack Pesall and Kyle Dowis; High Individual at districts was Kyle Dowis; Silver Individuals at State, Marissa Ritter, and Zack Pesall

• Meats Judging Team (State) Gold Award — Whitney Meier, Karah Karg, Wesley Meier; Gold individual, Wesley Meier; Silver Individuals, Karah Karg and Whitney Meier

• Ag Sales — Ryan Walther, Austin Yahn, Kyle Etl, Isaac Schumacher; Bronze Individual, Ryan Walther

Next, Meier gave his retiring address. The outgoing president expanded on Stahley's speech about working to your full potential. Meier also talked about mediocrity. He said that it is truly a privilege to be a part of such an amazing organization, but it is a shame that so many people choose to be mediocre at it. He has noticed that many people choose to excel at sports and academics, but slack when it comes to FFA. Meier mentioned how honored he is to wear the blue corduroy jacket.

He left the audience with a challenge to find their purpose in life and work hard at achieving it, then decide what kind of legacy they want to leave behind.

Installation of the 2014-2015 officer team was the next, and most awaited part of the program. Austin Zink, member of the nominating committee, gave the committee report. Ebony Lester, Sentinel; Kent Summers, Reporter; Kyle Etl, Secretary; Trent Marick, Treasurer; Austin Yahn, Vice President; Karah Karg, President.

The old officers escorted the new officer team to their respective stations, as Karg took the podium to start the closing ceremonies. After a salute to the flag and a tap of the gavel, the FFA Awards Celebration was over. Members and their families enjoyed cake and ice cream while mingling with others and being honest and fair in the game of life.