Photo: Getty Images The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act didn’t end the insurance industry in America, despite predictions to the contrary. But it did usher in a variety of changes that affect benefits professionals. No longer able to compete primarily on price, benefits market participants are working to add other kinds of value by becoming clients’ go-to source for guidance on medical costs, supplemental coverage and everything in between. No point in competing on price Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

His firm also helps employees understand that what the company health care plan pays out this year affects costs next year, and the company provides workers with an app that automatically price checks prescriptions to see if a better deal is available nearby. The same app offers users telemedicine when they are in the emergency room, to potentially save the hassle and cost of hospital services. Employers can ratchet up employees’ incentive to use lower-cost care with reference-based pricing, Contorno says. “You can make people pay the difference between a reasonable cost for a medical procedure and a higher price, if they choose the more expensive service,” he says. “Most employers are looking at what Medicare would pay and pay a multiple of that: perhaps 140 percent to 150 percent of that number.”