BIRMINGHAM, Alabama - A new filing in a class action antitrust lawsuit alleging Blue Cross companies of conspiring in Alabama and across the country to illegally stifle competition says high executive pay results in higher costs to consumers.

And the complaint uses Alabama as one of its examples.

"Large salary increases for executives with Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama have recently been reported," according to the latest expanded version of the lawsuit filed Sept. 30."Such salaries result in higher costs to consumers. These supracompetitive profits are built on the strength of defendants' agreement not to compete ... and the market power, in particularly their ability to force providers to join their networks at below market rates."

AL.com/The Birmingham News reported in August that the top 10 executives at Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama made more than $1 million each in 2013 and collectively have doubled their pay since 2011.

The amended complaint, which at 160 pages nearly doubles in size the original complaint, also states that the Blue companies have used their market power to increase market shares on the exchanges created by the Affordable Care Act.

"Of the 15 states where complete data on market share of the health insurance exchanges are available, Blues have obtained the greatest percentage of covered lives in 12 of those states," according to the lawsuit.

Numbers for Alabama were not available, the suit states.

The lawsuit was originally filed in 2012 by an Alabama chiropractor and consolidated with similar suits. It is being brought in federal court in Birmingham by Blue Cross subscribers and health care providers against about three dozen Blues from around the country, including Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama, which has one of the largest market shares of any insurer in the country.

The Blue Cross businesses are independent, but are linked by the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association with a board of directors. The lawsuit alleges that the board sets up anti-competitive agreements allowing the companies to carve up geographic markets in an illegal way.

The association, speaking for the Blues named in the lawsuit, has vigorously denied the allegations.

"We believe that the plaintiffs' amended complaint is as meritless as the original, and we look forward to the opportunity to present our case as the litigation moves forward," said association spokesman Caleb Weaver. "The Blue system does not prevent any of our competitors from selling insurance in Alabama or anywhere else a Blue plan offers coverage, either as part of our traditional plans or through one of the exchanges established under the ACA. We welcome all competition, including competition to coverage offered through the ACA-created exchanges, which are governed by rules and regulations that apply to all insurers equally."

Weaver also said in the emailed statement that the complaint related to executive compensation is "similarly without a factual or legal basis."

In addition to the example of Alabama executive pay, the lawsuit alleges that members of the board of BlueCross BlueShield of South Carolina "made up of prominent lawyers, bankers and development and business leaders earned between $100,000 and $160,000 for board duties.

"They were required to do little but show up to the occasional meeting," the lawsuit alleges.

In South Carolina, the executives made "in the millions," the suit alleges.

Previously a Blue Cross spokesman said salaries and premium prices are not related, prompting plaintiff's lawyer Joe Whatley to respond, "Where is Blue Cross of Alabama saying it got the money to pay the substantial increases in salaries ... Maybe the tooth fairy instead of premiums."