COMMERCE CITY —A group of seven children kept a safe distance from a giant Jenga game that they had stacked up higher than most of their heads in the backyard of Anythink Library in Commerce City. They held their breath every time another block was removed, and screamed whenever the wind gently shook the unstable structure.

Mahala Holiday, 8, slurped a flavored ice pop and moved to remove a loose block from the center of the game. The group of spectators clapped when the tower shuddered but remained standing.

Mahala’s mother, Gerilyn Holiday, 40, cheered and laughed as her daughter backed away from the game triumphantly. Around the backyard of the library, about 50 children and their parents were slurping ice cream in the shade, blowing bubbles and bowling for bottles of colored, water-filled bottles during Commerce City’s mySummer kickoff party June 2 at 7185 Monaco St.

“This year’s mySummer program has a STEAM emphasis — science, technology, engineering, arts and mathematics,” said Stacie Ledden, spokesperson for the six Anythink branches in Adams County. “As always, the programs are hands-on and a whole lot of fun, but the topics this year range from the environment to physics to robotics, and much more.”

The kickoff parties have been a standing tradition for the annual mySummer programming, which each branch hosts from the end of May through Aug. 31. Aligning with this year’s theme, all library branches are offering creative, science-based activities almost every day Monday through Friday. A complete list of summer activities at each branch can be found on the library website.

Deborah Hogue, branch manager in Commerce City, said this mySummer series is poised to be the best yet with a wide variety of special events and craft activities, including making tie-dyed Japanese scarfs, body scrubs and sun-printed shirts.

“All branches received four paid programs this year in addition to the kits that our youth guides have put together,” Hogue said. “There’s a huge selection of educational projects and games that will keep families busy all summer.”

Some partner programs include demonstrations from Mad Science, Science Matters and WOW! Children’s Museum, an interactive museum in Lafayette. Ledden said programs are open to people from birth to 100 years old.

“We have something for all ages and interests,” she said. “For adults, there are tons of programs that focus on making — you can learn how to solder, make your own woodburned jewelry or build your own robots.”

Anythink Wright Farms at 5877 E. 120th Ave. in Thornton will also host its second, free summer concert series starting at 6:30 p.m. June 13 at the 1-acre, outdoor park adjacent to the branch. Food from Dickey’s Barbecue Pit in Westminster and drinks from Beer By Design in Northglenn will be for sale.

There will be one concert a month from June to August. All shows are at the same time, in the same location.

“People from all over bring their lawn chairs and blankets to sit on the lawn at Anythink Wright Farms and enjoy some eclectic music,” Ledden said. “All of the proceeds from food and beverage sales go to the Anythink Foundation and will help us fund our Explore Outdoors outdoor classroom at Anythink Brighton.”

At the mySummer kickoff party in Commerce City, kids left with their own book totes and pamphlets for the next month’s planned activities.

“We plan to be here every day next week,” Holiday said. “We have a calendar at home with stickers placed on all the days where there are (library) activities that we want to attend, and the week is basically full of stickers.”

If you go…

What: Anythink Wright Farms free summer concert series

When: 6:30 p.m. June 13

Where: Anythink Wright Farms, 5877 E. 120th Ave., Thornton

For more information: Visit

anythinklibraries.org/ location/anythink-wright-farms