WASHINGTON, D.C. – A fresh legal fight is brewing over Obamacare, this time with Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine and at least one Ohio county smack in the middle.

The outcome could affect an Affordable Care Act provision that was supposed to hold down health insurance premiums while protecting insurers from financial losses. A lawsuit against President Barack Obama's administration by DeWine – who has been consulting on this with attorneys general in other states – looks likely, maybe by month's end.

It's unclear whether DeWine would prevail. Like many things with Obamacare, this one's tricky and depends upon how one interprets the law. So step-by-step, here is what the dispute is about.

1. Starting a health insurance program from scratch can be risky, especially if the goal is to cover as many people as possible regardless of their state of health while holding down the cost of premiums. What if an insurer guesses wrong on costs and winds up with too many clients who need expensive hospital care?

Democrats in Congress who passed the Affordable Care Act, or ACA, in 2010, and the Obama administration's Department of Health and Human Services, which wrote the regulations to carry out the act, dealt with this by creating a "Transitional Reinsurance Program."

2. Reinsurance is like a second insurance policy – not for the individual, but for his insurer. Under the ACA, it works like this:

a) The insurer sets premiums for clients every year, based on anticipated health care costs and an expected profit margin. State insurance regulators and HHS review these rates and approve them or ask for changes.

b) These calculations are based on standards and formulas accepted by the insurance industry and the government. They're not supposed be mere guesses. But with a new product or new clients, an insurer might estimate incorrectly. A slew of patients might get sicker than predicted, for example, or the share of older patients needing expensive care might turn out to be greater than estimated.

c) If that happens to an insurer selling individual policies under the ACA, the insurer can tap into a reinsurance pool. Just as health insurance protects individuals from financial ruin if they have massive health care costs, reinsurance protects insurers. So with that in mind, we move to:

3. The ACA established just this kind of protection. It called for a three-year transitional reinsurance program to guard insurers against losses in 2014, 2015 and 2016, the earliest and most unpredictable years for the new insurance policies. The idea was to collect $10 billion for the reinsurance program for its first year, $6 billion for the next and $4 billion for the last year.

The sums were to get smaller in the second and third years on the belief that insurance companies would set premiums more realistically as they gained claims experience each successive year. If insurers did not have this kind of protection, they might have had to set their first-year premiums 10 percent higher for the sake of self-protection, according to the Congressional Budget Office and congressional Joint Committee on Taxation.

4. In addition, the program was to collect more money -- $2 billion for 2014, $2 billion for 2015 and $1 billion for 2016 – as a way of funding another ACA feature, called the Early Retiree Reimbursement Program. The money was an incentive for companies that might otherwise drop early retirees from their existing health policies. In exchange for not dumping these early retirees – who are too young to qualify for Medicare – the government offered assistance to employers.

5. Who's paying this money? Chances are that you are, if you have health insurance from your employer. Employer health plans must pay into the Transitional Reinsurance Program (and the Early Retiree Reimbursement Program) with a per-enrollee fee. That includes not only employers who buy health policies through companies such as Aetna and Medical Mutual of Ohio, but also self-insured employers. For the 2014 insurance year, the fee came to $63 per person.

The deadline paying the first and biggest installment, or $52.50, happens to be today, Jan. 15.

The fee will go down for the 2015 and 2016 insurance years, when the transitional pool is expected to need less money.

6. This gets us to DeWine – and to the government of Warren County, in southwestern Ohio, whose county commissioners also think this is all not only a bad idea but is also, arguably, illegal. The state and the county are self-insured, although they retain outside companies to administer their plans. That's a common practice, and your company might operate the same way, even if you have an insurance card that gives the impression you are covered by, say, Aetna.

In the case of Warren County, the $63-per-enrollee fee comes to $113,000, according to county commission Chairman David Young. For the state of Ohio, it comes to $5.3 million.

7. Taxpayers pay for government services, including the salaries of employees. So local and state governments must find ways to offset the payments to the ACA reinsurance fund or else pass the costs on to taxpayers. HHS says the ACA saves money in other ways, benefiting all taxpayers. But that is an economic discussion, and DeWine, while personally opposed to the ACA, says through a spokesman that the attorney general's beef is strictly legal.

The legal issue here: The transitional reinsurance fee amounts to a tax, according to DeWine, and to Young, of Warren County. And the thing is, they say, the federal government may not tax a different domestic government.

"We're a government," Young said in a telephone interview. "Governments don't tax each other."

8. Furthermore, DeWine's office says that the ACA used legislative language that should exempt government health plans from paying into the reinsurance program. DeWine's office was referring to ERISA, or the Employment Retirement Income Security Act of 1974. ERISA set minimum standards for private-sector pension plans, and ERISA amendments added protections to other private-sector benefits, including heath coverage.

Exactly how this applies to Obamacare gets slightly lawyerly, but if DeWine takes his argument to court, this could matter. The ACA had a provision (Subtitle G – Miscellaneous Provisions) that said, "Unless specifically provided for otherwise, the definitions contained in section 2791 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg–91) shall apply with respect to this title."

"This title" was Title 1, in which the ACA laid out its primary provisions – including those for the operation and funding of the reinsurance fund. And section 2791 of the Public Health Services Act refers to group health plans under ERISA.

That means, DeWine' s office says, that state, county and local government plans should be exempt from having to pay into ACA reinsurance pot. They do not fall under ERISA.

9. Young, of Warren County, raises an additional objection. Nearly every employer group health plan, no matter how it is funded, must pay into the reinsurance program for the first year. But under the way the law was drafted, and under HHS's rule-making, some exemptions will be allowed for the following two years. Those exemptions will specifically go to health plans that are both self-funded and self-administered.

If an employer uses an outside administrator – remember how we mentioned Aetna as an example? – it still has to pay. That means most employer plans, including the state's and Warren County's, will still have to pay. But some multi-employer and union plans that are entirely self-administered will be exempt for the 2015 and 2016 insurance years.

Young finds that unfair. A number of conservatives contend that the Obama administration carved out a favor for unions. HHS defends the provision by noting that the ACA had language making these distinctions for health plans that don't have outside administrators.

HHS also noted ACA language that said the reinsurance fee should be based on an insurance plan's "commercial book of business." A "self-insured, self-administered plan would not normally be viewed as part of any entity's 'commercial book of business,'" HHS said in an email to the Northeast Ohio Media Group.

10. So what will happen next?

"We are going to pay it," Young said. "But we've already sent a letter to the folks in Washington saying we're doing this under protest, and we reserve the right to take legal action."

A decision on the state's part would have to come from the Ohio Department of Administrative Services, which did not return a reporter's call. But it appears likely that the state will pay – and possibly sue the federal government before the month ends.

DeWine wrote to HHS Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell last week and asked her to "reconsider this misguided and unprecedented assertion of federal power that threatens radically to alter the balance of authority between the federal government and the states."

He said if HHS persists, "the State of Ohio intends to take all appropriate legal action to recoup such forced payments exacted from State entities."

11. It's hard to predict what courts would do, especially since few legal and policy experts who follow the ACA are familiar with Ohio's contentions.

Jonathan Adler, a constitutional law professor at Case Western Reserve University who has been closely involved in a different ACA challenge, said courts have upheld the federal government's right to require state employers to comply with federal rules. States must pay overtime, for example, under federal employment law. And states' sovereign status does not mean they can get around federal laws governing waste disposal.

The question, Adler said, could come down to whether Congress created a presumption that states would be exempt from this ACA requirement.

"I don't know if it's a winning argument, but it's a serious argument," Adler said. "The attorney general is raising a serious issue that is worth looking at."

HHS may further respond to this issue today, as the Northeast Ohio Media Group asked it to address DeWine's assertion about ERISA. If so, this article will be updated.

Meantime, another law professor who follows the ACA, Timothy Jost of Washington and Lee University, said he is not persuaded by DeWine's argument.

He looked through the statutory language and, in an email, cited the same private-sector ERISA language as DeWine. But Jost noted additional language in ERISA that refers to coverage by any employer, without regard to its public or private status.

DeWine may be reading the statutes too narrowly, Jost suggested, citing a provision and adding, "That definition clearly includes governmental employer plans. "