Whilesmith elected to League of Municipalities

Sparta Councilwoman will serve as president of county board

Photos



Council Member Molly Whilesmith



“It’s great to network with other communities and help one another."

Sparta Council Member Molly Whilesmith

By Megan Heintz



— Sparta Councilwoman Molly Whilesmith was elected president of the Sussex County League of Municipalities last Wednesday.



Elections were held during the league’s first meeting of the year at Sheridan’s Restaurant and Tavern in Andover Township.



Two others were also elected to the league. Fredon Mayor Carl Lazzaro is now vice president, after serving two terms as president, and Sussex County Freeholder George Graham, of Stanhope, has been re-elected as secretary/treasurer.



There are 26 municipalities within the organization that meet once a month to keep up-to-date on legislation and court decisions, disseminate information across municipalities, and explore shared services with one another, according to Whilesmith.



Due to the wide range of communities involved in the league, Whilesmith hopes to hold the meetings, which take place on the second Wednesday of the month, at different locations throughout the county.



She said she also hopes this will encourage others to become more involved.



Over the course of the next year, the league plans on holding seminars for guest speakers to discuss today’s most prominent topics.



Whilesmith wasted no time stepping into her new role.



At the end of the meeting, she handed out surveys regarding who they would like to see speak at upcoming seminars. Among the topics are government ethics, benefits and pension, the Affordable Care Act, and foreclosures.



Whilesmith also hopes to learn from those who have been in the league for a long time.



“The more experienced elected officials have been in positions for over a decade. They have a wealth of information that I look forward to learning from,” Whilesmith said.



Under Sussex County’s bylaws, the president of the league is elected for one year but may serve a maximum of two years.



Whilesmith said she is grateful for the opportunity and is looking forward to working with the other municipalities.



“It’s great to network with other communities and help one another,” Whilesmith said.



Sign up to get our newsletter emailed to you every week! Enter your email address in the box below.

Select the newsletters you would like to subscribe to.

Click the 'SUBSCRIBE' button.



Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered.