Huron, SD

This weekend, a fairly new outdoor aquatic facility hosts its first state championship meet for hundreds of swimmers. It's a large event for the three-year-old Splash Central Waterpark in Huron.

Family members and coaches cheer from the sidelines as athletes, ranging from kids to young adults, take a leap into statewide competition. Even though this isn't the first meet Splash Central has hosted, Huron Parks and Recreation Swim Coach Bonnie Biel says it's an important event.

"We do the State B Basketball tournament, so we have had large competitions here in town, but nothing that has showcased our pool, our facility like this," Biel said.

It's a pool receiving high praise from other coaches, including the Sioux Falls Seals' Chad Dillon.

"This is one of the best facilities we have in the state," Dillon said. "So they've put a lot of money into this place, and it really shows. So, just from deck space around the pool to eight lane, full 50 meter distance, which is the Olympic size pool, it's really nice to have that."

Dillon says he also enjoys that the facility is outdoors.

With hundreds of people in Huron for today's swim meet, it's an economic boost for the city.

"All of these families staying in town and eating at restaurants and shopping here, you know, is a real big boost for our economy," Biel said.

The meet is also a chance for swimmers around the state to showcase their talent, including the relay team of Lizzy Spaans, Kristina Pike, Katie Dinsmore, and Corinne Pelzer. The four teens raced their way into the state record books Friday night with the fastest 200 freestyle relay since 1977. Dinsmore says she's enjoying competing in Huron.

"It's my favorite pool in South Dakota, definitely, because it's a really nice facility, and the water's really fast, so it makes everyone just swim fast I guess," Dinsmore said.

Causing these girls and many others to make a splash in the state championship.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.