Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., and Sen. John Cornyn, R-Texas, take questions from the media Wednesday on Capitol Hill. Both parties agreed to a compromise that led to the passage of an anti-human trafficking bill in the Senate, and lawmakers will move soon to a vote on Loretta Lynch, President Barack Obama's nominee for attorney general. Win McNamee/Getty Images

At the outset of the 114th Congress, Republicans were eager to prove that with them holding the majority in both chambers, the government's legislative branch was finally going to get things done. And a bill that helped law enforcement prosecute traffickers while also improving services for victims seemed to offer the perfect opportunity for the GOP to show they could overcome partisan gridlock.

But as lawmakers finally cleared a major hurdle Wednesday with the passage of the Senate measure targeting human trafficking, it didn't come without one more squabble highlighting continued party divisions over sensitive social issues.

Senators were able to break an impasse over anti-abortion language that was stalling the trafficking bill, but an amendment that would have bulked up services offered to homeless youth – who are particularly vulnerable to traffickers – failed to pass out of the chamber. And the fight over the measure reflected an increasingly common flashpoint in American politics: the conflict between gay rights and religious freedom.

Democratic Sen. Patrick Leahy of Vermont proposed an amendment to the Justice for Victims of Trafficking Act that would have reauthorized the Runaway and Homeless Youth and Trafficking Prevention Act and included new provisions to curb trafficking. The measure also contained a clause barring recipients of federal money for homeless youth services from discriminating against gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender minors. Up to 40 percent of homeless youth are estimated to be LGBT, often cast out by parents who don’t approve of their orientation or identity and likely to get involved in commercial sex out of desperation.

[READ: House GOP Draws Next Battle Line on Religious Rights Debate]

Leahy's measure was co-sponsored by Sen. Susan Collins, R-Maine, and had the support of a few other members of the GOP.

However, Sen. John Cornyn said some faith groups were worried the provision would allow the government to intervene in their hiring practices. Cornyn, the Texas Republican who authored the larger trafficking bill, offered his own, more scaled-back version of the homeless youth legislation that did not include the nondiscrimination clause. But it pulled funds from a provision in the Affordable Care Act, earning allegations that it doubled as a political attempt to dismantle Obamacare.

Neither amendment reached the 60 votes required for passage Wednesday, though both came close.

“My Runaway and Homeless Youth and Trafficking Prevention Act includes similar protections for LGBT youth who are vulnerable to becoming walking prey to traffickers, but who can face discrimination when they seek help,” Leahy said in a statement upon his amendment's failure. “I am encouraged that my amendment received a strong bipartisan vote from a majority of the Senate today, but I am disappointed that the far right of the Republican caucus chose to oppose this critical protection for these highly vulnerable runaway and homeless young people.”

The fight over homeless youth shelters, as well as the larger fiasco over the anti-abortion language, highlights how even something as broadly supported and bipartisan as fighting human trafficking can be dragged down by proxy culture wars. While the House has passed a number of provisions regarding human trafficking with relatively less drama, the question now becomes whether similar debacles will plague the Senate measure as it moves to the lower chamber for final approval.

[ALSO: Senate Reaches Deal on Abortion Language in Trafficking Bill]

The Justice for Victims of Trafficking Act was proposed as budget-neutral – funded by fines levied on perpetrators – and was led by Cornyn, the No. 2 Republican in the Senate, making it a top priority in the new Congress.

The bill passed easily out of committee, but its fate was put in jeopardy soon after when Democrats objected to language that barred funds collected under it from paying for victims' abortions; they said it expanded on the precedent of the Hyde Amendment, which typically applies only to public money but would have applied under the bill to fines levied on traffickers. Republicans pushed back at allegations that they were trying to increase the reach of Hyde, arguing it was in line with previous uses of the language and blaming Democrats for not reading the bill closely enough.

After weeks of wrangling that also stalled the nomination vote of Loretta Lynch, President Barack Obama’s attorney general nominee, lawmakers finally came to a deal this week. They agreed that funding for victims' services would be divided into two pots. The first, funded by fines on traffickers as initially intended by the bill, would go toward services outside the health care realm, such as legal aid and shelters. The second pool of money, which could pay for health services for victims, would be collected from funds already appropriated by Congress for community health centers.

“We can now say there’s a bipartisan proposal that will allow us to complete action on this important legislation so we can provide help for the victims who desperately need it,” Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., said on the Senate floor when announcing the compromise Tuesday.

Not everyone was happy with the deal – particularly those who believe victims should have access to abortion – but it gained the support of leadership across the aisle, as well as the approval of top anti-trafficking groups.

[MORE: Republicans Seek to Put Abortion on the Front Burner in 2016]

Senators also avoided running into trouble with amendments aimed at immigrants in the U.S. illegally, another polarizing issue on Capitol Hill. One measure offered by Sen. David Vitter, R-La., would have blocked those born on U.S. soil to parents lacking legal documentation from automatically becoming citizens. Sen. Jim Inhofe, R-Okla., also proposed amendments that would change the detention and deportation protocols for certain immigrants. The measures from both senators did not make it to the floor for a vote.

However, lawmakers did pass language sponsored by Sens. Mark Kirk, R-Ill., and Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., to crack down on websites that publish ads selling the services of sex trafficking victims. The measure raised concerns that it could infringe on constitutionally protected free speech.

The trafficking bill now travels to the House, where it will be blended with previously passed legislation or presented as a whole new package for House lawmakers to approve.

"I am pleased that once again we have come together in a bipartisan effort towards solving a major problem facing our country: human trafficking," Cornyn said Thursday. "But our work is not finished, and we must continue to fight until all of our children can be freed of the threat posed by this heinous crime.”

Anti-trafficking advocates' attention is now on the House, where they will have to hold the delicate deal struck by the Senate in place.