Is it just me, or was that a long work week? Either way, football Sunday is finally here. Let’s take a look at this week’s starts and sits.

Start

Stefon Diggs,WR, Minnesota Vikings

Let’s be honest, the matchup isn’t great with the Minnesota Vikings hosting the St. Louis Rams but I believe in wide receiver Stefon Diggs. Why? Because I believe in running back Adrian Peterson. If last year’s tilt between the Rams and Vikings told us anything, it’s that St. Louis will do everything in their power to stop Peterson on the ground. This means they’ll have to stack the box against the run. That will give Diggs softer coverage. Not to mention, Diggs’ already faced the league’s toughest pass defense in the Denver Broncos in Week 4. He still managed a decent 87 yards. Look for Diggs to shine again on Sunday as the rookie inches closer to matchup-proof status. Diggs missed practice Wednesday due to a hamstring injury but returned Thursday. He should play Sunday but monitor his status.

Jeremy Langford, RB, Chicago Bears

Many fantasy owners are probably wondering if rookie running back Jeremy Langford is a good plug and play option this week with veteran back Matt Forte out. The matchup couldn’t be much better for Langford as he and the Bears head to Qualcomm in San Diego. The Chargers have allowed 125 rushing yards per game. Last week however, they held Ravens back Justin Forsett to just 69 yards. Even so, I expect Langford to have a great Monday Night debut.

Jonathan Stewart, RB, Carolina Panthers

Running backs Matt Forte, Todd Gurley, Jamaal Charles, Ronnie Hillman and C.J. Anderson all made mincemeat of the Green Bay Packers’ run defense and I expect Panthers back Jonathan Stewart to do the same. One way you beat a great quarterback like Aaron Rodgers is to pressure him constantly. Another way is to simply keep him off the field. Expect the Panthers to run the ball early and often as their defense struggled to find ways to stop Andrew Luck late in last Monday’s game.

Brandin Cooks, WR, New Orleans Saints

Saints wide receiver Brandin Cooks has been resurgent over the past couple weeks, putting up 169 yards and a pair of touchdowns in his last two outings. Those two scores came in the mega shootout between the Saints and Giants last Sunday. Cooks should continue his positive momentum against a Titans’ defense that has allowed a score to No. 1 receivers in their last three games, including 90-plus yards and a touchdown to both Julio Jones and DeAndre Hopkins. Cooks isn’t on that level but he should prove start-worthy Sunday

Sit

Randall Cobb, WR, Green Bay Packers

Talk about coming out of the frying pan and into the fire. Last week, Packers wideout Randall Cobb faced the Broncos’ elite pass defense, and this week he gets the Panthers and shutdown cornerback Josh Norman. Norman is coming off perhaps his best performance yet, limiting Colts’ receiver T.Y. Hilton to just 15 yards. He made a game-saving play in the 4th quarter against Hilton last Monday. Bottom line is, Cobb is in for a long day if he draws Norman.

Allen Robinson, WR, Jacksonville Jaguars

“Gang Green” a.k.a the New York Jets may have gone down in Oakland last week, but it wasn’t cornerback Darrelle Revis’ fault. Revis held Raiders receiver Amari Cooper to just 46 yards in Week 8. Expect Revis’ dominance to continue when the Jets take on Jacksonville. The Jaguars have gotten star receiver Allen Robinson involved in the offense lately. He’s scored in each of his last three outings –scoring twice in Week 5 against Tampa Bay. Robinson will see a drop in production against Revis this coming Sunday.

Ryan Tannehill, QB, Miami Dolphins



After a shaky start, the Buffalo Bills have shored up their pass defense allowing less than 200 passing yards in two of their last three games (One of those outings came at the expense of Blake Bortles who has played surprisingly well this season). Dolphins quarterback Ryan Tannehill and Co. head to Buffalo to play the Bills Sunday. His history against Buffalo leaves much to be desired. Through seven games against Buffalo, Tannehill has thrown for an average of 189 yards, 1.6 touchdowns and 1.1 interceptions according to Pro Football Reference. If Tannehill keeps to that stat, a sub-200 yard, two-touchdown (rounding up), one-interception (rounding down) game wouldn’t be a good outing. Part of Tannehill’s and Miami’s recent success offensively has been due to the team’s effective run game, featuring running back Lamar Miller. Expect Buffalo’s sixth-ranked run defense to be up to the challenge of stopping Miller. It will be a point of emphasis for Buffalo especially after being torched by Jacksonville back T.J. Yeldon for 115 yards and a score in Week 7. With no run game and a history of mediocrity against a team that knows how to defend against him, Tannehill will falter.

Andrew Luck, QB, Indianapolis Colts

After seeing what the Denver Broncos did to Aaron Rodgers last week –77 yards passing, 31 yards rushing and ZERO touchdowns–you have to be wary of playing any quarterback against them. Luck surprised me last week when he still managed 231 yards and two touchdowns against the Panthers. Of course, that came with three interceptions. But the Broncos are a cut above the Panthers, and if last week was any indication, there’s no such thing as garbage time when you’re playing Denver. In recent weeks, Luck has taken advantage of softer coverages during garbage time, but the Broncos’ defense has no chill and will continue to pressure Luck long after the game has been decided. With Luck being an “every-week starter” due to name value only, I can’t advise playing him in any capacity against the league’s best pass defense.

Hugh Johnson: 303-954-1037, hjohnson@denverpost.com or @HughJohnsonDP