One in five nursing homes in Western New York received the lowest possible score in the latest ratings released by the federal government.

Not only did more facilities receive a 1-star rating compared with last year, but the ratings for dozens of others fell by one, two or three stars on the government’s 5-star scale.

The dramatic ratings drop came after the federal Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services toughened the scoring system to measure how well the nursing homes care for their residents.

A Buffalo News analysis of the scores found:

• The share of Western New York nursing homes with a 1-star rating increased from 6 percent in 2014 to 22 percent this year. Statewide, the percentage of nursing homes with the lowest rating rose from 11 percent to 18 percent.

• The share of the region’s nursing homes with the highest, 5-star rating fell from 17 percent last year to 10 percent this year, a steeper drop than in New York State as a whole. The percent of the state’s nursing homes with the highest rating fell from 25 percent to 20 percent.

• The average overall rating for Western New York’s nursing homes fell from 3.3 stars to 2.8 stars, placing the region in the middle of the pack among the state’s 10 regions.

• Locally, the ratings for five nursing homes fell by three stars in the past year, while the ratings for four nursing homes fell by two stars and by one star for 22 other facilities. The ratings for 33 nursing homes did not change, and nine facilities gained a star in their ratings.

The government made it harder to achieve a 4- or 5-star rating because of growing concern that ratings in past years failed to reflect the quality of care at facilities.

“This is a terrific step,” said Richard J. Mollott, executive director of the Long Term Care Community Coalition in New York City, a consumer advocacy group.

The new ratings are more accurate, Mollott said.

“In the past, it was too easy to get four or five stars,” he said. “It’s still easier than it should be, but definitely better.”

About 80 percent of the nearly 16,000 nursing homes in the nation received either a 4- or 5-star rating last year. Only about one-half of nursing homes earned a 4- or 5-star rating in the new ratings.

The overall rating is based on annual inspection results, staffing levels and performance on 11 quality measures, like the percentage of residents who had urinary tract infections or reported pain.

The ratings can be found at the Nursing Home Compare, a government website that helps consumers evaluate nursing homes.

Federal officials cautioned that the lower scores – a result of the new standards – do not reflect a sudden decline in quality at many homes.

But nursing home representatives worry that consumers will interpret the lower ratings as a drop in quality rather than a change in the measurements.

“Nursing homes improved and reached targeted goals in the old rating system. It’s natural that you would reset the targets,” said Nancy Leiville, senior director of member operational support for the New York State Health Facilities Association, an organization for for-profit nursing homes.

The new standards were adopted to keep pace with progress made by facilities, she said.

“Nursing home quality has improved, and the government just ratcheted up the benchmarks,” Leiville said.