— They walked on the well-worn paths that took them up the mountain of garbage, past empty bottles and tires and plastic bags. They saw sheets of metal and pieces of wood standing together in what looked to be a hut, certainly too small to house an individual, yet it housed a family of six.

Or more.

They saw children playing in this world of trash, their feet bare or maybe wearing one sandal with a broken strap, their faces dirty with the soot that coats the mountain of garbage known as Smokey Mountain that rises more than 100 feet in the worst slum in Manila, the capital of the Philippines.

And those children, dressed in tattered clothes and perhaps playing with what was left of a toy or a doll, smiled through those dirty faces.

“It was the best eye-opening experience I ever had,” Mikaela Souza said.

In November, Mikaela and her husband, Rays right fielder Steve Souza Jr., traveled to the Philippines with a small group as part of a faith mission organized by Unlimited Potential Inc. (UPI), a Christian organization dedicated to using baseball and baseball players to spread the word of God.

❖ ❖ ❖

The Souzas visited orphanages, schools and a mission that was a refugee for girls rescued from sex trafficking.

They held baseball clinics and shared their faith.

Whenever Souza saw a group of children playing basketball, he joined in, dunking the ball to shrieks of laughter. At 6-foot-4, he was the biggest person around.

They walked through some of the poorest villages and yelled, “Feeding! Feeding!” And those living there — the young and the old — left their tiny huts and eagerly accepted the food, which Souza described as an oatmeal-like mixture of rice, vegetables, protein and nutrients.

“We were there for 10 days, and they did more for me than I will ever be able to do for them,” Souza said.

The Souzas traveled to the Philippines with Brewers pitcher Chase Anderson and his wife and Brian Hommel, who organizes the missions for UPI.

Hommel has been going to Manila since 1996. Five years ago, he included Smokey Mountain as part of the trip.

“Everyone is impacted by it to some degree,” Hommel said.

Smokey Mountain is a garbage dump. Trucks pull up daily filled with refuse. Over the years, it has grown so high you can see the prosperous parts of Manila from the top. It gets its name from the fires caused by the methane gas that escapes from the garbage.

Many of those who live on Smokey Mountain or in the slums at its base left their villages for the promise of a better life in Manila. But having not found employment and with families to feed, they are pushed toward the slum, where they pick through the garbage for recyclables that can earn them a few dollars or burn the wood to make charcoal to sell.

❖ ❖ ❖

The trip to Smokey Mountain is long and includes a van ride to a train, then a tricycle ride to the slum. Normally, Hommel’s trips there did not include a hike to the summit. But for some reason, the Souzas and Andersons asked to make the climb.

“I totally believed there was divine intervention that we were sent up there,” Souza said.

They encountered children of all ages playing in the garbage, even some, Souza said, who appeared to be eating dirt.

“Everybody on the mountain is covered in ash. They are black,” he said. “It just was crazy. You just don’t see those types of things in your lifetime.”

Near the top of the mountain, the group saw a tiny hut that was home to a family of eight. The father, Souza said, was in jail after sexually assaulting one of his daughters. The mother held her baby, a 1-year-old boy who looked to be about six months, Mikaela Souza said.

On the baby’s head was a growth. Was it a tumor? The result of a cut that had become infected? An insect bite?

“What can we do?” Souza asked Hommel.

With the family in tow, the group brought the baby and his mother to a pastor, who was able to get the baby to a hospital. That was a blessing for the family, Hommel said, because those who live in Manila’s slums are often not admitted to a hospital because they can’t pay for the treatment.

The baby stayed a week. The growth was removed. The Souzas and Andersons paid the hospital bill.

“That was the ultimate blessing,” Souza said.

Souza has been on missions before. He traveled to Thailand in 2012. He and Mikaela have worked with the homeless here in the United States.

“But I wasn’t ready for this,” Souza said. “We left there with so much humility, and honored to interact with these families. We left with a mindset that we don’t need to have all this stuff. It’s nice to have great things, and we’ve been blessed in our lives to this point. But what do we need on a daily basis and let’s try to live within our means and by that way, whatever we’ve been given in excesses by the Lord we can spread around us.”

❖ ❖ ❖

Mikaela said whenever she hears friends and family say they are starving as they are about to sit down and eat, she looks over at her husband.

“We’re not starving. The people in Manila are starving,” Mikaela said. “We’re hungry.”

The Souzas would like to return to Manila, to Smokey Mountain, because as Hommel predicted, they were affected by it.

Americans are obsessed with possessions, Souza said. The more we have, the more comfortable life is, or so goes the belief. In the poorest villages in the Philippines and in the slums around and on top of Smokey Mountain, possessions are what other people threw out. That’s why the smiles of the children stood out.

“Up there, it’s tough to find joy,” Souza said, “but they find joy in themselves.”

So what if Souza struggled through an injury interrupted season in 2015. So what if his start to camp this year is delayed by an intercostal strain.

You want to see real problems? Look at a family huddled inside a tiny hut constructed of garbage that sits on a pile of trash. See a mother who can’t feed her children because her husband, who used to find what he could to sell from the garbage, is in jail for assaulting one of the girls.

“It’s humbling. Your bad days are nothing like theirs,” Mikaela said. “It’s insane.”

But see how that family enjoyed the company of strangers. How the kids smiled through their dirty faces while someone took their picture. How excited the children were during the ride to the hospital with their mother and baby brother. How thankful the mother was to see her baby receive proper medical care.

“In that area of the world, it’s so easy to be neglected,” Souza said. “Just to show people you care and you’re loved and no matter what the situation is, we’re here for you. It puts a smile on their face.”

rmooney@tampatrib.com

Twitter: @rmooneyTBO