As consumers, most of us have experienced first-hand the many changes that have taken place in health care. It’s a different world.

Times are changing in the world of community clinics as well, including Marin Community Clinics.

We are light years away from what we were in the 1970s, when an all-volunteer team provided basic care to indigent patients in church basements.

We’ve continued to change over the years, but none of the change has been as rapid or as dramatic as the past few years. Marin Community Clinics is truly a different organization than it was in 2013 — and all for the good.

What has changed?

• We are no longer the “walk-in clinic” that so many associate with community clinics. Today, we offer a sophisticated system of care: a Patient Call Center that takes 1,000 calls a day; comprehensive medical, dental and behavioral health services; on-site pharmacies, X-rays and optometry; a staff of 310 that includes highly trained physicians and dentists; and, an effective method of arranging for referrals to specialists.

• We now serve patients from all walks of life — including older adults on Medicare, employed people with commercial insurance, and previously uninsured patients who are now on government-sponsored plans. Eighty-five percent of our patients are now insured.

• Ninety-three percent of our patients would recommend us to others and we have received numerous awards and recognition for our quality. In 2015, Marin Community Clinics had a $35 million budget and raised $1.7 million in philanthropic support.

• The most dramatic change: unprecedented growth. Marin Community Clinics now serves 35,000 patients — 30 percent more than we did just a few years ago.

The number of patient visits has more than tripled since 2008; in 2015, we had 161,128 medical and dental patient visits. We are full!

Why all these changes?

With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act and expansion of Medi-Cal eligibility, thousands of patients who were previously uninsured now have insurance.

When people have insurance, they understandably are more likely to seek care.

We are also seeing more patients with Medicare and commercial insurance.

Marin has physician shortages, especially in the area of primary care, and we like to believe that the word has spread about our talented clinicians, easy appointment access, person-centered care, and modern facilities.

Advertisement

As Marin Community Clinics looks into the future, we are embracing a more encompassing view of who we serve. We are poised to take care of virtually anyone in the community — and we are prepared.

One example is the $4 million expansion of our Novato Clinic, scheduled for completion this spring. Developed in response to an increasing demand for services, we are constructing 21 new medical exam rooms, expanding to nine dental chairs, and adding an on-site radiology service.

Another example: our increasing focus on older adults. Given the tremendous increase in Marin’s senior population, there is a growing need for physicians and other clinicians who have expertise in geriatric care — and willingness to accept Medicare.

The fact that many independent physicians are aging or struggling is going to create a significant void. To that end, Marin Community Clinics is currently engaged in a development strategy with senior organizations and individual providers to create clinics that will focus on serving older adults who require more time with a clinician.

Even with these changes, we will not lose sight of our core mission — serving those who are uninsured or underinsured.

There is still a great need in Marin and we are here to help fill the gap. And, we will continue to rely upon generous community donors to support the care we provide to those less fortunate.

For more information, visit www.marinclinics.org.

Linda Tavaszi of Greenbrae is CEO of Marin Community Clinics. Dr. John Boland of San Rafael is chairman of the board and a volunteer dentist at the clinics.