People living with HIV and AIDS in Louisiana will be able to use a federal grant to help them pay for their health care coverage, at least for four more weeks.

Three insurance companies doing business in the state said they won't block the use of grant money to cover health care premiums on March 1, as one had previously said it would. All three will allow people to use money from the federal Ryan White HIV/AIDS program to pay for their health care plans at least through April 1, an extra month.

Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Louisiana, Louisiana Health Cooperative and Vantage Health Plan faced pressure from U.S. District Judge Brian Jackson, who issued a temporary restraining order Monday night barring the three companies from dropping those from coverage who were using the grant to cover insurance costs. Lambda Legal, an HIV/AIDS advocacy organization, filed a lawsuit for John East, a Louisiana resident who uses Ryan White money to cover his insurance plan with Blue Cross.

Jackson lifted the restraint Tuesday afternoon, after lawyers from the insurance companies promised they wouldn't change or drop anyone's policies during the next two weeks. The judge will hear arguments on whether the insurance companies should be forced to accept payments made with Ryan White federal funds March 10.

The Ryan White program helps about 2,400 people in Louisiana pay for health insurance coverage. So far, only Blue Cross has said definitively that it intends to stop letting clients use the grant money to cover their premium payments. But both Louisiana Health Cooperative and Vantage Health indicated they might also deny coverage if Blue Cross, the largest insurer in Louisiana, stopped accepting Ryan White funding.

Blue Cross has said it isn't singling out those with HIV and AIDS who use Ryan White funds, but rather banning all third-party payments for health care plans because of concerns over fraud.

"The third-party prohibition applies across the board, no matter who the third party is," said Richard Tyler, the company's lawyer, in the court hearing Tuesday.

Tyler conceded that there is no evidence the Ryan White program has been involved in inappropriate activity. Lambda Legal's lawyer, Harry Rosenberg, also argued that it was unlikely the federally funded program would be used to commit fraud.

Blue Cross, Louisiana Health Cooperative and Vantage make up more than half of the private health insurance market in Louisiana. They are also the only three entities offering health care plans through the new federal marketplace set up under the Affordable Care Act, commonly called Obamacare.

. . . . . .