Ashley Wyrick, owner of Gangwer-Wyrick Insurance Agency. (Herald photo/provided)

For 25 years, Gangwer Insurance has been a trusted presence in central Indiana. From their original location in Rossville, to their branches in Delphi, Michigantown, Mulberry, and Frankfort, Gangwer has been providing a full range of insurance and financial services from a variety of national carriers.



Now, under the name Gangwer-Wyrick, the company will open its first location in Howard County in Russiaville. Located at 175 S. Main Street. Suite B, between Waddell’s and Martin Brothers, Gangwer-Wyrick represents the only full service insurance agency in Russiaville.



“It has been a long time since there has been a local agent in Russiaville,” Owner Ashley Wyrick noted. “The strength of Gangwer-Wyrick is that we have major company backing but with a small town feel and personal service.”



Gangwer-Wyrick offers a wide variety of insurance and financial services that cover nearly every need.



“Whether it is home or auto, business, life, or even farm insurance, we have the resources to fulfill your needs,” Wyrick said. “We excel in retirement planning and have extensive experience with Medicare and helping people understand how to maximize those benefits.



“We also like to highlight our alternate investments for safety and security outside of the market,” Wyrick continued, “for people who want to by-pass the rollercoaster in this volatile economic environment, and who want steady growth with principle protection.



“These are investments outside the market such as life settlements, bridge plans and other various private equity investments.”



The business sector is an area of strength for Gangwer-Wyrick as they offer extensive experience in a variety of group insurance including health, dental, and vision, as well as group life, disability, and long term care.



“Flexible spending accounts and Health Savings accounts are another popular group choice,” Wyrick said. “Essentially, we have virtually anything a business would need whether they are a small business or a larger company.



“In the wake of the Affordable Care Act, many individuals and business owners still have more questions than answers. We can help them navigate through the confusion and find the plans that best suit their needs.”



Gangwer-Wyrick will hold a grand opening Tuesday, November 17, from 4 to 5 p.m.



There will be light refreshments and door prizes, and WWKI will be doing a live remote.



“We are very excited about being part of the Russiaville and Howard County community and hope to meet our new ‘neighbors’ at the grand opening,” Wyrick said. “It is a good opportunity for people to come out and find out who we are and everything we offer in a casual environment.”



You can reach Gangwer-Wyrick via phone at (765) 401-4033. You can also visit www.gangwerinsurance.com for more information.