Merino wrestling team qualifies all seven wrestlers for the state tournament

Merino senior Nick Vollmer reacts after he defeated SC-F junior Collin Casady in the Class 2A Region 3 Tournament 160-pound semifinals on Saturday. Vollmer went on to win the 160-pound tournament championship with a 4-3 double-overtime win over Holyoke's Luke Stewart. ( David Wilson / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

»

Nathan Schmidt called it.

Give this man a lottery ticket and a plane ticket to Las Vegas.

After the first day of the Class 2A Region 3 tournament inside the Bank of Colorado Event Center, the Merino head wrestling coach said he was "100 percent" sure that his team of seven wrestlers could qualify for the Colorado State Wrestling Tournament, held this Thursday through Saturday at the Pepsi Center in Denver.

The Rams made their head coach look like Rainman on Saturday, qualifying as a team for state, finishing third overall in the team point standings, and having four wrestlers compete in their respective regional tournament championship matches in the process.

"I'm excited. It's really all I can say," said Merino head coach, Nathan Schmidt. "They wrestled really well (Saturday) and it's an exciting day for us."

Sophomore Trevor Elliot at 106-pounds, senior Marcelino Baptista (132), senior Jaxson Hastings (138), and senior Nick Vollmer (160) were the four Merino wrestlers to make the finals on Saturday, with Vollmer taking home an individual tournament championship following a thrilling 4-3 win in double-overtime.

Vollmer, the Class 2A No. 8 ranked 160-pounder, according to Tim Yount's On The Mat Rankings, trailed 3-1 after the first of two 30-second overtime periods, but scored an escaped to begin the second overtime, then took down No. 9 ranked Luke Stewart from Holyoke with three seconds remaining to steal the 4-3 victory.

Advertisement

"Vollmer got away (for the escape) and he knew, down by one, he had to do something and he threw caution to the wind," Schmidt said. "He wrestled to win that match and won it. We had a couple matches not go our way (Saturday) where I don't think we necessarily wrestled to win and that's something that has to change for state."

Merino senior Jaxson Hastings (left) sizes up Burlington's Martin Torres (right) during the Class 2A Region 3 Tournament 138-pound championship match. Torres won 6-4 in overtime. Hastings finished second and is one of seven Rams heading to the state tournament. (David Wilson / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

Trevor Elliott, the No. 7 ranked wrestler at 1-6 pounds, fell 4-0 in his championship match against No. 2 ranked Tanner Watson from Akron, Baptista fell 10-5 to No. 4 Jake Trujillo, and Hastings, ranked No. 5 at 138-pounds, lost a heartbreaking 6-4 decision in overtime to No. 4 Martin Torres in the Rams' other three championship matches.

Senior Trace Elliott, ranked No. 2 at 220-pounds, rebounded from his semifinal loss to No. 3 ranked Levi Davis from Sedgwick County-Fleming to finish third overall.

The two question marks for Merino, freshman Remington Canfield (126) and sophomore Zhaylon Buckner (182), rounded out the list of Merino state qualifiers as Canfield finished fourth overall and Buckner, who only had five regular season wins, won four matches in a row in the consolation bracket to finish third overall.

"Remington did himself a huge favor winning that quarterfinal match against Wiggins (No. 14 ranked Cameron Holm) and not having to risk seeing that kid again. Winning that match was important for him and he did it," Schmidt said. "And Buckner did something really impressive, losing his first match of the tournament and coming all the way back to finish third. He showed some heart (Saturday) and it was exciting to see."

Merino will have three days of practice this week before heading down to Denver for the three-day state tournament, starting with preliminary rounds at 3 p.m. on Thursday.

Schmidt said there will be some minor tweaking to do before the Rams step foot in the Pepsi Center. But added, at this point of the year, it's more about getting his wrestlers mentally prepared for state than physically.

"My philosophy for them is to just go to state and do the things that got them there," Schmidt said. "Go out and wrestle to win, not to lose, and they'll find themselves placing on the podium."

David Wilson: 970-526-9285, dwilson@journal-advocate.com