iStock

A startup firm is trying to throw a monkey wrench into the online-lending industry, demanding refunds to consumers for loans that don’t comply with the laws of several states.

The venture, LoanReverse.com, aims to capitalize on the considerable legal uncertainty surrounding online lenders—which offer high-interest-rate, short-term “payday” loans to customers with bad credit.

The dispute is the latest headache for online lenders, which face numerous state and federal inquiries into their practices.

While some online lenders follow state-imposed interest-rate caps and licensing requirements, others argue they are exempt from state laws. These include offshore lenders and those owned by Indian tribes, which say they aren’t subject to state law due to their sovereign status.

But Florida-based LoanReverse and its founder, Alex Shogren, say online lenders that fail to comply with state law are making illegal loans that consumers need not repay. Mr. Shogren says banks that deduct money from consumers’ accounts on behalf of many online lenders have the responsibility to refund payments under a Federal Reserve regulation governing unauthorized money transfers.

Online loans that don’t comply with state laws are by definition unauthorized, even if the customer initially allowed a deduction from his or her account, Mr. Shogren says.

LoanReverse helps borrowers issue strongly worded demands to banks for such refunds and takes 35% of any proceeds as a fee. Customers “don’t know that the loans that they’ve entered into are illegal,” says Mr. Shogren.

Messages crafted by LoanReverse also suggest litigation may be in the works. In one email drafted by LoanReverse and sent to a lender, a borrower threatened to “pursue other ways and means of collecting money you may have illegally taken from me in the past.”

Mr. Shogren, who once ran an online lending operation based in the British Virgin Islands, says his company has helped several thousand people obtain refunds through their banks, with an average refund of $800 to $1,000 a loan.

Mr. Shogren isn’t alone in his view about the legal status of many online loans. Last year, New York’s top banking regulator, Benjamin Lawsky, ordered 35 online lenders to stop doing business in his state, and federal officials have challenged the loans’ legality in court cases. Earlier this month, Manhattan District Attorney Cyrus R. Vance Jr. indicted the leaders of a Tennessee-based lender on criminal charges of violating New York state’s interest-rate caps.

Online lenders say their loans are perfectly legal. They dispute the legitimacy of LoanReverse, contending it is misleading consumers by making false promises that their debts will be relieved. “We are very concerned that this company is violating federal law by misrepresenting its services to consumers and failing to disclose their true cost,” said Lisa McGreevy, chief executive of the Online Lenders Alliance, a trade group.

The CastlePayDay.com website

This month, a lawyer for the Lac Vieux Desert Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians, which operates a website called CastlePayday.com, sent Mr. Shogren a letter threatening litigation against LoanReverse.

“Counseling consumers to file claims with their banks that such [transactions] were not authorized when the lender obtained proper written authorization is deceptive and harmful to consumers,” the tribe wrote.

Some banking-industry lawyers disagree with Mr. Shogren’s argument. While banks have a duty to investigate whether transactions are authorized, they are “not required to determine whether the transfer was to repay a loan that may be illegal under state law,” said Leonard Chanin, a former Federal Reserve and Consumer Financial Protection Bureau official now with law firm Morrison & Foerster, which does work for online lenders.

Consumer advocates, however, see some promise in LoanReverse’s approach.

Nathalie Martin, a consumer-law professor at the University of New Mexico, said the strategy employed by LoanReverse “could be promising to consumers if banks indeed respond.” Consumers, she said, “do not need to repay loans made by online lenders that are not licensed in their state. Those are illegal loans.”

Andrew Fain, a television producer in Los Angeles, took out several loans from online lenders after he and his wife lost their jobs. By using LoanReverse to dispute loans made by several online lenders, Mr. Fain says he was able to get $1,400 in credits to his bank account for payments made to three online lenders and he is pursuing several more. For that, he paid LoanReverse $388.

Mr. Fain is still receiving collection calls but says he is optimistic that the debt will ultimately be gone. “If they’re illegal, they’re illegal, and I shouldn’t have to pay,” he said.