Seattle Seahawks Quarterback Russell Wilson is known on the field as a short but tenacious player who has already broken multiple NFL records. Off the field, he’s known for his love of others, devout faith, and now, his decision to abstain from sex until marriage.

Wilson has been a weekly visitor to the Seattle Children’s Hospital, visiting so frequently that the hospital has designated “Blue Tuesdays” for Wilson’s scheduled appearances. Even when travelling, he manages to drop in and brighten up a few children’s days.

Amazing time at San Diego’s Children’s Hospital @radychildrens today with @bwalt19 & this lovely girl! pic.twitter.com/oMBmq2A9K1 — Russell Wilson (@DangeRussWilson) July 8, 2015

The starting quarterback is also a Christian, and continues to be outspoken about his faith.

Grateful for God’s Love! He is simply more than enough! #PeacefulHeart — Russell Wilson (@DangeRussWilson) July 5, 2015

Wilson has gained national attention recently after speaking at a church service and sharing with the congregation that he and his popstar girlfriend, Ciara, are staying abstinent until marriage.

“I knew that God had brought me into her life to bless her and for her to bless me, and to bless so many people with the impact that she has, that I have,” Wilson told the The Rock Church in San Diego. “Nobody’s perfect, but He’s anointed us to do something miraculous, something special.”

“I ain’t gonna lie to y’all now,” Wilson continued, “I need y’all to pray for us. ‘Cause I know y’all seen her on the screen now. If there’s a 10, she’s a 15.”

Many people took to Twitter to show their support, voice their disgust and throw a few football puns in the mix as well. Some fans praised Wilson for not only speaking about his faith, but showing his efforts to practice it as well.

Thank you @DangeRussWilson for standing up for purity and the art of respecting God’s design for marriage. — Jarrid Wilson (@JarridWilson) July 8, 2015

Gained a lot more respect for Russell Wilson today. The fact that he stands by his faith in the environment he’s in is pretty awesome. — Young King (@JoshDMiller_) July 7, 2015

Others touted Wilson as a much-needed deserving role model in the NFL.

I hope Russell Wilson continues chastity and a successful marriage so teens have another positive role model to look up to. — Fr Matthew Schneider (@FrMatthewLC) July 7, 2015

Russell Wilson is setting the bar high out here! — Jonica Booth (@Blu1x) July 7, 2015

A few took the information in a lighthearted manner to taunt Wilson on his infamous picked off pass in last year’s Super Bowl.

As a #Seahawks fan, after that Super Bowl debacle, I’m pretty sure Russell Wilson should be thinking about scoring MORE, not less. — Rob Lowe (@RobLowe) July 7, 2015

I hope no one drafts Russell Wilson in fantasy football. Clearly he’s afraid of getting to the end zone. — Jason (@PeroEsPapiJason) July 6, 2015

A more serious approach was taken by some fans who wanted to comment in light of current events.

No suprise that same ESPN pundits that celebrated Michael Sam’s “coming out” are scoffing at Russell Wilson’s statement about abstinence. — Justin Kirksey (@JustinKirksey) July 8, 2015

So you guys praise Bruce Jenner but ridicule Russell Wilson ? Because that makes complete sense ???? — ??arcus Senpai (@sirmarcus__) July 6, 2015

You know society is twisted when Russell Wilson is getting slandered for building the foundation of his relationship on his belief system — Arachnid O (@OkeraJ) July 6, 2015

The debate even permeated ESPN as two of their commentators clashed over social media regarding the issue.

(1 of 2) @bomani_jones on @HQonESPN regarding Russell/Ciara u implied people trying 2 do it Jesus’ way by waiting till marriage r stupid. — Chris Broussard (@Chris_Broussard) July 7, 2015

i believe the underlying premise is flawed and about controlling women as much as anything else. so yes. https://t.co/DUyjVgmoAm — Bomani Jones (@bomani_jones) July 7, 2015

While Wilson hasn’t commented on the array of responses directly, he did continue to share the message he holds dear.