(Employees and community members look over produce at a mobile farmers market at the Our Lady of the Lake Urgent Care Clinic at 5439 Airline Hwy. Photography by Collin Richie)

Baton Rouge is leading the way in addressing community health needs by taking a simple box-checking activity to satisfy IRS requirements and creating unprecedented collaboration among the city’s hospitals, businesses and community organizations.

To retain tax-exempt status under the Affordable Care Act, every hospital must develop a Community Health Needs Assessment every three years and implement a strategy for addressing the community’s most pressing health priorities.

But instead of each hospital creating its own needs assessment, four of the city’s not-for-profit hospitals—Baton Rouge General Medical Center, Lane Regional Medical Center, Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center and Woman’s Hospital—worked jointly to identify those health needs, write the assessment and develop an implementation strategy for addressing the issues.

In addition to the four hospitals, representatives from Ochsner Health System-Baton Rouge, Surgical Specialty Center of Baton Rouge, LSU, Pennington Biomedical Research Center and the city’s Healthy BR initiative also helped develop and write the assessment.

For their first CHNA in 2012, the hospitals participated in a collaborative assessment, one of two types of CHNAs that can be done for multiple institutions. Although minimizing costs initially played a role in the collaboration, the hospitals quickly realized the benefits for the community overall from approaching the CHNA in unison. The result was one collective assessment for all the hospitals that identified the parish’s most urgent health needs. Each hospital then developed its own plan for implementing the goals identified and published its needs assessment separately.

“Each hospital took the goals we’d collectively developed and then tailored it for their own needs,” says Coletta Barrett, vice president of mission for OLOL. “That approach laid the foundation for what we did in 2015.”

Indeed, when it came time to update the needs assessment last year, the hospitals took their efforts further, becoming the first community in the United States to do a joint Community Needs Health Assessment—the other type of CHNA available for multiple institutions—as well as a joint implementation plan.

CITY HALL SUPPORTED

The joint process was initiated and facilitated by Healthy BR, also known as the Mayor’s Healthy City Initiative, which comprises more than 70 health care organizations, city and state agencies, for-profit businesses, educational institutions, faith-based organizations and nonprofit agencies. Mayor Kip Holden established Healthy BR in 2008 to harness the efforts the groups were doing to improve health citywide.

Working through Healthy BR, the hospitals jointly published one document that identifies the community’s top health priorities, covers the role each hospital will play in addressing the needs and detailing the tasks each will do to implement the strategies outlined the assessment. The result is a plan that maps out a communitywide, holistic approach to tackling the city’s greatest health issues.

“A joint needs assessment and implementation plan allows us to address specific needs on a communitywide basis,” says Donna Bodin, vice president of employee and wellness services at Woman’s Hospital, who worked on the 2015 assessment.

As a result, the collaboration extended well beyond the four hospitals.

“If we’re going to make an impact on the community’s significant needs, it’s not just going to involve our hospitals—it’s going to take involvement from community organizations and businesses as well,” says Andy Allen, outreach coordinator for the mayor’s office. “That’s the beauty of doing the Community Health Needs Assessment through the Healthy City Initiative—when we get to the implementation plan, there are pieces specific to health care and pieces specific to the community.”

The CHNA includes 10 top health priorities for East Baton Rouge Parish. From this list, four significant needs were chosen: HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases; mental health and substance abuse; obesity; and overuse of emergency rooms.

“If we improve [the] overall health of [our] community, then we are addressing these health issues before they become chronic,” Bodin says.

To determine the top 10 priorities, including the four significant needs, the CHNA workgroup reviewed data from a variety of sources, including government agencies and nonprofit organizations. The statistics included social determinants of health, such as household income, education level, and race and ethnicity, as well as the Community Needs Index, which identifies the severity of health disparities for every ZIP code in the United States. Parish health rankings measuring how long people live and their quality of life and input from community organizations also were used. The data were supplemented with what the hospitals observed at their own facilities.

“Each of us can see a pattern in our hospitals,” Bodin says. “As a group we could identify a trend.”

FROM PAPER TO PRACTICE

Turning this research into a readily understandable document was not a simple task. “The biggest challenge was turning a data-driven document into something the community can read and relate to, while trying to provide an educational message,” Bodin says.

The four significant needs remained the same in the 2015 CHNA as were identified in the 2012 document. “These are big-ticket items,” Allen says. “We’re making good progress, but we don’t feel like we’ve gotten to the point where we can take them off or where we can say we’ve done enough.”

While 10 health priorities were identified, many of them have a national or statewide support system or a strong organization with a track record of success in addressing the issue. The four priorities designated as having the greatest need in Baton Rouge don’t have that level of support.

“There’s not a single volunteer-based, national organization leading efforts on obesity. You’ve got 50,000 people doing 40,000 things, but overall we were not seeing the progress,” Barrett says.

Instead of being an insular document prepared in-house, the joint CHNA is a community plan. As such, Barrett says, every local resident can identify with some aspect of the needs assessment. “Our community members can see their needs in these strategies,” she says. “Everyone can have a role in this.”

For example, through the Eat Healthy BR initiative, partners—including restaurant owners and chefs—commit to offering healthy meal items for all customers. Among other things, they agree to include fruits and vegetables with all kid’s meals, make water or low-fat milk the default beverage and train waitstaff to promote healthier options.

For their ground-breaking collaborative efforts and the impact it’s expected to have on addressing health needs in the city, Healthy BR and the four hospitals received the NOVA award from the American Hospital Association in 2015. The award is given to no more than five recipients each year for “improving community health by looking beyond patients’ physical ailments, rooting out the economic and social barriers to care and collaborating with other community stakeholders.”

Barrett, who worked on both the 2012 and 2015 assessments, says working under the umbrella of Healthy BR was critical to successfully addressing the parish’s most urgent health priorities identified in the CHNA.

“This was a hospital-led and hospital-driven endeavour,” she says. “But hospitals can’t do it on their own. There has to be a broader approach and a broader range of partners.”

Bodin agrees. “A collaborative effort reaches many more people,” she says. For example, Bodin says, the number of individuals screened for HIV in Baton Rouge has increased by 28% since 2014. “One organization couldn’t possibly reach all these people,” she says. Further, Bodin notes, the value of produce sold at farmers markets, including mobile farmers markets, increased 8%, “so we know that those programs are impacting child and adult obesity through community strategies from partner organizations outside the hospital.”

Both Barrett and Bodin say having citywide support was essential to the joint process working, as well as to the potential for success.

“Doing the assessment under the Mayor’s Healthy City Initiative shows the value added of collaboration,” Barrett says. “You have to have that third party to lead it. You need that leadership to get people talking and working together and to look beyond their own four walls.”

As a neutral third party to developing the needs assessment and implementation plan, “the mayor provided a common table, with no competitive aspect, where the hospitals could come,” Allen says. “It’s impossible to overstate how important it is to have all the hospitals on the same page. These are such gigantic issues. But, if we align all the organizations, we are able to start making community-level change in those. That in itself is a huge win communitywide.”

HIGH PRIORITY

The top 10 health priorities for East Baton Rouge Parish as identified in the Community Health Needs Assessment, listed in alphabetical order and beginning with the top four Healthy BR priority areas:

HIV and other STDs

Mental health and substance abuse

Obesity

Overuse of emergency rooms

Barriers to health care

Cancer

Diabetes

Heart disease and stroke

Negative lifestyle/behaviors

Vulnerable populations