The Newnan Times-Herald A bin of pressed sludge was on display at Wednesday’s meeting on proposed sludge application sites.

The Coweta County Water and Sewerage Authority won’t be pursuing a plan to apply “stabilized biosolids” to property on Bill Hart and Old Corinth Roads.



The authority has been working through the process to get approval from the Georgia Environmental Protection Division to "land apply" the pressed sewage sludge on two sites on Bill Hart Road, totaling 87 acres, and a 52-acre site on Corinth Road.

A public information meeting was held Wednesday afternoon, and approximately 30 people turned out – most expressing opposition to the proposal.

The pressed sludge, a byproduct of wastewater treatment, is currently hauled to a landfill in Griffin. The authority pays approximately $70,000 a year to dispose of the sludge.

The authority was looking for other options, said CEO Jay Boren on Friday. It’s possible that, one day, the landfill might not be available.

“Griffin’s not putting any pressure on us, nor have they hinted that they will,” Boren said. But if that did happen, “we would have to scramble.”

Saving the money is not a primary driver.

“I’m not trying to cut that $70,000 out of my budget,” Boren said. “It would be nice to do that but not at the expense of some people who have been customers and residents of that property for decades.”

“Hearing what people were saying, from their hearts, we’ve decided that there are other options,” Boren said.

Newnan Utilities composts its sewage sludge at a facility on Hwy. 34 West. There have been informal discussions about sending sludge there, and authority representatives will be meeting with Newnan Utilities in the next few weeks, Boren said.

If the authority does pursue land application in the future, it won’t be at the Bill Hart and Old Corinth road sites, Boren said.

In land application, the pressed sludge, which is firm though wet, goes into a truck that grinds it up. It is then sprayed onto the land, similar to a hydroseeding operation.

The EPD requires monitoring for nitrogen levels and rotation of the application sites.

A plastic bin of the sludge itself sat on the main table during Wednesday’s public hearing. It has an earthy smell, with a barely perceptible sewage odor.

The fields would be planted with coastal Bermudagrass. Coastal Bermuda was chosen because it pulls high levels of nitrogen from the soil, said Rusty Russell, project manager.

Residents who turned out at the meeting were concerned about pathogens, runoff, and the effect the land application project could have on their property values.

Greg Farmer said he’d seen a study from Sweden stating that human pathogens could remain in the sludge for up to seven years.

“It includes cholera as well as leprosy, tuberculosis, dysentery. This is in clean waste after the treatment process,” Farmer said.

Though the levels of certain metals are within allowed ranges in the sludge itself, a Harvard study “determined the metal levels do tend to accumulate and last for years to come,” Farmer said.

“They are basically trace elements,” said Braiden Griffiths with engineering firm Stevenson and Palmer. “We have tested and we have to test them annually, and do soil samples … we do soil tests to make sure everything is still within the guidelines.”

Melinda Walden, who said the Old Corinth Road site is in her backyard, said she’d found a study that said that there’s a risk of wind-born pathogens going up to 10 kilometers.

Creeks, including Sandy Creek, which feed the Newnan Utilities drinking water reservoirs, flow near the Old Corinth Road site.

Stan Roughton said he has a shallow well and worries about the impact on his drinking water, especially after heavy rains.

Walden said that her children play in the creek that runs along her property. She asked Boren if he would let his children plan in a creek that near the land application site.

“I’d go ahead and say no,” Boren said at the meeting.

Friday, Boren said that, after gathering more information, he would feel comfortable letting his children plan in a creek near the site.

“People do not want this, no matter how safe you say it is,” Walden said. “As a community we are begging you to do something else.”