Mahatma Gandhi is often credited with saying, “I like your Christ, I do not like your Christians. Your Christians are so unlike your Christ.” That’s how I feel about this time of year. I love the meaning of Christmas; I do not love what the celebration of Christmas has become. The celebration is so unlike the meaning.

As a theoretical physicist, I can’t help but recognize in this important seasonal matter a parallel with quantum mechanics – specifically, with something called the complementarity principle. In a manner of speaking, it describes certain vexing trade-offs that characterize our relationship with the world generally, not just Christmas. An inevitable competition between pairs of measurements, concepts, phenomena – call them what you will – that forces us to choose between them.

I could give you many specific examples of such dueling couples, but I’ll settle for the one attributed to Niels Bohr, the famous Danish co-founder of quantum mechanics. “Truth and clarity,” he reportedly observed, “are complementary.”



[READ: What Would Jesus Do Today?]

Entire books can and have been written on the subject – I myself am working on one right now. But simply put, Bohr's claim can be interpreted to mean this: The more diligently we seek out certain truths, the less clear things become; and the more faith is required to understand the truths. Conversely, the more stubbornly we insist on keeping things clear-cut and down-to-earth, the less likely we are to apprehend or even credit certain complex truths.

The same, I believe, can be said about the meaning and celebration of Christmas. The two are complementary. The two compete for our attention and favor.

The meaning of Christmas is like truth. The more you contemplate it, the more incredible it seems. A God who becomes flesh? In the form of a baby, born to poor parents? A God who loves us so much he’s bent on offering us total and eternal amnesty? Those are truths that require more than just a little faith to believe.

But the celebration of Christmas is like clarity. The more you give yourself to it, the more it becomes about stuff that’s easy to understand – decorations, gifts, parties, the list of revelries is long and getting longer. Not much faith is required in this department – just a whole lot of stamina and money.

So what are we Christians to do at this time of year?



[READ: Christmas Compassion]

We could focus entirely on the meaning of Christmas and forget the celebration. In the mid-17th century, England’s upstart Parliament did just that. As early as 1642, seven years before ordering the beheading of King Charles I, it set about passing laws that would make the feast of Christmas illegal. Why? Because celebrating Christmas was unbiblical – nowhere in Scripture do we see Christians partying over the Nativity. And because, to the straight-laced Puritans, Christmas was nothing but a takeover of Saturnalia, the pagan winter festival celebrated by the ancient Romans.

One pious Scrooge – Thomas Mockett, rector of Gilston in Hertfordshire – even complained that the ill-advised holiday hijacking had brought “all the heathenish customs and pagan rites and ceremonies that the idolatrous heathens used, as riotous drinking, health drinking, gluttony, luxury, wantonness, dancing, dicing, stage-plays, interludes, masks, mummeries, with all other pagan sports and profane practices into the Church of God.”

Parliament’s earnest efforts at banning Christmas celebrations didn’t work out too well. Most people of the day ignored the injunctions and partied on – in many cases, harder than ever, just to spite the authorities. In 1660, with the Restoration, the anti-Christmas laws were declared null and void altogether; celebrating Christmas was once again officially sanctioned.



[READ: Jesus Is Your Reset]

From what I’m able to tell, today’s popular culture is the very antithesis of the aforementioned Parliament. Nowadays, it seems, it’s all about banning the message of Christmas and playing up the celebration. Radio stations play so-called Christmas carols celebrating wintertime, jingle bells and Rudolf. Television networks air movies such as "Deck the Halls," "A Boyfriend for Christmas" and "Holiday in Handcuffs" – which are all window-dressing (at best) and no meaning. And more recently, our tireless, clever friends on Madison Avenue who cooked up the lucrative idea of kicking off the Christmas season with Black Friday have treated us to a “jump-start” on Black Friday. Stores are now opening for business at 6 p.m. on Thanksgiving Day! Black Friday has now turned into Black Friday week.

So, I repeat, what are Christians to do?

My family and I, for one, choose to avoid the two extremes. For us, the meaning of Christmas deserves to be celebrated. In fact, we can’t see how anyone who truly understands it can help but leap for joy.To start with, we place magnetic bumper stickers on our two cars that depict the Nativity. Yes, I know it sounds corny; but it’s a concise, sincere way for us to declare our faith publicly. Next, we do our best to be involved with our church’s Christmas pageant. My wife loves singing in the choir, and I love listening to her. One year, my wife, son and I acted in our community theater’s staging of Gian Carlo Menotti’s one-act opera "Amahl and the Night Visitors." What fun! My wife was a singing peasant, my son a dancing shepherd boy and I the slightly deaf King Kaspar.



Related Content Related Content Stuck on the Way to Equality We can learn from his encounter with the Samaritan woman.

Of course, we decorate our house for Christmas. That’s my joyful task and, truth be told, I used to go overboard. But now we’ve banished Santa from our displays and replaced him with a beautiful, life-sized crèche. We love listening to carols and watching movies. But we heavily favor the ones that really do celebrate the meaning of Christmas, not just its superficial ambiance. Finally, yes, we give gifts, but increasingly, not to each other. Our guide in the matter is the Biblical story of Christmas, in which the only gifts exchanged on that remarkable occasion were from the Magi to the Christ child.

For us today, that example means giving gifts to those in need. In doing so, we emulate simultaneously what the wise men did two millennia ago and hearken to the words of Jesus in Matthew 25:40: "Truly I tell you, whatever you did for one of the least of these brothers and sisters of mine, you did for me."



[READ: Jesus Is Not the Reason for the Season]

One year, my son and I volunteered at the Variety Boys and Girls Club of East Los Angeles to hand out gifts to needy kids. Afterwards, I treated him to a simple lunch at a small, family-owned restaurant not far away from the club and close to where I was born and reared. That experience by itself made our Christmas!

This year, our family decided to sponsor four more children through the Compassion International program – bringing our total to five. Recently, we spent an afternoon sitting at the dining room table – with the fireplace lit and carols playing in the background – writing letters to “our kids” and sending them gifts. Afterwards, we drank hot chocolate and tried imagining how happy the kids would be when they received their presents – some basic necessities, plus a few fun items.