There’s nothing terribly convenient about trains.

They’re slow. Unless you live in the northeast corridor or western Michigan (I just learned), most don’t go over 79 miles per hour. Riding the train is expensive, sometimes more than flying. They zip-zag. Oy, do they zig-zag.

Pretend you want to go to Santa Fe, N.M. Your first leg on the Silver Meteor leaves Savannah at 7:30 p.m. and gets into Washington, D.C., at 7 a.m. Then you wait for the 3 p.m. Capitol Limited to Chicago. Crazy, I know. Completely the wrong direction. You’re going north but you really want to go southwest. But you find something to do. If you’re lucky, like I was the other day, you find a group of people who have business at the National Mall, a 20-minute walk away. I hooked up with a bunch of doctors who were carrying signs, heading to the Supreme Court, which was about to hear arguments in King v. Burwell over the Affordable Care Act.

It’s empowering to be around purpose. I had purpose, too. I had Flat Stanley, that mythical cutout child’s figure that encourages letter writing around the world.

“Would you mind holding up Flat Stanley?” I said to a protester squeezed next to me. “It’s a long story.”

But he knew the story. He messed up last summer when his niece asked for the favor and he didn’t mail it back on time. So he was glad to oblige. When it started to rain, I headed back to Union Station, a Daniel Burnham architectural wonder of vaulted spaces and gold leaf. Because it was early in the week, when the New York Times puzzle is easier, I managed to fill in a few more squares than usual.

Sometime later — it could have been a week, at that point; I had lost track — I boarded the Southwest Chief after waiting in Chicago’s Great Room, a 110-foot-high hall of Romanesque columns, barrel-vaulted skylight and hard wooden railroad benches.

Train travel wasn’t always so kaflooey. In the early 1930s, when my parents boarded a train in Detroit and headed out to Los Angeles for their honeymoon, they joined some 40,000 other people that night bedding down in Pullman “sleeper” cars. That would have made the Pullman Company the largest hotel in the world. Alas, most of us sleep in coach. It’s cheap. It’s cozy.

Not long after that, we Americans started trading in trains for cars. We decided we’d rather fly. Trains in this country became passé, old-fashioned. After that no one bothered keeping up the existing tracks. They rusted in the rain. They went kaput. So did the axiom that the shortest distance between two points is a straight line. By the time Amtrak picked up the slack in 1971, the problems were monumental.

No matter. There are still perks to trains. This Capitol Limited is a double-decker. It has an observation car with swivel chairs and little tables, where you can watch the real America pass by. That’s where I found the conductor, listening to his walkie-talkie, looking out at the scenery, at wind turbines, ball fields, graffiti, Redeemer Missionary Baptist churches, red barns, yellow tractors, blue shipping containers, slopes of limestone, patches of creamy white snow that looked like cotton and the winter woods, which rushed past us like they were grainy film on fast forward.

We started chatting because that’s what you can do on trains. You can chat. One morning I had breakfast, boarding house style, with a city manager from suburban Chicago. In between bites of French toast, he said he liked the train so he can relax from his job. Earlier I talked to a teacher from Pittsburgh who was returning home after visiting her ailing father in South Bend.

First I asked the conductor if I could take a picture of him with Flat Stanley. No problem. Then I asked why the toilet didn’t flush in Cleveland. Good question, he said. The air hose broke and he didn’t have a second pipe wrench to fix it. So he called ahead and when we pulled into Toledo someone brought him the second wrench. When the train stopped he and the assistant scooted under the car and using their legs for leverage replaced the faulty hose. It took 20 minutes.

“It was a work of art,” he said.

I doubt trains will ever replace highway congestion (neither will more roads). But what a way to see the country. Just ask Flat Stanley.

Jane Fishman’s columns appear weekly in Accent. Contact her at gofish5@earthlink.net or call 912-484-3045.