Topics: Amazon.com, dot com boom, dot-com crash, Snapchat, tech bubble, Yahoo, Technology News

In Madrid, there is always cause for a party. Legions of madrileños, the young and the old, seven days a week, partake in La Marcha, a moveable feast of pedestrians peculiar to the Spanish capital. Festivities kick off around 9 o’clock at night, with tapas, and end around 3 .a.m., sometimes with chocolate con churros, or if not then perhaps with copas.

On any other Wednesday night, I would’ve been loitering after hours with other expatriates at the Café Central — just off the Plaza Santa Ana, by the hotel where the matadors sleep — savoring sloppy jazz and sherry like any good, decent Castilian man. Yet, my Spanish friends never could comprehend my unabashed, American reflex to turn in early – especially tonight, having just flown back from Germany, exiting a fog of Cuban cigars after an impromptu jaunt to meet a cohort of real, live Internet entrepreneurs.

It was the fall of 1999, and those mythical American dot-coms had just begun to cross the Atlantic. As a result, Internet anything was worth a business trip, especially if you were a technology reporter for Dow Jones Newswires. Though at the time living in Madrid, where a friend had called me two days prior with his invitation, I prevailed over my laconic London editor to permit my acceptance of the all-expenses-paid junket to Berlin. The trip did not disappoint.

Upon my arrival at Berlin Tegel Airport, a chauffeured black Jaguar awaited me on the curb. My driver, Gregor, wearing a Baltic assassin’s scowl, sped through the Unter den Linden to the Pariser Platz by nightfall, careful never to stray into East Berlin. When I arrived at the hotel, and thus the evening’s festivities, Gregor escorted me down a red carpet to the Davidoff cigar bar, where Austrian sirens in tartan skirts posed with me for pictures. Someone plunged a cigar in my mouth. Someone handed me a snifter full of Louis XIV. Barrel-chested men with shaved scalps; the dealmakers in sartorial cashmere; Swiss bankers who spoke English with Long Island accents, Timothy Leary’s ex-wife (apparently), and many, many women named Paulina or Claudette. Everywhere were buckets of champagne and canapés of smoked fish and cordials and hand-clapping — and, most of all, an overall sense that life would always go on this way. Oh, the bonhomie! We were all so lucky to be here together, to clink our crystal together and toast to capitalism’s unfurling eastward. Or at least as far as West Berlin.

One Paulina kissed me on both cheeks, spoke something in French into her earpiece and now we were off, heading to see Ferdinand, my host. I had met him months earlier at another Bacchanalian fête, this one in Barcelona, for an Internet summit at the Hotel Arts — a sea-squatting glass high-rise with an exoskeleton of white steel and a Frank Gehry-designed copper whale facing the Ibiza, 50 miles away. The Hotel Arts was the tallest thing in a city hunched in gorgeous Gothic gloom, tall-seeming even three miles back. Inside, holding court among reporters and would-be rentiers, Ferdinand was a sort of Gore Vidal personality in the occult European start-up scene. No one seemed able to answer the question of who he was … Although, truthfully, no one ever seemed to ask.

“Eric, I am so glad you are here!” he exclaimed. And just like that I was swept up into his Austro-Habsburg embrace. I thanked my host, then let slip the question of the hour: “So, where are these guys?”

These guys were the show — a couple of hotshot entrepreneurs who’d started a buzzed-about e-incubator — sort of like a virtual consulting/investment firm designed to help other start-ups navigate the Spanish commercial climate, only sans the investment capital and actual consulting staff. It was just Ken and John.

Truth be told, Ferdinand told me, “these guys are raising tons of money as we speak for their own venture. You must write about them. How is your cigar? Isn’t Paulina lovely?” She wore rubies on her pinky that formed a heart.

* * *

There had been enough luxury at that single party to fill an entire book on the excesses of the New Economy – as it was then called. I would be remiss, though, not to mention the many other exuberances encountered while reporting on the tech beat in Madrid.

There was, for one, the time when I lunched with a Lehman Brothers banker, a good source of mine, at Viridiana. In order to impress me (which admittedly he did), he ordered expensive eel sushi, and the chef himself materialized table-side with a live eel, struggling for air within his clenched, fat fist. The sushi was very fresh that day.

And that’s before even mentioning the acrobats from the Cirque du Soleil I watched rappel down ropes from the vaulted ceiling of a prominent cava producer’s home, an androgynous SWAT team amid fuchsia strobe lights at a dinner for media at the Credit Suisse First Boston conference (also held earlier that day at the Hotel Arts). I had seen two entrepreneurs for lunch at once who told me in gunfire-fast Spanish that they had planned to sell groceries to Spaniards “online.” And I had sat aghast while a pornographer, Berth Milton, CEO of Private Media, confessed his urge to stream video onto cellphones “someday.”

Hearing so many intimacies of dot-com boom’s innovators, I was an accomplice in fomenting the unsustainable market froth. Writing on the tech beat, I saw plenty of ritzy business gatherings. What I didn’t see a lot of at all of these many business gatherings was, well, the actual business.

Of all the men I encountered – and they were all men back then, at least in Spain – some were dead wrong about the future, and some were right. The ones who were wrong had no plan, and as such were unable to share any details about what their plans actually entailed. That was’t a problem, though, because no one, including me, was asking real, detailed, concrete questions.

Relevant context: To actually get to the Internet in Barcelona in 1999, one had to traipse down alleys amid youth hostels and locate the now extinct Internet café, where the reliable, dial-up connections were consistently third-world. My own preferred café was actually a women’s hair salon in my neighborhood that placed a computer on a pedestal on the sidewalk, presumably to drum up business. I checked Hotmail there because, you see, my millennial readers, there was no Wi-Fi back then or iPhones or broadband in Spain and you could not imagine how anyone with money might be contemplating, in this state, trying to sell anything on the Web to people who were, almost without exception, existentially disabled in the ways of Web browsing.

So yes, I was an accomplice in this froth, until I was not.

Months after Ferdinand’s party, I connected with Ken and John at the launch of their e-incubator, First World E Commerce. The Wall Street Journal Europe had agreed to run a feature by me on the company, and now here I was, again, at the Hotel Arts.

Over the course of the weeks I spent interviewing them, something interesting happened: I started to ask questions. And when I didn’t like the answers, I asked more questions.

My feature began this way:

Ken Wrede hasn’t taken his family on vacation in almost four years and there are no plans for one anytime soon. His wife hasn’t bought any new clothes since January. The kids drink water during the week and can have Coca-Cola on the weekend. Usually, the refrigerator is almost half-empty. But tonight at the five-star Hotel Arts there are open trays of smoked salmon and brie, an open bar beside the olive trees on the seaside patio where Mr. Wrede has invited nearly 50 friends and business contacts…They have only one client; only now are some of their three employees being paid.

The story ended with a dark scene: Ken strumming Jimmy Buffet songs alone at night — specifically, a “Pirate Looks at 40” — and planning a fundraising trip to America to keep the lights on.

“How the fuck could you do this to me,” hollered a broker over the phone the next day, after reading the piece. (In retrospect, he may have been a silent investor.) The start-up fizzled months later and First World E-Commerce soon became a dot-com fatality. Efforts to locate Wrede for comment were unsuccessful.

* * *

This month marks the 17th anniversary of Alan Greenspan’s first mention of “irrational exuberance.” It was Dec. 5, 1996. Greenspan was then enthroned as the paterfamilias of our economy, delivering a speech to the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative think tank. Those words, “irrational exuberance,” were meant as a warning to investors, who, at the time (thanks in part to the Internet), were playing day trader with the family savings account. Greenspan, prone to coining neologisms for phenomena in the equities markets, would later mint the wondrously descriptive metaphor “froth in the market.” But that wasn’t until the shit had finally hit the fan.