Obamacare exchanges opened today for business, but good luck getting information right away — or at least, maybe try late at night or early in the morning.

Individual Obamacare exchange rate websites have been offline across many states today, with intense public interest in purchasing new, affordable healthcare plans made available under the ACA, ACTA, or Obamacare throttling government websites and downing the shiny, new internet properties.

(It is not currently clear whether the government shutdown, speculated to possibly affect web services, is a part of the problem — and it was initially speculated that.gov domains could be eventually affected, given the lack of a U.S. government web presence during the last federal shutdown.)

Earlier in the day, many on The Inquisitr‘s team were anecdotally unable to access Obamacare exchange sites for individual states in order to view the data for articles, and on Twitter, user reports of Obamacare exchange sites being currently inaccessible proliferate.

California, Kentucky, and Illinois Obamacare exchange rate sites were intermittently offline under intense user traffic this morning, with residents of those states tweeting their experience in trying to get on and view their individual Obamacare rate tables for the states in question.

Several other states were offline at certain moments as well, with users tweeting:



Kentucky Obamacare Exchange Down… — Rising Dawn (@DawnRiseth) October 1, 2013



Looks like no one in Oklahoma is going to be getting obamacare today! pic.twitter.com/vonF9Pwgo6 — Jon Gross (@grossjon) October 1, 2013



It’s 12:09 a.m. EDT and the #ObamaCare exchanges do not work. #Glitch pic.twitter.com/L0wSaS8xI8 — Cong. Tim Huelskamp (@CongHuelskamp) October 1, 2013

While individual states’ Obamacare exchanges are up and down under the barrage of new recipients, tables are available with state rates through other means.

A cursory view of Obamacare exchange rates for your state can be viewed over at the Health And Human Services website. Did you have a hard time accessing your state’s Obamacare exchange website today?