Evolving Care

January 27, 2015

by John Long



The Good Samaritan Project (GSP), which opened in 1985, once dedicated itself to patients trying, and often failing, to survive HIV/AIDS. Now it has grown into an agency serving the health needs of those living with HIV/AIDS.



Back in the 1980s, when so many people were dying from the virus, who would have thought that one day, a clinic inside GSP would offer health exams and more?



Opened last year, the clinic has been open only on Fridays, with medical care provided by Truman Medical. But beginning in mid-February, officials say, it will be open five days a week at Good Samaritan Project, 3030 Walnut, KCMO. (816) 561-8784, GSP.



Truman has hired a nurse practitioner for the clinic, said David Schlomer, who is the CEO of GSP.



“She is going through the orientation process at Truman right now,” he said. “The exciting thing is that it gives us an incentive to be innovative. For example, one of the programs we’re working on is one day a month, we’d have a young adult clinic, and that day would be devoted to teenagers and young adults. And we may have some days that are focused on women. We’ll just have to see what the need is.”



GSP is one of Kansas City’s four primary AIDS Service Providers (ASPs) that benefit from the money raised by the AIDS Service Foundation through AIDS Walk and their fundraising events. GSP’s clients are all living with HIV/AIDS. The other beneficiaries are SAVE Inc., Hope Care Center, and KC Care Clinic.



Schlomer said GSP gets roughly $60,000 to $70,000 a year from that fundraising. He said about two-thirds of the agency’s funding comes from the federal government (mostly from the Ryan White Care Act), other grants, and fundraising events like the annual Dining Out for Life. This year, that event will be May 7, with about 30 restaurants participating and giving a share of their proceeds.



Briana L. McClernon, director of case management at GSP, described the role of her staff: “The case manager’s role is basically to help clients engage in medical care and stay in medical care. That’s our goal. We have eight case managers; seven are medical case managers.” They carry a caseload of 66 to 73 right now, instead of the 50 to 70 that they usually have.



In addition, GSP has a transitional case manager who goes into the prisons and meets with clients about six months before their release and then six months to a year after their release, McClernon said.



According to GSP’s eligibility guidelines, she said, a person’s income must be under the national poverty level for a single person, to qualify for services.



“We help them with accessing medication, and insurance has been really a big part of our jobs now, especially with the Affordable Care Act,” she said.



Schlomer said they hired someone for a temporary position a few months ago through the end of February to assist clients in getting insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act.



“During the last open enrollment period, we enrolled about 140 people,” McClernon said. “We have less and less clients now who are totally uninsured.”



The case management client list changes slightly on a monthly basis. Here are GSP’s reported statistics by race and gender as of December 2014. Case Management

Program Statistics by

Race and Gender Current Month % Current Case Load: 500

Caucasian 245 49%

African American 184 37%

Hispanic 30 6%

Native American 4 1%

African 29 6%

Pacific Islander/Asian 8 1% Male 399 80%

Female 93 19%

Transgender 8 2%



The members of the African population in the statistics above are refugees in many ways, Schlomer said. “There is a fair number in Kansas City.”



McClernon said that “We do have one case manager where that is her heart, she really wants to work with this population of clients.”



If there is a language barrier in working with clients, Schlomer said, GSP can provide interpretive services when necessary. One bilingual staff member, Lorena Holguin, works with the Hispanic female population, he said. GSP also works with Mario Canedo on the annual Latino Gay Pride festival held in September for outreach to the Hispanic community.



GSP serves 11 counties in the Kansas City metro area, on both sides of the state line. Its clients have primarily used the medical facilities of Truman, KC Care Clinic, Southwest Boulevard Family Health Clinic, and KU Medical Center. The case managers work out of satellite offices. Two are at Southwest Boulevard Family Health Clinic; one is at the Johnson County Health Department, and one is at the Research Medical campus.



Clients get help with emergency assistance and sometimes transportation through GSP. They can use a computer in the building to look for a job or housing resources, McClernon said. She said GSP works closely with SAVE Inc. and ReStart on referring clients for assistance and housing.



“One great thing about our agency is that it’s just quiet. It’s away from the bustle of things and people can come and kind of take a break and look at the things they need to,” said McClernon.



“We also provide mental health counseling services through the Ryan White Care Act,” said Schlomer. “It’s a program that is coordinated by a mental health provider, not an employee, a contractor that we have -- maybe a dozen providers in the network. That way, the client can choose who they’d like to see, assuming they are eligible. But we pay for the sessions and we have providers all over town.”



McClernon said that GSP cannot provide vision coverage under the Ryan White Care Act, but they can provide dental care through approved contractors.



Travis Barnhart, GSP’s manager of prevention services, has implemented walk-in testing days, Schlomer said.



Free testing is held from 3 to 7:30 p.m. on Tuesdays and Thursdays.



They test for HIV, STI, gonorrhea and chlamydia. In addition to doing the standard urine testing, they do more.



Pharyngeal testing of the throat and rectal screenings have been effective, said Mark Halastik, GSP’s director of development and communications.



“They have actually found results by going through the extra step,” said Schlomer. The HIV testing uses the rapid screening finger prick, with results in about 20 minutes.



Barnhart does outreach in the community at LGBT events and health fairs. He also brings in a busload of youth four mornings a month for presentations on STI and HIV prevention; each group has 20-42 youth.



In the last 10 years, Schlomer said, “I think we’ve seen a big switch in the demographics. I think we are seeing more women and more diverse populations.” He also said that treatments have changed dramatically.



“Everyone is trying to get toward a single-tablet regimen,” said McClernon.



“One of our biggest goals this year is to re-build our client services program. That would include emergency assistance, coordination, transportation services,” said Schlomer.



“We have those services now but they’re just add-ons to management. It’d be great to have a separate department that could manage that and make it better,” said McClernon.



“Our role as case managers has changed a lot,” she said. “We still have a focus on their HIV care and educating them on medication and side effects and everything, but with the Affordable Care Act, we have become very insurance-focused. Those of us who didn’t have insurance backgrounds have had to become experts at health insurance, so that’s a big change.”



“I think it’s changed the way all of us do our work. Not just GSP, but the whole AIDS service community,” said Schlomer.