California has made stunning progress in cutting the number of people without health insurance since the implementation of the Affordable Care Act. The percentage of uninsured has dropped from 22 to 11 percent, thanks in large part to the 2.7 million Californians who have enrolled in Medi-Cal. In comparison, Texas' uninsured rate has gone down by only 1.9 percent, to 24.8 percent of its population.

The bad news is that the state won't come close to realizing the potential of health benefits if it doesn't have enough doctors willing to treat its Medi-Cal patients, who will make up about one-third of the state's population by 2016.

It's nonsensical that California would embrace federal health care reforms but fail to offer the doctors who care for the newly enrolled patients adequate reimbursement rates for their services. The payments California offers physicians who treat Medi-Cal patients ranks 49th in the nation.

Gov. Jerry Brown should, at minimum, restore the 10 percent cut to Medi-Cal reimbursement rates that was implemented in 2011 during the state's budget crisis. He also should work with the Legislature on a long-range plan to improve the state's reimbursement rates to at minimum the median rate offered by other states.

Advertisement

The alternative is a continued spike in the number of Medi-Cal patients being treated in hospital emergency rooms across the state -- the most expensive way imaginable to treat Californians. The goal of the president's health care reforms is to get people out of hospital ERs before their conditions become acute. It won't happen if California continues to discourage physicians from accepting Medi-Cal patients.

The California HealthCare Foundation recently released a report showing that California has only 35 to 49 primary care physicians per 100,000 Medi-Cal enrollees. Federal guidelines call for the state to have 60 to 80 doctors per 100,000 patients.

Doctors have no trouble explaining why so few are accepting Medi-Cal patients. The reimbursement rate for a regular, primary care visit -- a meager $16 -- tells the story. The problem is compounded by the loss Jan. 1 of the two-year payment increase the Affordable Care Act offered primary care physicians who helped care for the poor. California already has a looming primary care doctor shortage on its hands. It shouldn't provide disincentives for medical school students to go into other specialties.

The governor argues that 75 percent of Medi-Cal patients will be covered by managed care programs, for which the state offers more reasonable reimbursement rates. But that still doesn't take into account the needs of the millions of Californians who aren't in managed care.

The governor and the Legislature have a big investment in making the Affordable Care Act work in California. Offering reasonable Medi-Cal reimbursement rates will help ensure the state has the primary care physicians in place to meet Californians' medical needs.