WASHINGTON — Before recessing for two weeks, congressional Republicans passed budget plans that would end traditional Medicare and make deep cuts to food stamps, Pell Grants for college students, and other social programs.

Senate and House negotiators will now try to reconcile the different budgets and come up with one document that will guide the spending bills for the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1. By passing a budget, Congress also will enable the Senate to enact legislation by majority vote through a process known as reconciliation, rather than the 60-vote threshold that is becoming common for major bills.

Congressional Republicans insisted that budget reductions were necessary in order to end an ever-increasing federal deficit, and that tax hikes were not an option for closing the budget gap.

"It balances the budget in less than 10 years without raising taxes, reforms our outdated tax code to be simpler and fairer, and cuts $5.5 trillion in spending to put us on the right path to paying off our debt," said Rep. Tom MacArthur (R-3rd Dist.) "We need responsible legislation like this to help get New Jerseyans back to work, and I was glad to see it pass with such strong support."

President Obama and congressional Democrats opposed the Republican budget. The White House held a briefing for reporters from local newspapers to detail the state-by-state impact of the proposed GOP cuts.

While increasing defense spending over the president's request, the Republican budget repeals the Affordable Care Act, meaning 214,300 New Jersey seniors would pay more for prescription drugs and 254,000 of the state's residents would lose their health insurance. Cuts in the Head Start preschool program would mean room for 710 fewer New Jersey children, and reductions to Pell Grants mean less aid for 173,000 of the state's college students. And reductions in food stamps, now known as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, could affect 883,000 New Jerseyans.

Rep. Scott Garrett (R-5th Dist.), a member of the House Budget Committee, said the individual congressional committees will decide which specific programs to cut later.

"The minority party always picks out the worst-case scenario," he said. "It's always a scare tactic."

Should Medicare, food staps and Pell Grants be cut to balance the federal budget? Vote in our informal, unscientific poll.



Jonathan D. Salant may be reached at jsalant@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JDSalant. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.