Chris Fleming

December 17, 2014

The Affordable Care Act gives states discretion as to how they design their health insurance Marketplaces. Some states run their own Marketplace; others are part of the federally facilitated exchange; and a few chose a state-federal partnership. All states have plan management responsibilities, and if a state runs its own Marketplace, it has management choices. A “clearinghouse” model of management is when all health plans meeting published criteria are accepted into the exchange.

This model is used by some state-run exchanges and all the state-federal partnerships and federally facilitated exchanges. The alternative is the “active purchasing” model, allowing a state to directly negotiate premiums, provider networks, and other details. This model has been adopted by ten of the seventeen state-run exchanges.

A new study, released today as a Web First by Health Affairs, found that in the 2013–14 open enrollment period, state-based Marketplaces using a clearinghouse model had significantly lower adjusted average premiums for all plans within each metal tier (bronze, silver, and gold) compared to state-based Marketplaces having active purchasing models. This study offers the first attempt to assess the premium differences across Marketplace models.

To collect their data, authors Kelly Krinn, Pinar Karaca-Mandic, and Lynn Blewett used information from the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation and The Commonwealth Fund to identify state policy choices regarding Marketplace governance and plan management strategy. The primary finding of this study—that state-based Marketplaces using clearinghouses were associated with lower premiums—might not seem surprising.

However, “competition findings should be interpreted with caution, because during the first year of these Marketplaces there was substantial uncertainty about…expected health care costs,” the authors concluded. “[O]ur baseline estimates provide a valuable benchmark for evaluating performance and state involvement in governance, plan management, and regulatory authority.”

All the authors are affiliated with the University of Minnesota, in Minneapolis. This study will also appear in the January 2015 issue of Health Affairs.