During an annual visit to Cañon City on Friday, Sue Birch, executive director of Colorado Department of Health Care Policy and Financing, and Reggie Bicha, executive director Colorado Department of Human Services, met with local leaders and directors of the Fremont County Department of Human Services.

Birch and Bicha talked about how the two departments are working in cooperation to integrate health and human services to form a balance of health and well being.

Bicha said Medicaid can't be just a program that pays for people who are sick, but it has to be modified in such a way that it can expand services and outreach to things that will lead to people being sick and help address those up front.

"On the medical side, we are trying to retool pediatricians and OB/GYNs to pick up on maternal depression or to be aware that kids might have great immunization rates, but they might be food insecure or mom might be agitated or opioid addicted," Birch said. "We are working on our side to help the health work force understand that you can deliver perfect health care, but unless you really help move people along out of poverty, we're going to still have systems dependency."

The goal is to help move people toward middle class by middle age. Bicha said 76 percent of Coloradans on Medicaid and 40 percent of those who receive food assistance also are working.

Advertisement

"They may not have access to full-time jobs or enough hours in the work that they are doing," he said. "You can work full time in Colorado at minimum wage and still be eligible for food assistance."

Birch said as Colorado has leaned in on the Affordable Care Act and created its own solutions, officials have chosen to modernize parts of the system. One of those things this year will be changing the name "Medicaid" to "Health First Colorado."

"What we know is people get treated differently sometimes when there's a poverty stigma attached," she said. "We are pleased that the Affordable Care Act allowed us to get almost 94 percent of Colorado covered."

She said nearly 3,300 adults in Fremont County were able to become covered through the expansion of the Affordable Care Act.

"Those folks are paid for with 100 percent federal funds, but it brought jobs to this county and it created more economic opportunities to get jobs, to get dental services to become healthier to get back to work, and it helped us financially in the state," she said.

The initiative brought $3.82 billion into the state, created 31,000 new jobs and increased annual household earnings by $643.

Birch said Medicaid or CHP+ members may download the PEAKHealth mobile app to find a doctor, view their Medicaid card, keep information up to date and more.

Participants must have an account on Colorado.gov/PEAK. Medicaid and CHP+ members can create a PEAK account anytime at Colorado.gov/PEAK. Download PEAKHealth for free from the Apple iTunes Store or Android/Google Play App Store.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com