A majority of Americans side with the Obama administration in saying that most employers should be required to include contraception coverage in workers’ health plans even if the business owners have moral objections.

An NBC News/ Wall Street Journal poll found 53% of Americans believed that employers who opposed the use of birth control should not be exempt from the coverage requirement in the 2010 federal health law. Some 41% said employers who had objections should have the same exemption as religious organizations. Around 6% said they were not sure.

The Supreme Court will hear oral arguments later this month from two companies, Hobby Lobby Inc. and Conestoga Wood, whose evangelical Christian and Mennonite owners say their religious freedom is being infringed by the requirement to include the morning-after pill in employees’ insurance. They consider that form of emergency contraception to be a form of abortion. Some Catholic business owners also have broader concerns about other forms of birth control and have also brought cases against the requirement.

The administration says that it’s given an opt-out for churches and offered a compromise arrangement for Catholic-affiliated universities, hospitals and charities but that for-profit companies should not be able to claim that their owners’ moral beliefs allow them to sidestep the law.

Big majorities of women, Democrats and voters in the Northeast appear to agree, suggesting that the issue could again be used by liberal candidates as a rallying cry in the 2014 elections. In 2012, Democrats accused Republicans from the presidential nominee Mitt Romney down to House candidates of engaging in a “war on women.”

Some 65% of women voters between the ages of 18 and 49, 61% of voters in the Northeast, and 72% of voters who identified themselves as Democrats said they believed employers should not be exempt from covering prescription birth control.

But the issue might be used by some Republicans who have backed the for-profit companies. Among voters who say that religion is the single most important thing in their lives, 70% said that employers should be allowed an exemption.

The poll was conducted between March 5 and 9 and has a margin of error of 3.1 percentage points.

Q&A Replay: WSJ’s Aaron Zitner and Patrick O’Connor on Obama’s latest poll numbers and what they mean for 2014. Plus questions on health care, marijuana and more.



WSJ’s Patrick O’Connor explains the significance of Obama’s approval rating on the midterm elections:

More on the WSJ/NBC News Poll:

Full Poll Results

Obama’s Approval Rating Hits New Low

Candy Is Dandy But Pot Is Less Harmful

Majority Agree With Obamacare Contraception Rule

Voters Stay Negative on Christie

5 Takeaways From the WSJ/NBC News poll