What’s more important to President Obama than visiting the Texas border? Five hours of golf

This past week, President Obama engaged in a lot of fun activities: He played pool and drank beer with Colorado Gov. John Hickenlooper, visited the castle from the film “Blank Check” to rub elbows with a rich Austin crowd, dropped $300 on barbecue and even had time to sneak in a five-hour game of golf.

On Saturday, the president stopped at TPC Potomac Golf Club in Montgomery County, Maryland, to hit some balls on the championship course with three powerful friends.

His golf partners included White House aide Marvin Nicholson, ESPN host Mike Wilbon and co-founder of the investment firm Silver Lake Partners Glenn Hutchins.

Undoubtedly, the outing was a pleasant one and President Obama likely accomplished his goal of avoiding Washington. The topics of conversation probably ranged from LeBron James to technology investments and maybe even to some light White House gossip. One can’t imagine that any of the president’s friendly guests brought up the border crisis or his impending lawsuit.

Earlier on in the week, Democrats and Republicans alike — Texas Gov. Rick Perry, Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX) and Rep Henry Cuellar (D-TX), to name a few — sternly criticized Obama for refusing to visit the Texas border to address the crisis there during his visit to the state.

Obama defended his decision, saying he didn’t want to engage in “theater.” Clearly, golf is more his speed.

It looks like the president’s summer of leisure will only continue; the Obamas will vacation for 15 days on Martha’s Vineyard, Massachusetts in the middle of August for their longest summer break since the president took office. According to ABC News, the getaway home they’re renting is worth millions. More importantly, though, the president has four golf courses to choose from.

Ironically, Obama complained Thursday about his do-nothing Congress, claiming that he’s the only one “doing [his] job.” Perhaps someone on his staff should tell him that golfing isn’t a job requirement.