Perhaps House Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi is right that the disastrous Obamacare rollout will prove but a fleeting memory by the time Americans cast votes in the 2014 midterms.

Maybe Democratic National Committee chair Debbie Wasserman Schultz will have the last laugh when she insists that not only will Obamacare not hurt her party’s candidates, but it will be something Democrats can “run on” as “an advantage.”

It might not seem that way now, with the daily multiplying of negative stories surrounding what is again known as the “Affordable Care Act,” but, you know, benefit of the doubt, right?

Each new poll reveals more bad news for the passed-with-only-Democratic votes health care plan, those who did the voting and the guy who once proudly lent his name to the cause.

But maybe this is just a passing fad, like so many news stories. Maybe HealthCare.gov will be up and running smoothly for “the vast majority” of Americans, give or take 80 percent, by the end of this month. That’s the deadline President Barack Obama set and that Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius promised to meet.

Maybe enrollment will pick up, and the administration will meet its goal of 7 million Americans insured through the Obamacare exchanges. It could happen, but will it change things? That’s the whistling-past-the-graveyard question.

National Journal’s James Oliphant says it won’t matter:

But there is a more fundamental reason why the president is going to have a tough time bouncing back from this: to most Americans, Obamacare remains an abstraction. The direct benefits of the law are imparted to a relatively tiny part of the population. Only 12 million Americans are expected to use federal and state insurance exchanges to purchase coverage – that’s about 4 percent of the total population of the country. And it’s possible many of them have already received cancellation notices along with notices of rate hikes, which means their attitudes toward the ACA are, for want of a better word, complex. At the same time, about 13 million Americans are expected to benefit from the expansion of the Medicaid program. Add those two cohorts together and you end up with about 25 million who receive a direct, substantive benefit from the ACA. That’s less than 10 percent of the population and compared to those who benefit from Medicare (49 million) and Social Security (62 million), or even Medicare Part D (36 million), a thin slice of the electorate. More significantly, just about every American will ultimately take advantage of those three entitlements; this is not true for the ACA. What it all means is that even if the Affordable Care Act works perfectly from Nov. 30 on out (and no one is seriously expecting that), those whose lives are improved by the program represent just a relative handful of people, many of whom sit at the lower end of the economic spectrum and engage little with the political process. As Geer says, “They tend not to vote.”

And that’s just part of the story. As broken promises go, keeping your plan or keeping your doctor are just the car wrecks of the moment. Another big one, you’ll recall, was that Obamacare would save the average family $2,500 per year in health premiums.

Instead, it’s entirely possible that playing fast-and-loose with enrollment dates around the 2014 election will make no difference for Democrats, if Americans with employer-sponsored health plans suddenly find themselves out of luck or paying a lot more.

According to projections the administration itself issued back in July 2010, it was clear officials knew the impact of ObamaCare three years ago. In fact, according to the Federal Register, its mid-range estimate was that by the end of 2014, 76 percent of small group plans would be cancelled, along with 55 percent of large employer plans. The reason behind the losses is that current plans don’t meet the requirements of ObamaCare, which dictate that each plan must cover a list of essential benefits, whether people want them or not.

Connecting the dots, whatever problems Obama and Obamacare have now, imagine the havoc in 2014 if administration projections prove accurate and, again, they knew this was coming. That might not be the best re-election strategy for Democrats struggling to hold the Senate.

Follow @MikeHashimoto