Yesterday there was a letter to the editor in the Concord Monitor asking voters in Rockingham’s 32nd district to vote for Democrat Maureen Mann because she helped get a traffic light installed. Seriously. The author of the letter claims to be a Republican but votes for Mann when she runs because she “can do the work that needs to get done regardless of party.”

There is a special election coming up on May 19th for the New Hampshire House in the towns of Nottingham, Northwood, Deerfield and Candia. These towns combined make up Rockingham’s 32nd district which was previously won by a Republican who had to step down for employment reasons. Two candidates are running for the spot – Maureen Mann as the Democrat and newcomer Yvonne Dean-Bailey as the Republican.

Dean-Bailey is a young conservative who handily won her primary election but she’s also been the victim of discriminatory attacks by Democrats. In another letter an author writes that Dean-Bailey shouldn’t be elected because she doesn’t own a home. Sounds reminiscent of past draconian laws where people weren’t allowed to vote if they didn’t own property (poor people, women, blacks). The same letter states that Mann works tirelessly yet wonders how Dean-Bailey can handle college; writing for Campus Reform and supporting her constituents. Seriously?

So why not take a look at Maureen Mann’s voting record and see how much she actually represents her solidly Republican district. Voters in the district have made the mistake of voting for Mann previously:

Not only did Mann vote for Obamacare’s Medicaid Expansion which will eventually force an income and/or sales tax in New Hampshire but she did so against the majority of her constituents who are against Obamacare.

Mann also voted for the gas tax increase which shows her affinity for raising taxes.

Mann voted for increasing the minimum wage which has historically been proven to hurt young workers the most as well as hurt small business.

Apparently Mann is also against school choice and voted to repeal the Education Tax Credit that helps poor children choose a better education through scholarships.

Mann also is against Granite Staters protecting themselves anywhere other than their homes; therefore, turning law-abiding citizens who are being attacked by a criminal into criminals for daring to save their own lives or stop an attack.

These are just a few of Mann’s more egregious votes. You can see more of her horrific voting record at Project Vote Smart.

Several things are clear from Mann’s voting record: she is against the 1st and 2nd Amendments; she believes government should be bigger and have more control over your lives and she has no problem raising taxes. Her website actually claims the complete opposite of her voting record by stating the following:

“I pledge to be fiscally responsible, protective of individual rights, attentive to local needs, supportive of families and responsive to constituents.”

This is why it is vital to listen to the statements candidates make and verify the truth by looking at their voting record if they have one. Clearly Mann is lying on her candidate page which means she’s lying right to voters’ faces when she speaks to them. Her voting record proves, beyond a shadow of a doubt, that she is lying.

The election isn’t until May 19th which is less than a month away. Voters of Rockingham’s 32nd district can do themselves a favor by actually looking into Mann’s record before making the same mistake twice. While Dean-Bailey doesn’t have a voting record, it’s clear she aligns with the majority of voters in the district. She's the clear choice over Mann since voters already know the damage Mann has done to “Live Free or Die” New Hampshire in the past. Mann’s lying to voters should be reason enough to turn away from her.