WASHINGTON (ChurchMilitant.com) - Members of the Little Sisters of the Poor are invited to attend tonight's State of the Union address.

The newly appointed Speaker of the House Paul Ryan (R-Wis) is extending an invitation to two representatives from the order of Catholic nuns to be present at President Obama's final State of the Union speech at 9 p.m. EST in the House chamber.

The Little Sisters are currently engaged in highly publicized court battles over a contraception mandate in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare. The directive in question, the HHS mandate, demands contraceptive coverage be made available by all employers, controversially including Catholic charities, hospitals and universities.

However, in refusing to provide their female employees with birth control, the sisters, who currently operate 30 nursing homes within the United States, would be subjected to up to $70 million in IRS fines for noncompliance.

The move was announced Monday by Speaker Ryan, a baptized Catholic, who stated the order's mother provincial, Sr. Lorraine Marie Maguire, and the communications director, Sr. Constance Veit, will occupy seats in the Speaker's Box.

"The Little Sisters of the Poor care for the most vulnerable among us, and they should be free to practice their faith without the threat of government interference or intimidation," read a statement from Ryan. "The Sisters' stand in defense of religious liberty — one of our most fundamental rights — is nothing short of courageous, and it's my privilege to support their cause."

Free clip from CHURCH MILITANT premium Not a subscriber? Start your free trial.

"As Little Sisters of the Poor, we simply cannot choose between our care for the elderly poor and our faith," says Sr. Lorraine. "And we should not have to make that choice, because it violates our nation's commitment to ensuring that people from diverse faiths can freely follow God's calling in their lives. For over 175 years, we have served the neediest in society with love and dignity."

All the sisters want, according to Sr. Lorraine, is to "continue [their] religious vocation free from government intrusion."

The Sisters are represented by a lawyer from the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, who declares his clients "have a sincere objection."

During his tour of several U.S. cities in September, Pope Francis made a surprise visit to the Little Sisters, with a Vatican spokesman confirming the visit was a display of support for the sister's cause.

Among the other guests invited by Speaker Ryan are several pastors from across the country and, in keeping with Ryan's anti-poverty agenda, leaders of non-profit organizations aimed at combating poverty.

It is expected the Supreme Court will hear the Little Sisters' case in March.