John Boehner (R-Ohio) said in a radio interview with KTGO’s Scott Hennen in North Dakota on Friday that President Obama isn’t effectively leading the country because he wasn’t “prepared for the job.”

In particular, the speaker of the House lamented the fact that Obama is vacationing in Martha’s Vineyard amidst the problems at home and abroad, from the chaos in Ferguson, Missouri, to the border crisis to the violence in Gaza.

“It’s really about leadership, and while the president thinks that giving a speech is leadership, it really isn’t,” explained Boehner. “And, when you look at the issues confronting us domestically, the president’s solutions have not worked, but he won’t admit that.”

The Republican congressman also said that Americans are still wondering, “Where are the jobs?”

“The middle class in America is being squeezed,” continued Boehner. “Their salaries aren’t going up, there are no new good jobs, but they’re paying more for health care, they’re paying a lot more for food, they’re paying more for gasoline, and their disposable income is down. And it’s holding our economy back.”

Turning to Obama’s foreign policy mess, Boehner alleged that the crises in Gaza, Iraq and Ukraine are a “result of the president’s apology tour five years ago.”

“He went to Europe and he went to the Middle East and apologized for American leadership and apologized for America being strong,” the Ohio representative detailed. “And, look at the result. When America leads and America is strong, the world is a much safer place. World leaders are begging me everyday, ‘Why can’t you lead? We need America to lead.’ The world wants us to lead, but the president just won’t do it.”

When asked why Obama won’t lead, Boehner answered simply, “He’s just really not prepared for the job.”

The speaker of the House also explained that the problem with Washington is rooted directly in a White House that is unorganized, ineffective and unwilling to work with lawmakers in Congress.

He admitted that the House will likely proceed with its lawsuit against the president for his overuse of executive power come Labor Day.

“This lawsuit we’re about to file, probably right after Labor Day, is intended to rebalance the relationship between the Congress and the executive branch,” Boehner said. “It’s not about me versus the president, it’s not about Republicans versus Democrats. The president has the authority to do executive actions but he doesn’t have the authority to rewrite laws, which, in my view, on a number of occasions he has.”

“We think, working with some legal scholars, that we may have a real serious shot here,” he added.

Despite the obvious seriousness with which Boehner regards the lawsuit, Obama has rudely dismissed it as a “stunt.”

Obama is currently on a 15-day vacation in Martha’s Vineyard, Massachusetts, the longest summer getaway he has taken during his time as president.