BIRMINGHAM, Ala. — In an interview on Yellowhammer Radio with Cliff Sims Tuesday, Congressman Mo Brooks (R-AL5) pulled no punches when discussing how he felt about the Supreme Court after the same-sex marriage decision and its possible religious liberty ramifications.

In light of last month’s ruling, Alabama has joined a group of 15 other states in urging Congress to protect religious organizations’ tax-exempt status in the wake of Obergefell v. Hodges.

“More protections are needed,” Brooks said. However, instead of suggesting the Court be abolished, as some like Bobby Jindal (R-LA) have, he turned to democracy as the answer to conservatives frustrations.

Brooks said he believes “It’s up to the American people” to protect traditional morality through elections. “Elements of the Democratic Party have been very successful at putting in place judges that don’t carry respect for First Amendment freedoms,” he said. “Conservatives have not done what it takes.”

“It all comes down to American citizens participation in the political process to ensure that traditional moral values are protected.” Brooks encouraged conservative voters, who he says are justifiably occupied by their careers, families and faith, to speak up and turn out now more than ever. “If there were enough of us, we could remove any federal judge we want,” he said, noting that with a strong Congressional Republican majority, conservatives could constitutionally remove activist judges from the bench.

“There are a number of them I would vote out given the opportunity,” Brooks said, referring specifically to Supreme Court Justices. “I’d put the number closer to four or five.”

“When you have justices that can read the plain letter of the law… and openly rewrite laws,” he said referencing the courts’ holding in King v. Burwell that allowed Federal Obamacare subsidies in the states to stand, “They have gone beyond the powers of the constitution.”

“We don’t have the votes in the house and senate” to impeach and remove these judges he said, but emphasized the importance of turnout in the next election to get a more conservative Congress and White House.

Yellowhammer Radio airs daily in central and north Alabama from 11 a.m.-1 p.m. on Superstation 101.1 WYDE and can be streamed online or through the TuneIn app. Listen to the entire interview with Congressman Brooks in the audio clip below.