Photo

Good Wednesday morning from Washington, where efforts to curtail the nation’s domestic spying have stalled in Congress, Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York will find himself among some much-needed friends, and Republican leaders in the House stuck with an (almost) all-male lineup of committee leaders. Plus: Should Mitt Romney grow a beard?

Republicans have announced their new leadership lineup, and its makeup is very much like the old one — lacking women.

Only one of the House of Representatives committees in the next Congress will be headed by a chairwoman rather than a chairman.

Committee leaders tend to have greater influence and fund-raising power within their party, and of the 19 standing committees and the two select committees, 20 will be led by men and one by a woman.

Candice S. Miller of Michigan will remain the chairwoman of the Administration Committee. (It’s something like the chamber’s general manager and accountant, and it oversees the Library of Congress, the Smithsonian and the National Zoo.)

The issue has come up before. Former Speaker Newt Gingrich made a high-profile plea for more diversity in 2012 in an interview with Jay Leno on the “Tonight” show. Mr. Gingrich called it a “real problem for the Republican Party.”

“Outreach is when five white guys have a meeting and call you,” he said. “Inclusion is if you’re in the meeting.”

Women fare better in the party’s House leadership, where three of the eight members are women. One of them, Representative Virginia Foxx of North Carolina, told The National Journal in October that the lack of chairwomen was because “women came in and they haven’t stayed in as long as the men have.”

Having just won the Senate majority, Republicans may not name their committee leaders until January, after the Louisiana race is settled. In the current Democratic-controlled Senate, 6 of the 16 standing committees are led by women, and women run both the Select Committee on Intelligence and the Select Committee on Ethics.

— Steve Kenny

Newt Gingrich loves being in front of a camera. That was no less true 20 years ago, when he was speaker of the House, than it is now.

Back then, his rather colorful performances turned a decades-long tradition of low-key daily press briefings into free-swinging televised theater that often veered far from the Republicans’ message of the day.

That made the generation of Republican leaders that followed him a little wary. Representative Eric Cantor did away with such briefings altogether when he was majority leader.

Now, Representative Kevin McCarthy, the Republican from California who is the current leader, wants to bring them back in the more traditional low-key, pen-and-pad way. With no cameras.

It’s a quaint notion in the digital era. Let’s see how long it lasts.

— Carl Hulse

Mitch McConnell has promised that Republicans will run a more open Senate after being stifled by Democrats for years. There will be spirited debate, he said, and lawmakers from both parties will be given a fair chance to shape legislation.

But it was Mr. McConnell who was doing the stifling yesterday as a proposed overhaul of the National Security Agency’s mass surveillance program died in the lame-duck session. It was an abrupt case of role reversal.

Some Republicans supported the bipartisan legislation, but Mr. McConnell rallied the opposition, arguing that any curbs on the N.S.A. program would represent a threat to national security.

Democrats pounced, saying that Mr. McConnell, at the first opportunity, passed up an invitation to engage in exactly the kind of floor fight he said he would relish. They suggested it didn’t bode well for next year.

McConnell aides dismissed the objections, noting that the bill was not reviewed by the Judiciary Committee and that Democrats were trying to jam it through over the course of a few crowded days.

Still, Mr. McConnell has made extensive commitments on how he intends to operate the Senate as majority leader, and his ability to fulfill them will be followed closely.

— Carl Hulse

It’s been a bumpy week for Bill de Blasio. But a little dose of Washington might help.

The New York City mayor is in the capital today to bask in the company of his fellow progressives, stopping by the White House to chat with Valerie Jarrett before attending a confab with liberal A-listers like Julián Castro, the housing secretary, and Senator Elizabeth Warren.

The visit is another sign that Mr. de Blasio, 11 months into his first term, is intent on burnishing his national profile. But it could also serve as a much-needed respite for the mayor, who is coping with the departure of a key aide with messy personal troubles and a new poll showing a stark divide in his approval rating between whites and blacks.

De Blasio watchers will be wondering if the perennially tardy mayor — who cited a “very rough night” after missing a memorial service last week with grieving relatives of plane crash victims — arrives in Washington in time for his first stop, an 8:30 breakfast interview with Mike Allen of Politico.

But there is zero chance the mayor will be late for a news conference — because he isn’t having one. Mr. de Blasio will return to New York on Wednesday night without taking questions from reporters.

— Michael M. Grynbaum

President Obama speaks at a digital learning conference and then signs the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 2014 into law. He is also expected to scrap strict safety regulations for federally subsidized child-care facilities.

Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. begins his five-day trip to Morocco, Ukraine and Turkey with a meeting with King Mohammed VI of Morocco. They are expected to discuss the conflicts in Iraq and Syria.

Joseph P. Clancy, the acting director of the Secret Service, faces questions about the agency’s recent stumbles at a 10 a.m. House Judiciary Committee hearing.

The House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform investigates data security at the Postal Service at a 10:30 a.m. hearing.

As potential presidential candidates use the holidays to contemplate their futures, they will seek advice from friends, family and those who have been there before them.

Some are likely to pick the brain of Mitt Romney, who has twice run for president.

Mr. Romney, speaking at Brigham Young University on Tuesday, shared some of the lessons he has learned: Shorten anecdotes, don’t speak so fast and stick with the best applause lines.

He said he heard a different take from voters: Shed the image of a conservative corporate consultant and, well, bring sexy back.

“I was told to take bigger steps when I walk, to show that I’m young and athletic,” said Mr. Romney, who is now 67. “Another said I should stop shaving for a few days.”

Still, he is a devout Mormon – a religion that currently frowns on beards (but hasn’t always) – and he has hung on to his razor, and his blazer.

Scruff may be in, but we’ve always thought of Mr. Romney as more Tabernacle than trendy.

— Alan Rappeport

Jeb Bush speaks at a Washington education conference tomorrow, and some on Capitol Hill are calling it “the unofficial beginning of the 2016 election cycle,” The Wall Street Journal says.

Representative Nancy Pelosi has angered many Democrats by refusing to let Representative Tammy Duckworth of Illinois vote by proxy, according to The Hill. Ms. Duckworth, a veteran who lost both legs in Iraq, is pregnant, and her doctor has forbidden her to travel to Washington.

The tension between President Obama and his generals over Iraq recalls the discussions of Vietnam in the early days of the Kennedy administration, Fredrik Logevall and Gordon M. Goldstein write in Politico Magazine.

Former President Bill Clinton is using Twitter to urge former President George W. Bush to open a Twitter account, The Los Angeles Times says.

Gov. Steve Bullock of Montana is again trying to expand Medicaid to cover an additional 70,000 residents of his state as part of the Affordable Care Act, The Helena Independent Record reports. The Legislature rejected the move last year.