By Andrew Bloschichak

The "patient-centered medical home" (PCMH) is a model of health care that is gaining momentum among physicians and favor among patients.

Though the concept predates the Affordable Care Act by many years, the act has created an urgency for adoption of the model by physicians and their practices and acceptance by patients and their families.

The Pennsylvania Academy of Family Physicians has adopted the PCMH as a major focus of their mission, with its "emphasis on coordinated care, quality, safety, and a more robust patient-physician relationship."

Both the Pennsylvania and American Academies of Family Physicians note that medical practices that follow the PCMH model of care "seek to improve the quality, effectiveness and efficiency" of care "while responding to each patient's unique needs and preferences."

Words used to describe the medical home concept often include "comprehensive," "coordinated," "accessible" and "quality-focused."

A PCMH emphasizes the partnership between a patient and team of caregivers led by a primary care physician.

In such a practice, patients actively engage in their health education and treatment—an idea that, at first, may seem to be simple common sense.

Though the PCMH concept dates back to the mid-1960s, a fairly recent convergence of culture, technology and economics has thrust the PCMH into the health care limelight.

For many generations in America, patient care was top-down, with the physician firmly in charge and the patient humbly heeding the physician's every word (most of the time...).

In addition, all services were provided directly by the physician. While such professional approach is admirable, in reality it is not always effective, or efficient. Today's patients are more autonomous and more knowledgeable, and most patients have a wealth of medical knowledge at their fingertips via the Internet.

In a PCMH practice, patients are regarded as part of the health care team, along with their nurses and other care givers, under the direction of their primary care physician.

This team approach and greater participation in one's own care is particularly vital for those patients with chronic conditions and those who are seriously ill — a major focus of the PCMH.

Patients with chronic conditions and advanced illnesses account for 10 percent of the U.S. population but 80 percent of health care costs.

Currently in central Pennsylvania, nearly 300,000 Highmark members receive PCMH care at 300 participating medical practices.

In those practices, physicians and practice staff provide patients and families with greater support for patient education, understanding treatment options and decision making. At the same time, PCMH practices utilize health information technology, like electronic medical records, to better monitor and manage patient conditions.

This information — but not the personal health information — can then be used to advance overall patient care within and even beyond the practice, thus leading to a higher quality of care, improved prevention, expanded treatment options and, in the long run, controlled costs.

Highmark Inc.'s PCMH program, launched just over two years ago, is showing positive results with measured improvements in patient care. For example, we're seeing lower emergency room use and fewer hospital readmissions, and we have noted a clear trend in cost savings.

Our PCMH outcomes from central and western Pennsylvania illustrate that both the quality and efficiency of patient care have progressed significantly since the program was implemented:

Emergency room utilization is lower than the market by 15.7 percent (adult care), 14 percent (Medicare Advantage) and 12.6 percent (pediatric care).

Readmission rates for commercial and Medicare Advantage members are lower than comparative market rates by 1 and 2 percent, respectively.

Prescription drug use is 6.6 percent lower than the market, and stable for adult care, while the market trend is increasing by 1.6 percent. Similarly, prescription drug use for Medicare Advantage members is 6.8 percent lower than the market, with the market trending slightly upwards at 1.4 percent.

Inpatient surgical utilization is 12 percent lower (adult care) and 9 percent lower (Medicare Advantage) than the market.

Inpatient medical utilization for Medicare Advantage members is lower than the market by 25.8 percent.

And, nationally accepted measures of quality have improved by more than 30 percent.

In turn, care costs and care cost trends have also decreased. We reward our PCMH practices for improving the value of care delivery — improving outcomes at lower costs.

This approach, known as pay-for-value, has been linked to better provider-facility communications, fewer unnecessary tests, enhanced online patient services, evidence-based treatments and better patient access to care.

I commend our PCMH physicians and their team-based PCMH practices for these very significant improvements in quality, access, and costs!

Following the success with our participating PCMH practices, beginning in 2015, we are offering an insurance plan that reduces costs for members who choose practices providing PCMH care.

Patient-centered medical homes are not a here today-gone tomorrow trend. They're here to stay because they're effective.

They improve patient care and conserve valuable health care resources.

Our PCMH experience has clearly illustrated that working together, patients, physicians, practice staff and insurers can increase the quality of patient care, lower health care costs and improve the overall patient experience.

Andrew Bloschichak is a family physician and senior medical director for Highmark Blue Shield in East Pennsboro Twp.