RICHMOND — Gov. Terry McAuliffe promised Monday to remove language from a pending $2.1 billion bond bill that would prevent capital projects at colleges and universities from moving forward until he signs construction contracts for replacing the General Assembly Building as part of a pending $300 million overhaul of state buildings on Capitol Square.

McAuliffe told the presidents of public colleges and universities, meeting at the State Council of Higher Education for Virginia, that the General Assembly “made a mistake” in fashioning the language that would tie more than $1.6 billion in bonds to four pending projects on Capitol Square, including the eventual renovation of the Virginia Supreme Court Building and Morson Row, a historic complex of state-owned buildings on Governor Street.

Unless he removes the language, McAuliffe said, “You will have to wait until 2020,” or halfway through the next governor’s term, for bond money to pay for pending capital projects.

“I think they got a little too cute,” said the governor, who promised, “I will remove the language — I have to.”

McAuliffe’s remarks escalate a long-simmering confrontation between the governor and Republican leaders over their refusal to expand the state’s Medicaid program for uninsured Virginians under the Affordable Care Act. He has made expansion of insurance coverage a condition for signing the bonds to finance the replacement of the deteriorating General Assembly Building, renovation of Old City Hall and construction of a parking garage at North Ninth and East Broad streets, although he has allowed planning of the projects to proceed.

House Appropriations Committee Chairman Chris Jones, R-Suffolk, said Monday the legislature inserted the language into the bond bill after the governor’s spokesman, Brian Coy, told the Richmond Times-Dispatch earlier this month, “As long as we’re denying Virginians health coverage ... we shouldn’t spend that kind of money on the building.”

Legislators say the replacement of the General Assembly Building is not for their comfort, but to address dire public health, safety and liability issues raised in a 2012 consultant’s report that warned of a sudden shutdown if deteriorating asbestos insulation in one wing of the building gets into the air handling system.

Jones said he disagrees with the governor’s interpretation of the language in the bond bill, which was intended to apply only to construction contracts for the General Assembly Building, Old City Hall and the new parking garage. Those projects were part of a budget agreement the legislature and McAuliffe reached in late 2014 to break an impasse over the Capitol Square overhaul, which the governor had suspended after the legislature refused to expand health coverage for the uninsured.

“It was clear the legislative intent was the $300 million pool of funding,” he said. “It did not include the Supreme Court or Morson Row.”

But administration officials said the language includes all of the projects authorized in the 2014 budget bill, not just those funded. “Whether it was intentional or not, they did,” said Secretary of Finance Richard “Ric” Brown in an interview.

The governor’s warning caught college and university presidents by surprise. “It’s news to me,” said Glenn DuBois, chancellor of the Virginia Community College System, which is counting on the bond package to pay for nine capital projects, including renovation of two buildings at John Tyler Community College in Chester.

The portions of the bond package that would be held up include money for:

construction of a new building for the VCU School of Allied Health Professions and expansion of the School of Engineering, the university’s top capital spending priorities, as well as construction of the VCU-led Commonwealth Center for Advanced Logistics in Prince George County;

expansion of Western State Hospital in Staunton and the central forensic laboratory and Office of the Chief Medical Examiner in Richmond;

repairs and renovations at 14 existing state parks and the first phase of a new park at Widewater on Aquia Creek in Stafford County;

construction of a parking deck and creation of a master site plan at the Science Museum of Virginia, as well as replacement of air handling units at the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, both in Richmond; and

planning of 21 future construction projects, including a new state juvenile correctional center in Chesapeake, a STEM laboratory building at VCU, expansion of the Division of Consolidated Laboratories in Richmond, and the renovation of Morson Row.

The language would not affect $350 million in bonds to expand capacity at Norfolk International Terminal, $59 million for pollution controls to protect the Chesapeake Bay, $20 million to assist localities with storm water controls, and a pair of small bond issues for more than a dozen pending projects, including building renovations at VCU, the Science Museum, and the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts.

In addition to a potential four-year delay, Brown said the language could result in higher borrowing costs on municipal bonds to pay for the capital projects in the pending legislation.

“Our interpretation is it’s going to cost, because we don’t see interest rates going down,” he said.

McAuliffe said he spoke directly to Jones and Senate Finance Co-Chairman Emmett Hanger, R-Augusta, on Monday and also had tried to reach Finance Co-Chairman Thomas Norment, R-James City, about his concerns over the long delay of projects in the bond package, which the governor originally proposed in December at $2.4 billion.

“We will get into a negotiation stage now, which I always enjoy,” he told the educators at SCHEV.

In an interview Monday, Hanger said technical corrections to the bond bill language can be negotiated, but he told McAuliffe that replacement of the General Assembly Building “is important and shouldn’t be held up.”

“It simply isn’t going to work to try to tie Medicaid to this,” said Hanger, who was a leader of an unsuccessful effort to expand health care coverage for uninsured Virginians in 2014.

Jones said Monday the Appropriations Committee staff already is exploring the issue with Brown and his staff.

“I have confidence we’ll get it worked out,” he said.