As we wrap up the zany year that was 2014 in Georgia politics, here’s a look at the five blog posts that you, our dear readers, clicked on the most.

We spent the most time on the hyped governor and U.S. Senate races, but a trip through the time machine shows that there were plenty of other fascinating tales along the way. In reverse order of popularity:

5. Leaked doc: Michelle Nunn non-profit validated grants to charity with Hamas-tied affiliate, July 28

The lede:

The National Review got hold of a 144-page internal document drafted for the Michelle Nunn campaign in December. It includes plenty of juicy revelations on campaign strategy, including a potentially serious issue with a Points of Light connection to a charity that has ties to Hamas, which is now at war with Israel. The revelation came from an internal examination of the nascent campaign’s potential weaknesses and how Republicans could attack them.

This was the first of many posts about the infamous “Nunn memo” — the internal strategy document that the campaign inadvertently posted online and caught the attention of Republican researchers, who fed it to the National Review. The Islamic Relief USA piece — which, as the above post explains, was rather convoluted — was boiled down to “Points of Light funds terrorists” in a widely lambasted David Perdue ad against Nunn.

4. Emory backtracks: DeKalb never threatened sewer cutoff over Ebola virus, Oct. 14

The lede:

Updated at 2:30 p.m.: Emory University just issued a statement backtracking on a claim made in today’s New York Times, that DeKalb County had threatened to cut off sewer lines if it wasn’t satisfied over the disposal of waste from two patients being treated for the Ebola virus.

Ah, the heady days of Ebola panic. The original morning post quoted from a New York Times story saying that when Emory University Hospital housed Ebola patients in August, DeKalb County threatened to cut off sewer lines, and pizza parlors refused to deliver to the hospital. By afternoon, the hospital declared it was “mistaken” about DeKalb’s threat, but one pizza vendor did refuse delivery early on.

3. Six reasons why Republicans won big in Georgia, Nov. 5

The lede:

What was long expected to be tight elections at the top of the ticket turned into resounding victories Tuesday night for Gov. Nathan Deal and Republican Senate hopeful David Perdue. Here’s a look at six key factors that helped them win decisively:

List-icles are so gimmicky, aren’t they?

2. Top weather guy to those who talk of ‘unexpected’ Snowjam: ‘Wrong, wrong, and wrong!’ Jan. 29

The lede:

Above is a YouTube clip of Al Roker of NBC’s “Today,” calling out Gov. Nathan Deal and Atlanta Mayor Kasim Reed this morning on what Roker termed a reluctant response to Tuesday’s [paralyzing] snow. Roker’s not alone. Marshall Shepherd, a University of Georgia professor and president of the American Meteorological Society, just published a blog post that puts on notice those public officials who have described themselves as surprised by Tuesday’s snow

Snowjam is one memory we don’t really want to relive.

1. On new gun law’s first day, a draw-down in Valdosta

The lede:

The Valdosta Daily Times reports today that, on the first day of Georgia’s new law expanding the right to carry, we had a pair of gun-toting firearm enthusiasts – one of whom wasn’t sure that the fellow in front of him was a good guy with a gun:

Georgia’s so-called guns everywhere law earned a lot of national attention, and this post ricocheted around the Interwebs quickly.

Thanks to all who helped us shatter traffic records at the Insider this year. It was a fun one.