According to CMS, the Comprehensive Care for Joint Replacement (CJR) model encourages health care providers to improve the quality and coordination of care by testing bundled payments and quality measurements of care associated with hip and knee replacement. The proposed rule for this model was issued on July 9, 2015, with the comment period ending on Sept. 8, 2015. With around 400 comments received from the public, several changes were made. The CJR model is slated to begin April 1, 2016.

Orthopedics Today has compiled the following articles on the bundled payment initiative:

Bundled Payments for Care Improvement program to cut costs for episodes of care

CMS recently developed the Bundled Payments for Care Improvement Initiative which would allow hospitals, physicians and other health care centers to enter payment arrangements — including financial and performance-based accountability models — for episodes of care in an effort to reduce health care costs. Read more.

Bundled payments present alternative reimbursement scheme for hip and knee arthroplasty: Part 1

In January 2013, the CMS Innovation Center began the Bundled Payment for Care Improvement program enabled through the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. The program seeks to improve health care delivery, inclusive of the patient experience, while reducing costs and maintaining outcomes. One of four models proposed has found popularity among institutions offering lower extremity joint arthroplasty where an awardee enters into pre-negotiated payment arrangements that include financial and performance accountability for each clinical episode where a risk and reward calculus must be determined. Heretofore, fee-for-service payments have been issued to each provider independently. Read more.

Bundled payments present alternative reimbursement scheme for hip and knee arthroplasty: Part 2

This second part of a two-part Orthopedics Today Round Table continues the dialogue involving four orthopedic surgeons who, along with their institutions, are participating in the Bundled Payment for Care Improvement (BPCI) program, with some expecting to also engage in the Comprehensive Care for Joint Replacement (CJR) program. Read more.

VIDEO: Bert discusses co-management agreements in the current reimbursement environment

WAIKOLOA, Hawaii — At Orthopedics Today Hawaii 2016, Jack M. Bert, MD, spoke about the advantages of a clinical co-management agreement with bundled payments. He noted by 2020, the goal of Medicare is to have 100% of reimbursements be either through bundled payments or other alternative payment models. Watch video.

VIDEO: Iorio discusses improvements for TJA quality metrics seen with Bundled Payment Care Initiative

ORLANDO, Fla. — At the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons Annual Meeting, Richard Iorio, MD, discussed a study in which improvements in quality metrics for total joint arthroplasty (TJA) and the financial performance of the Bundled Payment for Care Initiative were compared at 1 year and 3 years. Watch video.

VIDEO: Gonzalez discusses latest industry news from DePuy Synthes

ORLANDO, Fla. — At the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons Annual Meeting, Juan-José Gonzalez, discussed the newest advancements and initiatives of DePuy Synthes. He also discussed how bundled payments have affected the company and its customers. Watch Video.

Reference:

https://innovation.cms.gov/initiatives/cjr