While the Washington Nationals couldn’t get much done in their series against the Los Angeles Dodgers, several Nationals recovering from injuries made progress over the weekend.

First baseman Ryan Zimmerman, second baseman Anthony Rendon and left fielder Jayson Werth all began rehab assignments and worked out with the team on-field.

Zimmerman began a rehab assignment with Double-A Harrisburg on Sunday. He went 1-for-2 at the plate, lining out sharply to second in the first inning before singling in the top of the fourth. He was replaced in the bottom of the fourth inning.

Zimmerman has been on the disabled list with plantar fasciitis in his left foot since June 10. He’s played in 56 games and is hitting .209 with 12 doubles, five home runs and 17 walks this season.

Rendon began his rehab assignment with Single-A Potomac on Saturday. He was 2-for-2 with a double before he was replaced by a pinch-runner in the third inning. He started the game at third base in order to cover less distance defensively than he would have at second but has fielded ground balls at both positions during workouts while rehabbing.

Rendon was placed on the 15-day disabled list with a strained left quad on June 26, retroactive to June 25. He has played in just 18 games this season and is hitting .290 with a .375 on-base percentage.

The length of his assignment has not been announced but Rendon will likely be back with the club within 10 days.

Werth started three games from Thursday through Saturday in Potomac, marking his first time in a game since May 15, when he broke his left wrist after being hit by a pitch in a game against the San Diego Padres. Werth has played in just 27 games for the Nationals and is hitting .208 with a .581 OPS.

Werth will likely continue his rehab process with Triple-A Syracuse when the Chiefs hit the road for a series at Buffalo on Monday. Werth is expected to return to the Nationals around the beginning of August.

Both Rendon and Werth took batting practice on the field. Zimmerman and Rendon worked out with the team on Thursday and Friday before the start of the three-game series against the Dodgers.