When socialist Bernie Sanders beat Democrat Hillary Clinton in a landslide Tuesday in New Hampshire, he crushed her among young voters by a whopping 83 percent.

Tuesday night in New Hampshire, 83% of voters aged 18-29 chose Sanders, according to exit polls. And those voters were a full one-fifth of the electorate.



Sander's message of "income inequality" (Hillary has one too, but her Wall Street ties and personal wealth make it transparent) is popular with young people drowning in student loan debt (thanks to liberals proclaiming college is for everyone and by promoting the purchase of worthless degrees without the prospect of future employment) and those who have sympathy for occupy wall street. The sympathy also comes after 40 years of liberal indoctrination in public education, starting at kindergarten and ending in PhD programs, imposed by Marxists posing as teachers.

Sanders sat down with Late Show host Stephen Colbert earlier this week, which is widely viewed by young people, to talk about his New Hampshire victory.

Although Sanders excites young people, the reason they do is sobering. According to analysis in the Washington Post, a majority of millennials now view socialism as preferable to capitalism. Keep in mind the millennial generation is 83 million people strong and the largest generation ever produced. Millennials outnumber Baby Boomers by nearly 10 million.

In a recent YouGov survey, respondents were asked whether they had a “favorable or unfavorable opinion” of socialism and of capitalism. Below are the results of their answers, broken down by various demographic groups.



As you can see, overall, 52 percent expressed a favorable view of capitalism, compared with 29 percent for socialism. Republicans, those in families earning more than $100,000, and people age 65-plus had an especially high regard for capitalism compared with socialism, but respondents in almost every demographic category demonstrated the same preference to some degree.



There were just two exceptions to this pattern: Democrats rated socialism and capitalism equally positively (both at 42 percent favorability). And respondents younger than 30 were the only group that rated socialism more favorably than capitalism (43 percent vs. 32 percent, respectively).

The other problem here is millennials have no idea what socialism actually is or what living under socialism feels like. Over to you, Greg Gutfeld:

Free-market conservatives have a lot of work to do, not just on the campaign trail, but in the education system to reverse this trend.