The IRS says it was addressing the issues identified in the TIGTA audit. | John Shinkle/POLITICO Checking IRS Obamacare readiness

The Internal Revenue Service has successfully finished testing systems to accurately calculate tax credits under Obamacare but needs to improve its controls to avoid problems with fraud as the agency begins doling out the credits in 2014, an inspector general report said Tuesday.

The Treasury inspector general for tax administration said in a report that IRS software has a system to verify tax credit calculations before it issues them to health insurers, but it said the agency may not yet have a system in place to stop tax cheats seeking to underestimate their incomes and fraudulently cash in on health subsidies.

Story Continued Below

“The ACA Program has not yet completed a fraud mitigation strategy,” the report said. “It is important for the IRS to thoroughly consider fraud threats and risks that could impact new ACA systems.”

( PHOTOS: 10 slams on the IRS)

The IRS said it was addressing the issues identified in the TIGTA audit, which was completed in July. The White House referred questions to the IRS.

Acting IRS Commissioner Danny Werfel said the IRS was prepared to administer the credits.

“The IRS has a strong, effective system in place for administering the Premium Tax Credit,” Werfel said. “We have a proven track record of safely and securely transmitting federal tax information, and we have a robust and secure process in place to deliver this important credit for taxpayers.”

Since the Affordable Care Act exchanges went live on Oct. 1, tech issues have plagued the website HealthCare.gov, embarrassing the Obama administration and the Health and Human Services Department.

Soon, the IRS could find itself in the hot seat, too. The agency is charged with distributing the Obamacare tax credits starting in January and also with assessing penalties for not holding insurance.

So far, the agency has avoided negative attention.

Lower-income taxpayers who purchase insurance on the exchanges can qualify for tax breaks that help them pay for insurance premiums — refundable tax credits that can be claimed at the end of each coverage year on a taxpayer’s return.

Alternatively, Americans can estimate their incomes for the upcoming year and have an estimated tax credit paid in advance directly to their health insurance providers. Those are supposed to be reconciled the following year, depending on whether the person makes more or less than what he or she estimated.

The IRS’s task of distributing health insurance credits has made many Republicans uneasy — particularly because other refundable tax credits administered by the IRS have high fraud rates.

Top Finance Committee Republican Orrin Hatch (Utah) has been one of the most outspoken critics of IRS capabilities to administer the ACA credits, and on Tuesday he called the refundable credits a “fraudster’s dream come true.”

“The very nature of these credits — pay first, verify a person’s income later — will lead to potentially hundreds of billions of dollars of improper payments and could put millions of Americans’ personal information at risk,” Hatch said.

Last month, Hatch and Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs ranking member Tom Coburn (R-Okla.) wrote to Werfel with concern following reports that the earned-income tax credit fraud rate was a whopping 25 percent.

Refundable tax credits have long been a problem for the IRS. “Refundable credits are fraught with fraud peril,” Robert Kerr, senior director of government relations at the National Association of Enrolled Agents, said in an email.

“Lots of money goes out the door, and IRS generally cannot determine in advance whether the taxpayer is truly eligible.”

Authors: