ASSOCIATED PRESS

For many black millennials, Ben Carson was an iconic figure during their childhood years. Many admired the black neurosurgeon who authored 'Gifted Hands' and adored the authentic story about a poor black kid from Detroit who embodied the American dream, despite his class and race. Although Carson was appreciated in abundance for his position in the world of medicine, applauding his marvelous ability to be the first surgeon to successfully separate craniopagus twins, he shocked us all at the 2013 prayer breakfast.

While in the presence of the first black president, Carson declared himself a black Republican. While many black political, academic and religious figures have disjoined themselves from the black community (Herman Cain, Carol Swain, and Clarence Thomas), Carson was perhaps the biggest blow to many black millennials because of his place in their world. Black children have few icons to look up to (at least, there are few outside the athletic and entertainment industry). In the context of white supremacy, seeing blackness in high places is inspiring. It says to them: 'despite the fact the world views you as physically and intellectually inferior, and these baseless assumptions have places barriers in front of you, attempting to a menial space in the world, you can subsist.'

So, since his self-exposure and idiotic statements, I have tried to remain silent. I have tried to ignore his comparison of Obama supporters with Nazis. I have tried to ignore his war on the healthcare act, claiming affordable healthcare to be the worst thing since slavery. I have tried to ignore his comparison of homosexuality with beastality. But, I can no longer ignore his demented speech.

At the most recent Republican debate, Carson, essentially, advocated for colorblindness, a technique that has proven itself to be completely worthless. In essence, Carson was advocating for silence from the black community. He wants us to ignore our oppression and take the murders in silence. While, in the view of the aggressor, this technique is favorable, it dehumanizes black people. It is commonplace for human beings to resist maltreatment. Carson's comments make white conservatives feel comfortable with their racism; pointing to their token black candidate as a representative for the black community to justify their race based calamities.

In a melange of bizarre attention-seeking politicians, Carson has sided himself with illogical politics, choosing greed and asphyxiation over inclusion and equality. Similar to his Republican comrades, Carson is attempting to be elected into the highest office of the land so that he can create a world based on 'family values.' But these values are anything but familial. The values he solicits are meant to seclude non-traditional Western beings from the general population (anyone who is not a cis-white male). His ostentatious love of whiteness has removed him from the man I grew up admiring. Instead, he has morphed beyond the traditional Uncle Tom figure, denying his own race their humanity.

Ben Carson is tragic figure for black people. He has self-converted from a field slave to a plantation overseer in the hopes to make a name for himself amongst White America. Instead of being known as the first surgeon to successfully separate craniopagus twins, a pride of black America, he will forever be as the Uncle Ruckus of the Republican party.

Follow Erin Logan on Twitter: www.twitter.com/elogann