For years, Ohio’s ability to outperform Michigan’s long-term job growth has been a silver lining around a cloudy Ohio economic recovery. No longer.

From Jan. 1990 to July, Michigan gained private-sector jobs more quickly than Ohio. Private-sector employment increased at a rate of 12.4 percent in Michigan and 11.9 percent in Ohio.

Michigan’s long-term job creation rate has leapfrogged Ohio, which has had middling job growth since the 2007-09 recession and miserable job growth through the first seven months of 2015.

Since December, Ohio has gained only 9,500 private-sector jobs while Michigan has gained 66,900.

Free-market think tanks The Buckeye Institute and Opportunity Ohio both noted Ohio’s slide behind its rival to the north in monthly reports tracking the latest U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics data.

RELATED: Who’s paying for Medicaid expansion?

Opportunity Ohio president Matt Mayer said compulsory union dues in Ohio are a serious hindrance to the state’s economic growth.

Ohio is one of 25 states where workers can be forced to pay a labor union to have a job. Michigan’s right-to-work law ending mandatory union dues took effect in 2013.

“As Ohio added a paltry 9,500 private sector jobs in 2015, just across the border, Michigan added seven times as many, creating a prosperous future for nearly 67,000 Michigan families,” Mayer said in an email to Ohio Watchdog.

Michigan adopted right-to-work after Indiana – Ohio’s neighbor to the west – enacted its own right-to-work law in early 2012. Ohio Gov. John Kasich says Ohio has no need for right-to-work.

Net job growth this year is almost four times greater in Indiana than Ohio, Mayer said, adding, “John Kasich can keep denying the importance of right-to-work, but his denial only denies tens of thousands of Ohioans a brighter future.”

Michigan and Indiana have markedly outperformed Ohio’s private-sector job growth since Kasich took office in Jan. 2011.

Since December, Ohio’s private-sector job growth rate is 0.2 percent, Indiana’s is 1.5 percent, and Michigan’s is 1.8 percent. Michigan and Indiana are both on track to create more jobs than Ohio does this year, despite having far fewer residents.

Mayer pointed to an Opportunity Ohio white paper showing 12 of the 13 U.S. states with the worst private-sector job creation don’t have right-to-work. The only right-to-work state in the bottom 13 is Michigan, whose economy has improved rapidly since 2013.

Buckeye Institute policy analyst Greg Lawson agreed that right-to-work is the most obvious reform giving long-suffering Michigan a new advantage over Ohio.

“It is not surprising Michigan finally eclipsed Ohio in private sector job growth,” Lawson told Ohio Watchdog. “Michigan, of course, finally joined the ranks of right-to-work states, while Ohio lags behind by not embracing that reform.”

“I would not be surprised if Michigan’s private sector growth rate continues to beat Ohio’s for some time,” Lawson continued, pointing out Michigan was the only state to lose more private-sector jobs than Ohio did between 2000 and 2010.

Kasich’s office did not respond to a request for comment.

Private-sector employment in Ohio was 4.62 million in July, far short of a 4.85 million March 2000 peak. Ohio has barely recovered from the 2007-09 recession, and could take years longer to recover from the 2000-01 recession.

In some sectors, Ohio’s economy has been on a downward slide for decades. Employment in the construction, manufacturing and information sectors was lower in July than in January 1990, according to Buckeye’s Ohio by the Numbers report.