Newman Regional Health, like many hospitals across the state, faces ongoing challenges related to bad debt. At a recent NRH board meeting, the 2016 budget assumptions were released. One of those assumptions is that 2016 will bring an increase in bad debt.

“One significant component in 2015 and 2016 that is affecting us is continued growth in bad debt,” Holly French, chief financial officer for NRH, said.

Chief Financial Officer Holly French says that one reason for that increase in bad debt is that patients are seeing higher out-of-pocket costs. Services that may have previously been covered by insurance are no longer covered. The hospital is also seeing an increasing number of insured patients with very high deductibles, leaving those patients with large bills that they struggle to pay.

“The ACA (Affordable Care Act) brought about a change with marketplace insurance so we have a lot of people that have insurance now that didn’t have it before,” French said. “But they have high-deductible plans. So in 2015, we are really seeing significant growth in our bad debt.”

In 2015 the hospital saw a 12- to 13-percent increase in bad debt. In FY 2012, bad debt was $105,046, by FY 2014 that amount had climbed to $181,047 and for 2015 was close to $228,000.

“I hope we are being conservative in 2016,” French said. “We are showing another 10-percent growth in our bad debt in 2016.”

The hospital has begun considering some options to help decrease bad debt. One option is up-front collections for some services, a practice that is already in place for certain procedures that are considered elective. However, the process for up-front collections is one that will take time to implement and board approval before put into action.

“In 2016, up-front collection will be the most controllable way we have at managing that bad debt,” French said. “Before we implement any of that we will bring back to the board policies and things of that nature for the board to approve. We will have to have discussions with our board and make sure we are following their philosophy so that would be the first component.”

As challenging as bad debt is for the hospital, it is also a struggle for those individuals left with large bills they are unable to pay. French says there are options for those individuals and the hospital is willing to work out payment plans to help meet the needs of all involved.

“We first try to collect payments through a statement series,” French said. “Our collection process is normally about four months.”

During that four month period the hospital will send statements to patients requesting payment for services rendered. During that time period, if patients are unable to pay the bill in full, they are encouraged to make a payment plan with the hospital.

“We do need them to reach out to us if they can’t pay,” French said. “So we can consider them for payment plans or financial assistance. Can they complete our application for financial assistance if they think they might qualify or could they qualify for medical indigentcy? Sometimes they may have an income that would preclude them from receiving charity care normally but if they have a chronic illness that causes their portion of their medical bills to be in excess of their annual wages then there are things we can do on situations like that.”

French says that patients should communicate their concerns regarding ability to pay so the hospital can work with them to explore available options. On each billing statement there is information about what patients can do if they are unable to pay their bill.

“We ask that they reach out to us,” French said. “There are tons of unusual situations out there that you might have a source of payment for. Crime victims, disability insurance. Can they qualify for Medicaid? So we do have somebody that is an expert in that area and can facilitate that process of trying to identify a payment source.”

If payments plans are not made, the debt can then be turned over to collections, the most serious step in the process. The hospital currently utilizes two collection agencies.

“When we have to turn it over to one of those agencies, that is when it effects their credit,” French said. “Those two agencies then try to collect those funds for us.”

Collection methods include civil judgements which can then lead to garnishment of wages and other measures to obtain the funds.

“Now if they (the collection agencies) are unable to collect anything and there is a potential to take it further and garnish wages, then they will take it to that next level,” French said.

For additional information about making payment arrangements call 343-6800, ext. 1153, or visit www.newmanrh.org.