“Have you been a good senator?”

Democrat Mark Udall, known to pause and to ponder, didn’t hesitate at the question put to him one summer afternoon as he drove across Trail Ridge Road in Rocky Mountain National Park.

“Let me put it this way,” he said. “I’ve been an effective senator. I’ve been independent. I’ve represented this state like I think it wants to be represented. There’s always a danger in grading yourself, but I would give myself a better grade than good.”

It’s an assessment that elicits disbelief from Republicans, who say part of the problem for Udall is that Colorado’s other senator, Democrat Michael Bennet, outshines him.

Udall attracted six GOP challengers in his current bid for a second term in the U.S. Senate before Congressman Cory Gardner parachuted into the race in February, driving out the top competitors who believed the charismatic rising star in the Republican Party offered the best shot of ending the Democrats’ winning streak.

The Republicans’ biggest beef with Udall: What exactly has the Boulder County Democrat accomplished during his nearly 16 years in Washington, D.C.?

“No one I knew could tell you a thing he’s done,” said state Rep. Amy Stephens, a Monument Republican who dropped out of the race to make way for Gardner.

She has dubbed Udall “Mark Uterus” because of his relentless attacks against Gardner on women’s health issues.

But Udall has plenty of fans, among them Heidi Johnson, a project manager from Estes Park who approached Udall after a campaign event there.

“I’m just not a political person,” she told him, “but I’ve been proud to say I voted for you. I truly believe you try to do the right thing.”

Related: Republican Cory Gardner defends conservative record in Senate bid

Fans say that’s Udall’s mode of operation.

He is passionate about energy, natural resources and national security. His belief in Americans’ right to privacy resulted in his vote against the Patriot Act and his public battle with the National Security Agency over spying on U.S. citizens.

He upset gun-control advocates in 2009 when he supported an amendment by South Dakota Sen. John Thune, a Republican, that would have made it legal for gun owners licensed to carry concealed weapons to take them across state lines.

“If you talk to anybody in the Senate, I’m seen as a centrist, a problem solver. I’m seen as somebody who works with members of the other party,” Udall said. “When you compare Congressman Gardner and me on that kind of scale, there’s a real difference.”

A close one

The race is a close one, with most polls showing the candidates in a ferocious battle that could determine which party controls the Senate.

That the contest is so tight surprises some Democrats, despite President Barack Obama’s unpopularity, because they believe Gardner is an ultra-conservative out of touch with most Coloradans.

Udall has called out Gardner in campaign ads where the senator looks straight into the camera, a stern expression on his face.

“Mark Udall looks so mean in his commercials, you think he’s the Republican in the race,” said former GOP state lawmaker Josh Penry.

But on the campaign trail, it’s a different story. At the Off the Beaten Bath bookstore in Steamboat Springs, Democratic Rep. Diane Mitsch Bush bubbled with enthusiasm as she introduced the upbeat Udall.

” He is the head rugged collaborator-in-chief. Why? Because in an atmosphere in D.C. that is nasty and extreme and partisan, he is the voice of reason,” she said. “He brings people together to get things done, and boy, has he gotten things done for us.”

What has Udall done?

He helped lead the effort to repeal the military’s discriminatory “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” policy for gays, saying, “In the end, if we want the best and strongest military in the world, we have to make sure that all Americans can serve.”

He worked with Wyoming Sen. John Barrasso, a Republican, to push the Obama administration to stop “fire borrowing,” the practice of using fire-prevention funds to fight current fires.

Udall and Sen. Tom Coburn, an Oklahoma Republican, sponsored legislation that closed a loophole that allowed millionaires to collect millions in unemployment benefits.

“When West Slope veterans were forced to travel hundreds of miles to Denver for basic surgeries, I intervened and championed a deal that cut through red tape to allow them to get essential surgeries here in Grand Junction,” Udall said in his first Senate debate with Gardner.

Coming Tuesday: The 2014 Denver Post Senate Debate with Gardner and Udall, check denverpost.com/election2014 for details.

Deep roots in state

Inside Rocky Mountain National Park in August, Udall inspected a sign featuring before-and-after pictures of the damage caused by last year’s historic flooding. Huge trucks repairing the Old Fall River Road rumbled by.

Udall has deep roots in Colorado.

His maternal grandfather, Roe Emery, is billed as the father of Colorado tourism and was the park’s first concessionaire, bringing loads of visitors to view the stunning mountain vistas. Emery’s three children, including daughter Patricia, spent their summers at the Stanley Hotel in Estes Park, which he co-owned.

Udall’s great-grandfather, L.G. Carpenter, was Colorado’s water engineer in 1903-04 and played a role in the landmark Kansas vs. Colorado water case. Family folklore says Carpenter, an agricultural professor at what is now Colorado State University, at one point was encouraged to apply for the president’s post.

“He evidently said, ‘That’s too much politics. I don’t want that job,’ ” Udall said, laughing.

That wasn’t the case on Udall’s father’s side.

After World War II, 6-foot-5 Morris “Mo” Udall came to Colorado from Arizona to play for the Denver Nuggets. He hailed from a Mormon pioneer family with a long history of public service.

Mo met and married Patricia Emery, and they settled in Tucson, where Mark Emery Udall was born in 1950, Randy in 1951, Dodie in 1952, Anne in 1954, Brad in 1957 and Kate in 1960. Growing up, they heard stories about hard times in the old days for pioneer families in the West. Among those storytellers was family friend Barry Goldwater, the Arizona senator and template by which conservatives modeled themselves.

“There wasn’t much water. The federal government didn’t care about the Arizona territory,” Udall said. “So you had to work together to get anything done.”

Mo’s brother, Stewart, was tapped by President John F. Kennedy in 1961 to serve as secretary of the Department of the Interior. Mo took over his brother’s seat in the U.S. House, where he served for 30 years and left a legacy of pushing landmark legislation protecting the environment .

Mark Udall spent part of his childhood in a very different Washington, D.C., where Republicans and Democrats carpooled to the Capitol and went to each other’s picnics. Mo, known as the liberal conscience of Congress, considered Goldwater his mentor. Years later, Arizona Sen. John McCain, the GOP nominee for president in 2008, would consider Mo his mentor.

After his parents’ divorce in 1965, Udall and his siblings spent their school years in Tucson. In 1968, Udall graduated from Canyon del Oro High School, where he was student-body president his senior year. Udall graduated from Williams College in 1972 with a degree in American civilization.

He briefly worked on his father’s failed 1976 presidential campaign, then moved to Crested Butte and lived with his brother Randy and sister Dodie. Randy, a longtime advocate for renewable energy, died on a solo backpacking trip in Wyoming last year.

“I’m really dedicating this race in part to my brother,” Udall said in April, after speaking to Denver Democrats at their county assembly.

Udall has tackled all of Colorado’s fourteeners, and climbed or attempted some of the world’s most challenging peaks, including an effort to scale Mount Everest.

It was in Crested Butte that he met his future wife, Maggie Fox, who recently stepped down from her role as the CEO of former Vice President Al Gore’s Climate Reality Project.

The couple, who married in 1982, have two children: Tess, 24, who is working on the 2014 campaign, and Jed, 27, who pleaded guilty in June to burglary and trespassing after he was caught breaking into cars in January. Deputies discovered heroin “debris” on a used syringe and on a spoon in his possession. In a statement at the time, Udall said: “We love our son and stand with him in his commitment to getting the treatment he needs.”

In 1973, Mark Udall was arrested on drug charges.

Recently unearthed arrest reports by the conservative blog Colorado Peak Politics show Udall had been caught with 3 ounces of marijuana and three tablets of amphetamines. Although charged with felonies, he was allowed to plead guilty to a misdemeanor. He spent a night in jail, paid a $300 fine and had his station wagon seized.

“I learned from it, and I’ve tried to teach my kids to be smarter than I was 35 years ago,” Udall said in 2008, when he talked about the arrest, although he did not reveal all the details.

Time for a change

At the age of 45, Udall, who had overseen Outward Bound, decided it was time for a change. He followed in his father’s size-13 footsteps and entered politics. In 1996, he narrowly won his state House race.

Two years later, Udall ran for an open seat in Congress.

Then it was off to Washington, D.C.

In 1999, Udall cast a vote he regrets, a bill that eliminated the so-called “Glass-Steagall” restrictions first enacted during the Great Depression meant to prevent commercial banks from getting involved in a riskier set of businesses.

With America’s economy on an unprecedented roll, it received overwhelming approval in Congress, with only one member of the Colorado delegation, then-Rep. Joel Hefley of Colorado Springs, dissenting. Hefley, a Republican, cited the damage the savings-and-loan scandal did to Colorado.

After 9/11, Congress passed the Patriot Act, which gave authorities sweeping powers, including indefinite detentions of immigrants and searches of phone and e-mail records without a court order.

Sens. Hillary Clinton and John Kerry, two liberals who had talked about running for president, voted for the measure. Udall did not, despite some advice from Democratic political consultant Steve Welchert of Denver.

“I said, ‘I don’t know how you vote “no” when they’re voting “yes,” and then one day you run for the U.S. Senate in Colorado,’ ” Welchert said. “He said, ‘I don’t care about the politics, it’s bad public policy.’ Mark turned out to be right.’ “

Udall did run for the Senate, in 2004, in what might be the briefest contest in Colorado history. He blinked in a game of political chicken, dropping out less than 24 hours later to make way for Democratic Attorney General Ken Salazar.

In 2008, Udall ran for an open Senate seat held by retiring U.S. Sen. Wayne Allard. Although the national political mood favored Democrats and his opponent, former Congressman Bob Schaffer, came off as prickly, the polls were tied that summer. With gas $4 a gallon, Udall’s emphasis on renewable energy seemed out of touch.

Everything changed that September when the stock market crashed. Some charged that the 1999 legislation lifting bank restrictions combined with Congress’ reluctance to crack down on questionable lending and investment practices in federally chartered Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and bad company practices set the stage for a crisis that left the world economy reeling.

Udall gained ground, but when they debated on TV’s “Meet the Press,” Schaffer was relentless, barely letting Udall get in a word.

Alan Salazar, who now works for Gov. John Hickenlooper and served as Udall’s chief of staff for nine years in the U.S. House, said Udall has never been able to conduct himself in a personally aggressive manner.

“In all the time I’ve known Mark, he cannot bring himself to cross the line of rudeness with people, even with people who are obnoxious to him,” Salazar said. “The kind of verbal combat that comes out in politics is not Mark’s forte.”

More than two years ago, Dick Wadhams, former chairman of the Colorado Republican Party, began recruiting Gardner to run for higher office. Wadhams, who ran Shaffer’s campaign in 2008, believed Udall would be an easier target than Bennet, whose seat is up in 2016.

“Sen. Bennet has plunged himself into the major issues being debated in the Senate,” Wadhams said. “Bennet seems energized, he seems involved. I don’t agree with practically anything he says, but he is not sitting on the sidelines. I just felt the energy and vitality that Cory Gardner brings as a candidate would be in stark contrast to Udall.”

Independent political analyst Eric Sondermann disagreed with Udall’s self assessment as a “centrist.”

“As politics in Washington have become more polarized, any image of Mark Udall as a bipartisan, walk-across-the-aisle guy has been significantly diminished,” he said. “The people I talk to think of Michael Bennet much more in that regard than they do Mark Udall.”

“Talk to the ski areas”

Udall scoffed at the suggestion he hasn’t accomplished anything.

“Nothing could be further from reality,” he said. “Go talk to the ski areas.”

Udall wrote the 2011 law to allow ski areas to expand their recreational offerings to include summer activities, such as mountain biking, disc golf and zip-lining. The Forest Service at the time estimated the bill would increase summer visits to national forests by 600,000 people annually, create 600 full- or part-time jobs and inject nearly $40 million into mountain communities.

“It’s amazing what you can do,” Udall spokesman Chris Harris said, “when you’re not trying to get on Fox News all the time.”

Lynn Bartels: 303-954-5327, lbartels@denverpost.com or twitter.com/lynn_bartels