If you go What: Boulder Historical Society celebrates its 70th anniversary When: Friday, Oct. 10 Specials • Boulder History Museum, 1206 Euclid Ave., will offer 70-cent admission all day (members free) • Museum of Boulder, 2205 Broadway, 2-6 p.m., will offer details about future plans and tours of the new location on the hour and half-hour. Also, Laurie Paddock, son of founder A.A. "Gov." Paddock, will speak at 4:30 p.m. Refreshments available. Etc.: At either location, Supporting Memberships will be offered for $70 (usually a $100 value) and season tickets for the 2014-15 Boulder Conversations with Extraordinary People will be offered for $70 (an $86 value for new or existing members) Info: 303-449-3464

The organization that chronicles Boulder's history will celebrate its own history on Friday.

Seventy years ago on that day, the Boulder Historical Society and Museum was born during a meeting in the library of the old Central School.

To mark the anniversary of its 1944 formation, the organization will celebrate at both its current location, the Harbeck Bergheim House, 1206 Euclid Avenue, and at the building into which it will move in 2015, the renovated Masonic Lodge, 2205 Broadway. When the move is complete, the Boulder History Museum will be renamed the Museum of Boulder.

Both venues will be part of Friday's celebration: The Boulder History Museum will offer a 70-cent admission fee all day, and the Museum of Boulder will offer informative presentations and tours of the new facility, as well as a 4:30 p.m. talk by Laurence "Laurie" Paddock.

Laurie Paddock, 86, is the son of A.A. "Gov" Paddock, who was chosen the first president of the board of the Boulder Historical Society and Museum during that meeting at Central School. "Gov" Paddock was a former editor and publisher of the Camera and was named after one of Colorado's former governors, Alva Adams.

Laurence "Laurie" Paddock, shown in 1966 when he was editor of the Camera, will speak Friday as part of the Boulder History Museum's 70th anniversary celebration. (Laurie Paddock / Courtesy photo)

Perhaps no one is more qualified to speak at Friday's celebration than Laurie Paddock, who attended the first board meeting as a 16-year-old. He ended up following in his father's foosteps, serving as president of the board from 1965 to '68 and again from 1971 to '77. In addition, Laurie Paddock's family has contributed large portions to the collection of more than 45,000 artifacts, 200,000 photos and 700,000 documents. The Boulder Historical Society also has an extensive costume collection of more than 9,000 period-specific costumes, many of which are sealed in acid-free boxes for preservation.

"It's an incredible collection most cities don't have," Jim England, vice president of the Boulder Historical Society, said last week.

Laurie Paddock, a former editor of the Camera, certainly has witnessed the changing times. The museum's initial membership fees were $2 a year for adults, 50 cents for children. Memberships since have increased to $100.

After spending its early years in shared spaces, the Historic Society got its own home in 1958 when it acquired the building that housed Boulder's first Safeway store. Safeway was seeking $100,000 for the site but eventually lowered the price to $75,000. Ebon Fine of the Historic Society contributed $10,000 to the purchase.

"In the contract, it said it would never again be used as a grocery store," Laurie Paddock said last week. That stipulation went out the window, however, when the museum moved into the Harbeck Bergheim House in 1985 and a developer bought the former Safeway building and turned it into what is now Alfalfa's.

The Boulder Historical Society has since become a private nonprofit with about 360 members. But one thing hasn't changed much over the years: The museum seldom has had enough space because of its success in gathering such a large collection of historical artifacts.

But space no longer will be an issue when the museum moves into its new home at Broadway and Pine next year, said Nancy Geyer, chief executive officer of the Boulder Historical Society.

"We've really outgrown this building and expanded since the '80s," she said this week, "so that's why we want to move downtown to a much larger facility."

And what better time to get a sneak peek at the new digs than the museum's 70th birthday party?