April showers bring May flowers, and the fourth month of the year also brings something else: sales.

Take advantage of this month’s discounts and avoid the duds with our list of the top things you should buy (and a few you should skip) in April.

Buy: Vacuums

If spring cleaning season has convinced you that your old vacuum isn’t getting the job done, now might be the time to buy a new one. You’ll find plenty of vacuumsales and home cleaning deals this month.

The discounts may not be as steep as they were during Black Friday, but you can still find deals from home-cleaning brands and third-party retailers.

Related: The 20 Most Expensive Shopping Streets in the U.S.

For example, Amazon’s Spring Event section includes deals on some of the site’s top vacuums. And Dyson is hosting a limited-time clearance event with discounts of up to $150, while supplies last.

Skip: Mattresses

April can be a great time for a fresh start — but don’t get rid of everything old just yet.

Major household purchases, such as mattresses and furniture, are best made during blowout sale events, which often occur during Memorial Day weekend and Labor Day weekend. Last year, mattresses were often discounted by up to 60% during Memorial Day at outlets including Sears and 1800Mattress.

This year, Memorial Day is on May 30, but deals will likely start the week before and run throughout the three-day weekend.

Buy: Jewelry

Back in February, we warned you not to buy necklaces, rings and the like for your Valentine because jewelry prices would be better at other times of the year. Now is one of those times.

Related: Here's How Online Stores Trick You in Paying More

In general, jewelry stores are more motivated to have sales during non-gift-giving months. And since there aren’t any jewelry-centric holidays — such as Valentine’s Day or Mother’s Day — in April, now is a good time to find discounts. Whenever possible, try to negotiate jewelry costs.

Skip: Bedding and linens

If you’re in the market for fresh bedding, linens or towels, you’re a few months too late. Stores offer the best discounts on bedding each January during what are called “white sales.”

What if you can’t wait until January 2017 for a low-priced set of sheets? Look for household goods to be included in Memorial Day and Labor Day sales at department stores, including Macy’s and J.C. Penney.

Buy: Easter leftovers

Since Easter fell at the end of March this year, the beginning of April will be an ideal time to stock up on Easter leftovers, such as candy, treats and decorations. Look for close-out sales at drug stores and department chains, as retailers clear inventory to make room for Mother’s Day displays.

Related: 7 Ways to Spring Clean Your Finances for Savings

It’s not uncommon to find deals of 50% off (or more), so you can stock up on baskets and plush bunnies for next year.

Skip: Summer essentials

Long months of winter blues could have you itching to skip spring and head straight to summer, but there are better times to stock up on swimsuits, beach hats and outdoor grills. Prices for seasonal items tend to be highest at the beginning of the given season and lowest at the end.

If you really need to replace those old flip-flops, try to hold out a few more months. You can expect midseason sales after demand has died down slightly.

Bonus: Tax Day goodies

This year, Tax Day is on April 18. To brighten up this often-dreaded day, look for Tax Day deals from retailers, restaurants and others.

Last year, Sonic offered half-off cheeseburgers, and Staples offered to shred your papers for free. Expect to find plenty of discounts and giveaways again this year.

This piece originally appeared in NerdWallet. Read more at NerdWallet:

NerdWallet’s Best Credit Card Tips for April 2016

Should I Choose a High- or Low-Deductible Health Plan?

Deciding Whether It’s Time to Change Robo-Advisors