In addition to Mexican cuisine, Plaza offers a variety of menu options, including vegetarian dishes, seafood, daily specials, a kid's menu and a full bar.

Plaza Tapatia in Salisbury (Photo: Graylin Hughes photos)

When you enter Plaza Tapatia, you are greeted with a smile. When you sit down, you are greeted with a basket of chips and dip.

Plaza offers an escape of sorts. Murals on the outside of the restaurant depict traditional Mexican scenes. The interior is decorated with artifacts from Mexico and the building is designed in traditional Mexican decor. Mariachi music plays in the background as you enjoy your meals.

Named after a plaza in Guadalajara, Mexico, the birthplace of mariachi music, Plaza Tapatia is dedicated to providing an authentic Mexican experience.

Buy Photo Carnitas from Plaza Tapatia (Photo: Graylin Hughes photo)

"We have authentic Mexican dishes and offer friendly service," said manager Cesar Valdivia.

In addition to Mexican cuisine, Plaza offers a variety of menu options, including vegetarian dishes, seafood, daily specials, a kid's menu and a full bar, which serves up their famous margarita daily.

"All the food is made here and prepared fresh daily," said Valdivia. "Our most popular food item is our carnitas."

The carnitas, a pork dish, comes with Mexican rice, refried beans, lettuce, pico de gallo, which is a fresh Mexican salsa, guacamole and tortillas.

Plaza Tapatia in Salisbury (Photo: Graylin Hughes photos)

None of the food is tremendously spicy but each table has a variety of hot sauces so that visitors can season their food to taste.

When you visit Plaza Tapatia, you momentarily forget that you are in Salisbury as you are transported to Mexico for the duration of your dining experience.

If You Go

Where: 1045 S. Salisbury Blvd.

Hours: 11 a.m. to 10 p.m. Monday - Friday; noon to 10 p.m. on Saturdays, noon to 9 p.m. on Sundays

Contact: 410-749-4303

Read or Share this story: http://www.delmarvanow.com/story/entertainment/dining/2015/08/16/go-plaza-tapatia/31813443/