As Barack Obama’s second presidential term winds to a close, black Americans are contemplating the sad prospect of holding their noses when they cast their votes for the next commander in chief. Instead of choosing the lesser of the remaining evils, here are five choices you should consider for the next black president of the United States:

1. Cardi B

If we are seriously considering the prospect that a reality star could be our next head of state, then why not the bootylicious Bronx, N.Y., beauty from Love & Hip Hop? Cardi B’s sneaky genius has manifested itself in countless quotes that seem stupid at first but, upon further contemplation, reveal an unexpected intellect wrapped inside the body of an African goddess. When a presidential-debate moderator implores her to treat her Republican opponent nicely, voters would love to hear Cardi’s infamous retort: “I am being nice to you. Have I stabbed you? No. Then I’m being nice.”

As tired as we are of half-truth, humdrum talking points, President B would reinvigorate the political process by addressing global warming with her platform of “A ho never gets cold,” or confronting systematic inequality with “Bitch, I’m a human just like you. I like chicken with barbecue sauce just like you.” Plus, America would have a clear advantage in geopolitics because no world leader could concentrate during negotiations while Cardi jiggled around the G-8 summit in her strapless freakum dress.

I’m sure conservatives would be up in arms about an exotic dancer as president, but many people aren’t aware that before he ascended to the presidency, Rutherford B. Hayes was a male stripper during the 1850s who went by the name Sen. Harry Weiner the D–k Slinger.

Campaign slogan: “The ‘B’ stands for ‘But dat ass, tho.’”

2. Ta-Nehisi Coates

He’s smart, articulate and well versed in political dialogue. T-Neezy has become the de facto leader of the black intelligentsia, so he might as well be our choice for president. We love Ta-Nehisi Coates because he is unafraid to tell white people the unbuffed facts to their faces without sugarcoating the unpleasant truth. He is just like Donald Trump, except he knows what he’s talking about. Black America would rush to line up behind candidate Coates without hesitation for one reason: the debates. You know he is going to make his white conservative opponent cry real tears when Coates throws undisputed facts in his face.