Here are seven stories from the "Nightly News" team that caught our attention as we get ready for tonight's broadcast.

Will Obamacare GIFs Boost Insurance Enrollment?

The White House is now relying on animated GIFs of cats, twerkers and Michelle Obama, in the scramble to boost HealthCare.gov enrollment before the March 31 deadline. In a post featuring “The 16 Sweetest Reasons to Get Covered” readers are asked to spread the word about Obamacare by voting for “your favorite reason to get covered.” In order to meet the administration’s enrollment goals, 1 million additional people would need to sign up for the new health exchanges by the end of the month.

Not-So-Golden Years

A new national survey shows that only 36 percent of workers have less than $1,000 tucked away for retirement. And only 44 percent say they’ve calculated how much they'll need to live comfortably. Some say it's a sign of a looming retirement crisis. Those 40 years and older should aim to save 20 percent of their income now, experts say.

News Helicopter Crashes and Burns in Seattle

At least two people have died after a local news helicopter crashed near the Space Needle in downtown Seattle this morning. One person is in critical condition, according to the Seattle Fire Department. The chopper reportedly crashed just moments after takeoff and was quickly engulfed in flames and clouds of smoke. The cause of the crash remains unclear.

15 Joyful Photos of India's Vibrant Holi Festival

Hindus across the world are celebrating Holi, the traditional festival of colors that ushers in spring. Young and old filled the streets, coating themselves and each other in a carnival of colored powders. Song, dance and spiritual renewal ensued.

Apple Launches Cheaper iPhone 5C Outside the U.S.

The latest addition to the Apple smartphone lineup is a cheaper, lower-capacity 8GB iPhone 5C. The new model is reportedly identical to the original 5C version with the exception of less storage. Unconfirmed rumors suggest its sales fell short of expectations. So far the latest model is only available in China, Europe and Australia. No word yet on whether it’s coming to the U.S.

Drexel University Student Dies of Meningitis

Stephanie Ross, a 19-year-old Drexel University student, has died after being infected with the same strain of meningitis B that was found on Princeton University’s campus. This case, however, isn't indicative of a new outbreak at Drexel, according to the Centers for Disease Control. The CDC confirmed Ross had been in contact with students from Princeton and that they were most likely the source of the infection.

U.S. Doctors Question Quality of Generic Drugs Made in India

The FDA is raising the red flag about generic drugs supplied by Indian manufacturers, which provide about 40 percent of the Unites States’ generic and over-the-counter drugs. Quality control problems “ranging from data manipulation to sanitation” have resulted in a flurry of recalls and import bans, Reuters reports. India’s drug makers deny claims that their drugs are inferior, but U.S. doctors remain concerned.