The countdown is on and for many Christmas shopping is just getting underway. Black Friday has historically been the leader in brining in profits for a business, but over the years another day is gaining ground. Super Saturday or Panic Saturday as it has come to be known is the last weekend before Christmas when shoppers flock to the stores for last minute deals.

"Since Thanksgiving it's been brisk every Saturday and this one is the same," The Liberty Shop Owner Robbie Hales said. "Of course it's the last Saturday before Christmas and it started off busy this morning."

As the economy continues to grow and consumers have more money to spend, this year is primed to be one of the best for local businesses in terms of profit.

"I know our days from what we've been doing business wise have been better than last year so far," Loeb's President Robert Loeb said. "I think there's still a lot to come next week, with it still being a week until Christmas."

"In 40 years, I've seen the ups and downs and the past couple of years I've definitely seen an increase," said Hales.

Although nationwide Super Saturday is projected to be one of the busiest shopping days of the year, local businesses say they stay business right up until Christmas.

"When it finally gets down to crunch time and I gotta go do it, I would probably say the last three days and Christmas Eve were the busiest days of the year, and I expect that as well this year," Loeb said.

All in all, local businesses say this year has been great in terms of sales and profits.

"It's been a great Christmas Season," Hales said.

The research firm Shoppertrak revealed that Thanksgiving shopping only generate $1.8 billion this year. Black Friday brought in $10.4 billion. Sales for both days fell by 1.5% compared to years past and can be attributed to shoppers moving to online shopping. However, Shoppertrak also said that Saturday, December 19th is projected to be the second busiest day of the year for shopping, with the day after Christmas being the third.