Rachel Max

Like all development processes, the design cycle has evolved. Years ago designers might have locked themselves in a room, come up with a concept and pushed it out to their customers, hoping for the best. Today design is all about rapid iteration, and as a startup, you can’t be afraid to experiment. With new features being rolled out in days or weeks instead of months, you might not get things right the first time. In fact, it’s likely you won’t—and that’s OK.

The bar for good design is getting higher and higher: designers must be both problem solvers and experience builders. Getting this balance right means that you will constantly have to test your assumptions, incorporate feedback and try again. This can be challenging for a startup, given limited resources. Here are a few ways we’ve found to best set yourself up for success:

Work in sync

Historically, engineers and designers have had an antagonistic relationship. Traditional product development started with a product management team, which would assign designers a feature to design, and then the designers would hand the feature design off to engineering for implementation. There was only the occasional meeting to keep the teams in sync. This caused unnecessary churn and a lot of missed opportunities for collaboration.

Thankfully, most companies have done away with this “waterfall” model of development. When teams are paired from the outset, both engineers and designers contribute ideas and understand scope and feasibility from the start. It also helps to hire talented people who can work across functions. Designers who can do both visual and interaction design, for example, and engineers who have design experience can help bridge communication gaps and keep work flowing smoothly. This helps create a team that speaks the same language, especially when it comes to user-focused design.

Create a feedback loop

Even the most seasoned designers can be surprised by what works and what doesn’t in the field. What once seemed like a brilliant and sophisticated idea may not lead your real-world users to take the actions you want. If you’re an e-commerce company, are customers putting items in a shopping cart, but not checking out? Are you getting traffic to your website but failing to sign people up? Invest early in the infrastructure to collect the right data so you know what’s working and what’s not. You should also take the time to speak directly with customers to understand whether you’re delivering the right experience. Form relationships with users and ask for feedback early. Their feedback—the good, the bad and the ugly—can be invaluable.

Balance user feedback with design innovation

On one side of the design spectrum are companies that rely on intuition to deliver new products. On the other side, some companies test every shade of color during development. We believe best practice lies somewhere in between. Whenever you change an existing product, you can expect some critics. Don’t ignore them, but remember that there may be a much larger group of happy users.

Feedback is important, but only you can understand your company’s big picture, and you should always lead with intuition. If you have a good reason for the design changes you’ve made—if you know they will ultimately benefit your users and your company over the long term—give people time to adjust, and they often will.

Mr. Cohen is the president and co-founder of Houzz, a platform for home remodeling and design. Earlier in his career, Alon was a senior director of engineering at eBay.

Follow @houzz



Follow @WSJstartup