The Newnan Times-Herald “I am taking this action on behalf of my daughters and granddaughters, all the young women I work with, and every American who refuses to be told how to practice their faith,” says Dr. Alveda King of the Priests for Life case.



Dr. Alveda King, whose father was a preacher in Newnan, is involved in a U.S. Supreme Court suit against certain facets of the Affordable Care Act.



King is director of African-American Outreach for Priests for Life, which is a plaintiff in a such against the HHS mandate. The suit was announced at a November press conference in which King and Father Frank Pavone , national director of Priests for Life, participated.

The opening brief with the Supreme Court has been filed. This action precedes oral arguments, which will probably be made this spring.

Priests for Life will be holding a national prayer vigil at the construction site of a new Planned Parenthood at 1225 4th St. NE, Washington, D.C. on Thursday from 9-10:30 a.m. Several related events are planned.

A national prayer effort has also been launched with information online at PrayerCampaign.org.

The Supreme Court has agreed to hear Priests for Life vs. HHS, along with six other similar cases. Plaintiffs in the other suits are the Little Sisters of the Poor, the Archdiocese of Washington, the Diocese of Pittsburgh, East Texas Baptist University, Southern Nazarene University and Geneva College.

“The cases challenge the HHS mandate, which tries to force groups like ours to cover abortion-inducing drugs, and other services we find morally objectionable, in the health insurance coverage we offer our employees,” Pavone said.

Pavone said the case is about “the freedom of us, as employers, to practice our own religious beliefs, not just in church on Sunday, but in the workplace on Monday.”

“The HHS mandate infringes upon my rights as a woman, my religious freedom, my civil rights – and my health and wellbeing,” King said. “In the end, natural law – God's law will always trump common law.”

Civil laws – like those regarding the HHS mandate “are not written on anyone’s conscience or mind,” King said. “They are not written in the physical creation, nor are they appended to the Bible. The civil laws of nations are only written in their own law books.”

Alveda King is the niece of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Her father, Alfred Daniel Williams King, was MLK’s brother and was a pastor in Newnan when his daughter was a girl.

A.D. King became pastor of Mt. Vernon First Baptist Church in Newnan in 1959. “He only pastored four churches, and one of them was Mt. Vernon,” Dianne Wood of the African-American Alliance said in a 2009 interview.

Mt. Vernon was the first pastorate for the recent Morehouse graduate, and his older brother preached a revival at Mt. Vernon during the time A.D. King was a pastor in Newnan.

“I know that my father, Rev. A.D. King, and my Uncle, Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. would be proud to see my name on a lawsuit that seeks to protect freedom of religion," Alveda King said. "I am taking this action on behalf of my daughters and granddaughters, all the young women I work with, and every American who refuses to be told how to practice their faith.”