Email letters, April 1, 2016

No reason to believe Strive is now better equipped to take care of loved ones

As the parent of a daughter who is one of the 28 people residing on the GJRC campus, I feel it is necessary to respond to your editorial regarding the Strive proposal to the JBC. My daughter was under the care of MDS, now known as Strive, for 20 years. They transferred her to the Regional Center because, as they told me, they were not equipped to handle her condition. It has taken some years, but she has improved greatly and it is because of the care available to her at the Regional Center.

What services can Strive provide for $350 per person per day? They say they are willing to become a provider of last resort if they can be compensated at a similar rate as the Regional Center, which is now the provider of last resort? Should that give anyone reason to question something? Those people on the campus have more complex issues than the Strive clients.

We have no reason to believe that they are any better equipped now to take care of our loved ones.

Parent/guardian meetings are held at the GJRC on a monthly basis. Perhaps it would be a good idea for a representative from the Sentinel to attend some of them.

DONNA JACKSON

Grand Junction

We need to support new BLM methane emission rules

I attended the Sustainability Council’s forum on the new BLM methane emission rules Wednesday evening at CMU. Like Dennis Webb, I found notable not only the excellent speakers but also the students who are well informed, involved and set on climate action.

The new rules are common sense given the impact of methane on the atmosphere. Billions of cubic feet of natural gas are wasted each year. From the literature distributed at the forum: “Between 2009 and 2014, enough natural gas was lost through venting, flaring and leaks to power more than five million homes for a year.”

This waste means a loss of revenue for the companies and a loss of royalties for the taxpayer – but it is also critically dangerous to the future of the planet. Climate change is well documented by scientists, and we must all do our part to rein in the pollution from oil and gas development. Methane is up to 80 times more dangerous to the atmosphere than carbon dioxide.

The last question from the audience was how the rules would affect jobs locally. In our current economic situation, jobs are an important concern to families here. Responsible production of natural gas has wide support and will likely continue in our region. Monitoring and retrofitting of the thousands of wells in Colorado will provide additional jobs.

As we transition our energy economy from fossil fuels to renewable sources, Western Colorado, with its 300 days of sunshine, is a perfect place for solar installations. This will provide steady work if new or expanding local companies see that as an alternative to oil and gas production.

These students from CMU deserve to work in an industry that does its best to provide jobs, energy and a safer future for the planet. If we want to help air quality, save money and keep these admirable young folks in Western Colorado, we need to support these BLM rules to reduce wasted natural gas.

I encourage my neighbors in the Grand Valley to support these rules and submit comments by the deadline of April 22 by going to http://www.regulations.gov and searching for “Waste Prevention, Production Subject to Royalties, and Resource Conservation.” Guidance for comments and letters will be held Wednesday, April 6 at Koinonia Church, 730 25 Road, from 5:15 to 6:30.

I deeply care about reducing the waste of our shared public resources and conservation of our beautiful planet, and I hope my voice can make a difference.

KATHY SLAUGHTER

Grand Junction

We need to embrace transition from dirty coal to clean power future

Former Senator Tim Wirth’s March 27 Op-Ed on climate change and coal reminds us of the pressing need to embrace the transition from dirty coal to a clean power future. Nowhere is this more relevant than in the coal country of the North Fork Valley. Whether the exemption to the Colorado Roadless Rule to allow coal mining is approved or denied, there is no denying that coal is rapidly facing extinction as an energy source in light of its tremendous climate-change causing properties. Former Senator Wirth is absolutely right that we should keep coal in the ground.

If the coalmining loophole to the Colorado Roadless Rule is rejected, coal mining can still continue for a decade at current rates. Whether coal mining ends in 10 years or a little later in the North Fork, one day it will end. Now is the time to transition to cleaner energy sources. Our communities and our environment depend upon it.

ALLISON N. MELTON

Crested Butte

We should oust Republicans due to counter-productive obstructionism

J. E. Sundquist’s response (“We need to oust Democrats, not our local leaders”) to Gene Coffin’s letter vainly tries to shift blame from free market forces and Republican policies to Democratic-led efforts to protect public health by cleaning-up the air we breathe.

“Lost jobs” in the coal industry are more attributable to the low market price of natural gas rather than to Democratic policies. “Lost jobs” in the local oil & gas industry are more attributable to the availability of cheaper natural gas elsewhere (with lower transportation costs to market), to the glut of oil on international markets, and to the increasing cost-effectiveness of renewable energy sources – rather than only to environmental policies.

While “poverty” is a foreseeable outcome of unemployment, our local Republican “leader” – Tea Party Congressman Scott Tipton – helped defeat Democratic efforts to extend unemployment benefits. While the Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program (Food Stamps) mitigates some effects of unemployment, Tipton and his Republican ilk (not Democrats) insisted on cutting Food Stamp funding. While the Affordable Care Act provides access to affordable health care even for the unemployed, Tipton and his smug Republican colleagues (not Democrats) voted 64+ times to repeal, de-fund, and/or replace “Obamacare” with inferior alternatives that would deprive millions of coverage.

“Conservatives’” revered free market routinely and continuously produces “winners and losers.” While Democrats generally favor governmental policies intended to mitigate the economic dislocations that inevitably result, Republicans remain committed to de facto social Darwinism – because the redistribution of public revenues from winners to losers via the progressive income tax is antithetical to their discredited ideology.

Republicans also prefer to preserve economic anxiety as a campaign issue – blaming the effects of their own misguided austerity on Democrats – rather than actually solving real economic problems. The absence of robust job retraining and economic development programs on the Western Slope is a testament to the opportunity costs of Republicans’ counter-productive obstructionism. Thus, they – not Democrats – deserve to be “ousted.”

BILL HUGENBERG

Grand Junction

Grand Junction: A visionary city with pioneering grit

For just a moment, imagine a message like that. Imagine how powerful it could be in communicating how resilient, how forward-looking, how attractive –in a substantial not frivolous way – our community is as it takes on 21st century challenges with pioneering grit. It’s a message of hope in dark times, of future possibilities instead of past glories in this region of boom and bust.

No, these are not just pretty words or politician promises, they are real possibilities that are becoming realities now. Out there among us are hard-working, visionary folks who are working to transform our Grand Valley and make the City’s 2020 Vision Statement a reality. Among them are folks in our own Grand Junction City government who years back came up with innovative ideas about renewable energy and built a leading edge solution converting methane from waste into biogas for transportation. Their work was recognized a few years ago in The Daily Sentinel. Now it has been recognized by a major national news organization: the PBS Newshour in their telecast of 28 March 2016.

Go to http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/turning-poop-into-power-not-pollution/ and celebrate our new notoriety as 21st century pioneers in renewable energy! And I for one believe this is just the beginning…

RICHARD P. HYLAND

Grand Junction

What would Republicans do with the next president’s Supreme Court nominee?

If admitted obstructionist Republicans are afraid to vote on a moderate Supreme Court nominee made by a black president, what would they do with a liberal judge, nominated by a woman or socialist President?

CARL HECK

Aspen



Grand Valley Drainage District fee is a way to get money without a vote

I received my drainage “fee” in the mail from Grand Valley Drainage District and would like to share this observation. The statement has an amount due of $36 and I understand why more money is needed for improvements. But then I look at my Real Property Tax Notice and there is a line item called “Grand Valley Drainage District” which is a tax and the fee dollars goes to the same entity.

One is a tax requiring a vote and the other is a fee that does not require a vote. That is what Bill Ritter did with license plates a few years when he tacked a road fee and a bridge fee on our vehicle registration. No matter how you slice it, it is still a way to get money from the populace without a vote. So much for the Bill of Rights.

ALAN CORPORON

Grand Junction

Transgender and restrooms raises some questions

Regarding transgender and restrooms.

If a deranged biological male exposes himself to a group of schoolgirls on a public street, may he not expect to be arrested for indecency and removed from the area?

Yet if the very same mentally ill individual demands to do so in a rest- or locker-room with the same girls present and in a state of undress, why is he now considered by the dissolute press, big corporations, and government to be the exemplar of virtue and damn the consequences?

Why do the demented three constituencies listed above, in state after state, relentlessly support this war on modesty and women in general or are they just plain evil?

Wasn’t the “Peeping Tom” whose violation of the privacy of the female sports reporter brought a $55 million judgment (March 7) against the Nashville Marriott hotel, merely exercising the same so called fetish?

RUSSELL W HAAS

Golden

Is the ACA a flop because it is successfully doing exactly what it was designed to do?

A letter to the editor today complains about the unavailability this year of the annual Health Fair and the value to lower income people that it provided. I know a lot of people who availed themselves of the services the fair provided and I don’t question the value they felt that they got from such services.

But then the author specifically mentioned the difficulty those with a high deductible Obamacare/ACA policy had in affording those services on his or her own. What? The ACA was designed to make otherwise unaffordable health insurance available to those that either couldn’t afford a conventional policy or couldn’t qualify at all for such a policy. People with an ACA policy that became available and affordable are somehow being singled out because their deductibles are too high? Did they have any insurance at all previously? Aren’t high deductibles for any kind of policy a hindrance to affording the kind of services provided at a health fair, not to mention the affordability to people with no insurance at all?

Conservatives hate the ACA as being government intervention in a place that should be reserved exclusively for private enterprise. But the program is meant to include private enterprise. True, in Colorado it is made even more affordable with Medicaid support. But what is the mention of Obamacare in a letter meant to highlight the unavailability of valuable testing to those who previously relied on it? Is the ACA not generous enough? Should the availability of different programs balancing deductibles with monthly cost be changed?

The ACA program is hated by conservatives but it is not generous enough to help those in need? Is the ACA a needless flop because it is successfully doing exactly what it was designed to do? The government is bad because it is not doing enough?

JOHN BORGEN

Grand Junction

It’s important that Colorado embraces plans to both save money and protect environment

As a resident of Colorado, I was very pleased to read last week’s article “Methane rule draws support,” in which I learned that environmentalists and energy companies are agreeing on positive outcomes of using technologies that cut methane emissions. As the article explained, this new technology that monitors and regulates the amount of methane lost during extraction both helps save the energy companies money and helps save the environment.

Although it is not usually discussed in the environmental debate, methane is a very powerful greenhouse gas. According to a NASA report, methane is 20 times more potent as a greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide.

As a student working toward a major in environmental studies, it is a huge victory in my eyes when people on both sides of the environmental debate can agree on something that works for everyone. Too often this debate is broken up into environmentalists versus polluters, when in reality we all want the same thing.

I think I speak for most Coloradans when I say we want a healthy environment as well as a healthy economy. It is for this reason that it is so important to embrace plans that both save money and protect our environment, such as the plan discussed in this article, or the Clean Power Plan, which aims to cut coal fire power plant emissions. When the two sides of this debate set aside their differences and compromise on a plan that works for both parties, everybody wins.

WILLIAM DOWNIE

Boulder

Bill uses wildfire as cover for land grab

For the third year in a row the Colorado General Assembly is considering a bill, Senate Bill 160, which would claim “police” powers over federally ­managed public lands like national forests and BLM lands.

In reality, this bill is nothing more than yet another Bundy-style attempt at the state level to seize control of our national public lands to sell them off for private profit. But this time the bill goes too far. This bill threatens the lives of our first responders and firefighters.

Colorado State Sens. Scott, Roberts, and Baumgardner are all claiming support for this bill by using the safety of our wild lands firefighters as a smokescreen to cover up the bill’s true land-grab intent. But if put into action, this bill would actually muddle the chain of command on our public lands in emergencies, and could get people killed.

My brother was a an engine captain for the Bureau of Land Management’s Little Snake Field Office when he was killed on the job in 2009. No family should ever feel the pain we feel from his loss.

It’s too much to risk for a bill that was actually drafted by the Koch Brothers — a duo of oil and gas corporate elite that are shopping this same bill language to states across the West.

This bill, at its core, is about advancing an out-of-state ideological agenda like the one that led to the Oregon wildlife takeover earlier this year. It stands counter to the Colorado way; we work together toward constructive, pragmatic solutions for public lands management problems. We don’t threaten the lives of our local heroes for political points.

State Sen. Randy Baumgardner is co-sponsoring this bad bill. I, for one, have had enough of his reliance on Koch Brothers to do his job. Let’s elect a new state senator for northwestern Colorado this November.

BRAD STEARNS

Craig

Loss of health fair was not the fault of county commissioners

The 9 Health Fair had been providing low-cost medical tests to area residents for years when St. Mary’s Hospital decided they wanted the business.

The first year they scheduled the local health fair before the 9 Health Fair so few people used the 9 Health Fair.

This year when I called the Health Department to inquire about the health fair I was told there would be no health fair this year and I needed to contact 9healtfair.org. I sent an email apologizing for the way they have been treated here and asking if I could do anything to help bring them back to Grand Junction. I got a lovely voicemail from Diane, director of business development for 9 Health Fair, telling me they had been coming here for 34 years and are working now with local Lions clubs to bring the 9 Health Fair back next year.

This year 9 Health Fair is charging $35 for 28 levels of blood chemistry, $30 for a PSA, $30 for hemoglobin A1C (screen for diabetes), $20 for a blood count, and $45 for a Vitamin D level. The total for all the tests except PSA is $130. Many people who lack medical insurance depend on the inexpensive lab work for a little peace of mind. People with huge Obamacare deductibles would like to have access to inexpensive lab work as well I’m sure.

I want to thank our local Lions Clubs for helping bring this important public service back to Grand Junction.

ROBERTA KNEISEL

Grand Junction