Cherokee Health Systems has received $1 million in federal money to connect its two East Knox buildings at 2200 and 2202 Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard and to expand services there. (CAITIE MCMEKIN / NEWS SENTINEL)

By Kristi L. Nelson of the Knoxville News Sentinel

A $1 million federal grant will help Cherokee Health expand its East Knoxville clinic, CEO Dr. Dennis Freeman said, connecting two "cramped" buildings on Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue.

The U.S. Health and Human Services grant was announced Wednesday, but Cherokee had applied about a year ago for funding to expand its East Knoxville clinic, Freeman said.

Cherokee began operating the clinic in 2010, at that time in cooperation with Knox County Health Department, which had previously operated the county's Hardy clinic there — named for prominent East Knoxville physician Walter Hardy, who originally owned the building and had his practice there.

In 2012, Cherokee received an HHS grant for $875,417 to improve the clinic, with a recurring $650,000 each year for operations, which it still receives. Later that year, it purchased the 1960-era, two-story buildings at 2200 and 2202 Martin Luther King Jr. Ave. for $550,000 and now operates a five-day-a-week clinic there with a medical doctor, nurse practitioner and psychologist, seeing about 2,000 patients at year.

When Cherokee purchased the buildings, they were owned by the nonprofit Tennessee Conference of the AME Zion Church Community Development Corp., which had acquired them with a 2004 donation from a trust set up by Hardy and received large city and county grants to renovate them.

Under order of former Knox County Community Services Director Cynthia Finch, who had ties to TCCD, the health department had moved its offices in 2006 from Asheville Highway to one of the buildings, leasing it for 10 years at $3,800 a month. The move, then-health department director Mark Jones said, was done under duress, and the health department saw patient visits drop by about 25 percent. When Cherokee began offering services, the county didn't charge Cherokee rent, and Cherokee paid for some of its own renovations, including high-speed Internet access. Meanwhile, TCCD dissolved, and the buildings were auctioned and purchased by Jefferson Federal Savings and Loan, which had a lien on them. The Morristown-based bank sold them to Cherokee.

With the new $1 million grant, Freeman said, Cherokee plans to connect the two side-by-side buildings on both stories, more than doubling usable space to 8,200 square feet. It will expand the lobby area and add three exam rooms, four behavioral health offices, and a large conference room that can be used for group therapy or community meetings, he said. Freeman said the nonprofit community health center will meet with architects next week and hope to finish construction within a year, though the clinic will stay open during renovation, he said.

Freeman said the clinic has 175-200 patient visits a week.

"I expect we'll double that" after the expansion, which will also add behavioral health providers, he said.

Freeman said the clinic serves primarily people in the neighborhood, most of whom walk there. Dr. Brad Carter, board-certified in both pediatrics and internal medication, provides primary care for all ages, he said. About 40 percent have no insurance, with more than 30 percent on TennCare, almost 20 percent on Medicare and less than 10 percent with commercial insurance.

"We're just really thrilled to be able to expand in an area where the need is so great," Freeman said. "It's the area of Knoxville that's most underserved."

This grant was part of $4,232,706 awarded to five Tennessee health centers for "facility renovation, expansion and construction." The money is from the Affordable Care Act's Community Health Center Fund, authorized in 2015.

Maury Regional Hospital in Columbia also received $1 million, with $685,000 going to Mercy Health Services Inc. in Franklin; $947,260 to Rural Health Services Consortium Inc. in Rogersville; and $600,446 to United Neighborhood Health Services Inc. in Nashville.