Photo

SOMERVILLE, Mass. — BECAUSE part of me hates winter, I go ice fishing.

Each year, the Meredith Rotary Club in New Hampshire hosts an ice fishing tournament. Tens of thousands in cash prizes draw people from across New England. Each year, I drag along as many friends as I can.

“Thanks for the invite, but ice fishing literally combines my two least favorite things on planet Earth — fishing and cold,” a friend R.S.V.P.’d this year. “There are very few things I would rather do LESS than go on this trip.”

Ice fishing on paper reads like a checklist for the clinically depressed: isolation, risky behavior, unrealistic expectations, drinking. So when describing the weekend to friends I give a little presentation: Picture days tending to the frozen tundra, using wit and muscle to hunt creatures of the depths for a bounty. Picture nights around the wood stove.

“I’m, like, really excited,” my friend Peter, who has come before, tells me a month before this year’s trip. “People ask me ‘what’s new’ and I tell them ‘ice fishing,’ ” he laughs. “It’s like the main thing in my life right now that I’m looking forward to.” Peter’s ignoring the fact that we haven’t caught a fish in five years. This is why I like him.

Spring is easy to love. All you have to do is mention the basics — flowers, new life — and you’re halfway to a poem. And fall’s publicist has convinced us that to dress in mudroom-chic attire and take a yellow lab apple-picking is the world’s greatest joy.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But winter, especially the days of late February and early March, is tougher. The season starts out quaint — holidays and hot cocoa — but ends as a yearly reminder that the planet doesn’t care if we die. I start tossing salt on ice like it’s my enemies’ land. By late January I curse Thomas Kinkade paintings, with their horse-drawn sleighs that never have to circle the block for parking.

Skiing saves some. Others go insane and pretend snowshoeing isn’t just walking. I feel for them. We all need something to transform our winter dread into excitement.

I hear forecasts for extreme cold now, and I see late-season lake ice. It’s a delight that helps with the discomfort, a magazine you love in your dentist’s waiting room. The friend who didn’t come ice fishing because he hates the cold — I think he hates the cold because he hasn’t come ice fishing.

You start by using a manual auger on a foot and a half of ice. A concentrated scraping, the blades turn and shave. Snow-cone-grade mush swirls up out of the hole. Soon tiny, rarely used muscles in your back announce their existence, catch on fire and become useless. You lean on the auger and breathe heavy, still turning, turning. Eventually you’ll stumble away from the hole and say “Your turn” to no one in particular.

Just to be outside, sweating, in winter, seems a small act of protest. And each hole, even when the group has drilled 15, is a thing of wonder when you clean the slush out with a special scoop and look while it’s still hollow. When you do punch through, the water makes a sucking noise and gurgles up. You spin the auger, lightly, to clean out the bottom of the hole and also as a little victory lap.

Hours later, someone politely asks if fish hibernate. Someone else whispers, “My toes are cold.” Ice fishing, like winter, like life, isn’t really that much fun, but it can be.

It’s the lead-up, the excitement. A month before the tournament my friend Mike and I made cusk traps, special lines that sit on the bottom overnight to catch a type of fish called cusk, which looks like a cross between a cod and a nightmare. We’d never caught a cusk before, but this year was like all the other years in that we assumed it’d be different. It takes about 300 days for the human brain to forget the terrible parts of ice fishing.

The weekend was bright, Saturday and Sunday morning. So little wind moved across the lake that everyone’s footprints stayed all weekend and we could see the huge distances we’d trekked, our only real accomplishment before Sunday morning, when we caught a cusk. It twirled our line and made us yell. Four of us stood around the hole and watched as an 18-inch, beautiful, slimy, tiger-spotted, bulging pork-roast-stomached thing came through. Too small for the prize board, it fit perfectly into our pot. Everyone agreed it was the best cusk chowder they’d ever had.

Some year, maybe we’ll catch what’s probably the most prized species of the seven the tournament accepts: the lake trout. It needs cold, oxygen-rich waters. Since the last ice age the lake trout have ridden out New England summers in the depths, where it stays cool. But in winter the whole lake’s theirs. They can go where they please. It’s something you have in common with them as you stand in the middle of a lake, on real estate made by temperature — when you wouldn’t wish summer on your worst enemy.