DETROIT, MI -- In what the governor said was a historic day in a much more positive sense than the day Detroit filed for bankruptcy last year, the city's plan for addressing its debt and fixing its government was approved in court Friday.

U.S. Bankruptcy Steven Rhodes called Detroit's plan feasible, fair and legal, and the city will soon proceed with wiping $7 billion in debt from its books and the reinvesting $1.7 billion into improving city services.

(Bottom line after Detroit bankruptcy: 200 more police officers, 100 new firefighters

)

But finalizing all the settlements that make up the plan could take months, said Laura Bartell, a bankruptcy expert from Wayne State University's law school.

"There are lots and lots of things that have to happen," she said. "Various approvals. All these settlement agreements, they have conditions to them. Somebody has to approve them. They have to get regulatory approval. Whatever approvals are necessary. Documents have to be entered in a final form.

"It's a like a massive closing."

Bartell said an effective date for the plan will be set within 180 days.

Detroit's state-appointed Emergency Manager Kevyn Orr, the architect of the bankruptcy plan, will depart office on that effective date, officially returning authority over the city to its elected leaders.

"One thing that (Orr's wife) and I both agree on is that we are really happy that he is going back home," Detroit Mayor Mike Duggan said Friday.

The bankruptcy process isn't quite over -- and there's still the possibility of appeals -- but Bartell said the rapid pace of Detroit's bankruptcy case since it began 16 months ago has never been seen before.

"Unprecedented," she said. "Never. It's a great testament to the talents of our bankruptcy judge."

Going forward, it'll be the talents of Duggan that will be tested as the city works in the coming years to stay on the path set by the plan approved Friday, Bartell said.

"They think that what they're going to be doing will make the city an attractive place to live, that population losses will diminish, getting more taxpayers," she said.

"That's going to be hard, particularly given the state of the public schools in Detroit... And if you don't have mayor Duggan in there, someone who's not as talented... It takes real administrative skill to make the city operate well."

The city will be borrowing $325 million from Barclays Capital as it exits bankruptcy to settle some of its debts and start funding post-bankruptcy reinvestment.

"Every business, every municipality borrows money," Bartell said. "They're shedding a great deal of debt. They're going to have much less debt than they had before they went into bankruptcy."

The judge plans a Nov. 10 status conference and hearing related to outstanding tasks to be done before the city actually exits bankruptcy.