PONCA CITY —- Police and a state child abuse review board asked the state Medical Examiner's Office to consider changing its autopsy findings in the death of a 4-year-old Ponca City boy last year, actions a defense attorney alleges amount to "witness tampering."

During a meeting last year with police and prosecutors, a member of a state board that reviews child deaths said he planned to talk to the medical examiner about changing the autopsy report of Hayden Wierz. The medical examiner's office ruled Hayden's death July 16, 2012, was due to drowning and of an "undetermined" nature, rather than a homicide.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

"I could see you not being able to go in a courtroom and go homicide or child abuse death with this ME's report," board member Dr. John Steumky told Kay County prosecutors and police in the meeting last October. "We are going to do everything possible to help you on this."

An audiotape of the meeting was obtained by the Tulsa World.

The first-degree murder case in Kay County against Hayden Wierz's father — Michael Wierz — is cloaked in secrecy.

A gag order issued by a Kay County judge prevents anyone associated with the case from talking about it, including to the news media or in postings on social media. A description of the gag order online states it applies to "all state employees."

The case docket — normally a public document listing each development and record filed in a criminal case — was missing for weeks from a court website until the World inquired.

Wierz's attorney, Lloyd Palmer, said he can't say much about the case due to the gag order. Palmer has asked that the gag order be rescinded, saying prosecutors had no basis to request it, court records show.

"My client has maintained from Day 1 that he's innocent and thankfully that's one of the things we still can say in this case," Palmer said.

District Attorney Brian Hermanson, whose district includes Kay County, said he couldn't discuss the case due to the gag order.

A filing by his office earlier this year states: "The state wholly denies that there has been any pressure put upon the Oklahoma State Medical Examiner to amend the autopsy."

Wierz, 29, has served five overseas deployments in the U.S. Navy and as a sergeant in the Oklahoma Army National Guard, including deployments to Iraq and most recently Afghanistan.

Wierz told police he fell asleep after running a bath for his son, who had soiled himself, and awoke to find the boy dead in the bathtub.

The Sept. 18, 2012, autopsy by the state Medical Examiner's Office ruled the boy's cause of death was drowning due to "multiple injuries, likely that of a canine attack." The report also notes "numerous traumatic injuries of the head, chest and abdomen," including two cracked ribs.

Wierz told police the family pit bull jumped on Hayden and bit him earlier in the day as the boy held a cat, knocking him down several stairs. The autopsy noted several bite marks and scratches on his body. Though Hayden did not appear to be seriously injured, Wierz told police he planned to have his mother, a nurse's aide, examine the boy that evening.

Other relatives told police the boy was autistic, prone to injury and on several medications for ADHD and autism.

Police and an emergency room doctor said Hayden's body was covered with bruises and that they suspected abuse, records show. Wierz is being held in the Kay County jail on $200,000 bond.

The Kay County District Attorney's Office filed an escalating set of charges against Wierz, first accusing him of child abuse by neglect and later first-degree murder.

The most recent charge was filed in May: first-degree child abuse murder "or in the alternative by willfully or maliciously" neglecting the child by failing to provide medical care after the child was injured.

Palmer countered with a motion asking the judge to throw out the charge due to a lack of evidence and the fact that Wierz essentially faced the same charge already.

In a separate civil proceeding, prosecutors moved to terminate Wierz's parental rights to his surviving child, a 6-year-old daughter. After a three-day trial in May, a jury terminated his parental rights, finding him guilty of child neglect but not abuse of his son, records show.

"A little boy died," Palmer's motion states. "The Oklahoma State Medical Examiner ruled that the boy drowned. She cannot say how or why. A Kay County jury ruled that Defendant did not abuse his son.

"State has accused the boy's father of murder. It will not say why or how, because it does not know. State simply hopes a second jury will guess defendant into the penitentiary based on some highly disturbing, but ultimately non-probative, photographs of the child."

The Kay County District Attorney's Office responded that the state "must prove only general intent to commit the act which causes the injury." The parental rights case was a separate action and has no relation to the criminal case, states a response filed by prosecutors Aug. 5.

"This is 'textbook' first-degree murder by child abuse," the prosecutor's motion states.

'It's my fault'

An energetic 4-year-old, Hayden enjoyed playing Power Rangers, "ninjas" and rough-housing with his cousin, who also lived in Ponca City.

The day Hayden died was near the end of a visit that he and his sister had with their father. Wierz had just returned from duty in Afghanistan and had arranged with his ex-wife, Breanna, to keep his children for a month at his home in Ponca City.

After the two divorced in 2006, Breanna moved to Texas with the children and Wierz remarried in 2011.

Wierz's parents, Kyle and Teresa Tapp, said their son is a good father who would never hurt his children. Kyle Tapp said his son fell into a depression and blamed himself for failing to watch Hayden.

"He said, 'Dad, I can take 30 guys into the valley of hell and bring them back but I can't be responsible enough to watch my own 4-year-old.' "

Kyle Tapp said Hayden's death "was an accident — unfortunately an accident with fatal results."

"My biggest concern is the political people here in this area are trying to make it their own personal mission to see to it he gets put away for the rest of his life," Tapp said.

One motion filed in the case alleges that the investigating detective has a personal grudge against the family due to a fight he had with Tapp 30 years ago. Other records allege Wierz was assaulted in jail by a relative of the detective, who had tried to get him to talk about the case.

In a videotaped interview with police that day, Wierz sobbed and said he felt responsible for his son's death.

"It's my fault. I shouldn't have let him take a bath by himself," an emotional Wierz states on the taped interview.

Wierz had taken Hayden and his sister to Kaw Dam, a reservoir created by a dam in the Arkansas River.

"We had just got back from the river. We were looking for arrowheads on the (river) bank. It got hot, so we came home."

On the way home, Hayden had an accident in his pants, Wierz said. At home, he said he ran a bath for his son.

"I was trying to get him cleaned up. He wouldn't wait. I told him we had to wait for the tub to fill up; we needed to check the temperature."

Wierz told Ponca City Police Detective Jimmy Sherron that as the water ran, "I went to my room and sat down watching TV" and fell asleep.

"I got up 10 or 15 minutes later to go check the water and find him. He was under the water," Wierz said.

He would later acknowledge he could have been sleeping much longer.

An emergency room physician told police "it appeared to me that this child had been dead for awhile." The doctor also said the boy had many bruises that looked "suspicious."

Wierz said he pulled his son's body out of the tub but accidentally dropped the boy. Then he said he began to perform CPR and called his wife.

Police would later question why he didn't call 911. Wierz said he was performing CPR and just hit redial for the last number called.

Becky Wierz told police her husband called and was frantic and crying, telling her to come home but didn't say why. She raced to the house, calling Teresa Tapp on the way.

Tapp, a certified nurse's aide who works in an emergency room, told police she took over CPR from her son when she arrived.

"I don't believe those are bruises on his body. I think it's lividity," Tapp would later tell police, referring to a term used to describe post mortem discolorations of skin.

"If he does have bruising on his chest, it's from the chest compressions," she told police.

Hayden was declared dead at a hospital.

In the two weeks following Hayden's death, police and Department of Human Services workers interviewed his sister, 6-year-old Kylie, three times, records show. Each time she told essentially the same story: She was asleep, and her brother died in the bathtub.

"I have not seen anyone be mean to my brother," she told police.

Breanna Wierz told police she had called her son several times during his visit with his dad "and he was having fun." She told police that she and her husband separated due to "domestic violence."

Records show a domestic assault and battery charge was filed against Wierz one month after his son's death but dropped because his wife declined to cooperate.

During the parental rights termination hearing, Breanna Wierz testified that Mike Wierz "never hurt his children," court filings state.

"Breanna stated that Hayden has numerous behavioral issues and she said that he will bite himself," a police affidavit states.

Autopsy called 'disaster'

About two months after Hayden's death, the state Medical Examiner's Office released the autopsy listing his cause of death as drowning and the manner as "undetermined."

During an Oct. 24, 2012, meeting, Kay County District Attorney Brian Hermanson, police and DHS workers involved in the case met with Steumky and other child abuse experts.

An audiotape of the meeting, part of discovery material in the case, reveals discussion focused on whether the medical examiner would change her report.

While several court filings refer to the Oct. 24 gathering as a meeting of the state Child Death Review Board, the board did not meet on that date, records show. However Steumky, a board member, led the meeting and said the board would be reviewing the case.

Numerous times during the meeting Steumky said he was certain Hayden's injuries were caused by abuse. Others asked if the bruises could have been from lividity and the injuries due to the dog attack or vigorous CPR, theories Steumky rejected.

Hermanson called the autopsy report "problematic" and said he had charged Wierz with child abuse by neglect "because of the medical examiner's report."

"If we get a good medical report, we probably would charge in the alternative," he said.

Steumky told Hermanson: "We are going to do everything possible to help you on this. We agree with you the ME's report is an unmitigated disaster in my opinion."

As the meeting ended, a man who appeared to be a Ponca City police officer said: "Let's get the SOB."

More than seven months later, the state Child Death Review Board was preparing to review Hayden's death, records show. The board reviews child deaths and makes recommendations to policy makers and others about how to prevent deaths from abuse and other causes.

Records show Lisa Rhoades, administrator of the board, wrote to Dr. Chai Choi, the doctor with the state Medical Examiner's Office who performed the autopsy.

"The Oklahoma Child Death Review Board is reviewing the death of Hayden Matthew Wierz ... and respectfully requests a review of the autopsy report and consider amending the manner of death to homicide," Rhoades states in the letter, dated May 15, 2013.

"I need your help. thank you," states a handwritten note at the bottom.

Other notes on the letter indicate Rhoades had several conversations with Sherron, the investigating detective, in June.

On June 25, Timothy Dwyer, chief investigator for the Medical Examiner's Office, wrote a supplemental report about the case: "On this date I spoke w/Det. Sherron w/Ponca City PD about this case after receiving a letter from the Child Death Review Board about changing the manner. ... Det. Sherron asked if there was any way to amend the mannder (sic) to reflect homicide, which they believe is what occurred."

A month earlier during the termination trial, Choi told a judge she stood by the report's conclusions, which remain unchanged.

In court filings, Palmer has stated that the taped meeting and other records indicate prosecutors and police may have been engaging in "witness tampering." He has asked the OSBI to investigate.

"The Child Death Review Board has been complicit in state's efforts to build a case against defendant. There is no need to conjecture regarding State's efforts to make the evidence fit the crime: the prosecutor stated as much at a star-chamber-style meeting," Palmer states.

Rhoades said she couldn't discuss the matter due to the gag order, and Steumky could not be reached for comment.

In a filing in August, the District Attorney's Office flatly denied pressuring the Medical Examiner's Office.

"The state has sought to ensure that the autopsy report is accurate and at no time has acted in any way that is improper," the filing states.

Amy Elliott, a spokeswoman for the Medical Examiner's Office, stated in an email she could not discuss the Wierz case due to the gag order. She was not able to provide statistics regarding how many autopsy reports have been changed after being issued.

In general, Elliott said: "Our policy is if, when additional information is received, we will consider that with the case. However, in our experience, we have never been asked to render or change an opinion for the sake of prosecution or defense."