Morning lineup:

Meet The Press: Attorney General Eric Holder; Paris Attack Roundtable : David Brooks (New York Times), Helene Cooper (New York Times), Andrea Mitchell (NBC News) and Rich Lowry (National Review); Guantanamo Roundtable : Former State Department Special Envoy for Guantanamo Closure Clifford Sloan, Carol Rosenberg (Miami Herald) and Danielle Pletka (American Enterprise Institute). Face The Nation: Attorney General Eric Holder; Rep. Michael McCaul (R-TX); Sen. John Cornyn (R-TX); Paris Attack Roundtable : Former CIA Deputy Director Michael Morell, Bob Orr (CBS News), Former State Department Special Representative to Muslim Communities Farah Pandith and David Ignatius (Washington Post); Political Roundtable : Ruth Marcus (Washington Post), Peter Baker (New York Times) and Jim Vandehei (Politico). This Week: Attorney General Eric Holder; Sen. Richard Burr (R-NC); Others TBD. Fox News Sunday: Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen. Martin Dempsey; Sen. John Hoeven (R-ND); Sen. Chris Coons (D-DE); Roundtable : George Will (Washington Post), Julie Pace (Associated Press), Republican Strategist Karl Rove and Juan Williams (Fox News). State of the Union: Attorney General Eric Holder; Sen. John McCain (R-AZ); Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-CA).

Evening lineup:

60 Minutes will feature: a report on the state of Colorado's pot industry a year after retailers began selling the drug for recreational use (preview); an inerview with author Steven Brill about his new book about Obamacare (preview); and, a report on a former Hells Angel who helps gravely wounded veterans climb the world's Seven Summits (preview).

On Comedy Central...

Jon Stewart celebrated the start of the 2016 presidential campaign.

The Daily Show:

Monday : Former President Jimmy Carter (D); Tuesday : Sen. Marco Rubio (R-FL); Wednesday : Actress Julianne Moore; Thursday : Actress Sienna Miller

On Fox News...

Hosts Kennedy and Andrea Tarantos defended high-priced executive whores.

Kennedy introduced news of a rule in the Dodd-Frank financial regulation bill that will soon require all publicly traded companies to disclose the pay ratios between highly-compensated executives and regular workers. "Critics say the regulation will just force companies to compile complex data to determine the median salary for all their employees which could cost them millions," Kennedy said. [...] "They are essentially trying to slut shame companies into paying their highest workers less money," Kennedy concluded. Co-host Andrea Tantaros chimed in: "And slut shaming companies is not the job of the U.S. government."

Then...

Kennedy and Shannon Bream worried that color blindness is hampering our ability to spot the bad guys.

Fox News anchor Shannon Bream on Wednesday pondered how observers would've known that the gunmen who perpetuated the terrorist attack on French satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo were bad guys if they didn't know what their skin color was. [...] Co-host Kennedy Montgomery, who goes by just the name "Kennedy," noted that "sometimes bad guys don't look like bad guys." That's when Bream joined in. "That's my question about these guys because if we know they were speaking unaccented French and they had, you know, ski masks on, do we even know what color they were," Bream said. "What the tone of their skin was. I mean what if they didn't look like typical bad guys?'

And elsewhere...

Former MLB pitcher Curt Schilling was seeing red over his rejection by the Hall of Fame.

Curt Schilling, a former ace pitcher for teams like the Philadelphia Phillies, Arizona Diamondbacks and Boston Red Sox, says he was snubbed in this year's election to the Baseball Hall of Fame because he's a Republican. In an interview with a Boston radio station, Schilling gave several reasons why he wasn't elected this year while former Atlanta Braves starter John Smoltz made the cut. After praising Smoltz's abilities, and the "14 straight pennants" his Braves won, Schilling then theorized that "some people don’t really like" that he's a Republican, and would prefer to vote for a Democrat like Smoltz. Except the Braves did not win 14 straight pennants (they did win 14 straight division titles), and Smoltz is a also Republican. In fact, the Cy Young winning pitcher has donated to a number of Republican candidates, compared gay marriage to bestiality and was even urged to run for Congress for the GOP in 2010.

#ThanksObama

- Trix