Saint Francis HealthCare Partners (SFHCP) has formed an affiliated Post-Acute Care Network to offer patients of Saint Francis Care a high-quality, highly efficient network of preferred providers to enhance the transition from hospital care to post-acute care.

This affiliated provider network will include the full continuum of post-acute care services, including long-term acute care, inpatient rehabilitation, skilled nursing, and home health and hospice.

The Saint Francis HealthCare Partners affiliation with these providers helps ensure that patients will receive post-acute care and rehabilitation services in collaboration with their medical team at Saint Francis Hospital and Medical Center, as well as their primary care providers.

Selection criteria for participation in the network included Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) quality scores, readmission rates, availability of specialty clinical programs/capabilities, other quality criteria, and proximity.

To facilitate ease of planning, the affiliated providers will have access to patient information through the Saint Francis electronic medical records (EMR) EpiCare software. The EMR at Saint Francis is a single point of data entry for patient medical services, providing medical history for each patient.

“Our goal was to select a group of affiliated providers to help enhance the transition from hospital care to post-acute care for our patients,” said Jess Kupec, President and Chief Executive Officer, Saint Francis HealthCare Partners. “This network will match patient needs with the right level of care to improve transitions of care, help reduce readmissions, and improve overall patient outcomes.”

“As hospitals and physicians look to manage patients across care settings, post-acute providers play a vital role in building an effective continuum of care,” said Adam Silverman, M.D., Vice President, Ambulatory Strategy and Development, Saint Francis Care. “Our goal is to provide our patients and their families with the peace of mind that everyone is working toward providing the best possible care plan with the goal of getting the patient better, faster.”

Patients and families always have the right to select a post-acute provider of their choice. They will continue to be offered provider options based on their individual clinical needs. SFHCP will be working with providers in the post-acute network to develop protocols for admission, patient education, coordination with the patient’s primary care provider, and facility discharge.

Members of the affiliated Post-Acute Care Network are:

· Long-Term Acute Care Hospital: Hospital for Special Care in New Britain

· Inpatient Rehabilitation Facility: Mount Sinai Rehabilitation Hospital in Hartford

· Skilled Nursing Facilities:

o Avon – Avon Health Center

o Bloomfield – Touchpoints at Bloomfield

o East Hartford – Riverside Health and Rehabilitation Center

o Glastonbury – Glastonbury Health Care Center

o Manchester – Touchpoints at Manchester

o Simsbury – McLean

o Stafford Springs – Evergreen Health Care Center

o West Hartford – Hughes Health and Rehabilitation; The Reservoir; Saint Mary Home; West Hartford Health and Rehabilitation Center

o Windsor – Kimberly Hall South

· Home Health and Hospice: Masonicare Partners and Masonicare Home Health and Hospice

About Saint Francis HealthCare Partners

SFHCP is a joint venture between a community of exceptional physicians and Saint Francis Hospital and Medical Center (SFH&MC). SFHCP is a group of healthcare providers who coordinate care and are accountable for cost, quality and patient satisfaction for the healthcare they provide. SFHCP includes more than 735 primary care physicians and specialists and over 243 Physician Assistants, Nurse Practitioners and Mid-Wives in more than 200 medical practices. Throughout its 20-year history, the organization has been noted for its clinically integrated network focused on value and innovation in patient care. Clinical integration is accomplished through the early adoption of interactive IT solutions, single-signature-authority contracting, and care coordination across the continuum. For more information, please visit www.sfhcp.org.

About Saint Francis Care

Saint Francis Care is an integrated healthcare delivery system established by Saint Francis Hospital and Medical Center, an anchor institution in north central Connecticut since 1897. Licensed for 617 beds and 65 bassinets, it is a major teaching hospital and the largest Catholic hospital in New England. Other major entities of Saint Francis Care include The Mount Sinai Rehabilitation Hospital, the Connecticut Joint Replacement Institute, the Hoffman Heart and Vascular Institute of Connecticut, the Saint Francis/Mount Sinai Regional Cancer Center, the Joyce D. and Andrew J. Mandell Center for Comprehensive Multiple Sclerosis Care and Neuroscience Research, and Saint Francis HealthCare Partners. Johnson Memorial Medical Center, parent organization of Johnson Memorial Hospital, Evergreen Health Care Center, and Home and Community Health Services, is also a Saint Francis Care Partner. Saint Francis Care’s services are supported by a network of five major Access Centers and eight additional medical office centers sited throughout the region. For more information, visit www.stfranciscare.com.