Steph Curry-branded heroin is reportedly being sold on the streets of Philadelphia according to local cops.

Curry, the Golden State Warriors superstar who is currently injured as his team prepares for the second round of the NBA playoffs, is hardly the first celebrity that enterprising drug dealers around the country have used as a branding mechanism to distinguish their product in the presumably crowded illegal substance marketplace.

Earlier this month, for example, a New Hampshire woman was taken into custody for allegedly trying to sell Donald Trump-branded heroin to a police informant in a McDonald’s bathroom and in a convenience store. In 2013, Massachusetts state troopers pulled over a car allegedly transporting more than 1,000 bags of heroin labeled “Obamacare.”

“Philadelphia is known for having the most potent heroin in the country,” AP Sports claimed about the drug sold in the City of Brotherly Love.

Officials with the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority (SEPTA) confiscated the Steph stash this week, The Big Lead reported.

“Rough week for Stephen Curry. First the face of the NBA suffered a knee sprain that will keep him out of the playoffs for at least two weeks. Now we find out he’s apparently the face of heroin in Philadelphia. The Chief of SEPTA Transit Police tweeted out this image showing Chef Curry’s face inside tiny baggies of heroin. This is so not jawn.”

Thinking Steph Curry wouldn't be happy that he is this week's brand for heroin in Philly. cc: @StephenCurry30 pic.twitter.com/mmRcC741YM — Thomas J. Nestel III (@TNestel3) April 27, 2016

About the Steph Curry dope baggies discovered by police, NBC10 in Philadelphia explained that “The stamp, as the branding is called, is like a logo drug dealers use to market the potent opioid to drug addicted people. They can be named after companies (like Facebook), objects, feelings, or in Curry’s case, people. These stamps come and go quickly with dozens being sold at a time across the area, narcotics officers say.”

Steph Curry’s face is apparently being used to brand heroin in Philadelphia: https://t.co/Yd9431zZDd pic.twitter.com/H3SDfFjAjf — Complex Sports (@Complex_Sports) April 28, 2016

A SEPTA officer reportedly discovered the Steph smack after he stopped and frisked a teenage suspect on Tuesday evening.

In October 2014, as the Inquisitr previously reported, New Jersey police busted an alleged drug dealer for trying to sell packets of heroin labeled with the pseudo trademark “Ebola” as a marketing technique.

“Different dealers have different potencies and products. Many times they are labeled with catchy phrases,” said one officer at the time. “In the past we have had Bin Laden, Hello Kitty, D.O.A., Twin Towers, 911, Gumball, Pow, etc.”

Another narcotics investigator remarked that “It’s usually a marketing tool for [dealers]… We have [drugs] stamped as the president, as the Pope. You name it, they stamp it.” He noted that he’s also encountered an “O.D.” stamp on drug packets.

While obviously not lending his likeness to illegal street drugs, Stephen Curry — who led his team to a record-breaking 73 regular season wins in the 2015-2016 NBA campaign — has endorsed various legitimate products, SportsRageous observed. “The reigning MVP also has sponsorship deals with Under Armour (UA), Degree, Express, State Farm, Muscle Milk and JBL. He also has his own brand of shoes with UA…”

After eliminating the Houston Rockets from the playoffs, the Warriors will return to action (likely without Curry until he is cleared to play) in the NBA West Conference semifinals once the first-round contest between the Portland Trail Blazers and the Los Angeles Clippers gets resolved, probably in favor of Portland.

“NBC10 reached out to Curry’s reps to get his thoughts about the stamp, but we haven’t heard back. A spokeswoman for the Golden State Warriors had no comment,” the station added about the Steph Curry heroin.

[image via Shutterstock]