BOSTON — The Massachusetts health insurance exchange will remain Massachusetts-based and will not join the federal HeatlhCare.gov website, Maydad Cohen, a special assistant to Gov. Deval Patrick overseeing the fixes to the Health Connector website, said Friday.

"Massachusetts will remain a state-based marketplace in control of the policies and programs that have made us first in the nation for health insurance," Cohen said in a conference call with reporters.

The Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange, created to make Massachusetts conform with the federal Affordable Care Act, launched Oct. 1, 2013, but was plagued by glitches that left individuals unable to use the website to enroll in subsidized health insurance plans. The state managed the problems with a mix of temporary coverage, coverage extensions and labor-intensive manual workarounds while determining a long-term fix.

In May, state officials said they were pursuing two plans simultaneously to make sure that one would be ready by the time the next open enrollment period begins on Nov. 15. Their first choice was to migrate to off-the-shelf software called hCentive, which is also being used in exchanges in Colorado and Kentucky, and customizing it for Massachusetts. They were also exploring moving to the federal HealthCare.gov system for a year, if hCentive would not be ready in time.

Cohen said state officials met Thursday with Marilyn Tavenner, administrator for the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, and received approval to move forward solely with the hCentive site.

Cohen said testing on the site has demonstrated that the software will be able to deliver "a smooth customer experience" by November.

Patrick wrote in a letter to Tavenner that an emphasis on testing, early demonstrations of the site's functionality and a decision to "front load" core parts of the technology in early releases of the software have allowed the state to move forward with hCentive and drop its work related to the federal site. "We are poised to offer consumers a streamlined, single-point-of-entry shopping experience for health care plans in time for fall 2014 Open Enrollment," Patrick wrote.

Patrick said the state will prepare contingency and backup plans in case of problems.

Cohen said the decision was made after ensuring that the new website will be able to interface with a state program, called the State Wrap, that provides premium subsidies to low-income residents. It has also demonstrated an ability to interface with the company that handles billing and enrollment for insurance companies.

Cohen said by the time open enrollment starts, the site will be able to provide "single front door access" for individuals enrolling either in MassHealth, state Medicaid, or a plan through the health exchange.

The functionality that Cohen described was similar to what the state had hoped to have in place last year, in which the website allows customers to shop for plans, determine what plan and what level of subsidy they are eligible for and enroll online. The insurer would then send the enrollee a bill in the mail. If the customer were eligible for Medicaid, the site would automatically enroll them in Medicaid and send them a notice by mail.

Mindful of the disaster with last year's rollout, Cohen said there is "still a lot of work in front of us." But he expressed confidence that this year's experience will be "a much better one." He said a program that determines someone's eligibility for a particular MassHealth plan had previously been testing at just 40 percent accuracy for people with complex family situations and is now up to 90 percent accuracy.

A report released last week found that the state already spent $108 million building the website, out of an anticipated project budget of $174 million. It also spent or obligated another approximately $34 million in administrative costs due to the website problems. The state terminated its contract with CGI, the technology vendor that created the original website, and is negotiating a contract with a new company, Optum. Those costs do not include the cost of the new Optum contract, which Cohen said Friday is still being finalized. He did not yet know how much of the project will be paid for with federal money.

The state will also face the same hurdle it faced last year, which is getting people enrolled in old plans to choose new plans that conform to the Affordable Care Act. Currently, around 100,000 people are in plans under the state-subsidized Commonwealth Care program that were extended until the end of the year. Another 250,000 people are receiving temporary coverage through Medicaid. All those people will have to re-enroll through the hCentive website.

The state said it is planning an intensive outreach effort to around 450,000 people, which is likely to include robocalls, mail, media advertising, health fairs and partnerships with community organizations. In addition to those in Commonwealth Care and Medicaid, that group also includes some people who are currently in commercial plans or who are uninsured.

Lora Pellegrini, president and CEO of the Massachusetts Association of Health Plans, said in a statement that the association is pleased with the decision. "We have believed that a state-based solution offers the best approach for Massachusetts residents given the unique offerings to supplement coverage, such as the State Wrap, that are available only in our state and would not be possible through the (federal marketplace)," Pellegrini said.

The site will likely face skepticism from many in the public, after last year's botched release. Joshua Archambault, director of health care policy for the conservative-leaning Pioneer Institute said, "The move forward with hCentive comes with severely lowered expectations for the state website, with no final cost estimate for the rebuild, no clear understanding of what the federal government will pay for, and no Plan B if they fail again."

Archambault pointed out that the state still has not fully answered questions about the cost to taxpayers of keeping people on temporary Medicaid coverage.

Charlie Baker, a Republican gubernatorial candidate, said in a statement, "In order to prevent history from repeating itself, the Connector Board must prove every aspect of the new site is ready to go before launching." Baker said the public "deserves a clear understanding that the new site will work, how and when it will work, and how the board plans to address the issues that have plagued the Connector thus far."