Times are tough for Barack Obama when even his friends dig into him.

On Monday night’s edition of the “Tonight Show with Jay Leno,” actress and television talk-show host Whoopi Goldberg became the latest celebrity to take a swipe at the president’s failed effort to get the Healthcare.gov website operational as the Affordable Care Act, also called Obamacare, made its debut.

“I don’t understand how a 4-year-old can upload videos and put a whole website together, and these guys can’t do jack,” Goldberg quipped.

Whoopi lamented it was typical of how government works, but also came to the president’s defense, noting Obama didn’t personally design the website, but had merely delegated the work to others who failed.

“What really gets me, though, is this, like, they say, you know, he, he did this. Like he built, he built the thing himself. He didn’t do that. He gave it to people. It cost $17 billion to make. And it’s like everything else that the government does. This is not new,” she said.

The co-host of ABC’s “The View” was confident, though, Obamacare would eventually see success.

“Eventually, people will be covered,” she explained, as Leno’s audience remained silent.

When no one applauded her remark, Goldberg said, “See, I knew they wouldn’t like that.”

Over the weekend, NBC’s “Saturday Night Live” poked fun at the string of Obama’s recent scandals including Obamacare, Benghazi, the IRS and NSA spying by creating this phony commercial for a product called “Paxil,” designed to relieve Obama’s second-term depression:

The ad includes a mocking disclaimer: “Warning, Paxil is not covered by Obamacare. We promised that it would be, but it’s not. And for that, we apologize.”

Two weeks ago, as WND reported, legendary Jewish comedian Jackie Mason uncorked a full-blown assault on the president and his troubled attempt at providing affordable health care for Americans.

“It’s such a ridiculous thing. The whole country’s walking around wondering if this guy’s really the president of a country. He sounds more like a maniac in an asylum,” Mason told WABC Radio host Aaron Klein.

“He’s saying things that nobody believes. He was always lying every day of his life. Every time he talks it was a lie. The only time he told the truth is when you didn’t hear from him.”

“This is becoming so ridiculous, that even the biggest liar can’t top himself,” said the 82-year-old. “He looks at you straight in the face, and tells you that if you want your plan, you got your plan, you keep your plan. Now, a month-and-a-half later, you got no plan, you lost your plan, and he tells you you still got a plan.”

The stand-up comic, who calls himself “The Ultimate Jew,” continued on Obama: “He has a whole country walking around dizzy wondering who we’re listening to. If this is a president of a country, how come he’s the only one in America who doesn’t seem to know what’s going on here?

“Never did I expect a guy like this, the head of a country, to blatantly lie to your face, and then not only lie to your face, then lie about the fact that he never lied. Then lie again about the next lie he told. There used to be a time when you would worship the president, even if you didn’t like him. You knew he told the truth because he’s the president of a country. Now, he’s the only guy in America who would have the nerve to lie this much.

“You say to yourself, ‘Wait a second. Who am I listening to? Was this guy actually elected to the presidency? A man who’s completely out of his mind, who’s out of touch with humanity, with America, who doesn’t seem to know what’s going on here? Does he read a paper?’

“A guy like this should be locked up … If he wasn’t the president, he’d be in jail or in a sanitarium. He wouldn’t be outside talking to people in this condition. He would be considered a danger to his own his own health, to his own life.