Attorney General Pam Bondi asserts in court documents that law enforcement officers throughout the state can freely snoop into the records of 15 million licensed Florida drivers — so long as the prying is not done for economic gain.

Moreover, the state's top law enforcement official maintains, Congress is powerless under the U.S. Constitution to protect those drivers' privacy, despite a 20-year-old federal law that seeks to do that, because local cops simply peeking at the personal data and photographs of drivers can be construed as part of law enforcement, which is a state function outside the realm of federal authority.

And forget about trying to stop such snooping on your own, according to Bondi.

She alleges in documents that under the federal privacy statute in question, the 1994 Drivers' Privacy Protection Act, only the U.S. attorney general, and not individual citizens, can sue a state for misuse of drivers' records.

Bondi argued those claims in documents filed in federal court in defending two state agencies against a lawsuit brought by an Ocala woman.

Kellean Truesdell asserts her privacy and civil rights were violated by a former Marion County deputy who wrongfully accessed her information through the state's Driver and Vehicle Information Database, or DAVID, which includes addresses, Social Security numbers and other personal data.

Besides suing the deputy, former Sgt. Clayton Thomas, Truesdell also sued the respective leaders of the Sheriff's Office, the Florida Department of Law Enforcement and state Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles for failing to adequately protect her and others from Thomas' electronic rummaging.

Truesdell seeks class-action status for more than 42,000 reported victims, fewer than 20 of whom were men, whose records were perused by Thomas.

Bondi, in court records, urges the judge to dismiss Truesdell's lawsuit against FDLE Commissioner Gerald Bailey and HSMV Executive Director Julie Jones.

Andy Dogali, a Tampa lawyer who represents Truesdell, could not be reached for comment on Thursday.

Bondi, in her answer, notes that Thomas "did nothing more than look at" Truesdell's data, and thus the case should be tossed because his intrusion did not involve an "economic purpose."

According to the state's case, Congress enacted the Drivers' Privacy Protection Act under the Constitution's provision for regulating interstate commerce, known as the Commerce Clause.

Truesdell's complaint falls outside the Commerce Clause, Bondi argues, because the state sharing drivers' data with local law enforcement is a "noncommercial activity" and "unconnected to economic activity."

The state grants that the U.S. Supreme Court has determined in a past ruling that the Commerce Clause is applicable to the drivers' privacy law, but that only pertained to its prohibition against making personal data available to bulk-mail advertisers.

"Jones and Bailey cannot be held accountable under federal law if law enforcement officers improperly access driver information. That is a state matter that should, under our federal system, be addressed by state law," Bondi maintains in court documents.

To that end, Bondi encourages the court to not be persuaded by rulings in similar federal cases from last September, in which courts decided that Congress had authority to punish public officials for improperly accessing the DAVID system.

Those decisions involved a Gainesville police officer who accessed driver records in order to videotape a woman through her window.

Yet those rulings, which cite the previous Supreme Court decision, were erroneous in applying the law to "a classic state police power" like verifying driver data, and "lack in-depth analysis and should not be persuasive here," Bondi says.

"It is hard to imagine how driver records, viewed on a computer screen, might find their way into the stream of interstate commerce," Bondi maintains.

"When (the federal privacy law) penalizes defendants Jones and Bailey for the disclosure of state public records when the information is not an article in commerce and the disclosure does not involve economic activity, it violates federalism and the Tenth Amendment."

But Bondi's own filing seems to illustrate the weakness in Florida law on this matter.

She observes that state statutes allow local law enforcement access to drivers' records, provided that the information is not sold, given away or copied.

Bondi further suggests that Truesdell, as a private citizen, cannot sue the state in this instance.

For one thing, Truesdell cannot show that Jones or Bailey were personally involved in the breach of her records, Bondi says.

Rather, the claim is that state policies failed to protect her.

Thus, under the federal law, Congress wanted only the U.S. attorney general, and not "aggrieved" citizens, to bring "policy-and-practice" claims against state agencies for systemic failures, the state's filing says.

Finally, Truesdell cannot show, as her lawsuit asserts, that state officials were inadequately trained or supervised, Bondi argues.

Instead, Truesdell offers only "fact-free, formulaic" allegations that depict "hypothetical" harm, the state's response says.

Besides the seeming contradiction that only the U.S. attorney could sue for something that the federal government cannot regulate anyway, Bondi's defense is rich in irony.

For example, Bondi herself is a likely victim in the case, if it attains class-action status.

Thomas' trolling of the database came to light after a reporter from Bay News 9, a local cable TV network in the Tampa area, asked the HSMV which agencies had looked up Bondi's records.

When the Sheriff's Office popped up on that list, Sheriff Chris Blair's staff investigated Thomas, and discovered that he had accessed thousands of records over the past three years.

Thomas, a court bailiff who had also been a decorated SWAT team member, subsequently ended his 26-year career by resigning once the scandal broke.

Which raises a second point about Bondi's defense: cops have been penalized for viewing her records.

Thomas was forced to resign, although not specifically about Bondi.

The Bradenton Herald reported last October that an officer there was suspended for one month without pay after being netted by the same public records request that caught Thomas.

Finally, much of Bondi's defense, found in court records, rests on pointing out the "significant" and "definite" limits of the Commerce Clause.

That's based on the U.S. Supreme Court's ruling last year on the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, President Barack Obama's key health care legislation, sometimes called Obamacare.

Last year, as the Obama administration was trying to establish the insurance exchanges under the law, Bondi was at the forefront of critics attacking it for allegedly insufficient safeguards of consumer privacy.

Thomas, as of Thursday, has not filed a response to Truesdell's lawsuit.

Sheriff Blair has retained Bruce Jolly, a lawyer in Fort Lauderdale, to represent his agency in the case.

According to court records, Jolly is scheduled to file the sheriff's defense on Monday.

Contact Bill Thompson at 867-4117 or bill.thompson@ocala.com.