State Supreme Court to hear arguments in UPMC-Highmark Medicare battle

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

An October showdown in the Pennsylvania Supreme Court between rivals UPMC and Highmark Inc. could determine whether more than 180,000 seniors on Highmark plans will have to switch insurers to keep access to UPMC.

The court Wednesday scheduled an Oct. 6 hearing on a contract dispute over costs for people insured through Highmark's Medicare Advantage plans. The hearing will take place before the Oct. 15 start of open enrollment for the plans, which provide seniors alternative coverage under the Affordable Care Act.

Depending on how the court rules, seniors on Highmark plans could have to find new doctors and new specialists — or different insurance coverage. UPMC offers its own Medicare Advantage plans, and other insurers sell plans with other provider networks.

If the decision is made early in the open enrollment period, seniors would have time to pick an insurer before it closes Dec. 7.

“Predictions are tough. I think the court obviously is aware of the need for a final determination,” said Sam Marshall, president and CEO of the Insurance Federation of Pennsylvania.

A contract between UPMC and Highmark for in-network care for seniors on Highmark's Medicare Advantage plans expired at the end of last year. UPMC continued providing services at in-network rates according to the terms of a state-brokered consent decree. But then, according to UPMC, Highmark violated the decree by drastically reducing what it paid for cancer care, and UPMC cut in-network access for Highmark members.

State officials sought court intervention, and in May, a Commonwealth Court judge ordered UPMC to keep Highmark's Medicare Advantage members in-network through 2019. UPMC appealed to the Supreme Court.

If the court doesn't issue a decision in time for seniors to pick plans during open enrollment, the federal Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services could establish a special enrollment period for those affected, said Bill McKendree, team leader of the APPRISE State Health Insurance Assistance Program. The program helps seniors navigate Medicare insurance options.

But, McKendree warned, that is not certain.

“There's no absolute rule that this has to happen,” he said. “All things are possible, and it really just depends on what the ultimate decision from CMS is.”

If the court sides with UPMC, seniors would face tough choices, said Erin Ninehouser, policy director for Pennsylvania Health Access Network, a consumer advocacy organization.

“Changing health plans means changing provider networks; it means having a different set of costs — premiums, co-pays, deductibles; it means getting established as a new patient at a new practice, having to transfer your medical records and history from one team of providers to another,” Ninehouser wrote in an email. “That's hard for anyone to manage, especially seniors who thought they were safe from being put in the middle of the ongoing war between UPMC and Highmark.”

Wes Venteicher is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 412-380-5676 or wventeicher@tribweb.com.