After days of rain, and no flooding, water rose rapidly Thursday evening sending what residents of Frasier Meadows Retirement Community described as a wall of water barreling down their street.

Water filled two underground parking lots packed with cars, ground-level apartments were flooded, power transformers blew out, and residents the most in need of care — those in wheelchairs and beds and tended to by nursing staffers — were being carried up steps by staffers and other residents.

Just as the water charged into the building, the people unable to escape were rescued — 54 residents in 24 minutes, Frasier Meadows CEO Tim Johnson said Tuesday. “Not one injury.”

For the next two days, the upstairs dining room became a skilled nursing facility for the residents who needed close care. Now, they are at another Boulder retirement center, Golden West, as Frasier Meadows managers assess how much damage the assisted-living center suffered, and whether to rebuild.

The retirement campus on Thunderbird Drive, which has 425 residents, some of whom are fully independent and healthy and others who need around-the-clock care, was a vortex of gawking on Tuesday afternoon, as workers hauled mud-caked, wrecked cars from the parking garages.

When workers opened the doors, cars floated on top of one another, cast about like toys.

“I had seen on television that raging waters were pushing cars down streets, so I left mine in there,” said Jane Crabtree, 70, who moved to the facility in March from the Chicago area. On Tuesday, her 18-month-old VW Tiguan sat on Thunderbird Drive — dented all over, a window smashed, mud everywhere. A total loss — like as many as 120 other vehicles.

“Friends said it was devastating, but compared to so many other people, I think it was just an inconvenience,” she said Tuesday.

Nancy Tilly, 78, and her husband Eben Tilly, 84, sat in chairs in their garden-level apartment while workers in the hallway removed water from other units. Their home flooded, but only by a few inches; for the most part, all they will need is new carpeting.

And a new car. Their 1997 Toyota RAV4, which they normally park on the street, was lost in the garage. They moved it there for fear the river-like waters roaring down Thunderbird Drive and spreading down other streets would sweep it away.

The night of sirens blaring and water coursing through buildings and evacuations happening all around is not one they are keen to repeat, but it warmed their hearts a bit.

The Tillys moved to the community 3-months ago from Chapel Hill, N.C. As the waters rose, a couple they did not know well offered the Tillys a place to stay, a gesture that other residents said happened all night — people on lower levels had sleepovers in higher units.

“They gave us a guest room with two beds, and clean sheets,” Nancy Tilly said, just before getting ready to change into a dress for dinner in the dining room. “It was wonderful.”

Douglas Brown: 303-954-1395, djbrown@denverpost.com or twitter.com/douglasjbrown