Cemetery workers and mourners at a cemetery panicked when they heard muffled screams and banging from inside a coffin that had just been put in the ground and covered with dirt. The coffin lay under six-feet of freshly packed dirt, but the frantic sounds indicated the 45-year-old woman who was inside was still very much alive, according to the BBC News on Sept. 26.

The workers at the Greek cemetery scrambled to unearth the coffin and get the woman out, as she was alive and had very little air in the small confines of a coffin. Mourners from another funeral called the police and jumped in to help. When the workers finally brought the woman to the top and opened the coffin, she was dead. This time she suffocated from lack of oxygen.

The woman was brought to the top of the ground and the coffin was opened about an hour after she was buried, so she would have been in the coffin deep in the ground for an hour. She was originally deemed dead by a doctor after she had succumbed to cancer, according to The Independent News UK.

Thankfully the family of this woman had left the cemetery before the woman seemingly woke up and was screaming for help. The cemetery workers were not the only ones who heard her horrific pleas for help, neighbors who were outside, also heard her muffled screams and the banging on the coffin.

When the woman was found dead, the controversy began. The doctor who called her death said that several tests are used in determining the breathing and heartbeat of a person has stopped before calling a death. Dr. Chrissi Matsikoudi, who is a doctor who happened to be at the site as they were unearthing the coffin in the town of Peraia, said that she thinks it is “impossible” for that woman to have been alive an hour before being taken out of her coffin, reports the New York Daily News today.

"It would have been impossible for someone in a state of rigor mortis to have been shouting and hitting the coffin like that," said Matsikoudi.

Still, there were too many witnesses who heard this to dismiss the possibility that the woman was buried alive. This has prompted an investigation into how this woman died. The coroner will now do another autopsy to determine if the woman was in fact buried alive as the many witnesses claim.

Did she die from complications of cancer of did she suffocate in her the coffin as witnesses suggest? The woman’s cries were heard by cemetery workers, neighbors and even children playing outside. The family of the woman is now contemplating filing a complaint against the doctors who treated the woman for her cancer and called her time of death.