Imagine you had a heart attack. Maybe you are one of the millions who already have. You got a stent that opened up your clogged artery, and it saved your life. Your lab work and CT scans look “normal,” but over the course of the next year, you, like 1 in 4 heart patients in this same scenario, still have chest pain and the associated discomfort.

I saw this pattern frequently as a practicing interventional cardiologist: patients who, despite successful interventions with a stent, returned to their doctor frustrated and scared because they still felt chest pain. After a series of tests, they were often told there was nothing “wrong” with their heart. Yet that pain sent them back to the doctor looking for relief, adding to the burden of our healthcare system.

ADVERTISEMENT

When testing new therapies in clinical trials, medical device companies rarely measure how people feel as a result of the treatment. In fact, just one in six cardiovascular clinical trials includes quality of life measures.

If we don’t test for the impact of a medical device on a patient’s quality of life, how can we develop innovative treatments that could improve their health and make them feel better, too?

The need for such quality of life trials is beginning to gain recognition. This summer, the European Society of Cardiology called for better tools to measure how people feel following treatment so cardiovascular clinical trials can better inform health policy, manage disease and help patients and doctors choose the right therapy. In addition, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) published guidelines to show manufacturers how to better design and use tools to show how a treatment affects the patient’s quality of life.

Clinical superiority remains our threshold, but quality of life matters. And even better if a device can improve a patient’s quality of life and actually save money.

A person who feels well is less likely to use healthcare resources than someone who feels lousy and frequently seeks medical care. This is based on research showing new medical devices that improve health and shorten hospital stays reduce overall healthcare costs.

To add to this evidence, we recently launched a clinical trial in which quality of life is a primary endpoint so that how the patient feels takes center stage in determining the device’s success or failure.

Comparing a novel dissolving heart device to a permanent metallic stent (the standard of care), this trial will directly measure the treatment’s effect on how people feel and their use of healthcare resources.

It’s time for medical device makers to embrace quality of life metrics when they design, study and introduce new therapies. By offering innovative technologies that improve clinical outcomes and help patients feel better, we can improve our country’s health and help alleviate healthcare costs.

Simonton is chief medical officer of Abbott Vascular.