WATSONVILLE >> Recruiting of staff is underway for a new dental clinic nearing completion –and funded by the Affordable Care Act – to serve low-income families.

“If not for the Affordable Care Act, we would not be talking,” said Scott Moats, an analyst for the county Health Services Agency who is serving as project manager.

The new clinic at 1430 Freedom Blvd. Suite C is a former courthouse that dated to the 1930s next to the county health clinic.

It represents a new collaboration for providing services and a first in Santa Cruz County.

The county is renovating the building to create a dental clinic and Dientes Community Dental Care, a nonprofit that runs a clinic with 10 dental chairs at 1830 Commercial Way in Santa Cruz, will operate the new location.

Before this, the property was known as 1442 Freedom Blvd., and tenants included a nursery, a used car lot, a video store and an RV dealership.

Pickard and Butters Construction of Atascadero was awarded the contract with a winning bid of $1.5 million. Construction started a year ago.

Some underground issues resulted in a delay of three to four months, according to Moats, who is shooting for opening the first week of July.

Dientes’ development director Sheree Storm said nine new employees will be hired to staff the facility: two dentists, a hygienist, four dental assistants, and two front office staff.

Even though Western Dental is still accepting new Denti-Cal patients in Santa Cruz County, “We still have a systemic problem of not enough dental providers in Santa Cruz County accepting Medi-Cal as compared to the need in our community. The issue has to do with the Medi-Cal reimbursement rates that are available to private dentists.”

Both Dientes, which expanded its Santa Cruz facility in October, and Salud Para La Gente, which has a team of nine dentists in Watsonville, have the status of a “federally qualified health center.”

Such facilities averaged a reimbursement of $164 per Denti-Cal patient visit in 2012 compared to the $22 average for common procedures done by dentists in private practice.