Extreme anti-government figures, and veterans of an armed standoff with federal officers in Nevada, will headline a Saturday gun rally in Olympia, titled “I Will Not Comply” and keyed to defiance of voter-passed Initiative 594.

The rally, slated for 11 a.m. at the State Capitol, will hear from Ammon Bundy. He is son of Nevada rancher Cliven Bundy who has for years refused to pay grazing fees, now totaling $1 million, for grazing his cattle on Bureau of Land Management land in Nevada.

Armed defenders of Bundy confronted law officers in April, after a federal judge said Bundy’s cattle could be taken if they continued to graze on BLM lands.

Ammon Bundy was tasered after kicking a police dog.

The elder Bundy became a poster boy for Sean Hannity of Fox News and other conservative pundits, but was jettisoned after his racist “I want to tell you one thing I know about the Negro” remarks appeared in The New York Times.

The younger Bundy has been defiant in his rhetoric. “Who is always been the aggressor, who is the one who is doing the wrong?” he asked in one interview. “Ah — that is the Bureau of Land Management, the Forest Service — ya know these federal agencies — they’ve been preying upon the people for years.”

Gavin Seim, a convener of Saturday’s rally, is a longtime defender of the Bundys. He declared, earlier this year, that “The Second American Revolution almost started” at the Nevada ranch, when “hundreds of people were willing to due for your liberty.”

Seim ran for Congress in the 4th District earlier this year, taking 1.97 percent of the vote in August’s primary.

Seim has made expansive statements in buildup to Saturday’s rally, declaring: “We the people, with the vested authority of absolute law, declare ALL restrictions and permits of ALL kinds to be VOID. If you want to buy or sell a tank, you have that right.”

Ammon Bundy has presented a similar, radical view of American federalism, telling an interviewer:

“We have the right to protect our life, liberty and property first, and we give a little bit of that right to the county, and the county gives a little bit of that right to the state, and the state gives a little teeny part of that right to the federal government. And that’s all the rights they have.”

The rally will also hear from Mike Vanderboegh, an Alabama-based leader of the “Patriot” movement who came to prominence after the 1993 Waco standoff with a guide titled “Strategy and Tactics for a Militia Civil War,” with lessons on such subjects as the value of snipers.

Vanderboegh urged direct action at the time Congress passed the Affordable Care Act in 2010.

“If you wish to send a message that (House Speaker Nancy) Pelosi and her party cannot fail to hear, break their windows,” he told a rally. “Break them now. Break them and run and break again.”

He has been equally defiant on gun safety laws, saying:

“The recent spake of citizen disarmament laws in states like Colorado, Connecticut, Maryland and New York has led me on a campaign to defy, resist, evade and smuggle in opposition to those laws.”

Initiative 594, which took effect last week, requires a criminal background check for those purchasing firearms at gun shows and on line. Such checks are currently required of those buying guns from gun dealers.

“We will buy and sell guns from whom we please: We will not submit to background checks,” Seim proclaimed in announcing the December 13 rally. The rally emblem is a poster of two guns crossed.

But the Washington State Patrol has said it will not arrest demonstrators on Saturday who exchange firearms.

While strident in their rhetoric, larger gun groups seem to be putting distance between themselves and the Saturday rally. Two groups, the Second Amendment Foundation and Citizens Committee for the Right to Bear Arms, have announced their own rally for Jan. 15 at the Legislature.

Dave Workman, a popular gun rights writer, seemed to downplay sponsors’ early predictions that thousands would show up for Saturday’s rally.

“Weather may determine the size of the crowd as well as a conflict with the Washington Arms Collectors’ gun show in Puyallup,” Workman wrote on Monday.

He noted that on Jan. 15, the Legislature will be in session in Olympia.