A plan to convert the former Knox United Church on Rubidge St. into 41 affordable-housing apartments with 17 parking spaces on the property goes to city council’s planning committee meeting Monday.

The city’s planning division recommends council approve the zoning changes that would be needed to allow the property at 165 Rubidge St. and 164 Park St. N. to be used for the 41-unit apartment building.

“The application proposes to retain the existing buildings and repurpose them by converting the use from church and associated hall, to residential units,” land use planner Caroline Kimble states in a report to council.

“The existing building has been long established within the block, and respects the scale and physical characteristics of existing development in the surrounding neighbourhood.”

Paul Millard is the person behind the project. The land-use designation would change to multi-residential zoning from its current public service district designation.

The main building of the former church would be converted to 29 units and the neighbouring former Keith Hall would be turned into 12 apartments.

Millard is applying for financial incentives for affordable housing under the city’s Community Improvement Plan.

In exchange for a commitment to keep rents at average or below average levels for the Peterborough market, the city could give breaks on property taxes and waive development charges.

Depending on rent levels, the municipality could give rebates for a percentage of the property tax increase that stems from the improvements.

Knox United Church closed in June 2011 after struggling with declining attendance.

The church’s trustees had accepted a $400,000 offer for the property from Our Space drop-in centre group, but the deal fell through when the buyer decided renovations would be too expensive.

The high-density residential use is appropriate in the city’s central area, Kimble states.

“The proposed amendment contemplates re-use of the existing buildings, no longer viable as a place of worship,” she states.

The city’s community services department wants council to designate the property under the Ontario Heritage Act.

City staff met with the applicant to discuss heritage preservation and they are working toward reaching a conservation agreement to address specific features and conservation provisions, staff state.

Other items council will consider Monday include:

- Changing the zoning for 191 Bethune St. to allow the property owner to convert the existing duplex with five-bedroom units into a four-unit building with each unit having two or three bedrooms.

- Completing the approval of the subdivision plan for 52 lots by R.D. Land Corp at 420 Simons Ave. and 748 Hemlock St., which are at the east end of Raymond St.

The planning committee meeting starts at 6:30 p.m. in the council chambers at City Hall, 500 George St. N.

NOTE: Council will hold a closed-door meeting of committee of the whole starting at 6 p.m. in the general committee room to discuss an item about personal matters about an identifiable individual and three items about proposed or pending purchases or sales of land.

brendan.wedley@sunmedia.ca