By Shauna Johnson in News | December 21, 2015 at 12:51PM

WASHINGTON, D.C. — U.S. Senator Shelley Moore Capito (R-W.Va.) sees more good than bad in the $1.1 trillion federal budget that will keep the U.S. government funded through Sept. 2016.

“Obviously, it’s not perfect, but there’s a lot in there for West Virginia,” Capito said.

File U.S. Senator Shelley Moore Capito (R-W.Va.)

President Barack Obama moved quickly to sign the legislation after the U.S. Senate approved it Friday with a 65-33 vote.

While Capito was in the majority, U.S. Senator Joe Manchin (D-W.Va.) was in the minority with his vote to oppose the legislation which included $680 billion in tax cuts.

His decision, Manchin said, was based on the amount the tax cuts will add to the national debt in the coming years.

“You’ve got to live within your means, you’ve got to budget out and be able pay for what you want and you set your priorities based on your values. You don’t say yes to everybody,” Manchin argued. He asserted votes in favor of the legislation were “irresponsible.”

U.S. Senator Joe Manchin (D-W.Va.)

Capito denied that. She said many of those tax credits had been extended for years and are critical to thousands of West Virginians.

“When you look at 160,000 West Virginia households that are going to get some relief at the lower end, the Earned Income Tax Credit, the Child Tax Credit hits 95,000 households — these are people who are on the edge,” Capito said in defense of her vote.

Other tax cuts that were made permanent include the research and experimentation tax credit, the American Opportunity Tax Credit for undergraduate tuition and allowances for seniors to continue tax-free charitable donations from Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs).

Also extended through 2019 is a corporate tax break that lets companies more quickly depreciate equipment values.

In the legislation, several tax increases created in the Affordable Care Act have been delayed, including the taxes on expensive insurance plans, called the “Cadillac” health plans, that had been scheduled to begin in 2018. Those taxes will now wait for two years.

Medical device taxes are also paused for 2016 and 2017.

Overall, the omnibus legislation combined 12 smaller appropriations measures for every U.S. government agency into one giant funding bill covering 2,000 pages.

The budget does not include monetary assistance for financially struggling Puerto Rico or pension security for coal miners and their dependents in the form of the Miners Protection Act, but it does tighten up requirements of the program allowing people from 38 countries to travel to the U.S. without a visa.

There are additional tax credits for solar and wind energy projects, coupled with a lifting of the decades-old ban on U.S. exports of crude oil.

Prior to the U.S. Senate vote Friday, the U.S. House approved the spending bill with a 316-113 vote.

Among West Virginia’s House members, 3rd District Congressman Evan Jenkins (R-W.Va.) voted in favor of the legislation, while 1st District Congressman David McKinley (R-W.Va.) and 2nd District Congressman Alex Mooney (R-W.Va) voted against it.

McKinley, Jenkins and Mooney all voted ‘yes’ on the $650 billion tax break package which was taken up separately in the U.S. House before being combined for one vote in the U.S. Senate.

Manchin said he could have supported the omnibus bill on its own.

He asked, “Do you have to give away the whole darn store and, basically, put us in a situation which gives us very few tools to ever do an overhaul of the tax system?”

Both Capito and Manchin talked about their votes on Monday’s MetroNews “Talkline.”

“This is the beginning,” said Capito of the budget. “We’ve got lots we can do.”