Collier County deputies have arrested the man they believe is responsible for the shooting deaths of two people in Immokalee.

Evoull Bachat is accused of shooting and killing his ex-girlfriend, Guilene Toussaint, and her boyfriend, Elkim Angervil.

It's been less than a week since two families lost their loved ones in a horrific shooting in Immokalee.

Both families say the early morning arrest was welcomed news. But it's only the beginning of the long road of healing ahead.

An anonymous tip lead Collier County deputies to a house in Immokalee just before 4 a.m. Saturday.

Bachat was armed, dangerous and wanted for gunning down his ex-girlfriend and her boyfriend.

Deputies arrested Bachat just four miles down the road from the deadly crime scene.

"We're not going to celebrate that but we're going to feel better," said Judzer Angervil, one of the victim's older brother.

Deputies say Bachat forced his way into an apartment last Sunday and started shooting.

He shot Elkim then chased Toussaint outside and killed her.

"I'm going to feel justice when he is in prison, not in jail. When he stays there for his whole life," said Judzer Angervil.

We are told deputies arrived to a home at 970 Chapman Lane, where Bachat was standing outside. Deputies arrested him without any trouble.

"I feel better now than before because the killer [was caught]," said Judzer Angervil, "That was his last day. They catch him."

Judzer Angervil says the arrest is a sliver of light in all the darkness. He says his mother has barely been able to move or speak since her son was killed.

"He was a lovely boy. He was a baby for my mom, and he was the last son," said Judzer Angervil.

In the days since his brother was killed, Judzer Angervil says he has been wearing his brother's clothing – in an attempt to move on and slowly start to heal.

"Every time I'm lonely, I'll think of him," said Judzer Angervil, "He's with me. He's close to me."

We spoke with Guilene's older brother at their home today.

Surrounded by family and friends, he says despite the arrest he still feels like it is a bad dream. He and his family are still very much in shock.

Funeral services will be held for both victims in Immokalee next week.

Bachat is charged with two counts of second-degree murder.