Last month, Caryn Hoadley received an unexpected letter after a routine mammogram. It said her mammogram was clean but that she has dense breast tissue, which has been linked to higher rates of breast cancer and could make her mammogram harder to read.

“I honestly don’t know what to think about the letter,” said Hoadley, 45, of Alameda. “What do I do with that information?”

Millions of women such as Hoadley may be wondering the same thing. Twenty-one states, including California, have passed laws requiring health facilities to notify women when they have dense breasts. Eleven other states are considering similar laws, and a nationwide version has been introduced in Congress.

The laws have been hailed by advocates as empowering women to take charge of their own health. About 40 percent of women have dense or extremely dense breast tissue, which can obscure cancer that might otherwise be detected on a mammogram. Dense breasts have more glandular and fibrous tissue, which block the X-rays used in mammograms more than fatty tissue does.

But critics say the laws cause women unnecessary anxiety and can lead to higher costs and treatment that doesn’t save lives or otherwise benefit patients.

“While I think the intent of these laws is well meaning, I think their impact is going to be a significant problem, where we end up doing more harm than good,” said Dr. Laura Esserman, a UC San Francisco surgeon and breast cancer specialist.

Typically, the laws require that a notice be sent to a woman if she has dense breast tissue seen on a mammogram. Some notifications suggest that a woman talk to her doctor about additional screening options.

But in some states, not including California, the laws go further by requiring health providers to offer a supplemental screening such as an ultrasound to women with dense breasts even if their mammograms are clean. Connecticut, Illinois and Indiana even require insurers to pay for an ultrasound screening after a mammography if a woman’s breast density falls above a certain threshold.

Otherwise insurers do not routinely cover supplemental screening for women with clean mammograms, even if they have dense breasts. The Affordable Care Act does not require it.

The problem, Esserman said, is that no medical consensus exists on whether routine supplemental screening for women with dense breasts is worthwhile.

A recent Annals of Internal Medicine study using computer modeling found that offering an ultrasound to women with dense breasts after a clean mammogram would not significantly improve breast cancer survival rates but would prompt many unnecessary biopsies and raise health care costs.

Advertisement

Connecticut study

Another study conducted in Connecticut after its notification law went into effect found that supplemental ultrasound screenings for women with dense breasts did find a few additional cancers — about three per 1,000 women screened — but the probability that such screenings would find life-threatening cancers was low.

Dense-breast notification laws have added another layer of complexity to the long-running and often emotional debate over how best to screen women for breast cancer.

Breast cancer is the second most common form of cancer among American women, behind skin cancers, and the second leading cause of cancer death. An estimated 231,840 U.S. women will be diagnosed with invasive breast cancer this year, according to the American Cancer Society.

About 38.5 million mammograms are performed each year in an attempt to find signs of cancer early enough to treat it successfully. Emerging technologies such as tomosynthesis, a 3-D digital X-ray of the breast, may become cheap enough to replace conventional mammography and make the notification laws irrelevant, but their widespread use is years away.

For a long time, women were advised to start yearly mammograms at about age 40. But in 2009 the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force issued controversial recommendations that most women without a family history of breast cancer or other risk factors should wait until age 50 to begin mammograms, and repeat them every two years. Patient advocates decried the recommendations as “rationing” preventive health care for women.

In the meantime, Nancy Cappello, an education administrator from Connecticut, was pushing to pass what became the nation’s first dense breast notification law.

Mammogram clear

Just two months after a clean mammogram, she had been diagnosed with breast cancer that had spread to her lymph nodes. She had extremely dense breasts, something her radiologist knew. But Cappello was not told.

Eventually, she founded the patient advocacy organization Are You Dense Inc., and took her campaign national.

“There’s no evidence that we’re scaring women. Most women I’ve talked to are very happy to get these notifications,” said Cappello, whose cancer is in remission. “We want to make informed decisions ... to have a better chance of surviving the disease.”

Similarly, Amy Colton, a registered nurse from Santa Cruz, was the driving force behind California’s dense-breast notification law, which took effect in 2013. After learning she had advanced breast cancer that did not show up on her mammograms, Colton had entered her suggestion for the law in then-state Sen. Joe Simitian’s “There Oughta Be A Law” contest.

Today, Colton, 53, says she can’t understand why anyone would object to the law.

“I think that an average person, if their doctor runs a test on them, expects that the test has a reasonable degree of accuracy. But in the presence of dense breast tissue, mammography is far from accurate,” Colton said. “No one is saying that these supplemental screenings after mammograms are perfect, but I just can’t understand how giving more information to patients is a bad thing.”

Simitian, now a Santa Clara County supervisor, continues to strongly support the law he championed. He said he’s been pleased to see other states follow California and Connecticut in passing their own laws.

“These are the same tired arguments we confronted here in California back in 2012,” when the law was debated, Simitian said. “Is this relevant information that should be shared with the patient? For me the answer is a resounding yes. If we’re fostering those conversations and the health care industry is now obliged to give better answers that are more carefully tailored to individual patients, that’s nothing but good.”

New classifications

New ways of classifying dense breast tissue could put even more women in the category of receiving dense breast notifications, said Dr. Priscilla Slanetz, who recently wrote a New England Journal of Medicine article questioning the effectiveness of dense-breast notification laws.

One reason she wrote the article, she said, was that “in our state (Massachusetts) very few of our primary care providers have any knowledge about breast density and the strengths and limitations of these different tests” for supplemental screening.

The same may hold true in California, where a small survey of primary care doctors found that only half of them had heard of the state’s law and many felt they didn’t have enough education to address what breast density meant for their patients.

On this point, both supporters and critics of the laws agree: Doctors need better tools to help their patients identify their individual cancer risks.

To that end, specialists are developing more personalized screening protocols that result in low-risk women being screened less often than higher-risk women.

“It’s not rationing; it’s being rational,” said Esserman, who has a $14 million grant to study the issue. “We should be testing different approaches for screening women with dense breasts, and then pass legislation once we know what to do.”

Kaiser Health News is an editorially independent program of the Menlo Park-based Kaiser Family Foundation.