Did you know that Montgomery County is the “reddest” (GOP representation) in the state of Texas and fourth in the U.S.? But what exactly does that mean?

In our case, it actually refers to the fact that there’s a GOP “stronghold” in this county. But what has that done for us at the federal and state levels? Actually, very little, especially when you consider the lack of anything meaningful, other than the passing of bad bills by Congressman Kevin Brady, after 20 years in office. Come to think of it, is there anything worthwhile that’s come out of his office, except a fancy chart of Obamacare which he ostensibly helped to pass, despite some show votes to the contrary?

Advertisement

In such a GOP stronghold where time and again we’ve sent Brady up to do the nation’s business on our behalf, all he’s done is come back to “report” what “good” has happened there as we move toward a $20 trillion debt load as a country, and all the while his ghostwriter here writes about how much he’s accomplished. In the meantime, Brady’s built a huge campaign war chest (over $2 million) by mostly out-of-state lobbyist PACs, that is second to none ( https://www.usvotesmart.com/index.php/candidate/view/26/22).

After reviewing his campaign finance reports, where over 75 percent of his contributions come from outside the state of Texas, do you really think he’s looking out for “our” best interests?

The truth is that he’s really done nothing, other than pass bad bills, while being a dutiful sidekick to liberal speakers like John Boehner (whom he unbelievably called a conservative a few years ago) and now Paul Ryan. And he claims that since he’s now inherited the “coveted” Ways & Means chair position by doing what Boehner/Ryan/Pelosi, et al told him to do, he can finally orchestrate some meaningful policy. Oh really, Mr. Brady? In 20 years, you have shown nothing that would lead me to believe you will. No “tough” votes from you, as your ad proclaims, that runs 24/7, paid for by those lobbyists.

It’s bad enough that the (truly) conservative Heritage Foundation gave him a failing grade of “55” (that’s a big fat “F”). http://www.heritageactionscorecard.com/members/member/B000755. But even worse, he’s voted more times (16) for debt increases than Sheila Jackson Lee (14).

In fact, here are just a few of the bad bills he was a part of:

• Brady voted for more NSA spying on U.S. Citizens

H.R. 2397 Surveillance of Phone Records July, 2013

• Brady voted for more CISPA spying on U.S. Citizens

H.R. 624 Internet Spy Program April, 2014

• Brady voted for more NDAA detention of U.S. Citizens

H.R. 4435 Indefinite Detention without a trial May, 2014

• Brady voted to fund Obama Care and Obama’s Executive Amnesty.

H.R. 83 CRomnibus $1.1Trillion Funding Bill December, 2014

• Brady voted for a labor union bailout & more power to the president

H.R. 2146 OBAMAtrade TPA Secret Trade Deal June, 2015

• Brady voted for the $1.2 trillion Omnibus Bill of 2015

Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2016.

It’s said that the U.S. Congress has an overall rating below 10 percent. That’s true, but the problem is that everyone thinks their congressman is not part of the problem. That it’s someone else’s representative. Well, unfortunately, it’s quite evident that Brady has been part of the problem. Any of Brady’s three challengers would be infinitely better than him. We happen to think that Steve Toth’s proven conservative, legislative experience in the Texas House will serve him and us well in the U.S. Congress. It’s why the Montgomery County Tea Party chose Toth.

Brady’s had his chance. He blew it. His time has passed. It’s time for a change.

Vote for Steve Toth for Congress.

John Wertz is the Vetting Committee Chair of the Montgomery County Tea Party(MCTP).