While Medicaid and prisons – which absorb more than half Alabama’s General Fund budget – remain tense topics for decision-making in the legislative session, a local legislator said issues with Alabama’s pension system are why the other programs experience shortfalls.

State Rep. Paul Lee, R-Dothan, said the Retirement Systems of Alabama take up between $940 million and $960 million of the General Fund budget each year at about 63-percent funding. RSA encompasses the Employees’ Retirement System of Alabama (ERS), the Teachers’ Retirement System (TRS) and Judicial Retirement Fund (JRF).

“ That’s why we’re in the shortfall we’re in in all the other areas – the system is not producing the actuaries expected to make sure the payments are made,” Lee said during a legislative update meeting at the Dothan Area Chamber of Commerce on Monday.

“… If it was 90-percent funded, you’re talking about $400 million or $500 million less. I’m not saying we’re not going to fund it and you’re not going to get your retirement. We’re going to do that. …But $960 million is what we have to do just to keep it at 63-percent funding.”

According to RSA’s annual 2014 report, revenues from TRS, ERS and JRF were $5.55 billion and made up of 12.81 percent of employee contributions, 20.66 percent of employer contributions and 66.53 percent of investment income.

An Alabama Policy Institute publication showed that as of September 30, 2014, RSA’s TRS, ERS and JRF held assets of $29.4 billion and liabilities of $44.6 billion, resulting in an unfunded liability of $15.2 billion.

RSA had an estimated 339,000 members in 2014. Total claims expense in 2014 was $1.25 billion, according to the report.

State Rep. Donnie Chesteen, R-Geneva, said the Public Education Employees’ Health Insurance Plan (PEEHIP) requested $23 million from the Education Trust Fund, which he said “was great” compared to what was expected.

Chesteen said the 18-percent cost of living adjustments for retirees that were given between 2004 and 2006 are a $1.2 billion unfunded liability.

“ That is a $1.2 billion unfunded liability we just cannot sustain, but we do want to make sure that we try to take care of the health insurance needs for retirees with no COLAs…to at least address the needs.”

State Rep. Steve Clouse, R-Ozark, said the last time the retirement system was at 100-percent funding was in 2001, when the Legislature’s contribution to RSA (according to API) was $334 million. He said some big reforms were made in 2011 when the Legislature opted not to give cost of living adjustments anymore to retirees and to restrict the age to draw retirement to a minimum age of 62 for employees who started work after January 2013.

“ We made significant changes but it’s going to take a long time before you can finally see that in the retirement system,” he said.

“ With retirement it’s not like taking a jet ski and turning it around on the dime. It’s like a big ship we’ve got to turn around.”

In addition to discussing retirement issues, the three legislators talked about efforts for workforce development and career technical courses.

Clouse also gave a review of last year’s session and a general update on the current session to residents who attended. Clouse said last year was the toughest budgeting experience he has in his 21 years in office.

Clouse said the Proration Prevention Account established in 2011provided a “cushion” in the education budget by taking the average of the last 15 years of the budget and spending that amount while carrying the surplus over to the next year.

“ Because of that we haven’t had pay raises in the last four or five years. Employees and retirees have had to pay more in health insurance, but we’ve …instilled discipline in that spending process and formed a budget …,” he said.

Clouse said hiking the cigarette tax up 25 cents, from 42.5 cents to 67.5 cents per pack, as part of about $165 million in new revenue measures for the state’s total 2016 General Fund budget of $1.76 billion, is about half of what the state needed.

He said an internet sales tax discussed in Congress could potentially add revenue to the state and local municipalities.

Clouse said at least some of the $10 million would go toward hiring pardon and parole officers to get nonviolent offenders out of the prisons. He said $16 million was allocated to that effort beginning this month.

Clouse said multiple agencies have tightened their budgets in a variety of ways.

“ We can still keep the train on the track if the agencies just stay with what they have, but we know for sure the prisons are going to need at least $10 million more for the prison reform we passed,” he said.

“ But I think the big issue like it was last year, like it’s going to be this year and like it’s going to be the next few years is Medicaid.”

Clouse said it is possible the Affordable Care Act might be repealed if a Republican wins a presidential race and has a Republican Congress, which would likely lead to the funding of some other type of low-income health insurance like Medicaid..

Clouse said he was unsure the state will be able to fund regional care organizations designed by the Legislature three years ago to coordinate the health care of Medicaid patients in each region.

“ We’re in a holding pattern and we may be lucky just to level fund Medicaid,” he said.

The next legislative update meeting at the Dothan chamber is set for 7:30 a.m. Monday, March 14.