Longmont has rescinded its evacuation of about 1,000 homes in the Lake Macintosh area that was issued after a gate that separates an irrigation ditch from the St. Vrain River ruptured on Sunday afternoon.

The city is urging people in the affected area to “shelter in place,” according to the Longmont Times-Call. An advisory evacuation notice is in place as of about 3 p.m.

A reverse 9-1-1 call had been issued around 12:30 p.m., telling citizens in the area that flooding in the area was “imminent” after water breached the headgate of the Oligarchy Ditch.

Emergency workers have dug another ditch to carry water from the Oligarchy ditch into the lake, said Cmndr. Jeffrey Satur.

The ditch runs north of the lake, Satur said. “Normally, there isn’t water in it but we had it open to release pressure on the river, but the whole head gate ruptured so water is flowing into the ditch more than we wanted.”

Crews are digging a second ditch near the headgate to funnel water back into the river.

The St. Vrain River has been rising, and earlier on Sunday the city ordered evacuations along the river corridor.

Gauges at the river show that as much as an inch-and-a-half of rain has fallen in one hour, Satur said. “All that rain is dumping into the river.”

“Flooding is imminent in your area, residents are urged to evacuate and move to higher ground immediately,” the city said in a release announcing the Lake Macintosh evacuations.

At about 2 p.m., Satur said there had been no flooding, and that with luck, there might not be any. “It will be several hours before we see some impact in Longmont. We are monitoring the levels of water.”

Longmont is asking residents along Left Hand Creek to shelter in place, prepare for evacuations, and monitor the creek for flooding. Residents will be notified if they must evacuate.

Evacuation centers are open at the Memorial (Longs Peak Ave and Coffman St.), Silver Creek High School and the Recreation Center on Quail Road, east of Main St.

Residents can check the City of Longmont’s website for updates. www.ci.longmont.co.us.

Tom McGhee: 303-954-1671, tmcghee@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dpmcghee