Planned Parenthood CEO Cecile Richards seems to jump at every chance she gets to do an interview with a journalist who will flatter her abortion work.

In her latest interview, Richards revealed her proudest moment on the job – forcing Christians to pay for contraception, including methods that many say can cause early abortions.

She told the Texas Observer:

TO: And your proudest moment at Planned Parenthood? CR: Definitely the day President Obama called to say he was about to announce that birth control would be covered for all women under their insurance plans, because it had been a hard-fought battle, long before I came to Planned Parenthood. We were fighting to make sure that insurance companies covered it and pharmacies would fill prescriptions. The fact that now, I believe, for your generation, all women will be able to get it without a fight, and they’ll be able to get the best birth control, is an enormously important moment. It was a win for the movement.

Richards is talking about the HHS Mandate requ, which Christian organizations and businesses have had to challenge all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court. As Richards noted, abortion activists used their influence to force religious employers – including nuns – to pay for abortion-causing drugs in employee health plans through HHS.

The Little Sisters of the Poor is the latest group asking the nation’s highest court to ensure they do not have to comply with Obamacare’s abortion mandate. The mandate compels religious groups to pay for birth control and drugs that may cause abortions. Without relief, the nuns would face millions of dollars in IRS fines because they cannot comply with the government’s mandate that they give their employees free access to contraception, sterilization, and abortion-inducing drugs.

SUPPORT LIFENEWS! If you like this pro-life article, please help LifeNews.com with a donation!

Richards and Planned Parenthood don’t just want Americans to pay for birth control. They want to force taxpayers to pay for abortions, too. When Planned Parenthood endorsed Hillary Clinton for president, Clinton promised the abortion group that she would overturn the Hyde Amendment and force taxpayer funding of abortions.

The abortion giant isn’t hurting for money. Richards makes a whopping $590,928 salary for leading a business that aborts more than 300,000 unborn babies a year – more than any other group in the United States. Planned Parenthood gets about $500 million in taxpayer funding every year, too.

And Richards is fighting hard to keep it that way.