SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — Last summer’s blockbuster trade that sent star shortstop Troy Tulowitzki to Toronto from Colorado had a lot of pieces.

The Blue Jays received Tulo and now-retired reliever LaTroy Hawkins. In return, the Rockies acquired three highly regarded pitching prospects: Jeff Hoffman, Miguel Castro and Jesus Tinoco. Colorado also took on shortstop Jose Reyes and his annual $22 million salary.

The Rockies are intrigued and hopeful about Castro and Tinoco, but make no mistake about it, Hoffman was the centerpiece of the Tulo trade.

WATCH: Who could end up in the Rockies starting pitching rotation?

Hoffman, a nonroster invitee, walked into the Rockies’ spring training clubhouse at Salt River Fields last week. He was wearing a golf shirt from East Carolina University, his alma mater. He is 23 but could pass for a college freshman — if that freshman was 6-foot-4 and could throw an upper-90s fastball.

A hovering question is whether Hoffman is ready to carry the weight of the trade on his broad shoulders, but he seemed unruffled by the query.

WATCH: How did Colorado Rockies’ players spend their offseasons?

“I don’t think (there is) any added pressure,” Hoffman said. “They made the trade for who I am, and I don’t think I need to be anything extra.”

General manager Jeff Bridich, who engineered the trade, clearly feels the same way. During last month’s Rockies Fest at Coors Field, a reporter asked Bridich if the Rockies would handle Hoffman with extra care, given that he was the cornerstone of such a major trade.

Bridich responded brusquely: “No. He’s another player and another person just like everyone else. If you are hung up on giving him that moniker, then that’s you. You were not involved in those negotiations, and you have no idea how much we value him as a player. So, that’s your hang-up.”

There is no timetable as to when Hoffman will make his Rockies debut, not after Tommy John surgery in May 2014 complicated his path. Hoffman was considered one of the top players in the 2014 draft and a possible first overall pick, thanks to his wicked fastball-curveball-changeup combo. But the surgery curtailed his junior season and he slipped to the ninth overall pick, where Toronto snared him.

According to Bridich, the Blue Jays planned to promote Hoffman to the big leagues last season. The Rockies are taking a different, slower path.

“He was being told by his former team that they were planning on having him be a September call-up last year,” Bridich said. “We certainly put every foot that we had on that brake and changed lanes and changed avenues with a greater outlook toward future help, toward extended help.”

After spending 2014 recovering from surgery, Hoffman began pitching again last May. Pitching first at High-A and then at Double-A, he went 5-5 with a 3.03 ERA and a 1.17 WHIP.

Rockies Mailbag: Pose a question for Patrick Saunders

“Obviously, I was just trying to stay healthy,” he said. “It was my first year after Tommy John, and every day I was out there just feeling myself and kind of trying to get back in the groove of things and trying to get back to my normal self.”

Since his operation, Hoffman has added a slider to his repertoire.

“It gives me a different look,” he said. “It looks like a fastball coming out of my hand, and it’s a smaller, more controllable breaking ball.”

Hoffman said he doesn’t know when he will make his big-league splash. If Bridich has an idea, he’s not letting on.

“I’m not going to tell you exactly what our plan would be,” he said. “We certainly feel really good about where Jeff is at in terms of recovery from the injury and being able to take the ball and do what he did last year.

“I think we have to sit down with Jeff in spring training and make sure that everybody is on the same page. But we all look forward to Jeff pitching for us and hopefully advancing his career at the highest levels here.”

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or @psaundersdp