Here’s your morning jolt of news, insight and analysis on the global energy business. Send us tips, suggestions and complaints: EnergyJournal@wsj.com

Sign up for this newsletter: http://on.wsj.com/EnergyJournalSignup

Saudi Arabia’s Minister of Petroleum and Mineral Resources Ali al-Naimi arrives for a meeting of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries at their headquarters in Vienna. Ronald Zak/Associated Press

OPEC REPORT WARNS ON DEPRESSED OIL PRICES

As the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, or OPEC, starts its meeting, an internal report warns oil prices will remain low in the near future, even if the cartel cuts its production, Benoît Faucon reports. OPEC members are pessimistic about reaching an agreement to cut output.

The report warns “overall the current surplus, while easing, should continue to cap the upside in oil prices for the coming quarters.” Current OPEC production stands at 31.5 million barrels a day, and some members want to cut back to the group’s production ceiling of 30 million barrels a day. But if OPEC scaled back to that level, it “would not be sufficient to completely clear the current supply overhang” because of large amounts of oil in storage.

Bijan Zanganeh, Iran’s oil minister, said there remained “lots of disagreements” among ministers and the cartel was “not at all” close to a deal on its output strategy. The group is expected to keep its production ceiling flat, without any increase for a new member it is expected to induct, Indonesia, which pumps 800,000 barrels a day.

The OPEC attempt to hang on to its market share by maintaining output levels is arguably failing in Asia, where countries like non-OPEC member Russia have been gaining market share, Jenny W. Hsu reports.

The oil-storage business is booming, Reuters writes. But crude shipping rates are set to fall next year because of new orders for oil tankers and tankers currently being used for storage expected to re-enter service transporting oil, Robbie Whelan reports. Coal-shipping lines will also have it rough.

GOLDMAN TRIES A NEW COMMODITIES PLAY

Goldman Sachs Group Inc. is taking a new lower-risk, lower-return approach to commodities, Christian Berthelsen and Justin Baer report. That includes providing operating cash and credit guarantees to Oahu’s Hawaii Independent Energy, the state’s largest supplier of jet and ship fuel, and a marketer of gasoline and diesel to retail outlets.

JURY CONVICTS FORMER MASSEY CEO

A jury convicted former Massey Energy Chief Executive Don Blankenship of conspiracy to violate federal mine-safety laws in connection with a 2010 coal mine explosion that killed 29 miners, Kris Maher reports. The jury acquitted him of lying to regulators and investors. Mr. Blankenship faces a maximum prison sentence of one year.

Meanwhile, NRG Energy Inc. Chief Executive David Crane resigned amid investor dissatisfaction with his investments in renewable energy and the big drop so far this year in the power-generation company’s share price, Rebecca Smith reports.

MARKETS

Oil prices rose in volatile trading Friday with traders positioning as OPEC meeting got underway in Vienna. OPEC oil ministers are largely expected to stick to their year-old strategy of maintaining output in the face of a growing global glut and cheap oil.

Despite vocal opposition from member countries such as Venezuela and Algeria that are suffering from the low oil prices, analysts see OPEC’s most influential member Saudi Arabia remaining firm as it seeks to defend its share of the market.

“Some countries would like a production cut to spark higher prices, whilst other countries have a more long term agenda—making sure, oil revenue is maximized over decades rather than years or months,” said Michael Poulsen, oil analyst at Global Risk Management. “Oilmarket participants are on edge for whatever the outcome ends up being.”

Read our latest market report at wsj.com.