PHOTO GALLERY: Flying Scot Midwinters in Sarasota

SARASOTA

Sailing coach Zeke Horowitz, 25, flew into town late Sunday night for this, a chance to defend his Flying Scot Midwinters champion title in his hometown with his father, Jay, by his side.

The pair took first in the Flying Scot Midwinters championship last year in New Orleans, where the regatta for those who sail a particular 20-foot racing dinghy is held every other year. Father and son have raced in different sailboat classes over the years; this season marks the second anniversary of sailing a Flying Scot.

“This was the boat we could sail together and there was a really good fleet that we could sail here that was fun and competitive,” Zeke Horowitz said, as he waited with dozens of other sailors for the wind to pick up on Monday. The Sarasota Sailing Squadron is hosting four days of racing this week for 54 boats from across the country.

Competitors chatted as they took shade under the club pavilion. Colorful tents, where some sailors are staying, were set up along the northern bank. Others played corn hole as they waited for conditions to improve.

PHOTO GALLERY: Click here for more images from the Flying Scot Midwinters championship

The Flying Scot class competes with a sailboat model that has been around for more than 50 years, said regatta director John Pether. It’s a sturdy, simple model that tends to be less expensive than sleeker, faster sailboats. That means, he said, it attracts a diverse group, from competitive sailors who want a boat they can both race and take out with their families to newbies with less experience.

“It’s so rare to get a class of boat that has such a disparity of ages, from young people to old, and a mixture of very very good sailors with weekend sailors,” Pether said. “The spirit of this class is fantastic.”

Amy Smith Linton, the defending Flying Scot North American champion, started sailing a Flying Scot more than a decade ago with her husband Jeff Linton, a former Rolex US Sailing Yachtsman of the Year.

“For my husband and me, the really important thing about the Flying Scot was that it’s great bang for the buck,” Smith Linton said. “It’s not a $50,000 investment to get a race-ready boat.”

Competitors are expected to participate in at least eight races in Sarasota Bay through Thursday, when a champion will be named. They will race in challenger and championship divisions, with the latter considered more competitive.

Jay Horowitz, 58, wants to win the champion title again with his son, but he said he likes competing in this class because there is no one to whom he truly minds losing.

“When you get back to the dock,” he said. “I think of a lot of people take pleasure in the successes of other competitors.”