The Senate passed its 2016 budget early Friday morning in a marathon voting session—an event called “vote-a-rama” in Washington-speak—that split along party lines with a 52-46 Republican margin.

The Senate budget resolution would slash $5.1 trillion in federal spending over the next decade, mirroring the resolution passed by the House 228 to 199 March 25, which would cut spending by $5.5 trillion over the next nine years.

Both budgets agree on keeping sequestration cuts in place, and on repealing the Affordable Care Act.

Over the next month, lawmakers would have to negotiate a joint resolution, which would require the Senate and House to reconcile their contradictory plans for Medicare.

The Senate budget supports the White House request to find $430 billion in savings for Medicare; the House resolution proposes partial privatization of Medicare by converting it into a premium support system.

In summary, the Senate budget would cut $4.3 trillion in mandatory spending and $97 billion from discretionary programs.

The 10-year spending plans for both budgets call for even deeper cuts to non-defense domestic programs than was agreed to in the 2011 Budget Control Act, said Jon Retzlaff, managing director of science policy and government affairs at the American Association for Cancer Research.

“We are extremely concerned about both the House and Senate budget resolutions, which would make things exceeding difficult for the appropriators on Capitol Hill to provide budget increases in FY 2016 and beyond for our nation’s national priorities, including the life-saving cancer research and biomedical science supported by NCI and NIH, as well as FDA, which is increasingly using a variety of innovative regulatory tools to increase the pace and quality of new cancer drugs reaching patients,” Retzlaff said to The Cancer Letter.

“The bottom line is that these House and Senate budget resolutions underscore the need for the White House and Congress to reach a broader budget deal to replace sequestration and raise the spending caps that are currently handcuffing our policy makers from investing in these critical federal agencies (NIH, NCI, and FDA) that are so effective in leading our nation’s efforts to improve health and treat disease.”

These cuts would further erode federal investment in biomedical research, said United for Medical Research.

“While we applaud the Senate Budget Committee’s call for strong funding for medical research in its FY16 budget resolution, the proposed $236 billion cut to non-defense spending over ten years would make needed increases nearly impossible,” UMR said in a statement. “Reduced and inconsistent spending at the National Institutes of Health has devastating implications for our health and the economy.

“The House Budget Committee’s FY16 budget resolution drastically reduces non-defense discretionary spending by $759 billion over ten years and, as such, would significantly impede our ability to advance science and combat disease. As a nation, we cannot continue to erode non-defense discretionary funding levels and by association the National Institutes of Health budget which, when measured against the rising cost of conducting research, has been slashed by 22 percent between 2003 and 2013. We urge Congress to boost NIH funding to save and improve patient’s lives, increase economic growth and restore our nation’s place as the world leader in biomedical research.”

The proposed cuts are counterproductive, said Research!America President and CEO Mary Woolley.

“The House and Senate FY16 budget proposals call into question our nation’s commitment to medical innovation,” said Woolley in a statement. “Are we willing to delay the discovery, development and delivery of lifesaving therapies and cures because of insufficient funding, or will we choose to accelerate the pace of medical progress?

“The proposed cuts for discretionary programs are counterproductive given health threats like cancer, Alzheimer’s, Ebola, mental illness and diabetes afflicting millions of individuals close to home and abroad. Policymakers must work towards lifting sequestration and assigning a higher priority to medical research and innovation. Too many lives hang in the balance.”