David Nelson | Kitsap Sun Jennifer Kreidler-Moss was hired as CEO of Peninsula Community Health Services in 2015, after nearly 20 years working in the nonprofit community based health care provider.

After nearly 20 years in the health care industry, Dr. Jennifer Kreidler-Moss took over the reigns of the county's nonpofit community based health provider in the summer of 2015, as CEO of Peninsula Community Health Services.

At its six clinics PCHS provides primary care, dental, behavior health counseling, pharmacies and more, offering all services to patients regardless of their ability to pay. That mission puts PCHS in a position to be greatly affected by national policy like the Affordable Care Act, Medicaid and Medicare, in addition to the other forces shaping health care today.

We asked Kreidler-Moss for her perspective on what providers will do to survive, and how Kitsap residents can best utilitze the health care market.

Kitsap County now has one of the lowest rates in the state for uninsured residents, which means PCHS is seeing more patients who now have coverage for preventive care. What's the most effective way resident can use health insurance to move toward a healthier lifestyle?

Developing a relationship with a primary care provider (PCP) is the very first step to take on the road to a healthier life.

In all the new and developing health care delivery models, the PCP is the primary partner to the patient in gaining access to all different types of care and support services. At PCHS, we aim to connect patients to a primary care team that their health goals and personality resonate with. The clinical team of the PCP and the medical assistant serve as the starting point for all care coordination, but the team expands dramatically behind the scenes to include the referral specialists for obtaining specialist access to care, the pharmacy team for all medication related issues, the navigator staff for help in obtaining insurance, the healthcare specialists for help with transportation and communication around high risk diseases or circumstances, such as recent hospitalizations, and the patient service center staff for help with appointments, messages to the care team, interpreter services and obtaining medical records.

PCHS offers a wide range of care, from primary physicians to dental care and mental health services, and your organization is in the process of expanding. As you look at the community's health needs for the near future, what should be at the top of any provider's list?

Over the last 19 years that I have worked in health care, Kitsap County has grown immensely in the ability to provide quality, local, specialized care from dedicated community providers. PCHS has grown from three sites when I was a student in 2000, to 7 sites today as the largest group primary care practice in the county with more locations and programs on the horizon. In the post-Affordable Care Act climate, we still help patients with access issues every day. Along with those that remain uninsured for a variety of reasons, we are finding insurance doesn't necessarily equal access for those with Medicaid, Medicare, and our veterans.

Being mindful of the need for more social services in Kitsap and creative ways to access the great services that do exist should be on everyone's mind. It is a reality that there are more people without permanent shelter on our streets. The growing problems for our youth with addiction, suicide and depression are very real. The stories are rarely simple, but more access to mental health and substance abuse services are top on my list on things our community can improve to make a difference.

Many things are fundamentally changing health care industry, from the ACA to hospital consolidation. What will be the role of community health service providers like PCHS in the future, and how is PCHS preparing for those changes?

As a community health center, our entire service delivery model is dynamically driven by the needs of the community we serve.

For many years, the largest health care issue was lack of insurance for those of low-income. In 2012, when our uninsured rate peaked at 57 percent, PCHS did not close its doors to patients or prioritize the more favorably insured. In all discussions of health care reform today, the quality of the care delivered rises to the top of the priority list. PCHS adopted this priority into all the processes of the patient experience. We are a nationally accredited organization for ambulatory care, and in the last few years alone, we have received state and national awards for Innovative Pharmacy practices, blood pressure control rates and immunization rates. When Washington State became a Medicaid Expansion state, PCHS launched a new program of focused on eligibility, enrollment and outreach.

As I mentioned earlier, with mental health and substance abuse being top needs in the county, PCHS is developing new and expanded programs to help meet more of the needs present. PCHS is an ever-changing organization with resilient staff and an engaged community board of directors. We will continue to evolve and adapt to the current health care environment.

You're leading an organization that is focus on the health and well-being of many people, and it must be a busy job. What do you do to stay active and focus on your own health?

I sure wish I had the secret to personal wellness or even a clue to how to find an ideal work-life balance, but I fail miserably at both at times!

I honestly love what I do. I think many of the employees at PCHS, both today and some who have moved on over my 13 years here, give themselves fully to those we serve. Can anyone have a bad day and not let their best shine through? You bet. But I also don't think anyone comes to work every day just to do an OK job.

It is that energy and spirit of the our collective group of care providers and support staff that helps me explain to my kids why I missed their school concert or couldn't be a chaperone on their field trip. It is then the need to connect with them on the weekends or on evenings that I am home before they are asleep that trumps finding time to go to work out. Not to mention — I am just not a fan of physical exertion and I really like a Whopper from time to time.

So, when I figure out the secret to balancing a high pace job, fostering the growth and development of three elementary schoolchildren, carving out adult time for my highly supportive hubby, finding personal time for myself and making a weight-reducing workout plan a priority, I will post it on the PCHS website and Facebook for the world to share! Until then, I'll keep struggling like everyone else and hope to one day find the perfect balance.