Guest Opinion: A health care conversation

In a March Dispatch guest opinion, Rep. Josh Heintzeman noted three "big issues" as his priorities for this year's legislative session. One of these was health care, noting, "The problems facing MNsure have been well-documented as thousands of Minnesotans have seen their premiums skyrocket over the last several years." MNsure is cited as the cause of skyrocketing health care costs.

MNsure is the health insurance exchange that the state set up for those eligible under the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) to have access to the insurance market at lower than market costs by means of several mechanisms, including tax rebates. Minnesota chose to set up its own exchange rather than use the federal exchange, but neither have significant effects on the much larger entire other market cost factors. It should be noted that both the exchange concept and the mandate are conservative ideas first proposed by the Heritage Foundation in 1989 and used in a bill to help defeat the 1993 Clinton health plan. The problem, it seems, is not the concept, but who uses it.

Rep. Heintzeman's March 18 opinion also stated, "I am hopeful we will be able to pass reforms that give Minnesotans more choice and increased competition in the marketplace in an effort to drive down costs..." But in four Dispatch reports since, he has provided no update on plan specifics on how it would achieve these goals.

Without any reference to these opinions, in a March 22 guest opinion, Don Pylkannen of MN COACT and I explained the opportunity Minnesotans have for reducing the rising cost of health care. Under a State Innovation Waiver section of Obamacare, starting in 2017, many state change-options are possible. Obamacare allows itself—or more—to be modified.

The first option is to make no changes. The second is to adopt a plan proposed by the Minnesota Department of Health that would primarily increase Minnesotans enrolled in large medical groups designated as Accountable Care Organizations. ACOs are large medical groups that broadly measure certain benchmark quality health care delivery goals. The third option is the Minnesota Health Plan, a state universal single-payer "(Medicare for all") plan formulated by several collaborating private groups.

Multiple factors argue that MHP is most likely to reduce the rapid rise in state health care costs. The major fact undermining the ACO proposal is that multiple studies of ACO groups over 10 years have not demonstrated that they have significant effects on medical care cost increases. A bipartisan task force legislated last year to make recommendations on waiver options used terms such as "mixed results" or "unproven" regarding the ACO plans. In a news item in the April 11 Dispatch regarding ACOs, their five primary "intentions" (goals) did not include cost control or reduction. In contrast, an independent analysis of the MHP has projected over $100 billion savings over 10 years.

Because of such factors, the bipartisan task force recommended a robust study to "compare a publicly financed, privately delivered, universal health care system" (such as MHP) with other options. Our opinion was that Minnesotans should encourage their legislators to support the study that the task force and Governor Dayton recommend.

As a part of a one-day organized lobby effort, Mr. Pylkonnen and I visited Rep. Heintzeman and other legislators on March 31 to urge their support for the study. We only had 15 minutes per legislator so we were able to only discuss the recommended study. We were greeted warmly and had a pleasant conversation. But Rep. Heintzeman was non-committal about supporting the study, citing skepticism that an objective study could be done.

If Rep. Heintzeman is skeptical of the different economic projections for Minnesota's health care options, what better next step is there than an independent head-to-head comparative study? Of even more importance if he doesn't want a study, and in view of his declared cost-focused health-reform priority concerns, he should explain his position on the above three options.

Considering both world-wide experience with universal single payer and available comparative cost analysis favoring the greater cost effectiveness of MHP, Rep. Heintzeman should explain why he would not favor supporting that plan. And does the ACO option (and the recent mergers of four groups into two) increase the consumer choice and provider competition he desires?

An anti-single payer stance of either doing nothing or adopting the ACO proposal will likely have little or no effect on future costly health care increases for Minnesotans. This would not be good for Minnesota's middle class or its business competitiveness.

Colorado recently decided to have a state referendum on implementing single payer. Will Colorado become the leader in taking an envious health care reform path Minnesota could also have taken, but didn't?

Peterson, Nisswa, is retired from internal medicine practice at Park Nicollet Clinic.