Buy Photo Congressman Steve King, left, and Donald Trump hold a news conference in West Des Moines. (Photo: Kathie Obradovich/The REGISTER)Buy Photo

Billionaire businessman and TV personality Donald Trump, who decided against running for president in 2012, said today in Iowa he'll decide early next year whether to run in 2016.

"We'll see who's running, we're going to see what happens, first of all in the next month because it's going to be very interesting, and then after that, we'll make a decision sometime after the beginning of the year," Trump said during a news conference in West Des Moines.

Trump said the next president needs to be "very smart and very tough."

"We need a great one. Because we're so far behind the eight ball, good isn't good enough. We need a great president next time," Trump said. He didn't name anyone he might consider supporting if he decides not to run.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Donald Trump and Steve King talk give their thoughts on what should be done about Ebola during a news conference on Oct. 18, 2014 in West Des Moines. Kelsey Kremer/The Register

Trump was sharply critical of the Obama administration's foreign policy, including dealing with the Islamic State or ISIS, Russia and the Ebola crisis.

"Even our airports – you fly into La Guardia, you fly into Kennedy, you fly into LAX and they're like third-world airports," he said. "And then you fly into Qatar, you fly into Saudi Arabia, you go to China, all over China and you see airports the likes of which you've never seen in this country."

Trump didn't comment on how he'd rate the airport in Des Moines. It's not a concern often heard from Iowans, but few here fly private jets. The Hamad International Airport in Qatar, which opened last spring after five years of construction delays, is no doubt worth every penny of the $16 billion it cost to build.

The star of TV's "The Apprentice" was in town for a fundraiser for Republican Congressman Steve King, who is up for re-election in the 4th Congressional District. He called King "a smart person with really the right views on almost everything." Trump said King has "done an amazing job," and said he's "someone respected all over the country" and "people love this man right over here."

King, asked how it helps him to have Trump's support, said, "Well, it makes me feel good, so I can't think why that would be a bad thing at all."

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Donald Trump explains what he wants from the next president of the United States during a news conference on Oct. 18, 2014 in Wes Des Moines. Kelsey Kremer/The Register

Trump was a leader in early national polls during the 2012 presidential cycle, but ultimately decided he was not ready to give up his business and multimillion-dollar television contract. He made some waves in the Iowa GOP by suggesting at one point he might run as in independent if he did not win the GOP primary. Later, he upset some party leaders by canceling his scheduled appearance at the Lincoln Dinner in 2011, forcing the party to scrap the event.

Since then, however, he's spent time with conservative GOP leaders in Iowa. Last year, Trump appeared at the conservative Family Leader's August conference in Ames, headed by Bob Vander Plaats. His appearance with King, who is popular with conservative Iowans and equally unfiltered in his rhetoric, puts Trump in influential company should he decide to make another run.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1tC8YoT