“Go Trump!” Or, given the Cajun accent, it may have been, “Geaux Trump!”

Either way, says Jeremy Alford in his latest column, those were the first two words that came out of the mouth of former state legislator Troy Hebert at a recent U.S. Senate candidate forum hosted by the Louisiana Chemical Association.

The candidate forum, held in Baton Rouge, was the first time that all eight of the major Senate contenders appeared on a single stage this election cycle, Alford notes.

“It also was an early preview of how Donald Trump’s branding and messaging—trending topics in American politics—might influence the conservative side of the Bayou State’s top-tier race this fall,” he says.

Alford notes that it’s not just Hebert, an independent from Jeanerette and the one-time alcohol and tobacco control commissioner, who displays signs of Trump’s political temperament. Retired Air Force Col. Rob Maness, State Treasurer John Kennedy, congressman John Fleming and Charles Boustany latched on to Trump’s brand, in some shape or form, be it his slogans, platform, speech or his way of distancing himself from the political establishment.

For example, Maness wrapped up his opening statements at the candidate forum by telling the audience, “I’m the different one, just like Mr. Trump is.”

Alford says Maness, a Mandeville native who ran unsuccessfully in the 2014 U.S. Senate race as a tea party alternative, sought to draw a distinction between himself and the rest of those sitting at the table.

“Maness noted that his opponents have more than 100 years of combined elected experience. Or as Trump said at an Iowa rally, ‘These politicians are all talk,’” Alford writes. “Remarking on the oil and gas industry, Maness even lifted from Trump’s signature motto—‘Make America Great Again’—and made it his own. ‘It’s the lifeline of what makes America great,’ Maness said of the energy sector.”

Alford also notes that during forum, Kennedy described members of Congress as “weenies,” declared that “Obamacare sucks” and continued on with at least one other choice word use. He quotes Kennedy as saying: “The best way to get back on your feet, forgive me, is to get off your a**.”

“Cursing seems to have helped Trump grab headlines as well,” writes Alford. “At a New Hampshire rally, The Donald said of elected officials, “These people … I’d like to use really foul language. I won’t do it. I was going to say they’re really full of sh*t. But I won’t say that.”

Alford says that it’s possible that Trump, whose style and brand has seeped into the state’s U.S. Senate race, has tapped into something deeper than just one-liners, occasionally-vulgar diatribes and patriotic messaging.

“Maybe voters truly want someone who will shake up Washington, D.C,” he writes. “Of course, we’ve heard all of this before, just inside different packaging. Time will tell if this trend is just a flash in the pan or the fire needed to actually start cooking.”

Read the full column.

Jeremy Alford publishes LaPolitics Weekly, a newsletter on Louisiana politics, at LaPolitics.com. Follow him on Twitter, or on Facebook. He can be reached at JJA@LaPolitics.com.