Salina Regional Health Center has launched a new mobile health app, called Salina Regional Engage.

According to the hospital, the app allows patients greater access to their health records and helps them manage their care.

Engage is currently available for hospital patients at both Salina Regional Health Center and its affiliate, Lindsborg Community Hospital. The product was developed by NavisHealth, a Silicon Valley digital health information company, for Apple IOS phone users and Android devices.

Engage allows patients to instantly see lab results and prescription information, and provides a telephone directory of physicians on staff and hospital services. There also are tools to help patients track their blood pressure and set up medication reminders. A built-in reference of recommended health practices and first aid information also is included.

The app compliments Salina Regional’s “My Health Portal” electronic health record access, which was launched last summer. Within the patient portal – available through the hospital’s website at myhealthportal.srhc.com – patients can access their latest lab and x-ray test results, prescription lists, billing information, physician progress notes, discharge summaries and upcoming appointments.

“Salina Regional Engage and the My Health Portal access are user-friendly systems that empower patients to become more active managers of their own care,” said Michael McEldowney, information services director at Salina Regional Health Center. “Patients who are more informed are more likely to seek the best practices to maintain and achieve good health.”

Salina Regional’s efforts to enhance patient access to health records are aimed at exceeding requirements of the Affordable Care Act, which will eventually begin penalizing hospitals and clinics that do not meet criteria for meaningful use of newly developed information systems.

“We achieved all the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services measures for Stage 2 of meaningful use in 2014 and are now working towards Stage 3,” said Larry Barnes, vice president and chief information officer at Salina Regional Health Center. “Over the last several years we’ve implemented a robust information system that plays a prominent role in patient documentation, clinical decision support and the implementation of evidence-based protocols. It has taken a lot of dedication from hospital employees and medical staff to achieve this level of integration that now affords our patients the latest access to their health information.”

—

Internet Resources:

Visit myhealthportal.srhc.com to find links to download the Salina Regional Engage app, access My Health Portal or learn more information.

###