Which is your favorite gambling experience in NH?

Charity casino/Bingo

11%

Sports betting

11%

Online gambling

4%

NH lotteries/scratch tickets

50%

Playing poker with friends

24%

Total Votes: 726





tbuckland@unionleader.com

CONCORD - Proponents of expanded gaming say this year may be their best chance yet to see a two-decade quest come to fruition, while opponents of a casino say their determination remains steadfast to keep a casino out of the Granite State...The latest attempt, proposed by Sen. Lou D'Allesandro, D-Manchester, as its prime sponsor, begins its trek with a 9 a.m. hearing at Representatives Hall on Tuesday. Last year's effort to establish a single casino, which was supported by Gov. Maggie Hassan, passed the Senate but fell by a single vote, 173-172, in the House..."I think we can expect to be in the same ballpark of closeness" in this session, said state Rep. Joe Sweeney, R-Salem, an advocate of expanded gaming.But D'Allesandro and Sweeney will continue to face a challenge, given that casino gaming - while it has passed the Senate - has never passed the House. It is that rare issue divided not along party lines - it has supporters and detractors on both sides of the political aisle - but on personal ideology and constituency...And the Casino Free NH group, which opposes the establishment of a casino, is ramping up its efforts, calling on supporters and the public to contact their representatives to say they want to keep casinos out of New Hampshire..."I think the passage of time has actually strengthened the arguments against a casino," said Steve Duprey, Casino Free NH's spokesman.Duprey said those on the fence on the issue will see that Massachusetts has approved a destination casino that will be several times larger than one proposed for New Hampshire..."That would negate any chance that a New Hampshire casino will become anything but a local gambling parlor" that would do nothing but take discretionary income spent by New Hampshire residents away from other New Hampshire entertainment venues, Duprey said...D'Allesandro and Sweeney both said proponents have done much to appease concerns that saw failures in past years, including adding a second casino to the legislation to curb fears that the bill would establish a monopoly. The new language would allow more of the state to benefit economically, giving the legislation a better shot to pass by bringing more legislators under its umbrella, they said..."We can show that this piece of legislation benefits every person in the state of New Hampshire. Every person," D'Allesandro said.Last year's bill, "was limited to a specific scope," Sweeney said. "I think two (casinos) is the way to go. Economically and politically, it's probably best."..Sweeney said the governor also did the process a favor by not including revenue from licensing a casino in her proposed $11.5 billion budget, as she did two years ago by including $80 million in revenues from something that was still not legal in the state. She presented the budget in Concord on Tuesday..."A big issue (two years ago) was that it was being counted on in the budget," Sweeney said. "I think this way is better for the process."He said the budget move was a smart ploy politically as well, as it keeps Republican legislators from feeling as though they have to back a Democratic governor to approve gaming legislation..."It frees up Republicans who (would) view it as voting in favor of Maggie Hassan's budget," he said.Duprey disagreed, saying that Hassan avoiding the casino topic directly in her budget address "weakens their cause" because her proposal shows that the state can have a balanced budget without casino gaming. He called casino revenue "the crack cocaine" of revenue because it's addictive and erratic...Sweeney said the House is a new animal, as it features about 150 new members, making it harder for advocates and detractors alike to count on possible votes, either for or against."It's the same conversation, just completely different people," he said...Both sides of the gambling debate say they will lobby those on the fence and on the other side."I just talk to them," D'Allesandro said. "I'm my own lobbyist; poorly paid, by the way."Duprey said one message legislators should hear is that casinos come with baggage..."The societal costs of gambling are high," Duprey said. "No community says that casinos make neighborhoods safer with less crime and less drugs."D'Allesandro said he believes the biggest change in the legislation is that it attempts to meet concerns that have been expressed since he began his expanded gaming effort 16 years ago. The legislation is thousands of words long, the result of trying to appease those who might oppose, D'Allesandro said..."In order to meet every negative to come up, you have to create a positive," he said. "You might say it's a brilliant piece of legislation."Not enough, Duprey said."He said that 14 years ago, 10 years ago and four years ago," Duprey said...D'Allesandro, though, said he wouldn't speculate on how the legislation will go in the 16th year he's tried to get it passed."I never predict," D'Allesandro said. "I hope."Duprey did."I'm confident we'll prevail again," he said.....