ROSELAND, N.J. -- The web-based RUN Powered by ADP payroll and human resources management system is now serving more than 250,000 small business clients, ADP announced on Thursday.

The popular RUN platform was designed specifically to meet the unique needs of small business owners, enabling them to conveniently and securely process payroll and complete numerous HR tasks online or from virtually any mobile and tablet device. In addition to its easy-to-use and intuitive design, RUN Powered by ADP clients have continuous access to payroll and human resource-related information, all backed by live 24/7/365 client service.

The RUN platform is fully integrated with other available ADP small business products and services, including certain retirement plans, time and attendance solutions, workers' compensation premium payment plans, and a robust set of human resource tools. ADP's small business clients also have access to information and solutions to help manage compliance with ever-changing and complex rules and regulations, including employee communications, eligibility, and reporting requirements of the Affordable Care Act (ACA).

Kim Beare, office manager of Fenner, Melstrom & Dooling PLC, a Michigan-based public accounting and consulting firm, said: "RUN Powered by ADP has made processing payroll and managing human resources easier and more efficient. Our payroll now is more accurate, and since we can schedule our payrolls in advance, it is very convenient especially when out of the office. We can also access current and past reports at any time, which is very helpful. I particularly like the human resource forms and templates. They are extremely valuable to us in managing routine and even unexpected HR issues that come up."

"ADP has a system that is really easy to use," said Jim Haddaway, CEO for Kentucky-based Athletx. "RUN Powered by ADP reports provide a clear picture of taxes and liabilities and what's being deducted from my account. It also clearly itemizes everything for each employee so there's never any question about the state of company finances," he added.

"By working with 425,000 small business clients, ADP understands that owners expect their work solutions to be as effective as those used by larger organizations. That's why we built RUN Powered by ADP," said Anish Rajparia, president of ADP's Small Business Services division. "With its comprehensive suite of tools and resources tailored for small businesses, the RUN HR and payroll platform offers innovative solutions to help our clients better manage their employees, reduce the risks of being in business, and improve cash flow so owners can focus on growing their business," Rajparia added.

A video overview of RUN Powered by ADP is available here.