The key to providing access to quality health care for those with a mental illness lies in the expansion of Medicaid, Lt. Gov. Ralph Northam said Thursday to a crowd of 500 at the 25th annual Thanksgiving banquet of Hampton-Newport News Community Services Board.

Northam, a pediatric neurologist, emphasized that Medicaid expansion authorized by the Affordable Care Act had the potential to provide coverage to 400,000 working Virginians. "And I underline the 'working,'" he said. "There are people who have one, two, four jobs who don't have coverage. They go to the emergency room. It's not the place for preventive care. They need access to primary care."

He said more than 75,000 people with a mental illness have no coverage.

Himself a veteran, Northam cared for wounded soldiers from Desert Storm. "I know what war does to people," he said, noting that as many as 15,000 veterans fall into the coverage gap created by the non-expansion of Medicaid in the state.

"Those are people who risked their lives for us. The least we can do is give them health care," he added, describing it as both a moral issue and good business sense. "Each day, we're handing $5.2 million to surrounding states, our competitors. This is money we've paid as taxpayers. It's not a good business model. We need to stop playing politics and move forward."

Northam Anthony W. Soltys Virginia Lt. Gov. Ralph Northam (left) was the keynote speaker at the Hampton-Newport News Community Services Board 25th annual Thanksgiving banquet in Hampton on Thursday, Nov. 20, 2014. Brad Comer, chairman of the board, and his son Parker Comer chat with the lieutenant governor. Virginia Lt. Gov. Ralph Northam (left) was the keynote speaker at the Hampton-Newport News Community Services Board 25th annual Thanksgiving banquet in Hampton on Thursday, Nov. 20, 2014. Brad Comer, chairman of the board, and his son Parker Comer chat with the lieutenant governor. (Anthony W. Soltys)

Gov. Terry McAuliffe fought for Medicaid expansion during the General Assembly session earlier this year. The Republican majority in the House of Delegates, concerned over the potential future cost of expanding the health insurance program for the poor, opposed expansion, as did most Senate Republicans. Republicans gained control of the Senate with the resignation of a Democratic senator, and Medicaid expansion died for the year. Now that both houses of the legislature have Republican majorities, an expansion of Medicaid seems very unlikely.

As chairman of the governor's Task Force on Improving Mental Health Services, composed of 60 individuals from across the state, Northam is helping to push proposed changes in the state's mental health policies. He outlined four areas in which the task force recently recommended 25 changes. The areas of focus are crisis intervention, the provision of ongoing therapy, treatment of those with a mental illness in jails and penitentiaries, and the growing capacity of tele-medicine to provide behavioral health treatment.

As an example of tele-medicine, Northam cited the underserved city of Danville, where community services board patients can now receive remote counseling from psychiatrists in Charlottesville. They can pick up a prescription on site, and are then followed by a case worker in a one-stop shop. "It's certainly going to be expanded and it's a very exciting step in the right direction," he said. He also commended the establishment of a psychiatric bed registry in easing crisis care.

Northam detailed additional changes being pushed by the task force that include: ensuring that families and providers in each region know the resources available; assistance in recognizing mental illness among the incarcerated and directing them to appropriate treatment and therapy; and expanding Mental Health First Aid programs in schools. Despite the state's budget cuts, mental health funding was preserved, Northam said.

Last year, the Hampton-Newport News Community Services Board served more than 14,000 people , according to Executive Director Chuck Hall. The annual Thanksgiving luncheon to honor staff and board clients is funded by donations.

Salasky can be reached by phone at 757-247-4784.