Buy Photo John Ketzenberger (Photo: Frank Espich/The Star 2009 file photo)Buy Photo

Four words — that’s the crux of a case before the U.S. Supreme Court that will determine the fate of subsidies to help 335,000 Hoosiers buy health insurance under the Affordable Care Act. The court’s decision, expected next month, may resonate through the entire health-care industry.

Those words, “established by the state,” are at play because Indiana and 32 other states did not establish exchanges for their citizens to purchase health insurance. Instead, Hoosiers and others bought their coverage on an exchange established by the federal government.

The subsidies offered by the federal government under the ACA, commonly called Obamacare, go to those who are not covered by the expansion in Medicaid or are not getting insurance through their employer. Most of those who receive the subsidies fall squarely in the middle class, according to research by the Kaiser Family Foundation.

The average subsidy in Indiana is $4,835, which covers between a third and about half of the annual premium for a so-called Bronze policy. Hoosiers are expected to receive about $1.62 billion in premium assistance in 2016, according to a Kaiser report from December 2014.

And now we’re back to the four words. The Supreme Court heard arguments in March about whether the subsidies apply in states that did not establish an exchange. Only 17 states and the District of Columbia established exchanges; people in Indiana and the other states who were required to buy insurance under the ACA used one established by the federal government tailored to the individual states.

So if the exchange wasn’t “established by the state,” do its participants qualify for the subsidy that makes the insurance affordable?

This deceptively simple question, as we’ve seen, carries major implications. You would think contingency plans are being readied as we await the Supreme Court’s decision, expected next month.

You would be wrong.

And the consequences reach far beyond those who might lose their subsidies. Many experts think the entire health insurance market could go into a death spiral if the Supreme Court determines the subsidies are illegal.

In these politically charged and congressionally gridlocked days, it’s not a surprise that there is no legislative path toward a fix if the subsidies disappear. Some members of Congress have introduced bills to repeal and replace the ACA, but there is no apparent coordinated plan to act if the court rules against the subsidies.

President Barack Obama’s administration has admitted it has no alternative plans at the ready and Gov. Mike Pence has said his administration will wait until the court rules to determine its course of action.

The Supreme Court’s decision carries high stakes, according to a white paper produced by Gregory and Appel, a large local insurance agency. The decision “could do real damage — even kill the ACA over time and change how health care is paid for in the country,” according to the paper, authored by Gregory and Appel’s Susan Rider and Karl Ahlrichs.

“If those individuals lost access to subsidies, the cost of coverage would be unaffordable for the vast majority of them,” the paper determined. “A subsidy shutdown could result in 9 million fewer people with coverage by 2016, a 70 percent decline. The resulting adverse selection caused by healthy people leaving the risk pool would spike insurance premiums in the individual market.”

That’s the market beyond those who receive subsidies, so those who currently can afford insurance would soon find that’s not the case anymore. If this happens, health insurers like Indianapolis-based Anthem would have a smaller base over which to spread costs, which means rates for group plans provided through employers likely would spike, too.

“The loss of a healthier risk pool would create unprecedented premium price growth and insurers leaving the marketplace would create an even more uncompetitive insurance market,” the Appel paper observed. “The industry would be in a ‘death spiral.’ ”

It’s no secret there are many in Congress who would welcome the end of the ACA, but this plausible scenario puts a pretty high price on its demise. The effect goes beyond individuals and the insurance industry. Providers, too, will suffer if the payment system falters, which would put increasing pressure on the rates of those few who still would have insurance.

Lately, some members of Congress, including Central Indiana Reps. Susan Brooks and Luke Messer, have begun talking about what might happen if the Supreme Court strikes down the subsidies, but it’s still being addressed in the abstract.

Solutions range from repealing and replacing the ACA to enacting a single-payer system through the federal government. It’s much more likely Congress will tinker at the margins if the subsidies are eliminated, but the disconcerting truth is no one knows for sure.

Indiana joined several other states in asking the Supreme Court to eliminate the subsidies. What we don’t know is what they’ll do if the court gives them what they want.

John Ketzenberger is president of the Indiana Fiscal Policy Institute, a nonpartisan and nonprofit organization to research state budget and tax issues. Email him at jketzenberger@indianafiscal.org. Follow him on Twitter: @JohnKetz.

Neither the Obama administration, nor Congress, has a plausible fix if the Supreme Court strikes down federal subsidies for health insurance.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1Sse2pd