Competition is a good thing. It motivates hospitals to continually improve care for patients. It drives medical innovation, which has produced lifesaving technological advances. It also pushes health care providers to find operational efficiencies that improve care and lower costs. Hospitals welcome competition when all market competitors play by the same rules.

And therein lies the problem overlooked by those seeking hospital deregulation through the repeal of Virginia’s Certificate of Public Need law. Eliminating COPN would not be a health care panacea. It wouldn’t lead to new hospitals with new beds enabling patients to shop for less expensive care.

What it would produce instead is a situation where niche health care businesses swoop into communities and cherry pick profitable services to offer. Experience tells us those companies would not offer many of the services communities need, because not all are profitable.

Newcomers would gain an unfair advantage by offering only select services that benefit their bottom line, while hospitals continue to provide necessary community services regardless of profitability or patients’ ability to pay.

That’s because hospitals serve the public good with a focus on community health. Hospitals deliver specialty services ranging from emergency treatment, cardiac care and obstetrics to psychiatric and radiology. Some of those services generate income. Others do not.

Hospitals provide indigent care because it’s the right thing to do and aligns with community hospitals’ mission of serving those in need. What goes unsaid by many advocates for COPN repeal is they have little interest in a health care approach not exclusively driven by financial considerations.

***

Let’s imagine a Virginia without COPN. The number of ambulatory surgery centers likely would increase because they receive favorable insurance reimbursements for services, and that business model is known for aggressive patient targeting. However, that expansion would come at the expense of hospitals that have devotedly served their communities for decades.

It also would come at the expense of patients who would find themselves with fewer options for certain acute care services because community hospitals would no longer be able to afford them. Why? Because community hospitals would face the financial crunch of being left to provide many unprofitable services, often to indigent patients, while enduring lost revenue from profitable services horned in on by ambulatory surgery centers (ASCs). In other words, the community hospital would continue to bear community care responsibility while being financially harmed by COPN repeal.

In addition to a potential loss of health care services in less profitable but vital sectors such as psychiatric care or obstetrics, quality of care could suffer. We have seen that in Pennsylvania, where state health analysts observed a serious decline in general acute care hospitals in the 10 years (1996-2005) after the Keystone State ended its COPN law. Parallel to that was a dramatic increase in ASCs.

A separate report from a Pennsylvania legislative panel found that cardiac catheterization programs with open heart surgery, which started after Pennsylvania’s COPN ended, failed to meet industry-standard minimum proficiency volumes. That study also found higher mortality rates at such facilities. Those findings illustrate the utility of having appropriate regulatory oversight to protect patient well-being.

***

Without COPN in Virginia, hospital leaders would face unwelcome choices. Each would provoke economic hardship in the communities they serve, negatively impacting patient outcomes and community health.

One potential response would be the elimination of services like mental health care, pediatrics, obstetrics and post-hospital skilled nursing care.

Next might be layoffs. All job losses are devastating for workers, their families and the community. Hospital layoffs would hurt more because hospitals are among Virginia’s largest employers. That is particularly true in rural Virginia counties; health care among the top employers in 82 percent of those locales.

Though regrettable, such ledger-conscious moves would be inevitable in a regulatory environment where already financially stressed hospitals find themselves cornered by COPN repeal. Hospitals already face challenges from federal and state policy decisions that have introduced more volatility into an industry coping with much change.

Moody’s Investors Service in recent years has given nonprofit hospitals a negative financial outlook. Their for-profit counterparts have fared a bit better. Virginia hospitals fall into both categories. And while our operating models differ, one commonality among all hospitals is the federal legal requirement to treat people in our emergency rooms regardless of their ability to pay. Hospitals are obligated to give away their services in those instances. We’re not complaining about that. It is, quite simply, the humane thing to do.

That commitment makes hospitals unique among other commercial enterprises, which routinely charge customers for service. The duty to treat people in need is part of our mission to care for our communities. We take it seriously.

However, it comes with considerable cost. In 2013, Virginia hospitals provided more than $1.5 billion in uncompensated care, a figure reflecting growing Medicaid and Medicare shortfalls, and charity care. More financial hits to hospitals are coming as the Affordable Care Act calls for reductions in certain Medicare and Medicaid payments under a new care model that envisions greater Medicaid participation.

Yet another potential victim could be financial support for graduate medical education at our Virginia teaching hospitals, which produce the future health care professionals who will provide care to us all.

***

Virginia health systems are boxed in because cuts are coming and, so far, state policymakers have been unable to find compromise on a plan to assist uninsured Virginians. Hospitals face real, and increasingly critical, financial challenges from cuts and growing demand for charity care.

In 2013, about one-third of Virginia’s hospitals had negative operating margins. That problem afflicts providers across Virginia but is most acute in rural communities — where 20 of the 37 rural hospitals operated at a financial loss. It is reasonable to expect those conditions would further deteriorate if COPN were repealed without offsetting policy actions to stabilize Virginia hospitals’ competitive footing.

Hospitals are open to regulatory reform. We previously supported deregulation legislation in Virginia when the General Assembly approved a COPN wind-down law that has yet to be implemented. We remain open to thoughtful approaches to industry deregulation.

It is imprudent, however, to call for health care regulatory reform in a vacuum, without addressing the realities of health care economics. That would devastate the commonwealth’s economy, its communities and its health-care network.

The majority of states still have COPN laws, an indication that many state policymakers continue to see their benefits. Virginia hospitals are flexible on that subject and other matters of health care policy. We stand ready to work with any state or federal official committed to finding workable solutions to hospitals’ challenges so we can continue to deliver top-notch health care to our fellow Virginians for years to come.