Seventh District Rep. Rob Woodall used an appearance at the Greater Eastside Chamber of Commerce’s monthly luncheon today to talk about some of the bipartisan success in passing substantive bills in Congress. He pointed out that while most people can cite the latest quote from Donald Trump, or the issues Hillary Clinton has with her email server, no one is talking about or hearing about how people are working together in Washington.

He started his talk by describing the Hire More Heroes Act, which passed both houses of Congress and was signed into law earlier this year by President Obama. The law allows businesses to expand beyond the 50 full time employee limit without being subject to Obamacare regulations if the additional people being hired are veterans. Woodall called it a win for those who support the military and veterans, and for those who want to escape some of the pressures of the Affordable Care Act.

He mentioned the Budget Control Act of 2011, calling it the largest deficit reduction in history. The bill caps and prioritizes spending in order to save $2.1 trillion, and was passed with the support of Republicans and Democrats. Even though the bill limits spending by future Congresses, at least at this point, the caps are sticking. On a related note, the House and Senate passed a balanced budget agreement for the first time in over ten years in 2015.

A good portion of the balanced spending plan was developed in the House Budget Committee on which Woodall sits. As it developed the plan, the House wanted to show it was fiscally responsible itself as it urged other departments to cut discretionary spending, so it subjected itself to a 14% reduction in expenses since 2011. That reduction, along with spending cuts in other agencies has led to reduced discretionary spending throughout government compared to when Nancy Pelosi was Speaker.

Much of the government’s spending is on entitlements, though, which are not subject to annual appropriations bills. They represent a larger and larger share of spending as the population grows and ages. Yet this year, Congress passed and the President signed bipartisan entitlement reforms to replace the annual “doc fix” bill. The new law effectively adds a trillion dollars to Medicare funding in the future.

One other small, but significant change? Congress abolished earmarks, and none have been given since 2010.

Most of these measures haven’t gotten a lot of publicity. None of them are an end-all be-all solution to the nation’s problems, but together they represent a step forward, the significance of which may not be seen because the news tends to focus on disagreements in Washington, rather than what what can be agreed on.

According to Woodall, there’s something else important about these small successes, that process matters. Working together to pass bipartisan measures builds trust in Washington, something that doesn’t happen when Congress goes around the President, or when the President delivers an executive order without first selling the new policy to Congress and the American people.

Congressman Woodall wrapped up his talk by saying that most in Congress–both Republicans and Democrats–are people who care about making a difference. While calling for better leadership, both in Washington and by those Congress represents, Woodall expressed the hope that by combining the effort and interests of both, there is no limit who what the future could be for the next generation.