A town hall meeting was held in Paradise Grille on Feb. 19 where United States Representative Kevin Brady met with local members of San Jacinto County and discussed many of the issues that affect the citizens on the local and federal levels.

Brady is the U. S. Representative from Texas’s 8th congressional district and is a member of the Republican Party.

A crowd of local citizens gathered in the back of the restaurant as Brady began by personally talking with a few members of the county individually before addressing the people as a whole.

“I’m excited about the new changes in the county,” said Brady. “You’ve got good people [here].”

Brady expressed how much the Republican Party has changed recently, with a large majority of Republicans in power in the Senate.

One of the major areas Brady hopes the House of Representatives and the Senate could address is the economy. Brady praised the effort of generating jobs due to the construction of the Keystone Pipeline.

Brady also addressed the alleged damage caused by the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

“We’re moving very quickly to help people who have been harmed by Affordable Care,” said Brady. “We voted to fully repeal that law again because we think it’s the wrong solution for America.”

Brady said they also voted to restore the 40-hour work week, another action meant to help put American citizens back to work.

Regarding work, Brady hopes to encourage businesses to hire veterans.

Brady spoke regarding the defense of the United States, noting that Congress passed a bill to fund Homeland Security and recently strength has gathered to stop President Barack Obama’s executive order on immigration.

“This is bigger than immigration,” said Brady. “It’s really about restoring checks and balances. No president should be able to make up laws.”

Two major key things Brady wants to see come to fruition are the local sales tax deduction and the Research and Development tax credit.

Brady noted that the last one regarded the United States no longer leading in research, having now been allegedly passed up by 26 other nations.

He concluded by telling the crowd that the nation was off to a good start with the recent developments and then took time to answer questions.

Many questions regarded the nation’s debt levels, which Brady said he hopes can be ended with a balanced budget in 10 years. Others regarded the immigration laws and the methods proposed to prevent illegal immigration and still other questions were asked about veterans.

However, one of the main areas of concern was the potential threat of Islam as many who were gathered were concerned about the religion’s radical elements and the perceived violence toward unbelievers.

Brady understood the concerns presented, especially with the recent threats of ISIS, but he also explained that some followers of Islam do not follow the entirety of the religion.

“We have to go after [radical Islam],” said Brady.

Some were not as convinced of the issue and claimed that Muslims were attempting to change the nation from the inside.

Brady again restated he understood the concerns but also pointed out that this nation was founded for us to be free to believe as we wish.

“I believe this country was formed on religious freedom,” he said.

Brady listened to everyone’s concerns and either gave answers in response or promised to look into them more in order to better understand the situations, even going so far as to meet with San Jacinto County Senior Center Executive Director Rayfield Jefferson after the meeting to discuss issues with the center’s funding.

In the end, Brady admitted that it takes more than elected officials like him to make a difference in this nation.

“I really rely on you to help me,” he said.

San Jacinto County Republican Party Chairman Dwayne Wright thanked Brady for coming out to the county and speaking with the local citizens.

“It’s really nice to know that you’re able to come out here and share some time with us,” said Wright.