Practice was the only one in Boulder where women could be sure to have a midwife in a hospital setting

Boulder Nurse Midwives, the only midwifery practice catching babies at Boulder Community Health, will close Nov. 15.

In a message posted to the practice's Facebook page on Tuesday, owner Merrilynn Artman said she had decided to close the clinic.

"The decision was made last Friday to close our clinic at 4800 Riverbend Road, Suite 150, as of November 15th, 2014," she wrote. "We thank everyone in our community for the loving and kind support. There will be an opportunity for women to follow Kala and Erin to Boulder Women's Care. This is a combined midwife and physician practice where you may see a midwife or physician for your visit and also for your birth. . . It has been such a pleasure to work in this community. I feel grateful and have learned so much. Much love, Merrilynn."

Artman said Friday that she couldn't talk about the decision to close because she was attending women in labor.

The closure leaves a hole in the birth options for women in the Boulder area. Many Denver area hospitals have in-house midwifery groups that attend low-risk patients in a hospital setting, but Boulder Community Health, Longmont United Hospital and Exempla Good Samaritan do not. Avista Women's Care has two nurse-midwives and three obstetricians in a joint practice, and women there can designate themselves as midwife patients so that they are guaranteed a midwife unless a medical issue requires that their care be transferred.

Two of the midwives from Boulder Nurse Midwives — Kala Kluender and Erin Crawley — will go to Boulder Women's Care, the obstretics practice that provided back-up care for Boulder Nurse Midwives. But patients there will not be guaranteed a midwife when they go into labor. They will be attended by the provider on call.

Rachel Driver, of Longmont, had a baby girl with Boulder Nurse Midwives in April. She said she was treated with great care and sympathy when she sought follow-up care there for a miscarriage and then throughout her subsequent pregnancy.

"I'm really, really upset because I plan to have more children, and I really want to be attended by a midwife but be in the hospital," she said. "I just feel better in the hospital, and they were really the best of both worlds. They really fulfilled a very specific need."

'It felt like a good balance'

Nurse midwives are educated as nurses and then pursue a master's degrees in midwifery. They provide pre-natal and well-woman care and attend births for women with low-risk pregnancies.

Sameer Parekh Brenn, of Boulder, said he and his wife, Rachel Brenn, feel left in the lurch by the decision to close in just a few months.

The couple is expecting their first child in December. They moved to Boulder in July from New York and already had to change providers once. Sameer Parekh Brenn said his wife is a scientist and researched the outcomes women have with different kids of providers. Women birthing with nurse-midwives have lower rates of many complications and are less likely to have a cesarean section.

"You can have a midwife, but you are still in the hospital," he said. "It felt like a good balance between the medical model and the whole home birth thing."

Sameer Parekh Brenn said his wife got a call from the clinic informing her they would be closing well before her due date, but his wife had to be persistent to get information about her other options, which she is researching now.

Sameer Parekh Brenn said the practice has an obligation to the women who were already seeing them.

"We've said, 'We're hiring you guys to deliver our baby,'" he said. "I think there is a responsibility to follow through. Maybe you don't take new patients, but you stick with the people who are already with you. It's really stressful."

In addition to Boulder Women's Care, a free-standing birth center operated by nurse-midwives opened recently in Boulder.

Shanti Meyer, one of the founders of the Birth Center of Boulder, said the center has been getting a lot of calls from Bouder Nurse Midwives patients and has held one orientation for interested clients and expects to hold more. The center is still accepting new patients with due dates in every month.

But the closing of Boulder Nurse Midwives still leaves a big gap in care, Meyer said.

"We are very sad to hear that they are closing," Meyer said. "We love Boulder Nurse Midwives. They offered a great option. They are a hospital-based midwifery practice, and a lot of people want that. Or they might be a little higher risk, and we can't take them.

"Having no hospital-based midwifery practice in Boulder is a big gap."

A desire for something more natural — and safe

Diana Underhill, of Nederland, was one of those women who would have been too high risk to have an out-of-hospital birth. She spend 10 weeks on bed rest and was induced at 38 weeks for low amniotic fluid levels. She said Artman was calm and "very straight forward" through the various complications she experienced.

But when it came time to deliver, she still got midwifery care.

"Even in the hospital with the nurse during the day, she was so nervous about me and about the fact that I was on pitocin and didn't want me to eat anything and wanted me to stay in bed," she said, referring the hospital labor nurse.

"And Kala (the midwife) told me to eat because I needed my strength and that walking around helped stimulate labor. That was a big reason I wanted to work with the midwives. I wanted something that was more natural but also safe."

Underhill said she doesn't plan to have more children, but she feels sad for her friends who were seeing midwives at the practice.

Avista Women's Care in Louisville has also been getting a lot of calls. That practice currently has two nurse-midwives and three obstetricians and expects to hire another midwife in January. The midwives have their own call rotation so that their patients are guaranteed a midwife to attend them.

"It does leave a hole, and we hope we can fill it," practice manager Esther Burke said.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Erica Meltzer at 303-473-1355 or meltzere@dailycamera.com