Be in the pro-life movement for a while and you understand that those at the top of the pro-abortion movement tend to not really think truth or civility is relevant to debate. Recent examples include abortion-giant Planned Parenthood President Cecile Richards claiming that life begins at birth when in fact scientists of all stripes agree that life actually begins at conception (i.e. fertilization.) Or as Princeton Professor Robbie George puts it:

“That is, in human reproduction, when sperm joins ovum, these two individual cells cease to be, and their union generates a new and distinct organism. This organism is a whole, though in the beginning developmentally immature, member of the human species. Readers need not take our word for this: They can consult any of the standard human-embryology texts, such as Moore and Persaud’s The Developing Human, Larsen’s Human Embryology, Carlson’s Human Embryology & Developmental Biology, and O’Rahilly and Mueller’s Human Embryology & Teratology.”

Not to be outdone the head of the pro-abortion group NARAL claimed that those who fight for the cause of defending life are “un-American” (perhaps she was inspired by New York Governor Andrew Cuomo’s tirade that “pro-life” New Yorkers “have no place in the state of New York.”)

One reason those on the pro-abortion side say such things is because no one in the general media usually calls them on it. Overwhelmingly fact checkers at major news outlets are too busy checking up on Republican and conservative statements to focus on what their comrades in liberal thought are saying. I have little doubt that will also be true for the newest whopper from Planned Parenthood’s Ms. Richards.

At a political event in the state of Montana the abortion-industry president stated that Planned Parenthood is responsible for signing up 27 million women for Obamacare. That is quite a remarkable number considering that the Obama Administration is saying that only 4 million people have signed up for health insurance under the law.

While you wouldn’t expect someone as busy as Ms. Richards to get all her facts straight, a miscalculation of 23 million people is usually reserved for government bean counters. Does make one wonder that if that number is so off what about the $540.6 million in taxpayer funding that Planned Parenthood gets? Should taxpayers be subsidizing an abortion giant (Planned Parenthood reported $58.2 million in excess revenue, and more than $1.3 billion in net assets.) that plays quick and loose with numbers?

LifeNews Note: Tom McClusky writes for March for Life.