Boston Avenue area hardest hit in city

Woodley's Fine Furniture employees Gary Hess, left, and Mike Green, both of Longmont , are shown pulling under-construction furniture out of the company's manufacturing facility on Boston Avenue last week. Pretty much anything that was lumber in there is overwith, said Mark Kyner, a manager at the facility. (Matthew Jonas/Times-Call) ( Matthew Jonas )

LONGMONT -- Huge five-inch-thick concrete chunks are stacked randomly, one on top of the other, in what used to be Zometool's parking lot at 1040 Boston Ave.

A 40-foot shipping container that was sitting in the lot last Thursday was scooped up by the St. Vrain River as it plowed through the industrial neighborhood and deposited next to the north support of the Main Street bridge over the river, where it lies today.

"The river jumped (its banks), went down Boston and made its own river right through Boston Court," said Ryan Ward, Zometool's plant manager.

Zometool manufactures and sells plastic kits are can be assembled in a variety of shapes. They are a combination child's toy and science experiment, because the complexity of what is built is limited only by the user's imagination.

Rick Berdinner of WP Manufacturing shows how a mold is disassembled to be cleaned. Dozens of molds at WP got wet in the flood, and employees worked feverishly to make sure they didn't sustain permanent damage. Each mold takes weeks, sometimes months to make and can cost tens of thousands of dollars each. (Lewis Geyer/Times-Call) ( LEWIS GEYER )

Inside the shipping container was a large-scale, prototype Zometool system -- large enough to construct buildings, according to founder Paul Hildebrandt. He said it was the only one the company had and he projected the replacement costs at about $100,000.

Two feet of water swept through Zometool's plant in the flood, Ward said, soaking the plastic injection molding machines. What could be salvaged of the plastic struts and connecting balls that make up the kits can be dried out, he said. Anything paper -- the instructions, the packaging -- that wasn't on a shelf above water was lost.

Advertisement

The Boston Avenue industrial area was ground zero for damage to businesses in Longmont. Boston runs from Hover Street on the west side to Price Road, then picks up on the other side of the railroad tracks and extends to Main Street. The river jumped its banks and came through with astonishing force in a swath that cut nearly a half-mile wide, into the Bohn Park neighborhood.

Royal Mobile Park, which is just across South Pratt Parkway on Boston, remains the only neighborhood in the city that has not re-opened to residents.

This shipping container was carried by floodwaters from the Zometool manufacturing facility on Boston Avenue, west of S. Pratt Parkway, and deposited next to a bridge support on the Main Street bridge over the St. Vrain River. (Lewis Geyer/Times-Call) ( LEWIS GEYER )

"We were kind of expecting maybe four to six inches of water," said Mark Kyner, who works at Woodley's Fine Furniture's manufacturing facility at 1220 Boston Ave. "We got probably five feet of water through the whole plant. We had about 12 inches of mud."

Woodley's lone manufacturing plant is on the north side of the street on the east end of Boston a block west of Price Road. Just up the street at 1290 Boston, also on the north side of the street, is Woodley's lumber warehouse and mechanic's shop.

"That one didn't get damaged," Kyner said. "They didn't take on any water at all. But this one got hit pretty hard."

Floodwaters left a path of destruction when it hit WP Manufacturing, at the corner of Boston Avenue and Price Road. This is what the company's east parking lot looked like Thursday afternoon. (Lewis Geyer/Times-Call) ( LEWIS GEYER )

Some of his employees helped Woodley's put sandbags in front of that building the day of the flood, said Eric Wallace, president of Left Hand Brewing Co. The brewery, almost directly across the street from Woodley's mechanic's shop, also suffered only minor damage, Wallace said.

"They were on the same island we were," he said, referring to the Woodley's facility across the street.

But back down the street, Woodley's employees spent a day carting all of the under-construction furniture out of the building and piling up on the side. After everything was out they broke it all down into one huge pile of sticks.

"Pretty much anything that was lumber in there is over with," Kyner said.

That has been Woodley's only manufacturing site since 1979, so having it shut down is definitely a setback for the company, which has seven retail locations in the metro area. But Kyner said he and his team were dedicated to getting back to making furniture again.

"I just want you to know that we're committed to getting back going," Kyner said. "We're going to make it work.

"It's made in America man -- we're gonna do what we've gotta do."

Telephone pole through the wall

"Made in America" is a phrase near and dear to Steve McLean's heart. The president of WP Manufacturing at 1198 Boston, the building across the street from Woodley's, has been vocal about keeping manufacturing on these shores whenever possible. Just a year ago -- June 2012 -- he had moved his company into the 45,000-square-foot facility, more than doubling its space and in the process spending a lot of money getting the former charter school renovated back into being a manufacturing facility again.

"As far as our machines go, we managed to have our electricians out here," Mark Montoya, project manager for WP, said as he gave a tour of the flooded-out and very muddy plant last week.

Water damage was a major concern: the injection molding presses can run about $250,000 apiece, he said.

Another big concern were the molds the company uses to make products. The molds can take months to make and can range in price from $10,000 to $100,000 apiece. Several dozen of them were in the building when it flooded, some owned by WP but most owned by the company's customers.

Crews had been working feverishly to clean off the molds so they wouldn't get any rust on them and be permanently damaged, Montoya said.

Evidence of the St. Vrain River is everywhere on WP's property. There's a line on the lobby walls indicating about 18 inches of mud at one time. The parking lot is a disaster, with huge upended chunks of pavement and a small pond that's developed in one corner. Everything that isn't a machine or a mold or up on shelves out of the water has been dragged out into the parking lot to be sorted through and, if possible, cleaned and salvaged.

Montoya said the company hired a structural engineer and the building was deemed safe, although heavily damaged. On the building's northwest corner, there's a gaping hole where the earth washed away, exposing a support column that sinks deep into the ground. In the west wall there was a huge breach, and you can follow the path of water as it entered the building through that hole and cut through several interior walls of the factory, buckling floors as it went.

"What they were saying was, they found a telephone pole, a floating telephone pole, and it breached the wall," said McLean.

McLean said he had flood insurance, but didn't think it would be near enough to cover all the damages.

Fingers crossed machines are OK

Leonard Rozek operates two businesses out of 177 S. Sunset, Units A, B and C. The building is one of two in a small business park on the west side of Sunset just south of Boston.

Rozek and his wife own Closet & Storage Concepts, which designs, manufactures and installs custom pantries, closets, home offices and the like; and Concept 32, which is an installer of kitchen and bath furnishings.

On the back side of the business park, next to the parking lot, is Cattail Pond, part of the Boulder County Fairgrounds.

On Wednesday, Rozek was in the parking lot with two roll-off trash containers having already been filled and another on the way. He recalled what had happened the previous week.

"We left here Thursday (Sept. 12) at 3 o'clock because the weather was bad, and at that time, for some reason, we put some computers up, just out of paranoia," Rozek said. But we were thinking, there's no way this is going to get to us, we're nowhere close to a river.

"Then I got here Friday morning at 5:30 and it was just incredible."

Cattail Pond had overflowed, causing flood damage to every business in both of the buildings. Four of his employees' cars got flooded out, Rozek said.

"I think this one's going to be OK," he said, pointing to a huge, $112,000 machine he uses in the manufacturing process. "This machine is from Germany. It's two weeks old."

Elsewhere in the factory, some machines sat in a part of the room that didn't get much water, others -- such as a "case clamp" machine from Italy -- were having to be dried out before they could be tested to see if they would work.

Rozek said his 25 employees were working to salvage whatever they could but a lot of raw materials were lost.

He doesn't have flood insurance, Rozek said, so he will be turning to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for assistance.

Back at WP Manufacturing over on Boston Avenue, the cleanup continued. Employee Rob Moody asked McLean, 'Do you want me to get another ShopVac? We only have one.'"

He nodded. "We burned two out already," McLean said.

FEMA had been in that morning, he said, and he appreciated how professional the agency had been. But as he looked around at the stacks of molds taking on surface rust, and the muddy floors, and the machines all stripped of their covers so their insides could dry out, McLean managed just a wry smile and shook his head.

"I don't know anymore," he said to Moody. "I'm just wiped out."

"You know," Moody replied, "How do you eat a whale? One bite at a time."

Tony Kindelspire can be reached at 303-684-5291 or at tkindelspire@times-call.com.