John Lawrence

Congressman Joe Pitts, R-16, of East Marlborough Township held onto his seat after 18 years in the U.S. House of Representatives, but not before fending off a strong challenge by former state Rep. Tom Houghton of London Grove Township.

Pitts, 75, whose 16th district covers parts of Chester, Berks and Lancaster counties, gained his greatest support in Lancaster County, where he campaigned heavily in recent weeks. There, he defeated Houghton by 69,272 to 44,457 at about 11 p.m.

Overall in all three counties, Pitts earned 85,250 votes to Houghton’s 64,513. Houghton scored well in Chester County, where he earned 9,958 votes to Pitts’ 9,610.

Pitts said he was not worried as he fell behind in the votes at the beginning of the evening, because they were votes from large cities like Reading and Lancaster.

Advertisement

“It’s always like that because the cities come in first. Every election people call and tell me they are worried,” he said.

But later there was a surge for Pitts.

“That’s our big turnout — the towns and townships. There was a huge turnout, and I talked to a lot of voters,” he said.

Houghton, 45, who previously served as a supervisor in London Grove Township and as a state representative for the 13th District, campaigned heavily in Lancaster County against a proposed gas pipeline that would cut through farmland and open space.

Houghton could not be reached by phone as the evening ended.

During the campaign Houghton has vocally supported opponents of the pipeline. He stands on a strong environmental record, having advocated for open space and opposed the plan to build bypasses around Avondale and Chatham.

Pitts is the chairman of the Energy and Commerce Health Subcommittee in the U.S. House. He also serves on the Environmental and Economy Subcommittee. He is opposed to President Obama’s health care law, the Affordable Care Act, and has worked to repeal it.

In his eighth term, Joe was appointed by his colleagues to serve as the Chairman of the Energy and Commerce Health Subcommittee. He continued to also serve on the Environment and the Economy Subcommittee. Joe led efforts to repeal President Obama’s health care law, the Affordable Care Act. He worked to author and pass into law the bipartisan Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act.

According to his website, he is working to strengthen Medicare and Medicaid to preserve them for future generations.

He said as chairman of the Health Subcommittee, he has worked with colleagues “on the other side of the aisle” and passed 17 bills. He said he hopes to continue to pass more bills to ensure the health of the people.

Pitts and Houghton have agreed that more secure borders are needed, but they disagreed on how reform is to be handled.

Houghton opposes a piecemeal approach to the solution. He has said that agricultural and other business interests need reforms. Pitts has said that no bill that includes amnesty will pass.

Pitts said he believes American soldiers should be on the ground in Iraq to gather intelligence and train soldiers opposed to ISIS.

Lawrence defeats Schott

In the race for the 13th District of the Pennsylvania House of Representatives, Republican incumbent John Lawrence defeated Democratic challenger Ann Schott 7,854 to 4,685.

Both candidates are natives of southern Chester County and both voiced concern over the debt the state owns and will continue to owe for retirement funding for teachers and state workers.

Lawrence has voted to institute an impact fee on drilling for natural gas in the state, although he acknowledged that the drilling has brought more than half a billion dollars gone to local municipalities.

Lwarence said he is aware of the opposition to previous efforts to build bypasses around Avondale and Chatham from Route 41, but he is in favor of PennDOT’s efforts to evaluate and improve the intersections of routes 796, 926 and 841.

Ross defeats Rzucidlo

In a repeat of two previous races, state Republican state Rep. Chris Ross defeated Democrat Susan Rzucidlo. Ross had 10,665 votes to Rzucidlo’s 7,651. Their district covers London Britain in southern Chester County and other points north and east.

All results are unofficial until certified by the Board of Elections.