By the end of the week, we will be rid of the cutesy stand-ups from the midway, and the anchorbabes of both sexes making the funny with fried snickers, and the paeans to the pure, deep-fried (largely white meat) Americanosity of the people of Iowa. Your elite political media will have to stop pretending, and that will be a good thing. The problem, of course, is that very few of them will take the obvious next step, which is to point out that giving a place like Iowa, and a system like the Iowa caucuses, the place we do in our nominating process gets more ridiculous by the quadrennium. The electorate is representative of nowhere else in the country, and the system is a farce. The last time, they couldn't figure out who'd actually won for weeks.

Rick Santorum finished the Iowa Republican caucuses 34 votes ahead of Mitt Romney, but results from several precincts are missing and the full actual results may never be known, according to a final certified tally released Thursday by the Iowa GOP.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Oh, OK...

The problem is particularly acute on the Republican side, where Iowa can truly be said to be Patient Zero of the prion disease that afflicts the party and that is eating away its higher functions. Submitted for your approval, one Jan Mickelson, radio talk-show host and power within the Bible-banging, hayshaking Iowa Republican base to which the party hands the first big test in its nominating process. Mickelson is a big deal; he was the host and maître d' of the Christianist festival at which Scott Walker made such a splash back in April. The party base in Iowa is Mickelson's audience. So Mickelson's views on important issues like, say, immigration, carry enough weight to affect the entire process going forward.

I said, "Well I'd would put them on the end of the highway, on western part of the interstate system, and I'd put them on the eastern side of the state, right there on the interstate system, and in the north on the Minnesota border, and on the south Kansas and Missouri border and I would just say this: 'As of this date' -- whenever we decide to do this -- 'as of this date, 30--' this is a totally arbitrary number, '30 to 60 days from now anyone who is in the state of Iowa that who is not here legally and who cannot demonstrate their legal status to the satisfaction of the local and state authorities here in the State of Iowa, become property of the State of Iowa.' So if you are here without our permission, and we have given you two months to leave, and you're still here, and we find that you're still here after we we've given you the deadline to leave, then you become property of the State of Iowa. And we have a job for you. And we start using compelled labor, the people who are here illegally would therefore be owned by the state and become an asset of the state rather than a liability and we start inventing jobs for them to do.

Most Popular

To which a later caller replied, getting right to the heart of the matter:

CALLER: Well you know, you're singing my song; we're all slaves today the way the government is growing -

MICKELSON: If that's the case, maybe it's time to reverse the process. Isn't this a perfectly good time to do that?

CALLER: Well that'll swing the pendulum back in a pretty broad swing and maybe too far and we may end up swinging back the other way further left than we are right now. I take it about halfway Jan. I think it's a clever idea, it's worth throwing out there. It isn't an easy topic -

MICKELSON: No, this is pretty simple, actually this is very simple, what my solution is moral and it's legal. And I can't think - and it's also politically doable.

I have no doubt that it's "politically doable" among Mickelson's listeners, and among the Caucasian caucus-goers of Iowa – especially this caller, who considers, I dunno, the requirements of the Affordable Care Act to be the modern equivalent of chattel slavery. The Man Called Trump already has his party debating the guts of the 14th Amendment. What a RINO! Real men go after the 13th.

Obviously, no serious American politician ever should associate with this nut again, but the problem is deeper. No serious American politician ever should engage with Mickelson's audience, which is to say, the Republican masses that would tolerate, or even applaud, this brand of public madness.The country at large should laugh this entire electorate off the stage and get around to the serious business of electing a president. None of this will happen, because your elite political media thinks Iowa is so darned…cute. If obvious anagram Reince Priebus were any kind of actual party leader, and if the Republican party were actually a functioning political party any more – and welcome to the party, New Yorker – Priebus would tell any candidate that appears with Mickelson hereafter that he or she will lose any support from the national party and will go unrecognized at any further debates. Then, he'd go to New Hampshire and eat fried clams at Hampton Beach while extolling the virtues of the open primary system. The country and its politics have been pushed around by Iowa long enough. Stay off the midway, kids. You've wandered into the carnival of the damned.