Helicopters bring hundreds of stranded mountain residents to the flatlands

Robert Egloff, left, hugs Sharon Rady on Saturday at the Fort Collins/Loveland Municipal Airport, where Sharon was picking up her mother Marge Rady, back, and father, not pictured, who were flown out of Drake where they were stranded by recent flooding. ( STEVE STONER )

There was a moment when Drake residents shifted from wondering how bad the storm would be to wondering how they'd survive and when they'd be rescued.

For Marge Rady, it was when she looked out the window.

"We watched our neighbors' homes go right down the river. They're completely gone," she said.

With a duffel bag and a Maltese-Bichon who got more than he bargained for during a dog-sitting trip, Marge and her husband Leroy arrived at the Fort Collins-Loveland Municipal Airport on Saturday afternoon. A Century Link helicopter that had been deployed to examine the data company's lines in the flood-ravaged Big Thompson Canyon rescued them from a home in the Hayden subdivision in Drake.

Gib and Carolyn Dunning were also airlifted out of the canyon with the Marge and Leroy. For more than 48 hours, they'd been staying at the home together, along with more than a dozen neighbors who climbed to the highest, driest house in the subdivision and waited.

"The whole situation - I can't describe it vividly enough," Gib said. "You or I would never dream what's out there."

Waiting for answers

Some of the neighbors who banded together while waiting for rescue were still waiting on Saturday afternoon, including Sarah and Edward Egloff, whom neighbors credit with leading the survival efforts even after their own home was swallowed by the floodwaters.

Advertisement

"I know they'll be fine. Their both vets - my dad's a survivalist," said Robert Egloff, a Fort Collins resident who rushed to the airport when he heard the Century Link helicopters were landing with Drake evacuees.

Through Saturday morning, Robert had stationed himself at the Timberline Church in Fort Collins, where the Larimer County Sheriff's Office workers took hundreds of evacuees rescued by seven Army National Guard helicopters.

A Black Hawk helicopter takes off from the Fort Collins/Loveland Municipal Airport on Saturday after refueling there before heading out to pick up residents stranded by recent flooding in the area. Seven Colorado Army National Guard along with several privately owned helicopters were used to shuttle people to evacuation shelters. ( STEVE STONER )

He was hoping his parents would be next to walk in, but as of Saturday afternoon, they hadn't.

The last time Robert spoke to his parents was 11 a.m. on Thursday. They told him they were headed for safer ground. They told him not to worry.

By that afternoon, Drake was completely isolated. No way in or out.

On Friday, Robert studied the aerial photographs Sheriff Justin Smith posted to Facebook. That's when he knew the home he grew up in - and everything in it - was gone.

"That sunk my heart," he said. "They lost everything."

Surviving Together

Before waiting to be rescued together, Gib Dunning knew his neighbors well enough to wave hello or stop and chat.

Now, they might as well be family.

"It was a like a community; we didn't even know these people that well," the World War II veteran said. "We made out much better than we ever expected."

For some time, they were concerned about Carolyn's oxygen, but when it started to get low, Leroy got his new generator out and hooked it up to the oxygen machine.

Structurally, Gib thinks the home he's lived in for 22 years is "mostly OK." But there's the larger question of how and when they'll be able to access it: there's a 10-foot drop in front of the garage.

"(Gib) took eight separate trips up and down the mountain to try and salvage some of our stuff," Carolyn said.

How much has been salvaged and when they'll know what's left are questions for another day. After being evaluated by medical personnel at the airport, Marge and Leroy Rady left with their daughter, and sleep and a shower were the top to-do items on Leroy's list.

Gib was elated to see family and hot coffee - both of which, just a few hours earlier, he didn't know when he would see again.

Robert headed back to continue looking for his parents. And as soon as he can, he wants to go to Drake.

"Mother nature can take away everything but it can't take away your memories and your family," he said. "I'll be up there as soon as I can, searching for any memory I can find."

Jessica Maher can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 516, or maherj@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @JessicaMaherRH.