KRASNAYA POLYANA, Russia — There were two people in the crowd at the Rosa Khutor Extreme Park’s moguls course who were more excited than Canadian sisters Justine and Chloe Dufour-Lapointe, who took gold and silver Saturday night.

With tears streaming down her face, Johane Dufour-Lapointe embraced her husband, Bruce, the father and coach of the famous trio of Quebecois mogul skiers. They wrapped themselves in the Canadian flag. They hugged and jumped together. A lifetime of ski training, countless trips to the ski area and too many contests locked in tense, parental anticipation boiled down to a single glorious moment. Their girls — who began skiing at age 2 — were Olympic medalists.

“They made it,” said Bruce, whose three daughters competed in the moguls finals. “Is there something bigger than this? Is there anything bigger than this? No. This is the place. This is the place to be.”

It had been three weeks since the parents had actually seen their daughters, who traveled straight from World Cup competition to Russia for the Olympics. That was too long a span.

“I’m absolutely shaking right now,” Johane said, after clenching her husband during each of her daughters’ runs Saturday. “I’m so anxious to grab them and kiss them, because I didn’t have the chance in the last three weeks. Bring me my babies! Bring them to me!”

Defending Olympic gold medalist Hannah Kearney — the top-ranked bump skier in the world — was on the other side of that emotional spectrum.

The 27-year-old American on Thursday qualified first for Saturday’s finals. She was poised to become the first freestyle skier to earn consecutive Olympic golds in moguls skiing since the sport debuted in the 1992 Albertville Winter Games. She was on track for a repeat of her 2010 gold when she bobbled on the final run, her left ski caroming off a bump, breaking her form. She immediately regained her style and threw a smooth 360 on the bottom jump. But the bobble cost her.

“I made a huge mistake in my run, and you can’t win in the Olympics when you make a huge mistake in your run,” said a tearful Kearney, who earned bronze, the second U.S. medal of the day.

She said she showed mental strength cleaning up the rest of her run.

“It could have been worse,” she said, breaking down in tears. “I’ll have to treat this bronze as a reward for fighting — and not perfection.”

Her goal for the past four years has been Sochi. Now, she must reassess. Defend her World Cup title. Maybe squeeze another year of competition out of her knees.

“It’s tough to know your Olympic career is over and it did not end as well as you were imagining,” said the New Hampshire freestyle skier.

Justine, the youngest of the three Dufour-Lapointe sisters at age 19, woke up nervous Saturday. As soon as she stood atop the 28-degree moguls course, the nerves faded.

“It was clear. Everything was clear. I knew what I had to do,” said the youngest freestyle skier to ever win Olympic gold. “It was simple. I had to pull all the heart I had inside, all the energy, all the training that I got over all those years, and I made it.”

Chloe, 22, said the moment was something she and her sisters had imagined for four years. She agreed with her younger sister that the course “needed to be skied with emotion.”

“So I skied it with my heart and the judges saw that tonight. My goal was to cross the line every single run that I did and be satisfied with what I had done,” Chloe said. “And tonight accomplished this, but I also got a silver medal and I also got to be on the podium with my sister.”

The oldest Dufour-Lapointe sister, Maxime, was eliminated after the second of three final rounds Saturday. Steamboat Springs skier Eliza Outtrim finished sixth.