By Dave Andrusko

Dr. Alveda King, the niece of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., put what is at stake in its starkest form at Friday’s Prayer Breakfast in a well-received talk titled, “The Future of our Nation: The Choice Between Life and Death.”

Dr. King, an author of numerous books and director of African-American Outreach for Priests for Life, was special quest speaker and followed James Pinto, co-host of two programs on Mother Angelica’s Eternal Word Television Network (EWTN). Together they made a dynamic team.

Mr. Pinto talked of the growing collaboration between NRLC and EWTN and how EWTN’s massive outreach makes it possible for National Right to Life to reach a worldwide audience. He reminded us that pro-lifers should anticipate continued resistance but that “This is our hour.”

Dr. King spoke of her decades-long familiarity with NRLC and particularly with the late Dr. Mildred Jefferson, who was a NRLC president, and how “civil rights begin in the womb.” Harkening back to her own family’s deep involvement in the Civil Rights Movement, Dr. King said we shall also overcome abortion.

She lifted up her audience with her assurance that we are “moving toward victory.”

Bioethicist Wesley J. had a much grimmer message in his mid-morning talk on “Bioethics’ War on Humans.” He offered example after example of the fallout of what one anti-human exceptionalist called “Undignified Bioethics.”

A view that rejects inherent human dignity (which is now widespread in bioethics) and elevates the elimination of all human suffering to an ultimate goal quickly morphs into the conclusion that death is an acceptable “solution” for suffering, Smith explained.

Smith briefly but poignantly touched on other phases of Bioethics’ War on Humans and how each, including infanticide and assisted suicide and self-starvation, flows “naturally” when the bedrock assumption that we are of infinite value because of who we are, not because of what we do, is rejected.

Burke Balch, J.D.., and Jennifer Popik, J.D., both from NRLC’s Robert Powell Center for Medical Ethics, updated the overflow audience on the latest challenges presented by proponents of doctor-assisted suicide and ObamaCare’s relentless campaign to ration health care.

Following the Prayer Breakfast and the General Session, attendees had their choice of 23 different workshops. The topics ranged from “Grassroots Lobbying” through “Learning from Lincoln and the Civil Rights Movement” to “Ideas to Motivate and active Pro-life Students on Your College Campus.”

Saturday, the third and final day of the convention, gets off to a great start with a General Session titled, “Challenging the Nation to Respect Life,” featuring Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell from Kentucky.