MORRIS – When Charlotte Cohenour’s cat escaped from her rural Heatherfield home recently, she hurried through her house, turning on the lights and opening the garage door.

She quickly found her cat, turned out the lights and locked up for the night. When she woke, she realized she had left her garage door open all night.

Cohenour has never been afraid of living in the Heatherfield subdivision. She was widowed in 1988 and continued to raise her child in the neighborhood as a single mom.

But she fears the worst could happen if she forgets in the future to close her garage door if Greenhouse Group LLC is given permission by the city to locate a medical marijuana dispensary near her subdivision at the old Rockwell Inn restaurant, 400 W. Route 6. She is afraid the facility will bring a criminal element, such as illegal drug transactions or break-ins to local homes, to her street.

“I’m not going to be able to make a mistake like that again once they open there. I’m losing the beauty and freedom I’ve found in this county,” she said.

“I’ve never been afraid in this house,” she said while sitting on her back porch, from which the rooftop of Rockwell Inn is visible. “I’ve never worried, never laid in bed and wondered if I locked the back door.”

Greenhouse Group has said the facility is proposed as a wellness center or spa, featuring yoga, acupuncture, support groups – as well as medical marijuana that would be kept in a safe.

The use of medical marijuana, and the sale and growth of it, is legal in Illinois. In February, Gov. Bruce Rauner awarded 18 licenses to farm it and 52 licenses to sell it. About 2,500 people so far have been approved in the state to receive medical marijuana.

The Rockwell Inn is the second Morris location Greenhouse Group is attempting to get. It withdrew the first after discovering it was near a day care center; dispensaries cannot open within 1,000 feet of day cares or schools.

At recent city meetings, there has been public outcry against the second location. Residents also have raised concerns for their homes as well as potential crime.

The perfect location

On the other side of town, Linda Goudie is patiently waiting for the dispensary to get the go-ahead. The 67-year-old woman was diagnosed at age 22 with rheumatoid arthritis. Today, she’s been approved to carry a medical cannabis card.