Topics: Bernie Sanders, Capitalism, Economics, Elections 2016, Finance, Hillary Clinton, martin o'mally, The Democratic Party, the economy, Too Big to Fail, Wall Street, News, Politics News

The first democratic debate has come and gone, and while it probably hasn’t changed much in terms of polling, it was a good night for progressives. The majority of pundits have called Hillary Clinton the winner, while social media, online polls, and focus groups have been overwhelmingly more favorable for Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-VT). Overall, both frontrunners did what they had to do. Predictably, Sanders was called out on gun control, Clinton was called out on flip-flopping, while Martin O’Malley was called out on his record as the mayor of Baltimore. As others have said, the debate was a reasonable discussion of the issues, and exposed the first two GOP debates for the clownish debacles they were.

Things did, however, get a bit testy when the topic of Wall Street came up, and this was one of the few areas where Clinton really stumbled — although Sanders was generous not to go after her close associations with big banks. After all, her top donors over the past decade and a half have been banks like Citigroup and Goldman Sachs, and she and Bill have made a fortune on the lecture circuit, giving quarter-million-dollar speeches for the aforementioned financial institutions.

When the discussion of big banks and regulation came up, Clinton played the experience card, and brought up her history of representing Wall Street in her Senator days. “I represented Wall Street as a Senator from New York,” said Clinton, “and I went to Wall Street in December of 2007, before the big crash that we had, and I basically said, ‘cut it out,’ ‘quit foreclosing on homes,’ ‘quit behaving in the speculative behaviors.’”

Needless to say, this was an embarrassing moment for Clinton, who “represented” Wall Street from 2001 to 2009, as the speculation raged, after her husbands administration repealed Glass-Steagall and refused to regulate the derivative market. Sanders, who shook his head in disbelief, responded, “Congress doesn’t regulate Wall Street. Wall Street regulates Congress. Saying ‘please do the right thing’ is kind of naïve.”

Clinton is not naive, nor is she her husband, but her history and association with Wall Street is nonetheless concerning. As business writer William D. Cohen wrote for Politico last November:

“While the finance industry does genuinely hate [Elizabeth Warren], the big bankers love Clinton, and by and large they badly want her to be president… None of them think she really means her populism.”

So, is her recent populist rhetoric real? It could be. But Sanders and many other progressives have a legitimate right to be concerned. During the debate, Martin O’Malley called Clinton out for her opposition to Glass-Steagall, the New Deal legislation that prevented commercial banks and investment banks (and insurance companies) from merging into too-big-to-fail financial institutions. Bill Clinton’s repeal of Glass-Steagall may not have directly led to the financial crisis, but there is little doubt that it played a part, and led to enormous bank mergers. As Sanders has pointed out, the too-big-to-fail banks are bigger than ever.