Zinkia president and founder José María Castillejo wrote in his blog that Pocoyo is more popular in Google searches than Ironman, Superman…and Barack Obama. Zinkia Entertainment

By Carlos López Perea

MADRID—The thing with cartoons is that they live in an imaginary world, among imaginary people. In the real world, when cartoon-making companies issue bonds with an 11% coupon, they have to pay the interest.

That has turned out to be a big problem for Zinkia Entertainment, a small Spanish company that produces the kiddie shows starring Pocoyo, a world-famous small boy in blue who stays forever young in the likes of Disney Channel. No idea who that is? Ask your kids. He has a dog and an elephant as companions, if that serves as a clue.

Zinkia, founded in 2001, says Pocoyo (pronounced ”Po-ko-YO”) is seen in 100 countries around the world, playing and learning stuff with his animal friends. Still, competition in the children’s entertainment industry is fierce: such success translated into a €1 million ($1.3 million) loss in the first half; revenue was €4.7 million, down 50% from the same period of 2013.

Zinkia faces the same issues as many rivals when attracting little eyeballs.

The true growth markets are in Asia, and exposure there requires advertising and marketing money. Then, there is spending in new technologies, particularly software apps, to stay on top of the latest trends among six-year olds.

What sets Zinkia apart from rivals, at least the most solvent ones, is that the company itself seems to be living in fantasyland.

Even after such dismal first-half numbers, Zinkia is sticking to a projection of €21.5 million worth of revenue this year. Earlier this year, Zinkia said it plans to increase its staff from 45 currently to 327 by 2015. A company spokesman declined to elaborate.

A month ago, Zinkia president and founder José María Castillejo wrote in his blog that Pocoyo is more popular in Google searches than Ironman. Which sounds feasible. And also more popular than Superman. Mmmm. And also more popular than Barack Obama. Now, one wonders what metrics Mr. Castillejo is using.

Zinkia is listed in Madrid, where it’s valued at a mere €12 million, with the stock down 74% from the initial public offering price. It also has ADRs listed in New York. More importantly, it has €2.2 million worth of three-year bonds maturing this year.

Last month, reality caught up with Pocoyo. Spain’s financial markets regulator warned against a proposed issue of fresh bonds targeting retail investors—worth €1,000 each and paying a 11% coupon—and Zinkia had to cancel the issue.

Zinkia then announced a preliminary filing for creditor protection, which under Spanish law gives it three months to restructure its debts with banks. As of June 30, Zinkia’s net debt stood at €10.5 million.

Last week, the company offered bondholders an extension of maturity to 2015, in exchange for a switch to a 11% coupon from the current 9.75%–which Wallwood Spain analyst Carlos Ladero, one of a handful that follows Zinkia, calls a “sign of desperation.”

Creditors have a Dec. 9 deadline to respond to the offer but Zinkia just Tuesday said it won’t pay the interest of those bonds for now. Which brings potential and current investors back to the question Mr. Castillejo posed in his blog when he was trying to promote the second bond issue:

“Would you invest in this company?”