By of the

Baseball can be a funny game sometimes.

Less than 24 hours after being shut out by Jason Hammel, once again the Milwaukee Brewers made it look easy against one of the toughest pitchers in the major leagues in Jeff Samardzija.

Swinging the bats with aplomb from the start, the Brewers pounced on the Chicago Cubs ace for a total of eight runs in the opening three innings en route to a 9-0 laugher on a sultry Sunday afternoon at Miller Park.

Milwaukee scored twice in the first inning, once in the second and five more times in the third in chasing Samardzija, who entered tied with Cincinnati's Johnny Cueto with the lowest earned-run average in baseball at 1.68.

He exited with it jumping almost a full run to 2.54. Brewers starter Kyle Lohse, meanwhile, saw his ERA drop to 2.60 after twirling a 93-pitch, three-hit shutout for the team's first complete game of the season.

"It shows how good Hammel was yesterday," said manager Ron Roenicke, whose club managed just four hits in seven innings against him in an eventual 8-0 shutout.

"I talk about how goofy this game is. I can't figure it out. I figured it was going to be a low-scoring game today. It's hard to figure out what's going to happen in these games. That's why it's so fun day to day not knowing what's going to happen.

"When you try to figure it out, you're going to be wrong."

It was the second victory in as many tries for the Brewers against Samardzija this season. But unlike the first one, in which they scored twice in each of the first two innings and then had to hold on to win, 4-3, they eliminated any possibility of a Cubs comeback quickly.

Jean Segura singled to lead off and Ryan Braun followed with a home run to left, his second in three days, to stake Lohse to a 2-0 lead. Lohse then helped his cause in the second inning, lining a two-out single to center to score Scooter Gennett and make it 3-0.

The knockout punch came in the third.

Braun singled, Jonathan Lucroy walked and Carlos Gomez was hit by a pitch to load the bases with nobody out for Khris Davis. He hit a smash up the middle but was robbed by Cubs second baseman Darwin Barney, who gloved it with a diving stab, got up and stepped on second for the forceout and then threw over to third to get a sliding Lucroy for the double play.

Braun scored on the play to make it 4-0, but the Brewers' momentum had been stifled — if only for a moment.

"It was big," Roenicke said. "What a great play that was by him. That could have shut us down, and we would have had first and third and no outs. That was a huge play."

However, Gennett followed with his second double in as many innings, and then Mark Reynolds drew a walk to again load the bases. This time, No. 8 hitter Lyle Overbay served up a double into the corner in left to score three and stretch the advantage to 7-0.

"To set everything up, Reynolds on an 0-2 count worked a walk," said Overbay. "I think (Samardzija) was missing his spots today. We took advantage of it. Sometimes good pitchers can miss spots and still dominate. We were able to get some to fall in.

"There's only a certain amount of time before they figure it out, whether it's a release point or something like that. We put the pressure on him and continued it."

In keeping with that theme, Lohse came up and kept the inning alive with his second single, this one to right that scored Overbay and made it 8-0.

Samardzija then retired Segura for the third out, but his day was over at just 65 pitches. He allowed eight hits and eight earned runs while walking two and hitting another to drop to 1-5.

"He made a couple of mistakes, and we were able to take advantage of it, and we got lucky a couple of times," said Braun. "We hit a pop-up that fell in, a ground ball that fell in. You have to take advantage of mistakes against a good pitcher like that.

"When a team makes mistakes like that, you have to jump on it."

Staked to the huge cushion, Lohse was able to continue to do what he does, which is carve up the young, aggressive hitters that dotted the Cubs' lineup. He came into the ninth inning at 83 pitches and needed just 10 more to finish Chicago off.

"You try to take advantage of it," Lohse said of the Cubs' aggressiveness at the plate. "You know what kind of guys you're facing.

"When you're out there staying out of the middle of the plate and making pitches and they're swinging at it, you're probably going to be successful more times than not, and that's the way it went today."

It was the eighth career shutout tossed by Lohse, who missed one earlier this season when he went 82/3 innings in a win over the Pittsburgh Pirates on April 13.

"Rarely do you see a game where nine runs are scored and it's 2 hours and (18) minutes," said Braun. "It's a lot of fun on defense when a guy like that is pitching."

WEEKS IN THE SWING

Since April 25, Rickie Weeks is leading the National League in batting average, hitting .415 (22 for 53) with two home runs and 10 runs batted in (minimum 20 at-bats).