Some serious football fans share their most favorite game-time munchies.

Buy Photo Wings at The Deli in Salisbury are served with homemade ranch and celery. (Photo: Staff file photo by Justin Odendhal)Buy Photo

What’s better than watching football?

Watching football while eating delicious, calorie-packed foods, of course. From cheesy crab dip to juicy burgers, this list features what the serious football fans on Delmarva are eating on game day.

So if you plan on indulging in fruits and salads on NFL Sundays, this isn’t the article for you.

Wings

Some of the foods on this list are arguable. But chicken wings set the standard for football munchies.

They come in a variety of flavors and pair extremely well with an ice cold beer.

Wings are usually available at any restaurant with the game on. And any wing-lover knows the more you order, the cheaper they are. They’re even simple enough to make at home — just soak them in your favorite marinating sauce and toss them on the grill.

But just like the Cleveland Browns’ offense, chicken wings are often sloppy, so have plenty of wet naps available.

Nachos

Loaded chicken nachos. (Photo: David Scrivner image)

When it comes to game-time eats, this popular dish is one of Linda Barnhouse’s favorites.

“Nachos are great for sharing and you can top them with practically anything,” she says. “The more toppings, the better.”

She’s right.

Nachos are great plain, but let’s face it: They’re even better loaded with fresh ingredients like jalapenos, grilled chicken, pulled pork, bacon, diced tomatoes, onions, green peppers or whatever else your heart desires.

When it comes to nachos, the sky is the limit.

Chips and Dip

For Chuck Colburn, the weather tends to play a factor in deciding what kind of dip he’ll order.

“At the beginning of the season when it’s still kind of warm out, I’ll go for something like guacamole, salsa, spinach and artichoke, or even a nice taco dip,” he says. “But come time for the Super Bowl, when it’s real cold out, I want queso, beer and cheese, or buffalo chicken dip. Something thick and hearty.”

“Crab dip, however, is always a solid choice — no matter the season.”

From rich and creamy to thick and meaty — even decadent and cheesy — dips are a must-have for game time fare. Just be sure you don’t double dip; at least not when people are watching.

Pizza

Buy Photo Cheesesteak pie from Taste of South Philly. (Photo: Staff file photo by Hannah Carroll)

Longtime friends Dave Henderson and Delbert Lairn say pizza is always involved in their football-watching plans.

“Pizza is easy to share, easy to eat and requires minimum cleanup,” Henderson says. “And pizza is delicious.”

Practically every pizza joint on game day features football deals and specials. And fancier bars and sports dives will usually offer different sizes: individual, medium or large enough to split with all of your buddies.

Burgers

A double American cheeseburger topped with bacon and a fried egg. (Photo: File image)

On game day, Jonathan Riley usually orders an array of appetizers, but when he’s in the mood for a something a bit heartier, he wants a burger.

“Football, beer and burgers,” he says. “They just go together.”

A good burger is exceptionally meaty, satisfyingly greasy and overloaded with cheese. It’s the ultimate hand-held food — it doesn’t even require a paper plate, let alone cutlery.

The sheer density of the meat ensures a full stomach, while the veggies are stuffed right in there with everything else, saving you precious time so you can get back to cheering on your team.

hcarroll2@dmg.gannett.com

302-537-1881, ext. 209

On Twitter @hcarroll_1

Read or Share this story: http://www.delmarvanow.com/story/entertainment/2015/09/20/popular-football-eats/72522652/