Topics: Cybersecurity, Editor's Picks, hackers, History, passwords, The Internet, Innovation News, Technology News, Life News

News this week that Russian hackers have stolen 1.2 billion passwords makes me want to throw up my hands in resignation and change all my passwords back to “password.”

A security expert quoted in the New York Times suggests that we might protect ourselves from this new level of hackery by creating an anagram from a sentence “using symbols and numbers to make it more complicated. For example, the sentence One time in class I ate some glue could become 1TiC!AsG.”

Someday, computer innovators tell us, passwords may be replaced by optical recognition or a system that can detect each person’s unique pattern of touch on the keyboard. Let’s hope that happens sooner rather than later, but in the meantime, I’m afraid, the bad guys have won. There is simply no way that we can keep in our heads the new and improved super-safe passwords that would provide immunity from identity thieves. The cognitive pathways by which people perceive, process, understand and remember words prevent us from being able to embrace such random strings of characters as “1TiC!AsG.”

In cartoons from the olden days, a character might spout an obscenity that would be censored andrendered as “$#!!&$#&.” The “word” thus denoted was considered unspeakable in polite society, but now we are expected to use exactly such gibberish-chains to enable some of our most important communication. Little wonder that we might feel like shouting “$#!!&$#&.”

As a professional wordsmith (English professor and writer), it saddens me that these “words” we’re supposed to “pass” when we log onto our email and bank accounts even remotely share the same categorical denomination as the words that actually embody value for humanity: Words like “April is the cruelest month” or “The answer is blowin’ in the wind.” Today’s passwords aren’t words. I demand a new term for them.

According to the Oxford English Dictionary – the archive of how words appear and evolve in English – “password” first surfaced in its current usage (“a sequence of characters, known only to authorized persons, which must be keyed in to gain access to a particular computer, network, file, function, etc.”) a half-century ago, at a 1965 meeting of the American Federation of Information Processing Societies.

But the idea of a password long predated the computer age: Its first recorded use, as “a selected word or phrase securing admission, recognition, etc., when used by those to whom it is disclosed,” dates to 1799. Sir Walter Scott used the term – “George shall . . . force the fellow to give him the pass-word” – in a translation of Goethe’s 1773 play “Götz von Berlichingen.”