Topics: Americans for Prosperity, Editor's Picks, GOP, Koch Brothers, Republicans, Ron Johnson, Tea Party, The Right, U.S. Senate, Wisconsin, Business News, Politics News

Back in 2010, George Will called Wisconsin businessman Ron Johnson the face of the Tea Party, one of those righteous citizens rising up from the dying embers of our benighted republic to save us from the collectivist horde:

Before what he calls “the jaw-dropping” events of the last 19 months — TARP, the stimulus, Government Motors, the mistreatment of Chrysler’s creditors, Obamacare, etc. — the idea of running for office never crossed Ron Johnson’s mind. He was, however, dry tinder — he calls Ayn Rand’s “Atlas Shrugged” his “foundational book” — and now is ablaze, in an understated, upper-Midwestern way. This 55-year-old manufacturer of plastic products from Oshkosh is what the tea party looks like.

Johnson was one of the first Tea Party candidates, a genuine political neophyte who heard the call to higher office over the mortal threat of Obamacare and launched his campaign through Tea Party rallies all over Wisconsin. At an early Madison Tea Party rally, Johnson waved the bloody shirt of the victimized conservatives to the ecstatic crowd:

We need to elect true conservatives, not politicians but citizen legislators, people who actually listen to us. People who will tell the truth and in the end will do what actually needs to be done. And we need the level of involvement and commitment that is being demonstrated out here today. Because in the end, folks, we will need to out organize the community organizers…Folks this is a fight for freedom. This is not somebody’s else’s fight this is our fight. And this is a fight that we absolutely must win. So may God help us and may God continue to bless the greatest nation in the history of mankind

All the religious stuff at the end there notwithstanding, he, like most Tea Partyers, is a hardcore social conservative. When Will said that Johnson was a fan of the famous atheist Ayn Rand, he wasn’t kidding. In a video interview for the Ayn Rand Institute the Atlas Society he complains that Americans are suffering from Stockholm syndrome, saying that Obamacare is “the greatest assault on freedom in my lifetime.” He describes how he went to the Supreme Court to be with those who were begging the justices to leave one last crumb of freedom: the freedom to purchase a product of one’s choice.

In fact, that’s pretty much the extent of Sen. Ron Johnson’s definition of freedom. If any starry-eyed libertarians think his love of “Atlas Shrugged” might lead him to be concerned with government overreach in anything but the economic realm, they’re going to be disappointed. Like most of the Tea Party he is fully on board with the most authoritarian policies of the federal government.

He is the perfect Tea Party senator, far more in line with the real sentiments of the largely older, white, traditional conservatives who make up that movement than an iconoclast like Rand Paul.

So what to make of his scolding the people who put him in office at last week’s Republican Leadership Conference?