Aluminium outside a warehouse. The metal is among industrial metals that have seen prices rise after China data showed imports slowing. REUTERS/Olivia Harris Olivia Harris/Reuters

In metals markets long dominated by trends in China’s consumption, a weird new reality is sinking in: Good Chinese economic data is bad and bad actually good for prices.

The contrast stood out starkly this week. On Monday, prices of industrial metals such as copper and aluminum rose initially after China’s trade data for May showed imports contracted more quickly than the market had expected. On Thursday, meanwhile, prices of several base metals fell sharply even though China’s industrial output growth in May was in line with market expectations.

The pattern seems to have emerged because ‘weak’ Chinese economic data encourages hopes the government will introduce more stimulus measures that could stoke metals buying.

‘Strong’ data, by contrast, leads to expectations Beijing will stand pat on policy.

“Traders are playing on the expectation of more monetary easing from China when the data is weak,” says Avatar Sandu, Singapore-based head of Commodity Research at Phillip Futures. “The expectation is that more liquidity in the markets is going to increase consumption.”

For much of the last decade, prices of most industrial metals have been driven by a boom in China’s consumption to support its phenomenal economic growth. Now, the market is trying to adjust its expectations based on China’s “new normal” for the economy, analysts say.

Earlier this week, Nomura said in a research report that a steep drop in China’s imports in May showed its demand for commodities is now particularly weak. Partly based on the data, it predicted China would carry out two 25 basis-point interest rate cuts and two more 50 basis-point reserve requirement ratio cuts before the year end.

“We believe China’s ongoing stimulus policies and monetary easing will support copper demand growth,” said another report from Argonaut Securities.

However, hopes of reinvigorated demand were dampened by the relatively strong industrial output data released later in the week on Thursday.

Copper slipped below a psychological threshold of $6,000 a ton on the day.

Of course, not all metals price gyrations are caused by China alone.

Swings in the relative value of the dollar, the currency used for pricing of metals, mine supplies of ores and inventory levels also play a big part metals prices. But even if the market’s reaction to China’s economic data has become more topsy-turvy, it’s clear the country’s influence on prices will remain strong for some time.