With the final midterm Senate race decided as of Saturday, we can officially name the reader who correctly guessed the outcome of the Senate results in our contest for the 2014 midterms.

The winner is Ellen L. Carmichael, who correctly guess the Senate split — 54 Republicans, 46 Democrats — and correctly guessed how each state would go.

In all, twenty of our 200 or so entrants correctly guessed the number of seats each party would win or lose in the midterms. Of those, 11 entrants also guessed all the states correctly. But Ms. Carmichael was the first to submit the correct entry, making her the winner. (In a twist, Ms. Carmichael actually guessed the outcome correctly twice. We are using her final entry, as was specified in contest rules, to declare her the winner.)

Overall, readers slightly underestimated the scope of Republicans’ Senate wins. On average — the mean, the median and the most-common pick all matched up — readers predicted the midterm elections would leave the GOP with 52 seats and the Democrats with 48. With the Louisiana Senate runoff on Saturday going to Republican Bill Cassidy, the midterm elections actually left the Republicans with 54 seats and the Democrats with 46.

As for our winner: Ms. Carmichael is a 27-year-old Republican operative, and she credited her time working on campaigns for finding in-state nuances that can make the difference in tight races. She was the communications director for Herman Cain’s bid for the GOP presidential nomination in 2012.

In an interview, we asked her to outline her predictions for the new Congress, now that the GOP controls the Senate as well as the House.

“First, they should pass a balanced budget that saves America’s ‘safety net’ programs,” she said. “Next, they should vote at least once to repeal Obamacare in its entirety, as that would offer new senators the opportunity to go ‘on the record’ in total opposition to the law. Finally, they should pass pro-growth tax reform, especially measures that would address America’s jobs-killing, growth-stunting corporate tax rate.”

We want to give a nod to the other nine correct entrants. Below are their Twitter handles, as well as links to their guesses.

Note: some of the links to the entries may appear to not have a state highlighted, as tight races changed throughout the contest. (For example, Michigan was replaced by Virginia.) We verified these entrants against the states that were live at the time of the contest to make sure they were correct.