FORT COLLINS — Colorado State, ranked 100th in passing offense before the game, made a concerted effort Saturday afternoon to go airborne against Cal Poly in front of 14,146 at Sonny Lubick Field at Hughes Stadium. The strategy worked, and CSU junior quarterback Garrett Grayson did his part in a 34-17 Rams victory in CSU’s home opener.

Grayson threw for 227 yards passing in the first half, and finished 21-of-30 for 297 yards and two touchdowns.

Colorado State (1-2) at least gained some momentum into next weekend’s game at No. 1 Alabama.

Cal Poly (1-2) entered the game ranked No. 14 nationally at the FCS (formerly I-AA) level. The Mustangs pulled to within 27-17 in the third quarter and set up for a field goal to tighten the score. But CSU senior defensive end Shaquil Barrett blocked a 32-yard attempt by Bobby Zalud with 8:11 to go.

Colorado State put the game out of reach when Grayson hit tight end Kivon Cartwright for a 5-yard touchdown with 4:03 to go.

For the first time this season CSU emphasized its tight ends in the passing game. Senior Crockett Gillmore caught his first passes of the season in the first half Saturday — four of them, in fact. He finished with seven receptions for 83 yards.

Colorado State never punted in the first half, scoring on its first five drives before running out the clock with its sixth possession.

It didn’t always come easy for the home team, however. The Rams had their lead cut to 13-10 after a 34-yard touchdown run by Cal Poly senior Akaninyene Umoh on the first play of the second quarter.

But CSU regained some separation and took a 27-10 lead into halftime when Kapri Bibbs scored on a 1-yard run and Grayson connected with freshman wideout Rashard Higgins for a 36-yard score — the first TD of Higgins’ college career.

Colorado State, obviously feeling looser than in the losses to Colorado and Tulsa, even pulled out a gadget play to set up the Bibbs touchdown. Ty Sambrailo, a 6-foot-6, 305-pound junior who normally is the starting left tackle, lined up as a tight end and rumbled 11 yards to the 1-yard line after taking a backward pass (lateral) from Grayson.

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler