Donnie Missouri takes notes while Kristan Halaiko, Lisa Brown and Joe Martenczuk listen during a home visit with clients Donney Jefferson and his fiancée, Rosaleita Fulford. They are part of a team from Johns Hopkins that goes out into the community to follow up with super-utilizers. (Photo: Doug Kapustin for USA TODAY)

BALTIMORE — By the time Donnie Missouri met Rosaleita Fulford, the soft-spoken 44-year-old woman had funded a drug habit with prostitution and theft. "I was off the chain," she says.

She lived on the streets after not being able to make rent, injected opiates until Hepatitis C and HIV had crept into her veins, and used anger to deal with a soul-crushing blanket of depression.

Fulford's T-cell count was low; she missed doctor's appointments to look for her next high. She got sick often, and when she did, she went to the emergency room instead of to an inexpensive clinic. It all came at the government's expense.

Fulford represents the nation's "super-utilizers," the 1% of the population who account for 22% of health care spending, according to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. In the states' Medicaid programs — which increased by at least 3 million people in 2014 because of the Affordable Care Act — 5% of users account for 54% of spending.

Most have three or more chronic conditions, such as diabetes, heart disease or HIV. Many are also fighting substance abuse, homelessness and mental health issues, creating a mix of hard-to-reach and hard-to-treat patients.

Missouri, who's part of a Johns Hopkins Community Health Partnership, represents a possible solution. He's part of a group of workers who specialize in cutting health care costs by helping super-utilizers maintain their health and avoid the emergency room.

In between doctors' appointments, Fulford receives a call at least once a week to make sure she's taking her medications, to see whether she needs help with food or housing, or just to see whether she needs to talk. Missouri works with a care coordinator, social worker, nurse practitioner and primary care physician to keep tabs on hundreds of low-income Medicare and Medicaid recipients throughout Baltimore.

"I think they care," Fulford said. "I trust them."

They may care, but they are also motivated by the belief that by helping the super-utilizers with coordinated care that includes housing, food, bus tokens and other needs, they can cut millions of dollars in health spending.

"Most of the industry is aware that 74% of illnesses are due to things that are controllable," says Michael Yuhas, CEO of Integra, a company that helps insurers target Medicare and Medicaid recipients who rack up more emergency room visits than doctor's office visits. "With the expansion of Medicaid and the ACA — and the fact that insurers have to take all comers — it's very much in their interest to make sure these people stay healthy and use health care wisely."

Integra, Yuhas says, has helped cut hospitalizations by 50%.

"I can tell you personally that I think it's helped decrease emergency room visits," says Michael Fingerhood, Fulford's primary doctor who began working with at-risk populations 20 years ago. "We're below our goal for hospitalizations."

Some organizations have shown substantial savings: At Community Care of North Carolina, which handles high-risk Medicaid patients, savings were 15% — or $382 million — for super-utilizer patients enrolled in community coordinated care programs over Medicaid patients who were not, according to the Center for Health Care Strategies, which runs a "complex care innovation lab."

But the big push is coming from CMS, which is sending out millions of dollars in grants for super-utilizer programs.

CMS in 2013 gave Cooper University Hospital in New Jersey $2.8 million to expand a program in the hopes of a three-year savings of over $6 million. Pennsylvania, Colorado, Missouri and California received similar grants to try to save $68 million. Hopkins received $10 million.

Fulford's Hepatitis C and HIV status could come with costly complications, such as liver failure, cancer or pneumonia. But keeping her consistently on her medications, checking in on her immune system and making sure she maintains her mental health could keep those complications — and their costs — in check.

Donney Jefferson and his fiancée, Rosaleita Fulford, work with a team from Johns Hopkins to ensure Jefferson's health insurance is up-to-date, to increase the amount of Fulford's food stamps, and to try to find an apartment for the couple. They plan to get married in September. (Photo: Doug Kapustin for USA TODAY)

The system had to change, said Scott Berkowitz, who designed Hopkins' program. Patients used to visit the emergency room, get cared for and then be released with just a prescription and some instructions. No one checked to see whether they picked up the prescription or followed any of the instructions, which were often given verbally as a patient rushed out the door.

At Hopkins, the community teams receive a list of the names of patients who have the highest predicted risk for being admitted to the hospital within the next year. Anyone with a 50% or higher risk hears from a community worker. They then are set up with a case manager, who works with the primary care physician and the patient to determine the ongoing health needs and concerns.

The team makes sure Fulford and her fiancee, Donney Jefferson, 54, have medical appointments at the same time. Sitting at Fulford's mother's kitchen table, they brainstormed recent complications: Jefferson's insurance had been canceled. Missouri tried to sort it out on his iPad while the couple talked. Fulford's food stamps had been cut, so they tried to determine whether utility bills could be added to the eligibility list. They talked about Section 8 housing and the possibility of an eight-year waiting list. And Fulford had finally made it to the dentist, after getting the proper insurance.

"That's what I'm talking about, Rosaleita!" Missouri said.

Yuhas began his program in 2010 after realizing a small segment responds to doctors and authority figures in a negative way — in response to being treated negatively.

"That's the problem," he said. "Society has walked around them."

Mental health issues make the problem trickier. About 50% of psychiatrists accept insurance, so there's no need to take Medicare or Medicaid patients, which creates a shortage of providers. And it can be difficult to convince a therapist to open an office to a population that may not be clean or whose symptoms might come out in uncomfortable ways for the other patients seeking help, he said.

"People are often socially challenged," Yuhas said. "They may not be an easy patient."

In Philadelphia, a psychiatrist comes to an ambulatory care unit one afternoon a week, with the insurers agreeing to pay, Yuhas said. Typically, that doctor deals with mildly depressed middle-aged, middle-class patients.

His group is working with United Health in Washington, and in New York City and others in Florida and Pennsylvania. They've cut hospitalizations, readmissions and ambulatory costs, as well as improving the plan's Medicare quality rating, he said.

Robin Arrington was homeless until a team of Johns Hopkins care coordinators worked with her to stabilize her health, address her substance-abuse addiction, and find a safe living situation. (Photo: Doug Kapustin for USA TODAY)

Robin Arrington, 54, says that by the time she met up with the Hopkins team, she had been living on the floor of a crack addict's home. She had struggled with drugs, disease and multiple trips to prison, and she was homeless. But after being introduced to case worker Michael Braxton, her health and life situation began to improve. The team worked with her to stabilize her situation, from staying in a shelter, to moving to a halfway home, to — the last week in August — moving into her own place where she can "come and go as I please."

"Michael? He's my buddy," she said of Braxton. "I can call him for anything. He's like a life coach."

She paused, the tears welling up.

"I have no idea why they're helping me," she said. "I truly don't. I hope this is just the way they conduct business."

Follow @kellyskennedy on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1s4Y5ef