Our generous Denver Post colleague in the statehouse, John Frank, did Lynn Bartels and me a tremendous solid and spent the day yesterday covering the spectacle that is a state budget debate. He did the same last week in the Senate’s rhetorical knife fight. God willing, John will bear witness to the conference committee that works out the differences between what House Democrats want and the wishes of the Republican majority in the Senate, then each chamber votes on a compromise before the session ends on May 6.

“I don’t know how they are going to do it,” venerable Sen. Kent Lambert told John in his story today in the Post.

When you punch the clock — OK, show up — at the statehouse, the scrape over the public’s money is even more interesting to read when the people offering takes on it are unbiased professionals you know and respect. It’s also a lot less work to just write a blog about it the next day. (Hey, cut me some slack, I’m writing this at 6 a.m. in my Alabama Crimson Tide jammies.)

Peter Marcus of the Durango Herald told us how the House passed a budget amendment that puts $1 million worth of incentives into the courtship of Colorado and Hollywood. Perhaps if there’s another installment of “True Grit” filmmakers will come back to where the franchise started.

And there’s this reportorial gold from Pete and the Herald:

Rep. Don Coram, R-Montrose, continued his quest to secure funding for birth control, with an amendment that would add $5 million to the Family Planning Program, administered by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. The Democratic-controlled House advanced the amendment. Coram also has proposed a separate bill that would add $5 million to a program that provides the intrauterine devices, or IUDs, to low-income young women, in an effort to extend the program that has resulted in a 40 percent drop in teen pregnancies. But that bill faces a loss in the Republican-controlled Senate. Even though the IUD funding passed in the budget, it could be removed during continuing negotiations with the Senate in the days ahead. “It’s more than 50 percent symbolic,” Coram said. “We just got the word back (Tuesday) that Colorado is leading the nation in the lowest teen pregnancy rate. This is simply a way of putting it in.”

Ivan Moreno of The Associated Press had the best take of the day on social media:

House only has 39 amendments on the Colo. budget, limiting how long lawmakers will talk today to approximately 4,929 hours. #coleg — Ivan Moreno (@IvanJourno) April 8, 2015

Expect good, thoughtful radio on the budget in the next few days from Megan Verlee of Colorado Public Radio and Bente Birkeland of KUNC and Rocky Mountain Community Radio.

And it’s always fun to see how the House Republican and Democratic press offices deliver the news in press releases from their partisan perches.

Let’s go first to the GOP:

Democrats vote unanimously against more education and transportation funding Denver – Tonight, Democrats voted unanimously against Republican led efforts to direct available general fund to education and transportation. The votes came on amendments offered by House Minority Leader Brian DelGrosso (R-Loveland) and Representative Terri Carver (R-Colorado Springs) to the state budget bill, SB 234. House Minority Leader Brian DelGrosso’s amendment would have directed $15 million in available general fund to the Department of Education. “Colorado’s general fund revenue has grown by more than 43% or $2.8 billion dollars since 2009, yet Democrats are not willing take money away from their own pet projects to boost funding for education,” said DelGrosso. “Every superintendent across the state has said the recessionary cuts are still greatly impacting school districts and I am frustrated House Democrats refuse to hear their concerns.” Representative Terri Carver’s amendment would have directed $15 million in available general fund to the Department of Transportation. “Colorado’s roads and bridges are in a state of disrepair and yet House Democrats are unwilling to make transportation a funding priority,” said Carver. “With our roads in poor shape, we should be focusing our available resources on our core functions of government such as our roads and bridges, not new programs.” All Republicans, excluding Representative Bob Rankin, who as a member of the Joint Budget Committee customarily votes against all amendments to the budget, supported both amendments.

The Democrats called it a short day at 7 hours of debate, though most of the morning the Republicans and Democrats divided into their caucuses to lay out their priorities and strategies on top of the floor debate. Nobody got off easy, except Lynn and me. Despite an elbow here and there, the left gave the right credit where credit was due, which is refreshing three months into the session.