Police remained at the scene on W. Lapham St. well into the morning Sunday. Credit: Michael Sears

By of the

Milwaukee police are investigating four separate shootings that occurred Sunday morning, including one homicide and an incident in which a 12-year-old boy inside a house was struck by a bullet fired from outside.

The shooting of the boy on the city's south side appears to have stemmed from a gunbattle in the street just after midnight that left dozens of bullet holes in at least two houses and a car. The boy was expected to be released from a hospital after receiving treatment Sunday morning.

The homicide occurred about three hours later, when a man was found shot to death in a vehicle. A woman has been arrested in that shooting.

The outbreak of violence this weekend adds to the city's grim toll this year, with nearly 100 people killed.

The 12-year-old boy was shot at 12:15 a.m. in the 2000 block of W. Lapham St., and police remained at the scene well into the morning Sunday.

There, the side of the house where the boy was shot could be seen riddled with dozens of bullets, the holes in the windows and wall marked by police with numbered pieces of tape. Bullets also had shattered both passenger side windows of a white car parked in front of the house.

Two different groups or individuals had been shooting at each other in the street, when one of the bullets that pierced the house struck the 12-year-old boy inside, police said in a news release. The circumstances that led up to that incident remain under investigation, but police don't think the home was the target of the shooting.

The second shooting occurred at 12:18 a.m. in the 2600 Block of W. Capitol Drive and involved a minor injury that was treated at the scene.

The victim, a 19-year-old Milwaukee man, told police he was sitting in his car when an unknown person approached and began to fire shots at him.

The shooting that police are investigating as a homicide happened around 3:20 a.m. in the 2800 block of N. 49th St.

Police said a 24-year-old Milwaukee man was found shot inside a vehicle at that location. He was taken to a hospital, where he later died.

A 24-year-old female acquaintance was arrested at the scene. Police will present the case to the Milwaukee County District Attorney's Office in the coming days for possible charges.

Around 6:30 a.m., a 31-year-old Milwaukee man was shot in the 4400 block of N. Sherman Blvd. by a known suspect during an argument, police said. The victim was transported to a hospital for treatment. Milwaukee police were still seeking the suspect as of midday Sunday.