Please consider disabling it for our site, or supporting our work in one of these ways

Joe Arpaio, America's most flamboyant lawman, hired a private detective to investigate the wife of a federal judge considering whether he was in contempt of court.

Lots of conservatives talk a good game about how citizens should resist federal control and devolve power to local governments. Few of them are willing to put their convictions into action in quite the same way that Sheriff Joe Arpaio is. The man who calls himself "America's toughest sheriff" was already in trouble with Uncle Sam, on trial for contempt of court in a U.S. district court. It was only once that was under way that Arpaio and his lawyer apparently had the idea to sic a private investigator on the wife of the federal judge hearing his case. That shows toughness. It shows a willingness to use unorthodox tactics to resist federal interference. It's also not especially bright. Reporters in the courtroom describe a somewhat shocking scene. Lawyers had completed their questioning when Judge Murray Snow announced he had some questions for Arpaio. After a series of queries, Snow asked: "Are you aware that I've been investigated by anyone?"

The sheriff then admitted that his former attorney had hired the private investigator to look into a tipster's allegation that Snow's wife had told someone at a restaurant that Snow wanted to prevent Arpaio from being reelected. Arpaio's amazing rationalization: "We weren't investigating you. We were investigating some comments that came to our attention." Related Story Sheriff Joe Arpaio: The Most Lawless Lawman in America The sheriff was on trial for, well, thumbing his nose at the federal government. In 2011, Judge Murray Snow issued a ruling demanding that Arpaio stop anti-immigration patrols arresting people solely on suspicion of being in the country illegally, while Snow continued to consider whether they constituted illegal racial profiling. (In 2013, Snow finally ruled that they did, forcing Arpaio to drop the patrols permanently.) Arpaio simply disregarded the order for 18 months—as he now acknowledges. The question is whether that was intentional or not; if the judge decides it's the former, he could find Arpaio in contempt. The sheriff's somewhat improbable explanation is that he simply didn't realize that a federal judge had issued the order. "I have a deep respect for the courts," Arpaio said. "It really hurts me after 55 years to be in this position. I want to apologize to the judge. I should have known more about these court orders that slipped through the cracks." There are two problems with that. One is that a deputy testified this week that Arpaio had personally instructed him to continue enforcing federal immigration laws, in defiance of the judge's order. The second is that hiring a PI to investigate the judge who's considering whether you're in contempt of court isn't what most people would consider deep respect. "It is contemptuous behavior on its face," a former U.S. attorney told The Arizona Republic. "And it is information deserving of further investigation to determine if other criminal misconduct occurred here." Intimidating or trying to improperly influence a federal judge is in fact a crime. But this isn't the first time Arpaio has pulled a stunt like this—and in fact, he has a long history of launching investigations into political opponents. In 2012, a federal grand jury concluded a three-year investigation into abuse-of-power allegations without charging Arpaio.