By Nancy MacMorris-Adix

The Dec. 13 guest column by Rep. Julie Parrish, R-West Linn, titled "Facing 'Cadillac tax' crunch with Affordable Care Act" gave the impression that the Oregon Educators Benefit Board (OEBB) has created a potentially expensive situation for the state and has no plan to address it. The board had a presentation at its last meeting on the potential tax. OEBB offers school districts, educational service districts, community colleges and local governments up to 19 plans from which to choose.

Since the Affordable Care Act, OEBB has seen a steady movement of members away from Moda Medical plans A and B that are most at risk for the Cadillac tax. Currently Plan A has 1.6 percent and Plan B has 3.4 percent of all those who enrolled in an OEBB medical plan. Of all the OEBB plans offered, only those two plans are expected to trigger the tax in 2018, on the tiered plan options offered through OEBB.

All of the entities are covered by collective bargaining agreements that determine the amount of benefit dollars provided to each employee. For most of the high-cost plans, employees need to supplement the cost if they select them, thereby further deterring the selection of these plans.

Entities also have different ways to determine how the benefit dollars are applied. Some use a composite rate while others use a tiered rate. In nearly all cases, the excise tax affects those entities that have elected to use the composite rate structure and is limited to those employees who only cover themselves.

Finally, OEBB takes cost containment very seriously. With health care costs steadily rising, the board has worked with its insurance carriers to incentivize healthy behaviors, evidence-based practice and the use of centers of excellence that have better outcomes at lower costs. Member cost for preventive measures has been dropped. Chronic disease management has been increased to maximize health in members with treatable conditions. Monthly, we look at the current evidence on programs that are effective at promoting optimal health, thereby lowering costs.

The taxpayers in the state of Oregon should know that OEBB takes the stewardship of state dollars very seriously. Efforts to make needed changes to avoid penalties are a high priority for the board.

•

Nancy MacMorris-Adix, a member of the Salem-Keizer School Board, is chair of the Oregon Educators Benefit Board.