Residents have been laying flowers, lighting candles at site of his rampage

One of 26-year-old's victims was a man who got married just two weeks ago

Three killed, at least 34 injured when he ploughed through streets at 90mph

Driver who rammed into crowds in Graz has a history of domestic violence

One of the three people killed by a 'psychotic' driver who ploughed into crowds of people in a busy Austrian city centre yesterday was a man who had gotten married just two weeks ago.

His emotional relatives gathered in Graz's main square and wept as they held up a heartbreaking image of what appears to be the man named Adisa and his wife on their wedding day.

His wife is one of the 34 who was injured by the 26-year-old 'assassin' who drove through the packed shopping district at speeds of up to 90mph, before getting out and stabbing innocent bystanders.

Police say the driver was under a restraining order keeping him away from the home of his wife and two young children ever since a domestic violence report was filed against him last month.

Scroll down for video

Deceased: Relatives hold a picture of a young man (right) who was killed by a driver who ploughed into crowds in Graz, Austria, while his wife (left) was left with severe injuries

Distraught: Their emotional relatives hold a heartbreaking photo from the couple's wedding day just two weeks ago

The driver who has been described as a 'deranged lone assassin' drove a green SUV (pictured) through crowds of people at speeds of up to 90mph

The driver - who has been described by the province's governor as a 'deranged lone assassin' - was reportedly distraught because his marriage was on the brink of collapse,Spiegel Online reported.

Hermann Schuetzenhoefer added that the suspect was 'mentally disoriented' and acting alone. He was arrested shortly after the horrifying incident but is not yet in a condition to be questioned, the police have said.

A four-year-old boy was one of the three people killed and six people - including two children - are thought to be in a very serious condition.

He and a woman were killed as the driver rammed into people in the city's Herrengasse shopping street, before he reached the main square.

Locals have since been lighting candles and leaving heartfelt messages for the families of the victims as the scene of the rampage.

The driver did not resist when he was arrested by the police - who say he acted alone - and they have no reason to believe it was an act of terrorism.

Grief: The square where the rampage took place was packed with people who gathered to light candles

Memorial: Hundreds of stunned residents of the city turned out this evening to light candles and attend a remembrance ceremony in honour of the dead and injured

He killed two people while speeding towards the main square where he ploughed into an outdoor dining table full of people, a spokesperson for the regional police said during a press conference today.

One of those killed is reported to have been on a bicycle when they were hit by the dark green SUV.

The man is reported to have stopped the car outside a local business, got out of the car and attacked a couple with a knife.

The busy square was hosting an event relating to the Austrian Formula One Grand Prix which is being held 80km away, in the Red Bull Ring in Spielberg, in Steiermark.

A local resident told Sky News that her friend saw people flying through the air, adding: 'Apparently he was attacking elderly people with a knife.'

Dr Sea Rotmann says her friend told her how the driver was 'doing between 100km-an-hour and 150km-an-hour' on the busy road.

Attack: A man deliberately drove his car into a crowd of people in Graz, Austria, before getting out of the vehicle and stabbing people at random

Lost: Three people were killed when the driver sped through the busy shopping district at up to 90mph

Aftermath: Items of clothing were left strewn all over the road after the horrific incident in Graz - Austria's second biggest city

Disaster: The Provincial mayor of Graz - Austria's second city - said at least one of his injured victims is in a critical condition

A waitress at the Pronto restaurant on the main square told the Kleinezeitung website she heard screaming before she even saw the driver.

Simone Zucca added: 'He raced through the front of the restaurant without braking... He then caught a boy who was thrown against the wall.'

Another eyewitness told the BBC he saw bodies lying on the ground 'covered in blood'.

Other witnesses described the sound of the SUV knocking chairs in the square flying as being 'like gunfire'.

About 60 ambulances converged on the scene and the Austrian auto club sent four helicopters to bring the victims to hospitals.

The city council released a statement which read: 'At 12pm there was an appalling incident in the centre of Graz, which has caused major alarm and left the city deeply shaken.'

Provincial Governor Hermann Schuetzenhoefer said at least one of his injured victims is in a critical condition.

Emergency: Paramedics treat one of the 34 injured people on the side of the road and the town's mayor has said at least one is in a critical condition

Response: About 60 ambulances converged on the scene and four helicopters scrambled to bring the victims to hospital

Rampage: The driver killed two people while speeding up Herrengasse road towards the main square in Graz, where he ploughed into an outdoor dining table full of people, a police spokesperson said

He added: 'We are shocked and dismayed... there is no explanation and no excuse for this attack.

'We have much to do to ensure cohesion in our community, which has clearly become difficult for many people.'

The incident took place in Graz, Austria's second largest city, and police officers have now sealed off the area.

German-language website Krone reported that the man arrested by police is of Bosnian origin.

'People were screaming in panic and ran into the surrounding shops to get to safety', an eyewitness told the website.

Police chiefs told the Austrian Kleine Zeitung newspaper that the suspect got out of the SUV and started stabbing people with a knife.

Austria's APA news agency said two bodies were lying near the scene, covered with blankets.

Bishop Wilhelm Krautwaschl, the Bishop of Graz, shared his condolences on Facebook.

Carnage: Eyewitnesses report seeing two bicycles lying on the ground, that had been run over by the dark green SUV. One of those killed in the attack was said to be on a bicycle when they were hit

Alarm: Around 60 ambulances converged on the busy shopping district in Graz this afternoon

Attacker: Local media has reported that the man driving the SUV is a married father-of-two, of Bosnian origin

'I am shocked by what's happened, I pray for the victims and for those who have rushed to help then', he said.

The victims were remembered at a memorial service this evening, which took place at the Grazer Stadtpfarrkirche church in the centre of the city.

More than 600 mourners gathered at the church to pay their respects to the victims, while the city has launched an online book of condolence, according to German language site Welt.

Hundreds of messages of support have already been posted on the website, and dozens of floral bouquets, candles and messages of mourning have been placed at the site.

Mayor Siegfried Nagl - who was himself an eyewitness to the attack - ordered black flags of mourning flown from all municipal buildings and cancelled street fests and other city events.

The mayor was reported to be riding his Vespa in the street when the SUV sped past him, just feet away.