Topics: Dream City, New York City, robert caro, Robert Moses, The Power Broker, urban planning

Take an interest in the history of New York City, and someone will soon ask if you’ve read “The Power Broker.”

This is, in part, a good-natured gauge of your interest and experience; the urban affairs buff slyly asking for your credentials. But it’s more often a natural question, since Robert Caro’s biography of mid-century planning czar Robert Moses is so much more than that: It’s a history of urban politics and planning, of bonds, of infrastructure, of bureaucracy and patronage, and, as Caro emphasizes, a study of the use of power.

Though never elected, Robert Moses served nearly half a century in the city and state governments of New York. He built 627 miles of highway in the city and its suburbs. He built enough public housing for 555,000 people. He built hundreds of playgrounds, ballfields and tennis courts in the city, and a handful of enormous state parks beyond its borders. He built the Triborough, Throgs Neck and Whitestone, Marine Parkway, Cross-Bay, Henry Hudson and Verrazano Bridges.

It’s no surprise that most conversations about New York eventually fall into the orbit of Moses — and of Caro’s vast biography. “The Power Broker” isn’t just the best book about this city; it is, according to the historian David Halberstam, the best book about the city.

“The Power Broker” is a classic of great-man history. Yet it’s the stories of the disempowered that resonate most: the potato farmers of Nassau County, the environmental advocates of Inwood Hill, the families of East Tremont, Robert’s own brother Paul. All of them suffered at the hands of the Master Builder, and Caro gives them a voice.

The three chapters on the construction of the Cross-Bronx Expressway, for example, are justly the book’s most famous. Caro so captures the frustration and sadness of the vanished East Tremont community, channels their sense of loss and betrayal at the hands of callous officials, that one forgets he was only 17 years old when the notices of eviction arrived. By the time the author was doing research, East Tremont was an emblematic inner-city ghetto. “I had never, in my sheltered middle-class life, descended so deeply into the realms of despair,” Caro wrote in the New Yorker in 1998.

“The Power Broker” was published at the nadir of New York’s history, give or take a few years. The population fell by more than 10 percent between 1970 and 1980. The year after Caro won the Pulitzer Prize, New York City nearly went bankrupt. (“FORD TO CITY: DROP DEAD,” read the famous headline.) Two years after that, the South Bronx burst into flames during a World Series game at Yankee Stadium. The book’s subtitle summed up its author’s take on the era of urban fear and flight: “Robert Moses and the Fall of New York.”

Was Caro right to link New York’s decline to Moses’ reign? The zeitgeist, from St. Louis to New Haven, was that urban renewal projects had done more harm than good in cities. And New York had seen, thanks to Moses’s tireless draftsmen and shrewd financial practices, more urban renewal than anywhere else. Slum clearance was a known scam; the unbuilt schemes became urban boogeymen, warnings to future generations.

There were some doubts at the time: in a blistering review in the New York Times (a paper that Caro had repeatedly singled out for its sycophancy to Moses), Christopher Lehmann-Haupt challenged the simple conclusion and its implications. “If Robert Moses really is the root cause of our problems that Mr. Caro has made him appear to be … what we need now to straighten us out is another Robert Moses.”

There are certainly doubts about Caro’s thesis now. In the course of New York’s remarkable and well-publicized turnaround, Moses’s reputation has undergone a revision, if not a rehabilitation. As early as 1987, the Municipal Art Society was running a “Robert Moses Reappraised” bus tour, led by “Moses man” Arnold Vollmer. The sociologist Nathan Glazer, in a powerful rebuttal, called Caro’s views “Manichean.”