(TRUNEWS) Texas Game Warden’s have begun training to counter the potential threat that terrorists could use the Port of Houston to smuggle radioactive material into the United States.

In an interview with local news, Tom Harvey, the Deputy Director for the Texas Parks and Wildlife Departments Communications Division, said Friday that “game wardens encounter all kinds of things on their patrols, including a lot of illegal fishing, and this [the threat of terrorists smuggling radioactive material] is a new threat we’re gearing up to be able to address.”

Harvey said that the Port of Houston has for years had radiation detectors to scan cargo, but now “we’ve acquired about a hundred devices that allow game wardens to detect radiological or nuclear emissions. These are little devices that can be worn on someone’s belt.”

The device Harvey referenced is about the size of a cellphone and has the ability to detect radiation signatures, whether it be from energy or medical cargo, or connected to a terrorist plot.

When questioned by TRUNEWS if there was an active radiological terrorist threat in his region, Harvey said that to his knowledge there was not, but Texas Wardens are currently training for the possibility of a terrorist organization attempting to smuggle radioactive material through the Port of Houston, noting that they had just completed a mock exercise in January resembling that scenario.

Harvey said the Texas Game Warden’s used a Department of Homeland Security (DHS) FEMA grant to pay for the radiation detectors and the extra training, but said the drills are not designed to take the agents away from their primary job of regulating illegal fishing and hunting.

Captain Marvin Tamez from the Corpus Christi Texas Game Warden’s office told TRUNEWS that officers from their agency had also undergone the terrorist radiological detection training, noting that though he was unaware of any current threats, based off of current events he could see the necessity and plausibility.

Like many government agencies, the Texas Game Warden’s have been heavily militarized since the beginning of the War on Terrorism, evident by the formation of their own special operations division designed specifically to handle escalated levels of confrontation above their original scope of duty.

The idea of a terrorist attack on America’s southern border is far from outlandish, with the first instance of such an event occurring almost 100 years ago by a Mexican revolutionary named Francisco “Pancho” Villa. On March 9, 1916, Villa and more than 400 heavily-armed mounted bandits crossed the U.S.-Mexico border and successfully raided a town of 350 inhabitants, plus a garrison of 553 troops from the 13th U.S. Cavalry, in Columbus, New Mexico.

DIRTY BORDER

In regard to such an attack turning radiological, on March 1st 2016 Mexican officials from the National Coordination of Civil Protection said a 2006 red Chevrolet Silverado pickup transporting radioactive iridium-192 was stolen in San Juan del Rio at about 6 a.m. local time.

In an official statement they said the iridium-192 ”can be dangerous to people if not handled in safe conditions or if handled without the right protection.”

David Albright, a physicist and president of the Washington-based Institute for Science and International Security, mirrored that warning, telling Reuters that iridium-192 could cause harm simply by being left exposed in a public place for several days.

In November 2015 the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) reported that a laptop-size case with about 0.35 ounces (10 grams) of iridium-192 belonging to Turkish company SGS was stolen from Weatherford, a U.S. oilfield services company which was operating near the southern city of Basra.

The Category 2 radioactive substance was later found by authorities in the southern town of Zubair on Feb. 21st 2016, roughly 9 miles southwest of Basra, leaving Iraq’s environment ministry spokesman Ameer Ali left wondering what parties were responsible, and how the containers were transported that distance without damaging the material seals.

Weatherford, whose operational headquarters is based in Houston, TX, said in an official statement regarding the theft that they have no responsibility or liability because they do not own, operate or control sources or the bunker where the materials were stored.

In addition to the Iridium-192 thefts, a teletherapy device containing radioactive Cobalt 60 was taken from a disposal site near Mexico City, when a truck transporting the material was stolen on December 2, 2013. The 3,000 curies strength radioactive material was quickly recovered, but the source capsule had been removed from its shielding. Luckily the capsule, a small welded stainless steel container that holds a wire containing cobalt, was not itself opened, meaning no open contamination occurred.

Mexico’s National Commission for Nuclear Safety and Safeguards said at the time that there was “nothing to indicate the theft of the cobalt was intentional or in any way intended for an act of terrorism.” This seemed dubiously vague based on the fact that the IAEA classified the Cobalt 60 as a Category 1 source of radiation, and no explanation was ever furnished as to who stole the truck and why the shielding surrounding the capsule was tampered with.

Could the DHS funded Texas Game Warden’s drills have anything to do with these relatively recent documented thefts of radioactive material in vicinity to America’s southern border?

TERRORISTS IN MEXICO

In addition to the thefts, and aside from the terroristic drug cartels, ISIS themselves have been documented operating near the U.S. Mexico border.

Judicial Watch reported in August 2015 that sources that include a Mexican Army field grade officer and a Federal Police Inspector have documented that ISIS is operating a camp just a few miles from El Paso, Texas.

The exact location where the terrorist group had established its base was around eight miles from the U.S. border in an area known as “Anapra”, situated just west of Ciudad Juárez in the Mexican state of Chihuahua. Judicial Watch’s sources also said another ISIS cell located to the west of Ciudad Juárez, in Puerto Palomas, targets the New Mexico towns of Columbus and Deming for easy access to the United States.

During the course of a joint operation in 2015, Mexican Army and federal law enforcement officials discovered documents in Arabic and Urdu, Muslim prayer rugs, and “plans” of U.S. Army base Fort Bliss.

According to Judicial Watch’s Law enforcement and intelligence sources, the area around Anapra is dominated by the Vicente Carrillo Fuentes Cartel (“Juárez Cartel”), La Línea (the enforcement arm of the cartel) and the Barrio Azteca (a gang originally formed in the jails of El Paso). Cartel control of the Anapra area makes it an extremely dangerous and hostile operating environment for Mexican Army and Federal Police operations.

According to these same sources, “coyotes” engaged in human smuggling – and working for Juárez Cartel – help move ISIS terrorists through the desert and across the border between Santa Teresa and Sunland Park, New Mexico. To the east of El Paso and Ciudad Juárez, cartel-backed “coyotes” are also smuggling ISIS terrorists through the porous border between Acala and Fort Hancock, Texas. These specific areas were targeted for exploitation by ISIS because of their understaffed municipal and county police forces, and the relative safe-havens the areas provide for the unchecked large-scale drug smuggling that was already ongoing.

Mexican intelligence sources reported to Judicial Watch that ISIS intended to exploit the railways and airport facilities in the vicinity of Santa Teresa, NM, a US port-of-entry. The sources also said that ISIS has “spotters” located in the East Potrillo Mountains of New Mexico, largely managed by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM), to assist with terrorist border crossing operations.

Their intelligence source ended by saying ISIS was conducting reconnaissance of regional universities; the White Sands Missile Range; government facilities in Alamogordo, NM; Ft. Bliss; and the electrical power facilities near Anapra and Chaparral, NM.

WHITE HOUSE RESPONSE

TRUNEWS recently reported that the DHS slashed the border patrol’s budget for fiscal year 2017, ordering a draw down of 300 agents.

Chris Cabrera, the Vice President of chapter 3307of the National Border Patrol Council, said cutting these jobs was “a recipe for disaster” due to the unprecedented level of migrants who were beginning to flow into his region of the Rio Grande Valley, one of the major traffic points for illegal immigration.

The cut to the Border Patrol came on the heels of a shocking testimony from Customs and Border Protection Commissioner R. Gil Kerlikowske to the House Committee on Appropriations, where he said agents who object to President Obama’s illegal amnesty directive should “look for another job.”

The Obama administration was reported today by AP as “openly and unapologetically” stepping up efforts to find and deport unaccompanied children and families who arrived in the U.S. from the 2014 surge of illegal crossings. If true, this new push to enforce U.S. immigration laws would be a unique shift in Obama’s border strategy, which has up until now fueled a state of emergency along all towns bordering the failed state of Mexico.

But, even with this latest “effort” to reign in illegal immigration and selectively forget the ‘Fast and Furious’ scandal, the White House response has been wholly inadequate and border-line criminal.

As documented above, there is a serious threat that terrorists who hate America could potentially smuggle stolen radiological material through the pourus southern border, and commit a large scale genocide on U.S. soil.

Could the Texas Game Warden’s radiological drills be the canary in the coal mine?