One of the tri-state's largest health care providers has pulled its coverage under insurance plans offered through the state's online public health exchange.

Medical Associates Clinic, P.C. will no longer be part of the Coventry Health Care of Iowa network after July 31, according to letters by the insurance company to its members and brokers.

The health care provider -- which has clinics in Dubuque, Bellevue, Cascade, Dyersville, Elkader and Monona in Iowa; Cuba City and Platteville in Wisconsin; and Elizabeth and Galena in Illinois -- did not provide a reason for its departure from Coventry's network, Coventry spokeswoman Cynthia Michener said.

"We tried to negotiate with them to prevent this from happening," Michener said. "They've been unwilling to accept any of our proposals that would continue service for our members. We continue to evaluate network adequacy overall in the Dubuque area. And we are working to add other providers to our area network."

Medical Associates CEO John Tallent said the group practice gave notice April 20, but he did not say why it terminated its contract with Coventry. Medical Associates does provide its own health plan.

"We do not discuss confidential negotiations," Tallent wrote in an email. "We take our patient relationships very seriously and work very hard to avoid situations that would interfere with our ability to care for our patients. ... We are very concerned about our Marketplace patients, but this decision is between Coventry and ourselves."

Its decision affects roughly 1,500 Coventry and Aetna members who recently received services from Medical Associates, removing more than 170 health providers, including 109 physicians, from network coverage.

Coventry members using Medical Associates will need to find a new provider as soon as possible, Michener said.

Members in a course of treatment might be able to continue that treatment and receive covered services after July 31, but only if their provider agrees to "continuity of care coverage" terms before they leave Coventry's network. The carrier, for a limited time, may cover ongoing care for serious illness by a specialist no longer in-network, according to a company letter.

Those needing frequent or continuing consultation with a specialist for ongoing care should contact their primary physician to arrange transfer of care to a Coventry network provider, the letter states.

Tallent said Medical Associates' agreement with Coventry requires it provide services for up to 90 days after termination for patients receiving treatment. It also requires continued service through postpartum care for some pregnant patients.

Most Iowans who used HealthCare.gov last year had two choices for carriers: CoOportunity Health and Coventry Health Care. This year, most Iowans' sole choice was Coventry.

CoOportunity, the Iowa-based health insurance company created through funds made available by the Affordable Care Act, was taken over by the Iowa Insurance Division and liquidated due to a "hazardous financial condition," leaving plans offered by Coventry as the only option for many who qualify for federal subsidies under the law.

The Affordable Care Act requires all Qualified Health Plans include an "adequate network" of providers, offering "reasonable and timely access to a broad range" of health care options in accordance with federal standards.

Coventry spokesman Rohan Hutchings and Insurance Division Consumer Advocate Angel Robinson said Coventry's remaining network will still meet those standards and not affect its ability to sell plans through the marketplace.

Manchester attorney Mark Roeder worries about the quality and timely access to care he, his daughter and other Coventry members will receive without Medical Associates' large, popular network of doctors and specialists.

"(Medical Associates) is the dominant provider in Dubuque," Roeder said. "Will Dubuque people be forced to find care locally in Rock Island (Ill.), Rockford (Ill.), Prairie du Chien ( Wis.), Cedar Rapids or Iowa City?"

He said the two companies face little to no local competition, "(which) point directly toward the need for more regulation of the health care delivery system, not less."

"It's wrong to leave the insurance network in the middle of the year when Affordable Care Act policies have been purchased for the full year," Roeder said. "It is such a substantial impairment of the insurance contract."