Over 200,000 Smokers Quit After Ad Campaign Showing Consequences of Tobacco Use

An approximate 200,000 Americans stopped using cigarettes after graphic campaign advertisements against smoking based on the recently released study of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) on Monday.

Sep 10, 2013 09:21 AM EDT

An approximate 200,000 Americans stopped using cigarettes after graphic campaign advertisements against smoking based on the recently released study of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (Photo : Reuters)

An approximate 200,000 Americans stopped using cigarettes after graphic campaign advertisements against smoking based on the recently released study of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) on Monday.

The $54 million ad campaign, called "Tips from Former Smokers," vividly showed the consequences of smoking through graphic photos and real-life experiences. Funded by the Affordable Care Act, the series of ads the worse effects of smoking and also displayed appeals from former smokers who were experiencing these consequences. People with throat and oral cancer, damaged lungs, amputated arms or legs are just some of the features of the campaign.

The story of Terrie Hall, 52, from North Carolina is one of the most troubling experiences covered by the ad series. She had to undergo an operation to remove her larynx after she was found with throat cancer.

Although she can still speak after the operation, it is only through artificial means. She shares in one of the commercials that with the voice box her grandkid was able to hear her but only in her current robotic voice.

According to CDC, there were about 1.6 million of American smokers who tried to quit smoking within the previous year after viewing the ad campaign funded by the Affordable Act. Out of that number 200,000 stopped right after the campaign and over 100,000 of them are expected to stop smoking permanently.

The study projects that the campaign saved around 300,000 living years that may have been wasted through diseases caused by smoking. To date these illnesses still tops the list of preventable causes of mortality in the U.S., taking its death toll on about 1200 Americans daily.

The CDC also reports that during the series of ads, the calls received to its toll-free hotline, 800-QUIT-NOW, doubled and visits to its on-line site quintupled compared to the same period the previous year.

Tim McAfee, CDC Director further highlights that the study also shows the campaign is among the most low cost efforts to prevent smoking since a year of life is saved from less than $ 200.

CDC Director Thomas Frieden also commented that the ad campaign had exceeded their expectations. Due to the positive effects both manifested in longer lives and money savings, another round of ads were aired early this year and another in 2014.

The study was published in the online journal Lancet.