House Speaker Bill Howell announces re-election campaign

Join AFP's 112,000+ followers on Facebook, Twitter and YouTube

Subscribe to sports and news podcasts on iTunes

News, press releases, letters to the editor: chris@augustafreepress.com

Advertising inquiries: crystal@augustafreepress.com

Virginia House of Delegate Speaker and 28th District Delegate William J. Howell (R-Stafford) announced his campaign for re-election to the House of Delegates in an online web video Thursday.

Howell also issue the following statement.

“I have been humbled and honored to represent the people of this district in the Virginia House of Delegates. Today, I am proud to announce my campaign for re-election.

“Through proven conservative leadership, we have built a 68-member Republican supermajority. With that majority, we have led the fight against Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion and cut nearly $7 billion in proposed spending since 2007. Unlike Washington, we haven’t kicked the can down the road. We have tackled tough challenges like pension reform and transportation. Our reforms to the Virginia Retirement System saved taxpayers $9 billion in unfunded long-term liabilities and our reforms to transportation will help attract jobs and grow our economy.

“I am proud of my record, but like the people of Fredericksburg and Stafford, I know this election is about the future. I am running for re-election because I know there is more we can accomplish. Virginia needs real tax reform and relief for families and businesses. We need to increase opportunities and choice in education. And we need to continue to cut spending and make government smaller and more efficient.

“I have known Susan for a long time and welcome her participation in the democratic process. No one is entitled to the privilege of public service and I believe that competition is healthy and positive for our party. I look forward to this campaign and talking with the people of the 28th district about my record and the future of our Commonwealth.”

Howell was first elected to the House in 1987 and was elected as the 54th Speaker of the House of Delegates in 2003. He practices law in a log cabin in Falmouth, Virginia. He and his wife Cessie reside in Stafford County. Their two sons have blessed them with seven grandchildren.