Friends and musicians are mourning an up-and-coming 18-year-old Valley singer who was killed in a crash with a suspected drunk driver.

Keli May Rutledge died Friday night from injuries she suffered earlier that day in a collision on Queen Creek Road near Higley Road, Gilbert Police Lt. Hugh White said.

The other driver, Emilio Deleon, 26, was taken to the hospital but was not hurt, White said. Police say Deleon lost control of his vehicle and rolled into oncoming traffic around 9:16 a.m. Friday. Investigators suspect Deleon may have been impaired, but said more tests are pending.

Ryan Lambros, a youth pastor at Rock Point Church in Queen Creek, said Rutledge was on her way to work at a clothing store when the crash happened. He rushed to the hospital as doctors tried to save her.

"Within a couple hours at the hospital, we had over 100 people waiting in the chapel, singing and praying. Just at a moment's notice, from three different churches and three different bands she knew, just all coming together," he said. "You don't have that happen without making an impact."

The 18-year-old was deeply involved in church groups, and she sang and played guitar on the worship team, Lambros said.

"She was leading little 4th graders all the way up through high school students. Constantly, pretty much anywhere she could sing, she was singing."

Rutledge was scheduled to sing at two spring training games this month, along with several other gigs in Phoenix, Chandler and Glendale. In November, she won Alice Cooper's annual "Proof is in the Pudding" contest.

"They call her the 'light' singer. Everywhere she went and she sang, there was just light," Lambros said. "Her smile was just infectious. Everywhere she was at, big bright smile. Her Twitter handle, @hip_sister, she was super hip. Always dressing crazy, bright colors. And her laugh, it was annoying but amazing. You couldn't help but laugh when you heard her laugh."

Rutledge was a freshman at Chandler-Gilbert Community College, and graduated from Campo Verde High School.

"She was always happy, and always had a positive outlook on life and always had something positive to say, even if she was hurting sometimes," said Taylor McLeod, who had two classes with Rutledge and sat next to her in choir. "I really admired that about her."

"It was just crazy to me that someone so full of life could be taken so quick," McLeod said. "It just broke my heart."

This video is among several posted on Rutledge's YouTube channel:

On May 13th, you're supposed to open up for us. The night will now be in memory of you. Rest in peace Keli Rutledge. — NOSTALGiC (@nostalgicthemc) March 5, 2016

My heart is absolutely broken for the family of Keli Rutledge... The world lost a gorgeous voice… https://t.co/xNx9s41qSc — Laura Walsh (@LauraWalshMusic) March 5, 2016

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.