European buyout firms are enjoying a rapid fundraising environment with various top names on course to secure large pots of fresh capital in the coming months.

EQT Partners, which launched its seventh flagship buyout fund earlier this year with a 5.25 billion euro target, has attracted demand for more than double that amount and set a €6.75 billion hard cap for the fund, according to a letter to investors and a person with knowledge of the fundraising.

Montagu Private Equity, which recently returned to the market with a €2.5 billion fund, has already attracted roughly €2 billion of preliminary demand from its existing investors, one person said.

Silverfleet Capital hit a third close on its latest fund in March at “well above” its original €700 million target and is no longer accepting new investors, according to people familiar with the matter.

Meanwhile, Dutch buyout firm Waterland Private Equity announced last week that it had closed its sixth fund with commitments of €1.55 billion after just three months in the market.

Equistone Partners Europe also announced that it had closed its latest vehicle last week with commitments of €2 billion after around six months on the road.

Some managers are also pushing to come back to market earlier than anticipated in an effort to take advantage of the strong fundraising market. They are taking advantage of the large piles of cash that investors have ready to commit to the asset class following a period of record distributions. In the first three months of the year alone, 11 of Europe’s largest private equity firms returned around $15 billion to their investors, according to research by Private Equity News.

BC Partners, which raised its last buyout fund in 2012, is expected to return to market early next year with a target of around €6 billion, according to people familiar with the matter.

Cinven, which last raised a fund in 2013, is expected to return to market early next year. Advent International is also expected to return to market in 2016, the people said.

“We expect 2015 to be a very strong year for fundraising with a rash of funds hitting their hard caps and managers coming back to market earlier than anticipated and taking advantage of the market buoyancy to increase their targets,” said Janet Brooks, a partner at placement agent Monument Group.

Angela Willetts, a managing director at gatekeeper Capital Dynamics, said that she had seen a “disproportionate” number of funds come back to market in the first half and that she had “certainly seen much faster fundraising.” Ms. Willetts said that these large distributions were welcome, but were proving to be an issue for some investors who were finding it difficult to maintain their allocations to the asset class.

“The fact that they are getting distributions back it’s like trying to run up a down escalator, they can never quite get to allocation target as they are constantly getting money back,” said Ms. Willetts.

–Hillary Canada contributed to this post.

Write to Alec Macfarlane at alec.macfarlane@wsj.com and Becky Pritchard at becky.pritchard@wsj.com

(This item first appeared in Private Equity News, a U.K. trade publication owned by Dow Jones & Co.)