Over time, if health insurance premiums continued to rise faster than inflation, more plans would pass over the Cadillac tax threshold. The exact share of plans affected would depend greatly on the path of health care inflation — and the tax itself would be one of the key tools aiming to contain that inflation.

The reduction in spending that would result from effectively limiting the tax benefits for health insurance would be material, even if few health plans would be affected directly: According to an August report from the Congressional Research Service, the tax can be expected to result in between $40 billion and $60 billion less in health care spending per year by 2024. That’s about a 3 percent reduction, and it’s several times larger than the direct impact of the Cadillac tax on government revenues.

The reduction in health care costs due to the Cadillac tax would also flow back, in significant part, as lower government spending on health care. Medicare and Medicaid would benefit from a lower price environment, and it would be less expensive to subsidize private health plans brought though the A.C.A. exchanges. That is, if retained, the tax will help contain costs on the spending side of the federal budget, in addition to providing $87 billion of revenue through 2025.

Even if Mrs. Clinton finds a new source for the revenues the Cadillac Tax was supposed to generate, it’s not clear what she would to do provide the cost discipline that’s expected to flow from the tax, though her campaign says she is focused on the issue.

Photo

“Hillary Clinton strongly supports the goal of aggressively bending the cost curve,” said Brian Fallon, a spokesman for the Clinton campaign. “In the weeks ahead she will be presenting her ideas to continue to exert downward pressure on systemwide health expenditures, but in doing so she will be deliberate about ensuring that we are truly holding down costs, and not just shifting them to middle-class households in the form of higher premiums.”

Some people would indeed face higher premiums as a result of the tax, because the tax would effectively get built into the cost of the highest-cost employer-provided plans. But Peter Orszag, a proponent of the tax who served as President Obama’s budget director when the law was signed, rejected the idea that the Cadillac tax is “just” cost-shifting, saying employers and insurers would be motivated by the tax to find more cost-effective ways to provide care.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“You’re not going to succeed over the long term if all you’re doing is shifting the laundry from under the bed into the closet,” he said. “A far more promising path is to recognize that costs are very concentrated in a small number of beneficiaries.”

While the Clinton campaign statement focused on the issue of premiums for plans subject to the tax, some Cadillac tax opponents have also worried about what employers will do to get plan premiums below the tax threshold. They could, for example, raise co-payments and deductibles, shifting costs toward beneficiaries.

Mr. Orszag argued that cost-shifting changes like that would be “secondary or tertiary,” and that employers seeking to keep their health plan costs below the Cadillac tax threshold would have to focus most on managing costs for the sickest beneficiaries, whose behavior isn’t even influenced by co-payments or deductibles, since their health spending exceeds their plans’ out-of-pocket spending caps. To reduce the cost of caring for these patients, he said insurers would need to avoid high-cost, low-value care that is currently common.

“I don’t see why a beneficiary would want to be put in a high-cost skilled nursing facility that has worse outcomes than an alternative,” he said.

Ezekiel Emanuel, a key architect of the health care law, argued that the tax is already having a “psychological” impact on employers and insurers, motivating them to control expenditures and helping generate several years of the lowest health care cost inflation in decades. He worried that an expectation that the tax would be repealed would encourage health costs to rise.

A White House spokeswoman also defended the tax, saying a repeal “would hurt our economy by increasing the deficit, raising health care cost growth, and cutting workers’ paychecks.” While people often think of their wages and health benefits as separate issues, economists are generally convinced that the two trade off against each other directly, and that a faster pace of health care inflation would dampen wage growth.

Still, it’s easy to see why the politics of the Cadillac tax are terrible. The tax exclusion for health insurance is a longstanding feature of the American tax code, dating to World War II, and a politically dear one. People are simply not happy about paying taxes on their health insurance benefits when they never have before. In 2008, when John McCain ran for president on a platform that included converting the exclusion into a tax credit (meaning that the tax savings available from health insurance would be capped), Barack Obama called his plan “radical” because it “taxes health care benefits for the first time in history.”

Republicans have been long been seeking to repeal Obamacare, wholesale if possible or piece-by-piece if necessary. While Democrats have generally defended the law, there are key Democratic constituencies that hate the Cadillac tax, especially labor unions, which have often negotiated very hard to obtain the sort of high-cost health plans the tax seeks to discourage.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Perhaps most important, the tax sounds punitive. We don’t impose a 40 percent excise tax on expensive cars or expensive hobbies in an effort to control consumption. (Of course, we don’t generally let companies pay their employees in tax-free cars either.)

That may be why the tax’s main constituency seems to be health policy experts: Over 100 of them signed a letter last week urging lawmakers to keep the tax. Mr. Emanuel emphasized they’re not just doing this out of a love of new taxes.

“As a policy matter it’s very important to keep health care costs under control,” he said. “Everyone benefits from that.”