When David Green and his wife Barbara, former TG&Y employees, decided in 1970 to start Hobby Lobby arts and crafts stores, they borrowed $600 from Penn Square Bank.

“Later I asked the bank to borrow $1,000 more, but they wouldn’t give us the loan, even though I made all the payments on the first one. Mine would’ve been the only good loan they made,” Green said, teasing about the bank’s subsequent oil bust collapse.

Opening their first store in 1972, the couple — later with the help of their three children — grew that initial $600 investment into a multimillion-dollar nationwide company.

With some 650 Hobby Lobby and affiliated stores across 46 states and 28,000 employees, the company last year had more than $3.65 billion in sales.

The retailer, in keeping with the strong Christian values of the founding family, is well known for closing Sundays, offering a minimum wage of now $15.24 per hour and winning at the U.S. Supreme Court a campaign against the Affordable Care Act’s mandate for employers to provide access to the so-called morning-after pill.

“God turned us into a successful company with no debt,” Green said. “And we want to use it to his glory.”

Green’s comments came Thursday at Southern Nazarene University’s Peer Networking Learning luncheon at the Jim Thorpe Events Center. For the first time, he spoke alongside sons Mart and Steve Green, who also are executives in the family business.

The senior Green said he was a preacher’s kid and, for a long time, felt like a second-class Christian compared to his siblings who all went into the ministry.

“Then, I finally realized, I’m called to do what I’m doing,” he said. “It’s not so much what your job is, but how you pursue it.”

Green said his family believes God owns their business and that they’re only stewards. Consequently, they’ve all signed succession documents, he said, that leave all but a small portion of their company to a foundation, he said. Half of their profits already are earmarked for ministry, he said.

Mart Green, who at 19 established the Mardel chain of Christian and education supply stores that today number 35 across seven states, urged guests to follow Jesus’ example and become healers.

“Jesus taught, preached and healed,” he said. “And we’ve followed in his example by establishing schools, churches and hospitals.”

“You’ve got to be the best at what you do to earn the right to be heard,” he said. “You can’t buy from someone simply because they’re Christians, but because of their excellence.”

Curriculum challenge

Hobby Lobby President Steve Green shared the company’s ongoing efforts to open the Museum of the Bible in Washington, D.C., with three stories respectively dedicated to the history, narrative and impact of the Bible.

He said the company in the spring of 2012 sponsored a Bible artifacts exhibit at the Vatican.

Steve Green said their efforts also include developing Christian curriculum for public schools. “We were excited that Mustang Public Schools were going to offer the curriculum as an elective course until we were stopped by a lawsuit,” he said.

But that effort, he said, drew the attention of a mayor in Israel, who translated the curriculum into Hebrew for 1,400 kids at three schools, he said.

Steve Green believes the family’s greatest challenge will be introducing the curriculum into U.S. schools.

“But the Bible is our history and our foundation to our government,” he said. “All men are created equal. Created and equal are biblical concepts, and that ought to be taught and known.”