SCIENCE

In 2014, Obamacare increased the amount of incentives that employers are allowed to offer employees for participating in wellness programs.



Incentives are typically cash payments or reductions in employee deductibles and payments.



However, incentives can also be penalties of up to 30 percent of health insurance costs through higher premiums and lower company contributions, reports News Daily.



Approximately two-thirds of large companies are offering incentives to encourage participation. However, roughly a fourth of these companies are penalizing workers who decline to join wellness programs, according to a survey conducted by the National Business Group on Health and benefits consultant Towers Watson.



Some companies are not limiting the incentives to simply joining a wellness program. The incentives are based on meeting goals such as losing weight or reducing cholesterol. The number of businesses using outcomes is expected to double in 2015 to 46 percent, according to the survey.



Some critics claim that there is no evidence that workplace wellness programs are reducing health costs, but they are increasing corporate profits.



"Wellness-or-else is the trend," said Jon Robison, a workplace consultant with Salveo Partners.



"Basically, if you don't participate in these programs, you have to pay something like $1,000 out of pocket for healthcare before insurance kicks in," said an employee who asked that her name not be revealed.



In 2014, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission sued Honeywell because employees were required to answer personal questions in a health questionnaire about depression and a list of illnesses.



If answering these questions is not voluntary and involve disabilities, this can violate federal law.



"Financial incentives and disincentives may make the programs involuntary," said Chris Kuczynski, an assistant legal counsel at the EEOC.



"Employers are carrying a major burden of healthcare in this country and are trying to do the right thing," said Stephanie Pronk, a vice president at the benefits consulting company Aon Hewitt. "They need to improve employees' health so they can lead productive lives at home and at work, but also to control their healthcare costs."