Blake Johnson will graduate in December from the University of Oklahoma-Tulsa physician assistant program and enter a growing field of physician assistants who are becoming a key component in the health-care sector.

As older doctors retire and the Affordable Care Act brings potentially millions of new patients into the health-care system, the need for extra health-care providers becomes even more critical.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

"A physician assistant is an extension of the doctor," Johnson said. "So in a good clinical setting where a physician assistant is used, it allows the team to see more patients per day."

The physician assistant opens the way for the doctor to see more complex cases that may require a deeper knowledge of a disease process, he said.

Currently, the United States has 80,000 physician assistants, a number expected to grow 30 percent to 40 percent by 2024, Johnson said. The median pay in 2012 was $90,000, but it can be higher depending on the city or subspecialty a person practices, he said.

In Tulsa, the median annual income of a medical physician assistant is $87,540, according to salary.com.

Johnson, who earned a bachelor's degree in multi-disciplinary studies such as biology and microbiology and a minor in health and exercise science, is studying to become a physician assistant through the OU-Tulsa program. The 2 1/2-year master's degree program represents a joint effort between the University of Oklahoma School of Community Medicine and the University of Tulsa to provide one of the strongest primary care PA programs in the country.

From early as age 5, Johnson remembers being treated by a physician assistant, and it is that personal experience that prompted him to explore the field.

He plans to stay in Oklahoma after graduating and is considering going into emergency medicine and working in a rural community.

The Moore native said he has family who live in small towns with populations of less than 100 and understands the need of having to drive 25 minutes for health care.

Health care jobs and median annual income in the Tulsa area

Neurology surgeon $502,399 Emergency room physician $239,764 Family practice physician $170,293 Pharmacist $113,517 Medical physician assistant $87,540 Physical therapist $73,819 Registered nurse $64,266 Certified respiratory therapist $52,972 Licensed practical nurse $40,088 Ambulance driver $27,143