A few weeks after the trophy elk Big Boy was foolishly shot by a city police officer in a Boulder front yard, a councilwoman suggested the case may be an example of the growing disconnect between residents and city workers who don’t live in Boulder.

KC Becker, now a state representative, didn’t want to institute a controversial residency requirement that forces police to live in the expensive Front Range city. But she thought the city could look at ways to make it easier for first responders to live there. It makes sense.

Sam Carter, who last week was convicted in the shooting of the elk, didn’t live in Boulder. Nor do most of his former colleagues on the force.

Twelve percent of Boulder cops and firefighters live in town, according to the city. And 25 percent of all city workers live there. Aside from elected officials, only the city manager and city attorney are required to have a Boulder address.

The police chief doesn’t even live in Boulder.

That is completely understandable because of the high cost of living. The median price for a home there is $442,500, based on the 449 homes sold in Boulder in the past two months.

Many city workers don’t earn a kind of salary that could let them afford a home like that.

Becker, in a column she wrote for the Daily Camera, argued that a connection is lost when people who serve the city don’t live there.

“When officers live in the city where they work, they have a greater stake in the community,” Becker wrote. “They are more invested in it. Residents are more likely to trust the police that serve them if they get to know them on a personal level. Chance encounters at the playground, grocery store or school potluck that help all of us to know each other better, build community.”

I would add, it’s doubtful Carter would have killed Big Boy had he known the community had basically adopted the beast.

“People knew how that elk was very talked about, a very loved part of the town,” she said. “It is amazing to live in an urban city and have an elk in the town. It was noteworthy. I wonder if something would have happened differently if they would have known what the residents are talking about.”

Residency requirements have long been controversial. In 1978, Denver voters approved an initiative requiring full-time city workers to live within the city’s borders.

The rationale, among other things, was if municipal employees worked for the city’s taxpayers and were paid out of the city’s tax-supported general fund, then they should live in the same town they serve.

A decade later, the legislature passed a law, spurred by the police unions, to eliminate the requirement for cities. A dozen home-rule towns at the time still had the requirements, including Denver. (Denver has since eliminated the requirement.)

The Colorado Municipal League fought the state law, challenging the issue to the state’s highest court and arguing home-rule cities should have the right to require residency.

The Supreme Court agreed, and Colorado Municipal League director Sam Mamet still considers the ruling the greatest legal victory for home rule.

Not that cities should go back to the requirement unless they help pay for housing. But there is something to be said for hometown police officers who know the neighborhood and customs.

After all, Mayberry’s Andy Griffith would never have shot Big Boy.

E-mail Jeremy Meyer at jpmeyer@denverpost.com. Follow him on Twitter: @JPMeyerDPost