Buy Photo The Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center at Maury Regional Spring Hill hospital in Spring Hill, pictured in June 2013 (Photo: Sanford Myers / File / The Tennessean )Buy Photo

The Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center in Nashville will not strand patients who have signed up for care on the federal health insurance marketplace, but certain patients could see higher-than-expected rates for treatment.

Patients in many other states, however, have found that certain plans offered under the Affordable Care Act exclude some of the nation's best cancer programs from their coverage, according to a new study by the Associated Press.

These cancer centers are part of a group called the National Comprehensive Cancer Network. The NCCN includes 25 not-for-profit U.S. hospitals, Vanderbilt-Ingram among them, that are recognized for their capability to treat complex cancer cases.

Because of the quality of care, NCCN hospitals are sometimes more expensive than other providers to include on an insurance plan. Insurance companies in some states have opted to offer plans without an NCCN hospital in an effort to provide low-cost plans on the federal exchange.

This is a change from the past, said Dan Mendelson, CEO of the market research firm Avalere Health. He says that not too long ago, insurance companies would have been vying to offer access to renowned cancer centers, whereas now, those companies focus on cost.

Patients who can't access a NCCN hospital may not be able to get the most advanced treatment, including clinical trials of new medications. What's more, it might not be obvious to patients shopping on the exchange whether or not their plans include top-level institutions; that takes additional digging by the people applying.

"The challenges of this are going to become evident ... as cancer cases start to arrive," said Norman Hubbard, executive vice president of Seattle Cancer Care Alliance. The Associated Press report found that five out of eight insurers offering marketplace plans in Seattle, Wash., exclude Seattle Cancer Care Alliance.

Vanderbilt care available to many

But all Tennessee insurers with plans on the federal exchange have at least one product that includes Vanderbilt in the network, according to the Associated Press study.

For BlueCross Blue­Shield of Tennessee, the state's largest insurer, all plans on the federal exchange include Vanderbilt, except for its Network E offering.

"For the people that did enroll in the Network E plans, we knew this was forthcoming, and had conversations (with) BlueCross BlueShield and other carriers about how to address this," said Vanderbilt spokesman John Howser. "Basically, if the insurers have someone who they want to send here, we can work out an agreement to treat the patient out-of-network."

"Now, it's important to understand how out-of-network benefits work," said Alex Tolbert, founder of local health care company Bernard Health, which advises customers on health insurance options. BlueCross Blue­Shield has a breakdown of the cost differences between in-network and out-of-network care on its website. "You'll notice that going out-of-network can cost a lot more," Tolbert said. "That said, we would encourage our clients who find themselves in an out-of-network situation to negotiate with the hospital."

Patients who would prefer to seek care in-network have options, said BCBST spokeswoman Mary Danielson, who adds that 63 oncology providers in the greater Nashville area participate in its Network E plan.

"BlueCross has partnered with a key health care system and providers in each of Tennessee's major markets — Chattanooga, Knoxville, Nashville and Memphis," Danielson said. In Nashville, St. Thomas is the main in-network provider for Network E members. These kinds of partnerships, Danielson said, allow BCBST to offer high-quality care to members who want lower rates.

Nashvillians who choose Network E and need care at Vanderbilt can still get it. Out-of-network care can be more costly to patients than if Vanderbilt was in-network, but the hospital has solved a problem people in other states now face, where cancer patients who change their insurance to a marketplace plan find themselves having to change doctors mid-treatment.

Seattle, Houston are problematic cities

Vanderbilt is one of only four NCCN hospitals who told the AP that patients could access care at their facilities through all insurers offering marketplace plans in their state.

Seattle isn't the only area where the issue has been problematic. In Houston, the AP study says that fewer than 50 percent of health plans offered to residents on the exchange include major cancer research hospital MD Anderson.

One of the reasons Vanderbilt nipped this issue in the bud, Howser said, is because the physicians at the Ingram Cancer Center were vocal about their concern that a change in insurance could threaten the continuity of patients' treatment. "Never underestimate the power and the concern of the physician," Howser said. "They are part of the team that advocates for what's best for their patients."

The Obama administration says it has notified insurers that their networks will get closer scrutiny for next year in the 36 states served by the federal exchange. Cancer care will be a priority, it says.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1g57tHg