Brewers fans Bri and Jonathon Banovich of Kewaskum get an autograph from Carlos Gomez on Saturday. Credit: Roy Dabner for the Journal Sentinel

On the field: Robinzon Diaz's walk-off RBI single delivered a 7-6 victory over the Kansas City Royals at Maryvale Baseball Park on Saturday afternoon.

The Brewers looked like they were going to run away with the game after taking a 4-0 lead in the first inning and chasing Royals starter John Lamb after only two-thirds of an inning. But the Royals came storming back and eventually took the lead in the ninth before Diaz delivered.

Marco Estrada started and went 31/3 innings, allowing seven hits and three runs (all earned) while striking out one.

Aramis Ramirez made his first Cactus League appearance a successful one, doubling in three runs on the first pitch he saw and finishing his day 2 for 2 with a walk, those three RBI and a run scored in three innings of work.

"I feel pretty good," Ramirez said. "It's been awhile since the last time I played a baseball game. It was a little weird in the beginning, but now I've gotten the first one out of the way."

Cactus juice: Manager Ron Roenicke issued his first challenge of the spring in the first inning Saturday, contending Martin Maldonado was hit by a pitch that was ruled a ball by home-plate umpire Allen Bailey. The umpires conferred, reviewed the play and upheld the ball call in less than 2 minutes. Then in the ninth, with the game tied at 5-5, Roenicke challenged consecutive plays — a safe call at first base and a rundown between second and third that were both upheld.

The final tally for Roenicke: 0 for 3.

"I was (satisfied with the process) except for the first one — the ball hit Maldy and we had a view that you could see the ball change directions," said Roenicke. "If that's the case, they need to change the call."

Weather: 75 and sunny.

Scoreboard: Brewers 7, Royals 6. Record: 6-5. Next games: Brewers at Cubs, 3:05 p.m. Sunday. Milwaukee RHP Tyler Thornburg (0-1, 5.40) vs. Chicago RHP Kyle Hendricks (0-0, 4.50). Radio — AM-620. Brewers at Indians, 3:05 p.m. Sunday. Milwaukee RHP Wily Peralta (0-0, 0.00) vs. Cleveland RHP Josh Tomlin (0-0, 3.60).

Countdown: 22 days until opening day, March 31 against Atlanta at Miller Park.

Todd Rosiak