Jack Schron looks ahead to 2014. David Pepper looks back to 2011. John Kasich heads to Arizona. And James Carville brings his twang to Toledo. Here's Ohio Politics Roundup.

Has the Cuyahoga County Republican Party found its candidate?

County Councilman Jack Schron is openly exploring a run for county executive in 2014, and as Northeast Ohio Media Group's Andrew J. Tobias reports, he's expected to announce his candidacy soon. The Chagrin Falls businessman would give the GOP a high-profile candidate, as opposed to Tanner Fischbach, a 19-year-old neophyte from Berea.

But would Schron have a clear field?

While it's no secret that party leaders have shown heavy interest in State Sen. Tom Patton, they would prefer to avoid to a costly primary. Cuyahoga County is overwhelmingly Democratic -- even well-funded GOP nominee Matt Dolan lost the executive race by double digits in 2010 -- so Republicans want to save their resources for the general election. Patton told Tobias he won't make up his mind until next month.

But you have to think he won't run if Schron does, or vice versa.

Next year's race for county executive is wide open, with Democrat Ed FitzGerald choosing instead to run for governor. State Rep. Armond Budish, former Sheriff Bob Reid and State Sen. Shirley Smith are vying for the nomination on the Democratic side.

Pepper in some politics

Northeast Ohio Media Group's Robert Higgs reports that Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine is launching a unit to address the heroin epidemic. DeWine's likely Democratic opponent next year, David Pepper, quickly chimed in, with a not-so-veiled suggestion that the Republican incumbent was engaging in re-election grandstanding.

"This spike started in 2011," Pepper said. "It’s taken until 2013 before we’re hearing about this."

The morning after

We told you Monday about Laura Ingraham's observation that President Barack Obama and Gov. John Kasich were "practically spooning" over Medicaid expansion. Joe Hallett of the Columbus Dispatch takes another look at the politics of the issue -- the expansion, not the spooning.

"The debate exposes the eccentricity of Ohio politics: Seething that Kasich bypassed a recalcitrant GOP-controlled legislature and used the State Controlling Board to get Medicaid expansion, the tea party has vowed to withhold its support from him," Hallett writes. "Democrats, who support Medicaid expansion, criticize Kasich for opposing Obamacare. Meanwhile, the Ohio Republican Party, which hates Obamacare, lauds Kasich for expanding Medicaid."

Kasich heads to Arizona

Kasich, of course, remains a devoted Republican. As noted in this Wall Street Journal piece on New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, Kasich will be among those in Scottsdale for the Republican Governors Association's annual conference. (Christie is the new chairman.)

JobsOhio update

Dan Horn of the Cincinnati Enquirer has analyzed the numbers and found that Franklin County, home to Columbus, is getting the lion's share of state job-creation tax credits.

They say all politics is local. And with Kasich's privatized JobsOhio development agency overseeing these efforts, it's not hard to imagine this becoming a parochial issue in all-important Cincinnati or even FitzGerald's Cleveland base as the election nears.

Ragin' Cajun in Toledo

James Carville, the Democratic political operative known for guiding Bill Clinton's path to the White House in 1992, spoke Monday at the University of Toledo. The Blade's Tom Troy reports that the Ragin' Cajun has no plans of his own to run for office.

"I wouldn't vet well," Carville said.