Jan. 27, 2015

The National Restaurant Association is forecasting total restaurant industry sales of $709.2 billion in 2015, a 3.5 percent increase over last year.

This year will also mark the 16th consecutive year in which restaurant industry employment will outpace overall employment growth, according to the NRA. Restaurants will employ 14 million individuals this year as the nation's second-largest private sector employer, representing about 10 percent of the total U.S. workforce.

"Our nation's restaurants continue to be an essential part of Americans' daily lives and play a vital role in every community across the country," said NRA President and CEO Dawn Sweeney, in a press release. "Although operators will continue to face a range of complex challenges in 2015, the restaurant and foodservice industry remains a fundamental driver of the nation's economy, while providing valuable careers and opportunities to 14 million Americans."

Workforce Outlook

Eating and drinking places are expected to add jobs at a solid 3.2 percent rate in 2015, a full percentage point above the projected 2.2 percent gain in total U.S. employment.

Eating and drinking places added jobs at a solid 3.1 percent rate in 2014, outpacing total US employment which grew at 1.9 percent.

Restaurant industry employment will reach 15.7 million by 2025, an increase of 1.7 million positions during the 10-year period.

While every state is expected to see their restaurant industry workforce expand during the next decade, the top five states are: Arizona (23.8 percent), Florida (22.4 percent), Texas (22.0 percent), Georgia (21.1 percent) and Utah (21.0 percent).

Challenges and Opportunities

Operators will continue to face a range of challenges, including food costs, building sales volume, the economy and recruiting and retaining employees.

Average wholesale food prices jumped more than 5 percent in 2014, which represented the fifth consecutive annual increase. During the last five years, average wholesale food prices rose roughly 25 percent. Operators can expect to get pricing relief on several of the major commodities in 2015, including dairy and pork.

With the economy steadily improving and the jobless rate trending downward, restaurant operators are finding that the competition for employees is intensifying.

Labor costs will remain a concern for operators in 2015. Challenges with Affordable Care Act implementation and minimum wage increases have made a significant impact on restaurant bottom lines, as typically one-third of restaurant sales is spent on labor.

Consumers continue to have substantial pent-up demand for restaurant services: 38 percent of consumers say they are not eating on the premises of restaurants as frequently as they would like; 41 percent say they are not purchasing takeout or delivery as often as they would like.

Consumer Trends