Your Guide to Fall’s Fashion Weeks, New York to L.A. to Milan

This month heralds the advent of the fall fashion season, where major designers display their latest collections across the world’s major metropolitan catwalks

While our hetero counterparts are spending their autumn couch-quarterbacking for various sports, we gays know the only competition worth winning is fashion. And you better believe it’s a competition. This month heralds the advent of the fall fashion season, where major designers display their latest collections across the world’s major metropolitan catwalks—most importantly, declaring to the industry what is ‘in’ and what is ‘out.’

The season of sartorialism starts off in New York, one of the four major fashion capitals of the world. Frontiers Media is a presenting sponsor of Style Fashion Week New York, taking place Sept. 10-12 at the lavish Gotham Hall, where designers will showcase their latest designs on a 70-foot runway. One of our favorite local labels, Marco Marco, closes the event on Saturday evening with his dazzling men’s and women’s wear.

That same day, Mercedes-Benz Fashion Week begins, ruling Manhattan through Sept. 17. With over 80 designers showcased this year, the event can become a bit overwhelming, but be sure to scope out the Ralph Lauren show. Last year the label made a splash with its mystifying 4-D runway show using water-screen projections. Fingers crossed they up the ante this year.

Over on the West Coast, Orange County celebrates StyleWeekOC—nine days of fashion shows and events showcasing the best of SoCal style, Sept. 10-19. Featured fall collections include Trina Turk, Bebe and Rebbeca Taylor, plus a Neiman Marcus runway show spotlighting the luxe department store’s best looks for fall and winter.

For the rest of September, the fashion community will hop across the pond for back-to-back fashion weeks in the couture capitals of London (Sept. 18-22) and Milan (Sept. 23-29). Of course, once October rolls around, it’s back to Cali.

While not as well-known in the fashion world as the festivities of New York and Paris, Los Angeles’ fashion weeks have begun attracting runway shows from internationally renowned designers like Betsy Johnson, Nicole Miller and Tom Ford, who presented his autum/winter 2015 line at L.A. Fashion Week in February earlier this year. It was a move that definitely brought positive attention to L.A. as a hub for international fashion showcases.

Style Fashion Week L.A., also presented by Frontiers Media—and which will also head to Dubai and Cairo—taps into the trendy, eclectic atmosphere of DTLA, Oct. 14-18. The event takes place at The Reef, where a main stage will showcase designers’ collections on an 80-foot runway (take that, New York). More private viewings of new collections will be possible in the Intimate Stage and in a Designer Presentation Room. Even more, a 20,000-square-foot Marketplace will be set up, where labels can display and sell their products—and of course schmooze with high-profile editors and stylists, a sport in itself. Find more info about Style Fashion Week L.A. (and New York) at stylefashionweek.com.

Los Angeles may not have its own football team just yet, but when it comes to filling a room with fashion-minded people, L.A.’s fashion weeks are already MVPs.