MVP Health Care will no longer offer managed Medicare health insurance plans that serve about 2,100 senior citizens in Western New York and will raise the premiums on its remaining plans, in response to declining federal subsidies for the Medicare Advantage program.

Fifty-four percent of senior citizens in the area are enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan. Members of Independent Health, BlueCross BlueShield of Western New York and Univera Healthcare won’t know whether the three largest local insurers are modifying or dropping their managed Medicare policies until the companies unveil their 2015 plans next month.

MVP said this week that 19,805 senior citizens statewide are enrolled in the plans that will be discontinued next year. The Schenectady-based insurer blamed its decision on two years of federal cuts to Medicare Advantage, totaling 12 percent, combined with the increasing cost of providing the services to an aging population.

“As laudable as these programs are, and they have many outstanding features, MVP can no longer afford to offer them. And we believe plan members – seniors living on fixed incomes – will not be able to afford the premiums we would have to charge for them,” Denise V. Gonick, MVP’s president and CEO, said in a statement.

The insurer held news conferences Tuesday in Rochester and Albany to announce the decision and Wednesday provided information on Western New York enrollment to The Buffalo News.

Medicare Advantage plans are a type of Medicare health plan offered by insurers that contract with the federal government to provide hospital and medical coverage to those who are eligible. About 5,500 senior citizens in this area receive Medicare Advantage through MVP.

MVP still will offer Medicare Advantage plans in Western New York and across the state, but the insurer is sharply increasing the cost of the remaining plans. The premium increases will range from $29 to $64.50 a month, or 44.8 percent on average, according to MVP. The funding cuts included in the Affordable Care Act have been a point of contention in Washington. Overall federal reimbursements for the program fell by 6 percent for 2014, but the Obama administration in April announced that it was abandoning further cuts that were planned for 2015.

“The MVP decision demonstrates multiple challenges for Medicare insurers, generally driven by state and federal regulations, including new taxes. Their response in this regard will not be the last among the state’s health insurance companies,” Gretchen F. Fierle, BlueCross BlueShield’s senior vice president for marketing and communications, said in a statement.

BlueCross BlueShield, Independent Health and Univera all declined to provide specifics on their 2015 Medicare Advantage plans, citing federal regulations that limit when insurers can market the policies.

That marketing period begins Oct. 1, and senior citizens can begin enrolling in 2015 plans on Oct. 15.

Independent Health has 74,400 Medicare Advantage members, a little over half the local market, and the insurer said that it is committed to providing a full range of plan choices to its members.

“There’s no question that it’s more challenging to balance the cost and benefit in line with the cuts that are coming for MA plans,” said Nora K. McGuire, senior vice president and chief marketing officer for Independent Health.

email: swatson@buffnews.com