Gov.-elect John Bel Edwards wasn't considered an ally of businesses in his eight years in the Louisiana House of Representatives. He acknowledged those differences at a luncheon with the New Orleans Chamber of Commerce. But he took pains to invite business leaders to reach out to him with their concerns about policies and pledged to work with them to solve the state's fiscal problems.

"If we don't rise above partisan politics in Louisiana and pursue our common interests, if we stay divided, we cannot tackle these challenges," he said.

He's right. The challenges are enormous, and it will take great collective will to solve them.

Tax and fee increases passed by the Legislature last spring were supposed to patch together the budget for this year, but didn't. The state has already gone through two rounds of cuts, and the budget year isn't even half over. Treasurer John Kennedy predicts another round of cuts by February. There are shortfalls in the Medicaid and TOPS scholarship programs and oil prices are continuing to fall.

Some agencies are borrowing money from other state accounts to meet costs, Mr. Kennedy said. The state Bond Commission earlier this month approved a short-term loan to pay for roads and other construction projects.

"I'm concerned. I'm not hair-on-fire concerned, but I'm concerned," Mr. Kennedy said of the cash flow problems.

On top of everything else, the gap between revenues and expenses for the next budget year, which starts July 1, is predicted to be $1.2 billion to $1.6 billion. And the deficit could be higher.

There are spending needs, too. Higher education leaders are urging the state to restore some of the state funding cut during Gov. Bobby Jindal's two terms. The Board of Regents is asking for another $769 million in the new budget, which is roughly double what they got this year. Then there are billions in unfunded highway and health care costs.

The new governor and the Legislature face an enormous challenge in 2016 — and beyond.

Major structural problems restrict the way state revenues are used. To provide background leading into the special session planned for February, the Louisiana Association of Business & Industry is analyzing how money is spent. A report released in November breaks down the portion of the budget that is "locked up" by statutory and constitutional protections. More than $12 billion of the current $25.1 billion budget is essentially untouchable, and there is little review of what is done with that money.

Some of that spending — public schools, for instance — may in fact be a top priority. But some of the protected categories haven't been reviewed in years and may not be a smart use of revenues.

Then-Gov. Buddy Roemer and the Legislature abolished more than 100 statutory dedications to get more spending flexibility to deal with the oil bust in the 1980s, the LABI report said. That effort didn't last. "Since then, dedications have been created year after year, slowly locking away billions of dollars in state tax revenue for specific functions of state and local government." Since the 1988 budget year, the number of dedicated funds has exploded — increasing from 78 to 393, LABI said.

The overall result is that some agencies are shielded from cuts while others, like higher education and health care, get pummeled year after year.

Gov. Jindal and legislators didn't make long-term fixes to the budget or the tax code in 2015. Instead, they raised the cigarette tax by 50 cents a pack, increased costs for businesses by reducing a variety of tax credits and raised fees on car buyers and other Louisianians. That was supposed to bring in an extra $700 million in revenue during this budget year and keep the state in the black. It didn't work, and many of the measures are only temporary in any case.

The Public Affairs Research Council warned last June that the revenue estimates were shaky.

When the new governor and Legislature take office in January, they "will find that a lot of pieces are missing from the state budget puzzle. They will have a lot of work to do to ensure that actions this session have not caused longterm damage to the state's business climate," PAR said in a commentary titled "The Budget is a Real Piece of Work."

The new governor should lead a long-term financial restructuring, PAR said. "This job will be complicated by recurring budget shortfalls. But a new and more reliable plan for fiscal sustainability would be vital to the state government, the Legislature, businesses and the citizens of Louisiana."

PAR and other advocates for comprehensive tax reforms say the state must re-evaluate all of its tax credits and exemptions, which have grown dramatically in recent years.

With Gov. Jindal more concerned about his ill-fated presidential bid and lawmakers worried about re-election, few hard decisions were made in 2015. That must change in the new year.

Louisiana needs comprehensive reforms to tax policy and spending. State leaders must find a balance that is fair to individuals and businesses so the economy and families can flourish.

There's no more waiting until next year.