It's been a weird Second Quarter for American politics, no doubt about it.

How weird?

Well, let's review:

The past seven to 10 days have seen Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker quit the presidential race; U.S. House Speaker John Boehner has announced that he plans to quit Congress next month; Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders closed to a mere 7 points of Hillary Clinton in a recent Democratic primary poll, and a trio of GOP insurgent candidates have become the party's standard-bearers.

What do these four disparate events all have in common?

Writing at Vox.com on Monday, Ezra Klein posits that we're witnessing an unparalleled sea change in American politics, fueled mainly by the tools and optics that insiders use to "determine legislative and political outcomes" have been pretty much tossed out the window

In a word, party elites who traditionally leverage influence, power and money to determine who wins and who loses (and that includes the establishment Beltway press), are themselves losing that power:

"Parties have a range tools they can use to influence both electoral and legislative outcomes, but the most important one — in part because it underlies so many of the others — is elite opinion," Klein writes.

"If a critical mass of Republican Party elites think Jeb Bush is the best candidate, then the best staffers will want to work for him, the biggest donors will want to give him money, and voters will get signal after signal from trusted Republican sources that Bush deserves their vote," he continued.

So remember how Walker was supposed to be one of the guys to beat? That was elite opinion at work. But it didn't happen, so he's out.

Ditto for Sanders, who wasn't supposed to come close to Clinton in such key, early states as New Hampshire and Iowa (that Clinton has effectively hamstrung herself with her email problems has certainly helped).

But he's playing to packed crowds and tapping into Democratic dissatisfaction with the former SecState. That is, until or unless Veep Joe Biden concludes his Hamlet act, and makes a final decision on whether to run.

And had you asked a mere three months ago, just about everyone would have told you that Donald Trump, Carly Fiorina and Ben Carson would all have been laughed to the sidelines by now.

But Trump was on "60 Minutes" on Sunday night, where he looked like a frontrunner and floated a surprise tax reform plan that soaks wealthier income earners; Fiorina is still surging and Carson is plugging along.

Collectively, they've reached a combined 52 percent in the polls, Klein notes. Meanwhile, donors are telling once presumptive frontrunner Jeb Bush that he'd better get better - and fast.

And what of Boehner, who did the mother of all mic drops on Friday by announcing that he'll vacate both his leadership post and his seat at the end of October?

Essentially the same forces at work: Boehner is a conservative, no doubt about it. He spearheaded votes against Obamacare and the Stim, for openers.

Yet, he was not sufficiently conservative enough for the most fervent members of the House Republican Conference, who were constantly plotting to force him out of the top spot.

It's worth remembering, as Bob Cesca at Salon points out, that the "House of Representatives under [Boehner] has been one of the most radically obstructionist congresses in generations."

"There's simply no calculus in any universe to suggest that Boehner hasn't been, at the end of the day, a royal pain in the ass to the Obama administration, going all the way back to the stimulus debate and especially during the crafting of the Affordable Care Act when Boehner famously stood on the floor of the House and declared "Hell no!" to the passage of the law," he writes.

So, after getting a chance to sit within praying distance of Pope Francis last week, Boehner announced that he'd had enough. He was out, done.

And now elites (there we are again) are worried that, as conservative as Boehner was, he understood that Washington had to work. And now, there are forces even more conservative (but not in a good way) waiting in the wings to force Congress into permanent gridlock.

"Almost all of the donors understand that, you know, without a Republican in the White House, or 60 votes in the Senate, there are limits to what you could accomplish," Boehner told Politico last week. "They understand all the accomplishments I've had, and then some, have been accomplished with a Democrat in the White House. Donors around the country understand it."

And, as Klein notes, while it's still entirely too early to tell or predict anything, the shift in the balance of power from insiders to outsiders means it's an anything goes kind of campaign season.

The elites may yet win the day - but it's no longer a guaranteed lock. And, in the end, that could be better for voters, who will feel more personally invested in the outcome of the nominating races and the Big Game.

What do you think? Have your say in the comments.