WASHINGTON – When New Jersey tea partier Steve Lonegan was running for the U.S. Senate, he named Ted Cruz the senator he would most like to emulate.

He also blamed the 16-day government shutdown Cruz instigated for costing him the 2013 Senate race.

On Monday, he signed on as the Texan’s state campaign chairman.

“I’m probably the biggest fatality of that shutdown,” Lonegan told The Record, even as he praised Cruz for pushing that fight, because it’s “imperative to have a president who fully understands the Constitution and will fight hard for it even when it may not be the most popular thing.”

If Lonegan’s choice for 2016 was any sort of disappointment to Gov. Chris Christie, who also is eyeing a presidential bid, at least it was no surprise. He’d said three months ago he had narrowed his picks to Cruz and Sen. Rand Paul, and has blistered his fellow New Jerseyian’s stewardship.

“At the end of the day `it’s the economy, stupid’ and New Jersey’s economy sucks,” Lonegan said in April.

Christie beat Lonegan for the GOP nomination for governor in 2009, though he backed Lonegan’s 2013 Senate bid and later helped him retire campaign debt.

Lonegan was twice elected mayor of Bogota, population about 8,000, where among other things he sought unsuccessfully to declare English the official language. He ran for a U.S. House seat last year.

In October 2013, he lost a special election to replace the late Sen. Frank Lautenberg by 11 points to Democrat Cory Booker, the mayor or Newark. That was days after the 16-day federal government shutdown ended. Cruz played a key role in the confrontation, by rallying conservatives to resist any budget deal that failed to defund Obamacare. Lonegan lauded conservatives for their role in the shutdown, blasting other Republicans for fumbling the budget showdown.

Still, he blamed the episode for stalling his own momentum against Booker.

“There is no doubt in my mind or in the minds of any of my campaign staff that the shutdown cost me the election,” Lonegan told the Star-Ledger after the loss. “If I had known it was going to happen and that it was going to be handled so badly in Washington, I wouldn’t have run for the Senate.”

Critics in New Jersey viewed his admiration for Cruz with disdain.

“I don’t care about working together and all that nonsense,” he said at one point during the Senate campaign in which he declared Cruz his role model.

Since last August, Lonegan has served as director of monetary policy for the American Principles Project, a conservative group founded by Princeton University professor Robert George, a Cruz mentor at Princeton.

Cruz cited Lonegan’s statewide advocacy against hikes against gasoline taxes, sales taxes and highway tools, and called him “a tireless advocate for taxpayers” and “one of America’s most fiscally responsible mayors….He brings a wealth of knowledge in both New Jersey politics and conservative governance to our campaign, and I deeply appreciate his support.”

Lonegan lauded Cruz’s “courage to lead our nation back to greatness in the world.”

“We need a President who will support our Constitution fearlessly and cut the size of government, not just slow down its growth,” he said in a statement issued by Cruz headquarters in Houston.

The New Jersey primary is currently on June 7, the same day as California. By then, the race could well be over, so a New Jersey operation is no huge breakthrough at this point.