Each time Jamee Swan leaves her mother's home she hears a familiar reminder.

"Make good choices," her mother calls out.

This has been happening for years. Swan says it doesn't matter whether she is leaving for five minutes to take out the trash or leaving for a week to head back to Boulder, where she will be a senior at the University of Colorado in the fall and a star forward on the women's basketball team. But it is advice that hasn't fallen on deaf ears.

"That has made a huge impact on me because it reminds me of my mom and it keeps me focused on what I have to do," Swan said. "If I have homework I need to get done but somebody is like, 'Hey, let's go to the movies,' I always think, 'Make good choices.' So I'm like, 'Sorry, I've got to do my homework. My mom said. Even though she didn't.' "

Swan is celebrating Mother's Day on Sunday with her mom, Diane, and her grandmother, Brenda Gorman, both of whom she says have played a huge role in helping her earn the opportunity to grow and thrive at CU. Swan is one of a handful of Buffaloes who recently shared their thoughts on how important their moms are to their success.

While talent and intelligence are at the core of how these student-athletes became Buffs, there is a mother in the background who acted as parent, teacher, chauffeur, chef, nurse, cheering section and so much more.

Two days after Diane Swan gave birth to Jamee, she was on the court coaching a high school team with her infant daughter in a carrier on the bench.

"I've been in the gym ever since," Swan said.

Advertisement

Swan played for her mother in high school when the family still lived in Arizona. Not only was her mother her high school coach, for long stretches each year she drove Jamee between Tucson and Phoenix two or three times a week so Jamee could practice and play with her club basketball team.

Jamee said her mother taught her to be humble during her prep career by refusing to play her once games got out of hand, usually in their favor because of Jamee's ability. Diane's message to her daughter was simple: She wasn't going to improve or learn anything by scoring 100 points against an overmatched opponent.

"That taught me a lot about being on a team and being supportive of my teammates no matter what, which was a really important lesson for me especially coming somewhere where there were going to be people as good and better than I was," Swan said. "Not coming in with a huge head and keeping myself humble coming into college made the transition a lot easier for me. I have to thank my mom for that."

Stephane Nembot

In some ways, CU offensive tackle Stephane Nembot is the exception. He hasn't had the benefit of having his mother by his side for nearly seven years.

He left his homeland Douala, Cameroon, to come to America to play high school basketball almost seven years ago. He eventually discovered football during his high school career and became a highly recruited prospect who chose to be a Buff.

Nembot went nearly six years without seeing his mother or any other member of his family before he was finally able to return home last year at this time and celebrate Mother's Day, which comes a few weeks later in Cameroon, with Esther Nembot.

"Mom is usually the one that educates you," Nembot said of his roots in Cameroon. "Your daddy is just like the enforcer basically. My mom has played a tremendous, tremendous role in my whole life."

While he has spent so many years away from home, Nembot said he rarely allows a Sunday to pass without calling his mother. It's a policy she instituted when he left and he has made sure to stick to it because he doesn't want her to worry.

Nembot said his mother has always encouraged him to choose his words carefully and he does so most when talking with her. He said he never shares bad news with his mother, such as an injury or tough times academically.

"You should try to protect your mom at every cost and that is what I do," Nembot said.

Alexis Austin

Anyone who has attended a CU volleyball game in recent years has heard from Alexis Austin's mother, Shelia. She's the one yelling, "Do your job, Austin'' as her daughter drives another kill into the ground.

Austin grew up in a tight-knit family in the Houston area with her mom as one of her best friends. She said Shelia Teel-Austin helped guide her through every major decision including her choice to come to Colorado and play for coach Liz Kritza.

"She put in a lot of time and effort, especially around recruiting time because that is when I had to email and call coaches," Austin said. "The only way I could even stay on top of that along with playing sports and school and everything is with her help."

Austin said she isn't one to say the same thing twice. She says she doesn't do a lot of talking on the court or in the locker room, but when she does say something, she wants it to be meaningful among her teammates. She said she borrowed that approach from her mom, who played basketball in college at Dillard University in New Orleans.

"I feel like my whole personality is adapted from her," Austin said.

Austin Mitsch

Sophomore CU sprinter Austin Mitsch is a lot like Austin in that the voice he hears most consistently when competing is that of his mom.

"When I go to meets, the only person I hear is my mom," Mitsch said last week before a cool, damp training run. "In the stands, if she's yelling I only hear my mom yelling. Even my coach, he'll be right on the track yelling in my face and I'll tune him out. I only hear my mom."

Bob and Toni Ann Mitsch adopted Austin Mitsch when he was an infant. Toni Ann couldn't have children because metastasized ovarian cancer had robbed her of the possibility years earlier. It had been seven years since doctors had diagnosed the illness when she became a mom for the first time by adopting Austin. Doctors had warned her she probably wouldn't survive her cancer and she and her husband celebrated with each passing month when the cancer didn't return.

"She's a walking miracle," Austin Mitsch said of his mother.

Mitsch is a self-described "momma's boy." When he goes home at the end of each semester, Mitsch said he looks forward to spending days with his mom. He said she always ran a strict house and he grew to appreciate the discipline. It's something he now draws upon when juggling a hectic schedule of classes and workouts.

"My mom is the one who have given me the self-discipline," he said. "So if I really need to get something done, I focus and get it done."

Paige Soenksen

In two seasons at CU, Paige Soenksen has developed into one of the best goalkeepers in women's college lacrosse. Her mom had nothing specific to do with the technique and fundamentals that allows her to stop so many shots, but Kathy Soenksen had everything to do with guiding her daughter here.

"I wouldn't be the person I am today or where I am today, if it wasn't for my mom," Paige Soenksen said.

Paige is one of four children Kathy spent countless hours shuttling around Southern California highways from practice to games and other social events. Two older siblings already have graduated from college and a younger sister is entering her final year of high school.

Paige Soenksen said her mom never fails to send her a text message of encouragement before each game now that she is in college and Kathy can't be at every game.

When the Buffs played near the Soenksen home at San Diego State earlier this spring, Kathy Soenksen hosted a group of nearly 40 Buffs at her home and served steaks off the grill.

"Her main thing is, 'Do your best,' like in school, athletically, just everything," Paige Soenksen said. "Do your best. If you do your best, things will happen and it will be good. I mean it's really cliché, but it actually works and it's what she's been telling me my whole life."

Josh Scott

Josh Scott refers to himself as "the guinea pig."

The 6-foot-10 forward on the CU men's basketball team is the oldest of five boys raised by Theresa and Alton Scott. Both of Scott's parents served in the Air Force and played sports at the Air Force Academy. Theresa gave up her career to stay at home and raise Scott and his brothers. It was one of many selfless acts Scott has seen from his mom over the years.

"I think a lot of what's good about me as a person and what's good about me as an athlete in terms of my competitiveness, dedication, sacrifice," Scott said, "all of that comes from my mom. She had five boys and she had to put her dreams on the backburner to deal with all of our emotions, all of our school, all of our sports, and she never complains about it. She has to clean up after five messy boys. She is strong-willed and I think living with her helped me pick up on some of those things no matter how bad or how busy or how crazy things can get, it's important to attack every moment of every day with strength and just get through it."

Scott won the Class 4A state championship with his Lewis-Palmer High School teammates at the Coors Events Center in 2012. He said when the final horn sounded that day, the first person he began searching for through the chaos of ecstatic teammates was his mom.

He said his mother spent so much time during his childhood encouraging him and making sure he was able to get where he needed to go with any equipment or supplies he needed for the day's activities, that he wanted to share the victory with her. One of his favorite photos is of the hug he delivered when he finally found her.

"I don't really understand it about her," Scott said. "I think if I was her, I'd probably go crazy myself. She is special. You should see her planner and how she meticulously plans everything out ahead. She does it, don't know how, but she does it. I don't know if it's patience or strength, wisdom. I don't know what it is, but it's amazing whatever it is."

Kyle Ringo: ringok@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @kyleringo