Dave Loebsack (Photo: Special to the Press-Citizen)

America has long been a beacon for those throughout the world seeking refuge. We are a nation of immigrants that enjoys great opportunity, and I believe we have a sacred responsibility to help those fleeing war, terrorism and violence. Like many of you, I feel passionately that as Americans we cannot lose sight of our basic values and that we continue to welcome those from regions experiencing horrific conflicts such as what we have witnessed in Syria over the past several years. Indeed, I believe that we ought to accept more than the 10,000 refugees proposed by President Obama.

It is also true, however, that the only way we can continue to accept such folks is if the process by which they are accepted here is one that ensures our homeland remains safe. A vote for this bill was not a vote to block Syrian refugees, or to stop or delay the admission process. My oath of office requires nothing less than protecting America from threats both foreign and domestic. Rather, this bill is a simple request that the administration do its duty to the American people by certifying that among those seeking asylum, no one slips through who aims to do us harm. That is the reason I voted to enhance what is already a robust process.

There has also been a considerable amount of misinformation spread about the bill. If any of that were true, I would not have voted as I did. After an exhaustive consideration of the legislation on my part, including hearing from top Obama administration officials, it is clear to me that this bill will not pause the process for admitting more refugees. There is certainly no religious test for admittance. And, contrary to claims by the administration, it is entirely feasible to implement the legislation. Unfortunately, I have no doubt that if even one person who may be allowed in did us harm, the voices of xenophobia would drown out those of us who are welcoming refugees and the very existence of the program would be imperiled.

Disgustingly, some Republicans running for president have used hateful language and proposed policies that violate the very essence of our nation’s welcoming ethos. All Americans should denounce such tactics in the wake of the recent tragedies and the plight of innocent victim refugees. I certainly do.

I urge the administration to do everything it can for victims of conflict who wish to come to the United States, and I will continue to support making sure that our intelligence and homeland security agencies have the resources necessary to keep Americans safe. I look forward to continuing my conversations as to how best to keep America safe and to continue to be true to our values, including accepting those who see America as the beacon of hope and refuge that she always has been.

Rep. Dave Loebsack represents Iowa’s Second Congressional District and resides in Iowa City. Contact: 202-225-6576

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1HtimCP