''Best thing'': Peter Overton and Jessica Rowe with Giselle, 4, and Allegra, 6. Photo: Jacky Ghossein

For newsreader Peter Overton, life doesn't get any more magical than the daily ritual he shares with his six-year-old daughter Allegra - searching for fairies.

The Nine stalwart relishes their daily 20-minute walk to school.

The best thing in the world is being a father. I think it's given me much better perspective as a reporter and it's given me much better balance in life because, before I was a dad, I was very driven by work

''We look for fairies in the gardens, and the other day I found one,'' says the man who has covered war zones, as he watches Allegra and her four-year-old sister Giselle play with their mother Jessica Rowe at a Rose Bay park.

''I said, 'I think I saw something sparkling in the leaves.' Well, the excitement that gave her and, I'll be honest, gave me, too … Every day I think how lucky am I that, every day, at eight in the morning, we can hold hands and walk to school … and we can cover all the events in our little life.''

Advertisement

Overton will be at work for Father's Day, which also happens to be the 22nd anniversary of the day he started at Nine as a junior sports reporter.

As with many dads across the nation, he will have started the morning with bad coffee and gifts from his daughters: a colourful painting, a bag of Darrell Lea chocolates and a mobile phone holder - made of matchsticks.

Rowe jokes her only complaint is her husband can't cook, but he is the ''most wonderful father'' to their girls.

''He is caring, gentle and hilarious with them. He often puts on 'shows' for us, as the girls and I are not morning people and his antics get us laughing to face the day. I feel so blessed that we have him.''

It’s clear Overton is in a good place.

His work life is on a high: ‘‘I went into the [Nine News] chair in 2009, and we’ve gone number one in 2011, 2012 and this year we haven’t lost a week - it’s been very rewarding and a great sense of accomplishment for everyone. They’ve been loyal to me and I think I’ve had the two best jobs in commercial TV - a 60 Minutes reporter full time for eight years and now reading the iconic Nine News.’’

Overton and Rowe have a 'date night' most Thursday nights: ''The makeup girls on a Thursday night say ‘Is it date night?’ and I say, ‘Yup, how do I look?’,’’ he says.

''The balance is an ongoing challenge because work is a demanding master. But Jess is very good at saying ‘Come on, turn your phone off, this is us’. And we’ve nearly got the balance just about right in making sure the investment in your children is not sacrificed because of all the distractions and the intensity of life in 2013.

''The best thing in the world is being a father. I think it's given me much better perspective as a reporter and it's given me much better balance in life because, before I was a dad, I was very driven by work,’’ he says.

Making children the priority, no matter how demanding work can be, is key.

''So [on Friday] we had Father’s Day at Allegra’s school and it was wonderful for an hour and a half - before I went off to 60 Minutes - to be totally invested in her writing, making paper aeroplanes and just standing with other fathers and observing little girls running free and that wonderful sound, the best sound in the world of laughter. You know that kind where they don’t have the other pressures they’ll have when they grow up? And just this hour and a half window to spend with my daughter. All day that was my touchstone. Just thinking about it made me happy.’’

After revealing there would be no more little Overtons, he says his role model is his 75-year-old father, who was a paediatric anaesthetist.

''He worked his guts out. But no matter how hard he worked at the children's hospital, my greatest, greatest memories of dad are his investment in us four children. He'd come home tired, but he always embraced us and that’s so important.

''Allegra says to me all the time, ‘Will you be late home tonight?’ and sometimes you have to tell a white lie and they’ll have to drift off to sleep but I’ll work my guts out to get home.

‘’We love reading. I don’t think there’s anything better in this world than simply snuggling up to your child and reading them a book and hearing about their day.’’