When he switches to a 'save the refugees' placard the

A social experiment has challenged Australian people's compassion towards refugees in a unique 60-second video.

The clip which involves a man holding up a placard declaring 'refugees are scum' proves that Australians do care about the welfare of refugees but leaves us wondering if they're prepared to do anything about it?

During the video a swarm of people swear and scowl at the man standing outside Sydney's Town Hall handing out nasty hate pamphlets about asylum seekers, however he doesn't get quite the same reaction when he returns with a 'help refugees' poster.

Scroll down for video

A social experiment has challenged Australian people's attitudes towards refugees in a unique 60-second video

As pedestrians stroll by, the man, wearing his 'refugees are scum' placard, shouts out his message to strangers and receives looks of disgust.

People stop and question him on his beliefs and argue that he 'doesn't even know what he's talking about'.

One man is particularly perturbed by the placard and after initially walking past, he eventually turns around and rips the placard from the man to a round of applause.

The man wears a sign which reads: 'Refugees are scum'

Passerbys star at the man and are disgusted by his sign

One man takes particular offence to the sign and returns to rip it from the man's body

A host of people walking by cheer and lambaste the man for his hateful views.

‘You’re f****** ridiculous you’re a f****** disgrace,' one man says.

The video, which is designed to test out Australian's compassion for asylum seekers, was set up by Act For Peace, who are asking people to eat the same rations as a refugee for a week in an effort to raise $250,000.

The money is the equivalents of a year's worth of food for 925 asylum seekers.

The video ends with the question: 'You care about refugees, but do care enough to act?'

A stream of pedestrians cheer and agree with the man in the blue shirt

People walking by the man at Sydney's Town Hall call the man a 'f******disgrace'

When he changes his message to 'help refugees' he does not receive the same attention

Act for Peace executive director Alistair Gee told Mumbrella: 'Australians are angry about how our country treats refugees. People care about these issues but to make a real difference they need to act.

'By sharing this video and by taking action, Australians can bring the refugee struggle closer to home in a way that's impossible to ignore. We can make a difference for refugees and create a more compassionate society.'

8000 refugees and migrants are currently stranded in boats off the coasts of Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia.

The man struggles to get people's attention wearing the action sign