U.S. Rep. Randy Neugebauer said he’s undergoing radiation treatments stemming from prostate cancer treatment he received six years ago.

In a message in his regular newsletter, Randy’s Roundup, Neugebauer, R-Lubbock, said doctors gave him “every assurance that I will have a positive outcome,” expect him to make a full and speedy recovery and does not believe the treatment will interfere with his work.

Neugebauer said he underwent surgery to remove his prostate after an annual PSA blood test revealed he had an early stage of prostate cancer.

“Thankfully, the surgery was successful and, at that time, my doctors decided that no additional treatment was necessary,” he said.

Since then, Neugebauer said, he’s undergone standard, regular blood tests to monitor his PSA.

“This year’s results indicated I might need follow-up treatment,” he said.

After consulting with his doctor, Neugebauer said, he decided to receive radiation therapy to aimed to eradicate any remaining cancer cells.

Neugebauer said he urged others to learn from his experience and see their doctors regularly for annual physicals and checkups.

His statement continues below:

“Please know, my doctors expect me to make a full and speedy recovery. Because of my initial early detection, because my initial pathology report was so good, because so much time has elapsed between diagnoses, and because I continued to carefully monitor my PSA after surgery, the doctors give me every assurance that I will have a positive outcome.

As God’s timing would have it, at the same time, a new clinical trial was beginning at Johns Hopkins in Baltimore, MD. Up until now, prostate cancer has not been visible with any scans or methods until it is further advanced. Doctors at Johns Hopkins have, after 20 years of work, developed a tracer that is believed will be able to pinpoint the exact location of prostate cancer cells. This is a promising development and I was excited to participate in this testing and diagnostic tool as it moves toward the possibility of becoming standard protocol for all men. I believe its benefits could be far-reaching in the treatment of this cancer that impacts 1 in 7 American men.

I have started my treatments and I can honestly say that I feel great! Thankfully, I can receive radiation therapy in the morning and get back to work in time for votes and committee work in Congress. Every day, millions of Americans bravely and quietly fight much more aggressive forms of cancers than mine. I have been blessed that I have experienced no side effects and my work in Congress has not been interrupted.

I encourage you to learn from my experience and see your doctor regularly for annual physicals and checkups. Monitoring our health is one of the most important things we can do for ourselves, our families, and our friends. The habit has served me well and early detection is the key. I am grateful to the doctors who are treating me and for the amazing advances being made at Johns Hopkins and many other hospitals and research facilities in treating prostate and all other forms of cancer.”