Hooks, Evans, Stark all score for CU in shutout

The Colorado women's soccer team had no problem getting motivated for Sunday's game.

A week after a lackluster effort against Northwestern, the Buffaloes came out inspired against Villanova. They swarmed the Wildcats from the start in a 3-0 win in the final tune up before starting their Pac-12 Conference schedule."

"We had to get a win," CU coach Danny Sanchez said. "We didn't want to overstate it but we had to get a win because the next 11 games are going to be tough."

Danica Evans had a goal and an assist and Brie Hooks and Brittney Stark also had goals for the Buffaloes. Five of their six wins have been shutouts.

Sanchez wasn't happy with his team's effort in a 1-0 overtime loss to Northwestern on Sept. 13. The Buffaloes (6-2-1) used the week between games to rediscover their spark in the last nonconference game.

The energy was evident from the start. Colorado controlled the play and cashed in with an early goal. Evans sent a through ball to Hooks in front and goalkeeper Emily Harris made the initial save. Hooks got the rebound, dribbled around Harris and scored 5 minutes, 9 seconds into the game.

It was CU's fastest goal to start a game this year and Hooks' team-leading fourth of the season.

"We definitely had a lot more energy," Evans said. "It started the minute we got to the locker room."

Villanova, which beat Denver 2-0 on Friday for its only win of the season, struggled against the rested CU squad. The Buffaloes had 10 shots in the first half, nearly scoring two more times after Hooks' goal. Evans brought the 1,008 fans to their feet when her bicycle kick in the 11th minute went off the crossbar and over the net

"I've done that many times but never scored," Evans said. "Once in club I had one hit the goalie in the hands."

Three minutes after Evans' acrobatic shot the Buffaloes almost scored again when Hooks' shot hit the left post and Evans sent the rebound wide left.

CU goalkeeper Kate Scheele made two key saves in each half to keep scoreless.

"Kate made the two saves she needed to make," Sanchez said.

Evans scored her third goal of the season in the 55th minute to give the Buffaloes some breathing room and Stark iced it with her second of 2015 in the 77th minute.

"Maybe a little unfortunate not to get the second one in the first half but we got one 10 minutes into the second half and it kind of killed the game," Sanchez said. "It's tough for Villanova to play us and DU in a single weekend at altitude when it's warm."

Colorado hosts California next Sunday to open Pac-12 play.

Colorado 3, Villanova 0

At Prentup Field

Colorado (6-2-1) 1 2 — 3 1 2 — 3 Goals (assists) — Colorado: Brie Hooks (Danica Evans) 6th minute; Evans (Madison Krauser) 55th minute; Brittney Stark (Emily Paxton) 77th minute. Goalies (Min-Goals allowed-Saves) — Villanova: Emily Harris (90-3-4); Colorado: Kate Scheele (90-0-2).

Colorado's Alex Vidger, left, and Villanova's Kayla Hughes battle for a header during Sunday's match at Prentup Field in Boulder. Colorado won 3-0. More photos: BuffZone.com (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

0 0 — 0