By Juli Cragg Hilliard, correspondent

About a dozen women form a circle in a darkened dance studio, but they don’t start moving right off the bat. Kelly Atkins tells them just to stand there for now, gently shifting their balance.

“Imagine that you’re absorbing some of that space underneath you,” she says.

Then she invites them to take a seat.

“The action of getting down to the floor is one of the healthiest things you can do,” she notes. Once she has brought them back to their feet, she has them lower their bodies yet again: “Now, do it with pleasure.”

Leading her class through gradually intensified steps, to music that ranges from ethereal to pulsing, Atkins displays an ability to paint word-pictures that helps her students feel what’s happening inside them.

“Our hips have a natural tendency to like dancing.

“Let the muscles shrink-wrap around the bones.

“Open up the front of your hips like windows. ... Maybe you grew a little taller, opening that up.”

Atkins melded years of fitness training with her studies of the brain into a mind-body-spirit dance exercise she calls Kai. Since creating it three years ago, she’s had it trademarked, written two manuals, and trained 40 instructors in local and online classes.

“I feel that Kai has a life of its own,” she says, in an interview at Soul Studios on Sarasota’s Bahia Vista Street, where she teaches daily classes. “My sense is that Kai wants to be all over the world.”

Kai involves 21 movements designed to stimulate the legs and feet, the core of the body, and the arms and hands. They’re blended with Authentic Movement, a free-style form that pioneer dance therapist Mary Starks Whitehouse originated in the 1950s.

Atkins says each hour-long Kai class is about half choreographed and half improvisational. She’s drawing a wide range of students, but most are 35 to 50.

“They’re going to get a great sweaty workout that feels good on their joints and delivers a mind-body connection, providing a balanced state of wellbeing. And it’s fun,” she says.

Atkins traces her interest in how the brain works to her senior year in college, when she dropped out to care for her father — who had a brain tumor — during his last six weeks.

She changed majors from physical therapy and graduated from Empire State College with a degree in health and wellness, with a strong science background. She moved from Watertown, New York, to Sarasota in 2000, and had taught Nia, which blends dance with martial arts, for 13 years before launching Kai.

The more she learned about the anatomy of the brain, she says, the more she connected that into how to stimulate exact areas to enhance specific aspects, including focus, emotional stability, coordination and creativity.

“I think it’s very accessible, and it’s open to both men and women. You don’t have to have any dance background. We start with walking,” Atkins says.

A safe place

Patsy Westover’s husband of 30 years, Richard, was sick and then died in December 2011. That was a time, she says, when her own health was poor.

She had a transient ischemic attack, commonly known as TIA, a temporary disruption of the nervous system considered a warning for stroke risk. She had a spot on her lungs; had arthritis so severe “I couldn’t get on my knees on my bed,” and dropped 30 pounds.

“I just didn’t feel like eating, depressed, all of that, because of losing him,” Westover says. “I decided ‘I’ve just got to take care of myself.’ ”

She started taking classes from Atkins in April 2012, when Atkins was teaching Nia, and now every week takes Kai classes three days a week and walks nine holes of golf.

“Now I’m as healthy as can be,” Westover says. She says her doctor has been reducing her medications for blood pressure and cholesterol. She no longer needs physical therapy for her arthritis. She enjoys the community she’s found in Kai and looks forward to Atkins’s classes.

“She’s the most amazing teacher I’ve ever had. It’s fun, we dance, she makes it such a safe place,” Westover says. ” I don’t have any rhythm. I’m so not a good dancer. But it doesn’t matter. I don’t feel self-conscious. I just do what I do.”

Chris Martin moved to Sarasota five years ago from Indiana because she struggles with a neurological disease and needed to be out of cold weather.

“At the time I couldn’t walk, so it was very serious,” Martin says She was back on her feet, but not with fluidity, by last spring when she began taking Kai from Atkins.

“When I started with her I had some serious pain and balance problems,” Martin says. “Most of them are gone.” In addition to massage, acupuncture and eating a healthy diet, Martin tries to go to Kai twice a week. She says the moves she practices with Atkins are improving her coordination.

“Her choreography involves patterns and movements that challenge my brain, so as I learn different movements my balance and body are getting stronger,” Martin says. She sees a difference in how she walks, sits and gets through her day.

Kai is “a whole new way to move your body,” Martin says. “It encourages flexibility, it encourages strength, it encourages movement. But what I think Kelly does different is she honors an individual person’s ability and place within the class.”

Atkins has come far on her own journey. In college, she was diagnosed with bulimia — eating large amounts of food and exercising it off — and worked to recover. She’s taught aerobics, step class, kickboxing and powerlifting.

In the time since she created Kai, she’s gained a new appreciation for herself and her own body.

She’s also trained 40 Kai teachers around the United States and in Canada, Russia, the Czech Republic, and Turkey.

“Kai appeals to students who are well-traveled, intellectual, who want more for their time, and are interested in mind-body practices such as yoga and meditation,” she says. “The average person who comes doesn’t like gyms or traditional fitness. But they come here, and they like it.”