River City Memoirs: Peyote has a long history in Wisconsin. In 1956, it went badly wrong.

Russell Monegar. Image via Google News http://bit.ly/1qYhYyx (Photo: Image via Google News http://bit.ly/1qYhYyx)

Apprenticed to a Mexican-Indian sorcerer, young Carlos Castaneda, writing in the 1960s, consumes peyote, believing the plant contains "Mescalito," a being who could reveal the insights a man of knowledge must acquire.

After swallowing the cactus buttons and being wracked by gut-wrenching spasms, Castaneda meets Mescalito, variously a column of singing light, a black dog and a green warty-headed critter.

Closer to home by land but farther back in time, Mescalito, in the form of a two-faced holy ghost, arrived here over 100 years ago.

Since 1908, many Winnebago (Ho Chunk) supervised by the Grand Rapids agency had been ingesting "buttons" mailed from Oklahoma, Texas and Mexico, joining what media described as a "peyote craze."

In a 1920 report of the Board of Indian Commissioners, practitioners insisted the peyote cactus, also known as mescal, was used only in connection with religious meetings and denied any bad effects, moral or physical.

However, Rapids agency superintendent Willis E. Dunn opposed the vision-infused "church" meetings, held in members' homes, that "doped" the participants and prevented them from working for several days.

Dunn joined a continuing debate over whether the stuff was dangerous and whether Congress or other agencies had the right to regulate it when used for religious observances.

In 1931, Frances Densmore, legendary ethnologist, collected songs from the then-dubbed "peyote cult." She said the rites combined Christian symbolism with remnants of aboriginal ceremonials and that the adherents she knew were of splendid character.

A 1934 report from Oklahoma in the Daily Tribune said that Indians wove a "weird religion around cactus eaters' visions" and that a (still active in 2014) "Native American Church" had been chartered by the state of Oklahoma in 1918.

In 1940, the Capital Times of Madison described a "peyote church drug cult" in which a cactus preparation "stupefied" followers wanting to perceive the "world incarnation of the body of God — what communion is to Christians."

A 1944, the Daily Tribune announced that "a score of families in Wood county are expected to attend a big Winnebago ceremonial at Lake Delton, on the Sauk-Columbia county line, Saturday afternoon and evening ... an Indian religious event, with a huge ceremonial tepee in which sessions of prayer will be held. There will be no festivity, no dancing."

Winnebagos from throughout the state were expected to attend the ceremonies, "when prayers, councils and partaking of the sacred peyote will take place."

Despite apparent social acceptance, reactions to peyote could be toxic.

In 1936, Russell Monegar, descendant of a prominent and respected Winnebago family and brother of a talented artist, competed as a lightweight boxer for the City Point Civilian Conservation Corps camp, in a Golden Gloves match at the Wisconsin Rapids field house.

In 1940, then 22, living near Wausau, Monegar was jailed for speeding and disorderly conduct. He quickly joined the Army, became a paratrooper, and was released in May 1944, just after World War II's "Victory in Europe."

In June 1956, Monegar, then 38, suffering from a cold and a headache, consumed a brew prepared by his wife and mother-in-law from as many as 95 peyote buttons.

At his shack five miles south of Wausau, Monegar's Mescalito materialized in the form of monsters and colored flashes of light. When his eyesight blurred and he heard voices, Monegar told his wife to call the cops and have him confined in an asylum.

She said there wasn't anything anyone could do and told him to lie down. From time to time, his wife gave him more peyote.

Monegar told authorities that a force took hold of him and he went to a cupboard and got a hunting knife with which he stabbed his wife then went next door to his mother-in-law's, and, seeing them only as blurred figures, stabbed her and his niece and nephew, who were being taken care of while their mother was shopping in Wisconsin Rapids.

Not yet lucid, he went to a tavern, where he stabbed the proprietor's wife and a customer before escaping in a stolen truck.

Monegar's defense was that, under the influence of peyote, he had heard the voices of his ancestors telling him to kill.

He was sentenced to life in prison and incarcerated at Waupun. He died in 2009 at Wausau.

Dave Engel is a local historian and author of books in the "River City Memoirs" series. His columns are featured monthly in Daily Tribune Media.

Read or Share this story: http://wrtnews.co/V9DSV2