“Don’t let anybody tell you that it’s corporations and businesses that create jobs,” Hillary Clinton warned voters the other day.

It’s just her latest attempt to remake herself from the moocher who accepts $400,000 for some chats to Goldman Sachs fat cats into the second coming of class-warfare queen Elizabeth Warren. When will Hillary’s fans on Wall Street take notice?

Sure, she walked back the comment once people started laughing.

But this nonsense — coming from someone who should know better — is another sign that, for all the handwringing about the Tea Party and other “extremists” taking over the GOP, it’s the Democratic Party that’s been hijacked, by the left.

From President Obama to Warren (the Massachusetts senator who has made a career out of bashing job-creators) to New York City’s very own Comrade Bill de Blasio, the “New New Democrats” believe entrepreneurs only exist because government has bestowed upon them . . . something, though they never really say what. And exist only in order to feed government with tax dollars.

For these Dems, the fulcrum isn’t the “radical middle” successfully sought out by Hillary’s husband, President Bill Clinton, in the 1990s, but an array of radical interest groups, public-employee unions, environmentalists and other assorted dingbats, joined in support of extremist policies and politics.

The details of their credo are as stupid as Hillary’s comment: Small businesses can easily pay for big hikes in the minimum wage; large corporations are keeping money and hiring overseas because they’re simply unpatriotic (it has nothing to do with high US corporate taxes); ObamaCare is working great.

The scary part is, those moderates in the Democratic Party who don’t convert to such idiocies must prepare for the progressives’ wrath, which is why Hillary is now converting with a vengeance.

But why do major elements in the business community — a community that has felt the wrath of leftist economic agenda for five years and counting — continue to shower Hillary Clinton and the Democratic flat-earth society with their love?

And I will bet you Hillary’s Wall Street network is assuring the money men that she will still govern as Bill did, from the middle of the pack and with lots of crony-capitalist love for the banks.

After all, these cheerleaders — super bankers Lloyd Blankfein of Goldman Sachs, Larry Fink at Blackrock and Tony James at Blackstone — know Hillary well.

Those like Blankfein have already shelled out hundreds of thousands to hear her speak since she left the Obama administration. So ignore what she says when you write those checks to her presidential campaign.

My advice: Look at the video tape, where Hillary’s remarks hardly look like a slip of the lip. They seemed wholly contrived and possibly read from a script, which means she had more than a few moments to think before she spoke. Sorry, she wanted to sound like Warren, to appeal to the party’s lunatic-fringe base.

After all, that fringe is a bigger, more powerful part of the Democratic Party than ever before — something Blankfein, Fink (who’d love to be Treasury secretary under Hillary) and James have yet to fully appreciate.

They’re figuring that Obama and his jihad against business is an anomaly, that Hillary will restore the order of Clintonism once she gets into the White House.

The problem there is, a President Hillary Clinton would still have to contend with the new Democratic Powers That Be, including Warren, the new darling of her party, who wants to crush Clinton’s buddies at Goldman.

And she’ll need to honor the deals she cuts on the way to the nomination.

What will she promise to the unions who’ve made minimum-wage hikes a litmus test for Democrats, even though every credible economic study shows that they also kill jobs?

To the environmentalists, who hate fracking and every other real source of energy, and don’t give a damn about jobs or energy prices?

I’ve asked press people for Blankfein, Fink and James for comments on Hillary’s job-creation remarks; they haven’t responded. And to be fair, firms like Goldman have been giving more, overall, to Republicans than to Democrats in recent years.

But the Clintons are still Wall Street’s first love. After all, they deregulated banks while they wined and dined with the financial fat-cat club. And now they’re back to pursuing their manifest destiny to return to the White House and show us all how governing is really done.

Memo to Lloyd, Larry and Tony: Before you start writing those big checks and twisting arms to get others to join the fun, take a look. This isn’t Bill Clinton’s Democratic Party anymore. It’s Barack Obama’s and Elizabeth Warren’s.

Charles Gasparino is a Fox Business Network senior correspondent.