These days, Lafayette College men's basketball's all-time leader in free-throw percentage can more likely be found sinking different kinds of shots.

"I play as much golf as I can," said Brian Burke, Lafayette Class of 2002. "I try and work in as much golf as I can with my clients during the week."

Burke, originally from the Philadelphia area and now living in Clarksburg, Md., (south of Frederick, Md.), was a standout player on the last two Leopard teams to make the NCAA men's basketball tournament in the springs of 2001 and 2002. His 87.4 free throw percentage is the best Lafayette history, and he was the leading scorer (15.5 points per game) on the 2002 Patriot League championship team.

Now, off the golf course, anyway, Burke scores points for Willis, the global insurance broker, as an account executive.

"We have 17,000 employees all over the world," Burke said. "We assist companies with their employee benefits and risk management."

With the passage of the Affordable Care Act, Burke's plenty busy at the office for a company that may be better known for owning a towering skyscraper -- the Willis (ex-Sears) Tower in Chicago, where Burke visited on a recent business trip -- than for what it actually does.

"We help companies and their employees figure out how to get compliant with the ACA," Burke said. "We help them navigate all the changes; I'm advising our clients on the ACA all the time."

Name: Brian Burke : Brian Burke Local connection: Lafayette College (Class of 2002) Notables: Lafayette's all-time leader in career free throw percentage at 87.4 No. 9 on Leopards' all-time assist list Holds the all-time Lafayette record for most points in a single game at Kirby Sports Center (43) scored against Lehigh on Feb. 20, 2002 Played on the last two Leopard teams to make the the NCAA Tournament, in 2001 and 2002, and was the leading scorer at 15.5 points per game in 2002 Currently works as an account executive with Willis, an international insurance broker Currently resides: Clarksburg, Md.

Burke said the job requires him to be up-to-date on the laws and regulations as well.

"We're not lawyers, but as much as anybody can, we stay on top of all the changes that are coming every day and our clients count on us to do that," he said. "I meet with CEOs and chief financial officers who want to know what they need to be doing and provide them with reports and analysis."

Burke sees his role as comforting to busy businessmen.

"Like any business, being regulated by the government is not a pleasant experience," Burke said. "But our clients are glad to see us because we can help navigate what they need to do to stay in compliance."

It is a demanding and difficult job, but Burke makes effort to leave it behind on weekends and at night to spend time with his wife, the former Kristen Murphy (Lafayette 2003) and their sons Luke, 3, and Harrison, nine months.

"Time management is important," he said. "When clients call at 10 p.m. on a Friday you feel an obligation to get back them but there comes a time where you want to put the phone down and not answer emails. Managing the work/life balance is key so you can spend time with your family."

Lafayette was where Burke's family life got its start.

"My favorite class was Social Psychology with John Shaw because I met my wife in it," said Burke, who majored in English on College Hill. "We were kind of acquainted before, and we wound up sitting near each other. I was always borrowing pencils and studying notes from her."

Burke hasn't left basketball behind. He still plays in a Monday night pickup game, enjoys the NCAA tournament, follows the Leopards, and said if his children want to play he'd likely help coach them.

He could certainly coach anybody, anywhere, on how to make free throws -- both in high school, at Germantown Academy outside of Philadelphia, and at Lafayette he was the closest thing to a sure thing there was -- but his methods would be distinctive.

"People always say bend your knees and take a deep breath before taking free throws, but I did the opposite," Burke said. "I never bent my legs. I wanted to stay level. I didn't see the need to bend my knees and I think that helped me; one less variable. I always wanted to make sure I was lined up right so every miss would be left or right."

The deep breath thing also always baffled Burke.

"You see guys taking deep breaths to release tensions but it seems to be somewhat self-defeating, guys then seem anxious about shooting," he said. "You see guys waiting to take the breath, seems to create more anxiety than it solves. My thing was always to minimize variables. I'd teach my kids the same thing."

He may to have to teach his children about another sport first.

"Luke has the rubber basketball and hoop in the basement, and he likes it, but all he wants to do is hit golf balls." Burke said. "He's a big golfer."

Golf has also provided Burke with travel opportunities.

"We went to the British Open in 2005 at St. Andrews," Burke said. "You could spot the other Americans because of the white socks; that's how you could tell who was American. It was unlike what we expected; you see all the rain and wind at the British Open but we got almost sunburned, it was so nice."

Burke's post-Lafayette experience seems idyllic in its way, but he said he learned some hard lessons in college that helped him afterward.

"I had a difficult freshman year. I was always a skinny kid who could compete in high school but in college everybody was ahead of me and a lot stronger," he said. "I'd never lifted weights but I was forced to at Lafayette. I really wondered if Lafayette and basketball were the right thing for me. I thought about packing it in but I got stronger, it got easier and I am very glad I didn't change anything."

Indeed, Lafayette basketball helped Burke become the successful employee, husband and father he has become.

"I think a lot of that had to do with (Lafayette coach) Fran O'Hanlon," Burke said. "I am so glad I played for him, he gave me an opportunity and helped me grow. His message is always to leave things better than you found them. Playing big games at Lafayette made me reassess what I thought I could do, and being able to get through that helped prepare me to succeed in business."

Burke's prepared to help his sons succeed in sports and in school, but his oldest son may take his career in a different direction entirely.

"All he wants to do is sing," said Burke with a laugh. "His big thing is the (boy band) One Direction."

The one direction Brian Burke's life has gone since leaving Lafayette is definitely up.

"Catching Up With" is a weekly online feature that runs Sundays on lehighvalleylive.com. The subjects are former local high school or collegiate athletes who no longer live in the region. If you have an idea about an athlete you would like to see profiled, send an email to jfolck@express-times.com.