President Obama held the second White House College Opportunity Day of Action Thursday, but the “action” toward real college affordability was still lacking.

The summit brought together college presidents and education leaders to discuss ideas and goals for increasing access to college. But while most of these initiatives included direct action, the college affordability piece of the puzzle only warranted a laundry list in the event’s press release.

“President Obama believes that the United States should lead the world in college attainment, as it did a generation ago,” the release stated. “Because completing college is key to strengthening the middle class and should not be a luxury for the few, the President has increased Pell Grants by $1,000 a year, created the new American Opportunity Tax Credit worth up to $10,000 over four years of college, capped student loan payments to 10 percent of monthly income, and laid out an ambitious agenda to reduce college costs and promote innovation and competition in higher education.”

An “ambitious agenda”? More words and more promises.

Obama, who was voted in overwhelmingly by millennials, has been promising to help young people throughout his presidency, but instead most of his actions have only cost them.

While Obama seems to have no problem wielding his power in other ways — cough immigration cough — he seems to be content to pay higher education only lip service. Obama needs to recognize that his own over-regulation and interference in higher education has helped the cost of higher education skyrocket.

The average cost of college has increased by more than 500 percent since the mid-1980s, leading to the more than $1.1 trillion in student loan debt across the country.

The president’s healthcare law has contributed to a rise in costs at a lot of universities across the country. Because of Obamacare’s onerous requirements, the University of South Carolina was forced to hike student tuition by 3.2 percent in order to pay for the $4.5 million Obamacare bill and many others have had to follow suit.

Obama has also continued a vicious cycle by increasing the federal government’s role in higher education.

The government both regulates and pays for higher education, telling universities that they will foot the bill no matter how high tuition rises. The original goal of this program was to help make college more affordable for low-income students, but instead it became a way for the government to subsidize tuition hikes.

The federal government also monitors the accreditation standards, which only favor the traditional university structure. Innovative, and likely cheaper, options are cut off by regulation and arbitrary standards before they get a chance to really start.

Closing off the education marketplace in this way also allows costs to rise unfettered by competition.

Obama is certainly well intentioned on this College Opportunity Day of Action, but the opportunity to go to college won’t be accessible to the majority until college affordability is addressed in a meaningful way.