Republican presidential candidate, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, speaks at the RedState Gathering, Friday, Aug. 7, 2015, in Atlanta. (Photo: David Goldman, AP)

WASHINGTON — Just before Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal stepped on stage in New Orleans to announce his bid for president in June, the Rev. Mark Foster and a handful of pastors from across the state prayed with him.

“He has good Christian values that definitely resonate with me and much of the Christian community,’’ said Foster, pastor of the Pentecostals of the Twin Cities in West Monroe. “I think it would resonate with many, many people. ... If he gets in there and actually is able to get his message out in these (early-voting) states, I think he can stand a good chance.’’

Jindal, who just wrapped up a five-day campaign swing in Iowa and returns there Sunday, also hopes his message of faith resonates with voters as he courts evangelicals, who are influential in states where ballots are cast early in the presidential nominating contest.

But political experts say Jindal faces a major challenge standing out among a field of 17 GOP candidates, including better-known contenders targeting the same voters, such as former Arkansas governor Mike Huckabee, former Pennsylvania senator Rick Santorum and Texas Sen. Ted Cruz.

“He’s certainly trying,’’ said John Pitney, a political scientist at Claremont McKenna College in California. “However, when you have Mike Huckabee in the race, it’s kind of hard to be the most evangelical guy out there.”

On the campaign trail, Jindal, 44, repeatedly touts his faith and family values, including his opposition to abortion and to legalizing same-sex marriage. He also often talks about his conversion from Hinduism to Catholicism and the need to protect religious freedom.

“The governor is a fervent defender of religious freedom rights and will continue fighting to preserve the First Amendment,’’ said Shannon Dirmann, a Jindal spokeswoman. “He is also not afraid to talk about his faith and finding Jesus Christ. That said, he doesn’t believe in dividing Americans and is going after 100 percent of the vote.’’

A July Washington Post-ABC News poll of Republican-leaning voters who are white evangelicals put Jindal’s support at 3% among GOP presidential contenders. Donald Trump was the most popular at 20%, followed by Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker (14%) and Huckabee (12%). Santorum had just 2%.

Dirmann dismisses early polls, calling them “fluid and topsy-turvy.’’

“Republican voters are kicking the tires, as is their right to do,’’ she said. “Momentum is building and voters are signing up at our town halls.’’

Jindal not only hasn’t distinguished himself, but appears to be “getting increasingly desperate’’ and making comments “almost to the point of sheer madness,’’ said Albert Samuels, chairman of the Political Science and Criminal Justice Department at Southern University at Baton Rouge.

Samuels pointed to Jindal’s comments in June that Louisiana wouldn’t recognize gay marriages despite the Supreme Court ruling that legalized same-sex marriage. Jindal has since said the state will comply.

Earlier this month, Jindal announced plans to stop reimbursing Planned Parenthood for services provided to Medicaid recipients. Federal health officials, however, warned this week that the state may be violating federal law.

“These are desperate attempts by this governor to somehow distinguish himself,’’ Samuels said. “You have to keep upping the ante.’’

Pitney said many GOP candidates are talking about religion, noting that Huckabee is a former preacher and Walker repeatedly reminds audiences his father was a preacher. And retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson “might as well be a preacher,’’ Pitney said.

“The question is, what is Bobby Jindal’s unique selling proposition?’’ he said. “I don’t see a clear answer to that question. Most people aren’t even noticing him.’’

But the Rev. Gene Mills, president of the Louisiana Families Forum in Baton Rouge, said it’s hard for “the most normal’’ GOP candidates, such as Jindal, to attract media attention.

“As long as the debates remain the zoo-like environment that the media’s been fixated on creating, we’re going to have the funniest animal at the zoo who gets the most attention,’’ said Mills, who said he’s been Jindal’s prayer partner for more than a decade.

Democratic critics say Jindal’s efforts haven’t worked.

“His numbers in the polls say all that need to be said,” said former Louisiana Sen. Mary Landrieu. “There’s nothing about Gov. Jindal that would warrant him getting more than 1 percent in the polls. What would he have to offer the country? He’s left the state budget in shambles. He’s raided every trust fund — left us a deficit as far as the eye could see.’’

Jindal supporters counter that he’s been in the forefront on key issues, including vowing not to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.

“I have a feeling the young man might be what everybody’s looking for — they just hadn’t noticed that guy who keeps generating all these good ideas,’’ said Mills. “It ain’t courting. He’s a covenant brother and he’s been that way for a long time. He just does so naturally.’’

Follow @dberrygannett on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1TCghJI