In 1993 the new Clinton administration decided to make health care reform the signature issue of its first term. Bill Clinton appointed his wife to pilot the initiative, but the entire effort was botched from the get-go. Dubbed Hillarycare by the media, the package was an unwieldy piece of Rube Goldberg organization that would have made the 2013 rollout of Obama's Healthcare.gov website look efficient by comparison. But Hillarycare never even got that far because the Clinton administration did a miserable job of working with Congress to obtain passage of the legislation.

One of the factors that contributed to the American public's disdain of Hillarycare was a series of television commercials, the "George and Martha" ads, sponsored by the pharmaceutical industry. Although the ad campaign was full of half-truths and scare tactics, it was demagogically clever in attacking Hillarycare's confusing and seemingly contradictory provisions.

In 2009 when the new Obama administration decided to make health care reform its signature issue, the president and his White House operatives were determined to avoid another George and Martha ad barrage. That led them to strike a deal with the pharma lobby. In return for pharma resurrecting the same actors to play George and Martha and, this time, make mildly favorable comments about Obamacare, the administration agreed to keep Medicare from using its enormous purchasing power to negotiate drug prices. They also prohibited easy reimportation of drugs from Canada and other countries at vastly lower prices.

But the Obama administration wasn't finished handing windfall profits to pharma, at the expense of American consumers and taxpayers.

Now in 2015, President Obama wants Congress to approve the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a measure that would give pharma longer and stronger patent protection for prescription drugs. Its major purpose consists of making other countries pay more for their drugs, but TPP is so pernicious that it will also lead to higher drug prices in the United States.

As far as foreign countries, TPP will make it more difficult for their national health systems to negotiate reasonable drug prices. It will do that by means of Investor State Dispute Settlement (ISDS) tribunals to enforce the pact. ISDSs are extra-judicial panels empowered by TPP legislation to override U.S. law with rulings that are not subject to appeal. In fact, ISDSs would function as secret courts because their rulings wouldn't even have to be publicly disclosed for a currently unknown number of years.

The Obama administration defends the ISDS provision by arguing that some of the countries participating in the agreement lack independent judiciaries to protect the rights of foreign investors.

Perhaps that point is arguable in the case of Vietnam and Malaysia, but other signatories such as the U.S., Canada, Australia and Japan have separate judicial branches where investors can seek redress, yet they would also remain subject to secret ISDS rulings intended to benefit pharma. To assuage such concerns, the Obama administration offers its bland reassurances that it is unlikely ISDS panels would challenge U.S. laws. But given that the U.S. Supreme Court will soon announce whether it will tear the guts out of Obama's Affordable Care Act, it is understandable that the administration's reassurances about court actions, secret or otherwise, fail to offer much comfort.

What's especially galling about TPP support by pharma and its government lackeys is their blatant hypocrisy. Proponents of the treaty routinely accuse those that oppose it of trying to suppress free trade, yet the invulnerability to patent challenges pharma is seeking constitute a government granted monopoly that is an insidious form of protectionism.

The "fast track" legislation that the U.S. House of Representatives voted down last Friday was enabling legislation for TPP. It would have stripped Congressional authority to vote up or down on specific provisions of international trade agreements and, in fact, it would have kept many provisions of trade deals secret from the American public.

As Bill Moyers and Michael Winship suggested last week, when "President Obama, the Republican Party, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the Business Roundtable, K Street lobbyists and giant multinational companies" all work together on something and sing Kumbaya, it's a safe bet that the American public is getting screwed.

While Obama supporters claim he wants passage of the TPP as part of his "legacy," Moyers and Winship see his lobbying for what it really is: "payback time for the big contributors to both parties."

What kind of leader, they ask, seeks to leave a legacy by handing "a significant political victory to the very partisans who have fought tooth and tail to cripple his administration" during the past six-and-a-half years?

Deborah Gleeson of La Trobe University in Australia also sees the American negotiating position on TPP for what it is. She told the New York Times, "It was very clear to everyone except the US that the initial proposal wasn't about transparency; it was about getting market access for the pharmaceutical industry by giving them greater access to and influence over decision-making processes around pricing and reimbursement."

A spokesperson for Doctors Without Borders, Judit Rius Sanjuan, also told the Times that the TPP "will increase the cost of medicines worldwide, starting with the 12 countries that are negotiating the Trans-Pacific Partnership."

Their concern finds support in a study recently published by the International Federation of Health Plans. The Federation compared average drug prices paid for some top-selling brands in the U.S. during 2013, versus the average prices paid in six other advanced nations: Switzerland, the United Kingdom, Spain, Netherlands, New Zealand and Canada. In each of the countries, they compared the average prices for five of the top-selling drug brands: Enbrel, Gleevec, Humira, Copaxone and Gilenya. The U.S. paid higher prices for all the brands. The differences ranged from a 60 percent premium that Americans paid for Humira above the average in the other six countries, up to 339 percent more for Copaxone in this country than the average elsewhere. In other words, TPP is a means for pharma to price gouge the rest of the world on drugs the way it currently exploits American consumers and taxpayers.

President Obama's willingness to carry water for pharma on the TPP clearly shows his preference for rewarding big money contributors, even when doing so runs counter to overwhelming public preferences. For example, in April a Kaiser Family Foundation poll found that the U.S. public sees drug costs as its number one health care concern. More than three-quarters of respondents said they want the president and Congress to ensure that drug costs are affordable for people with chronic conditions and, in the process, they believe the government should do something to lower prescription drug prices.

Then this week Kaiser released another study where 73 percent of respondents said drugs cost too much and 76 percent of those people hold the pharmaceutical companies responsible for it because the industry sets prices too high. A staggering 87 percent of respondents, a huge majority in public opinion polling, want the government to give Medicare the authority to negotiate drug prices.

Pharmaceutical companies are reportedly now pouring more money into the TPP than other industries with stakes in the treaty. Their efforts have clearly won them the support of President Obama and Congressional Republicans. Those voters who don't like the high prices they have to pay for prescription medications should tell their Congressmen and Senators their own views of the issue.

Read more from the Check Up blog »