More options: Share, Mark as favorite

Having drawn venous blood from ObamaCare, Marco Rubio is hunting for an artery.

Yesterday, Rubio and Senator Orrin Hatch (R-Utah), chairman of the Finance Committee, accused the Obama Administration of breaking the law with another “bailout” of insurance companies. They used data from a new report that they commissioned from the Congressional Research Service to back up their claims.

This follows Rubio’s successful effort to block the Obama Administration from being able to flow taxpayer funds into the “risk corridors” that were meant to help limit the amount of ObamaCare losses that insurance companies could wrack up.

These challenges matter. They get to the heart of whether ObamaCare can ever evolve into a more market-based scheme following some radical surgery. Or whether it will limp along as a public entitlement dependent upon mounting piles of subsidies.

Learn more: 5 questions every presidential candidate should answer on health care

One of ObamaCare’s fundamental flaws is its failure to make health insurance more affordable. Owing to reams of political-minded but costly regulations on what benefits need to be included (and how the insurance plans must be designed) the resulting plans end up being hollow but still expensive, pricing out many consumers.

The aim of the political left is to pump up the subsidies offered under ObamaCare, as a way to offset these costs and put ObamaCare into the reach of more consumers. Re-jiggering the risk sharing schemes that Rubio is targeting is a main part of this subsidization. Increasing subsidies is a key feature of Ms. Clinton’s health plan.

By contrast, the consensus conservative proposal to replace ObamaCare envisions a more competitive market for coverage. It takes its cues from the benefits consumers’ want and not the mandates that Washington decrees. The resulting plans won’t have all of the same political bells and whistles as the ObamaCare. But more of the resulting plans would be affordable without heavy subsidies.

Learn more: How Marco Rubio is quietly killing Obamacare

By peeling away these subsidies, Rubio is helping to force this reckoning. It’s going to send a clear message to ObamaCare’s many constituencies inside and outside industry: They need to get on board with reforming or replacing the scheme, rather than lobbying for subsidies to bail them out of the law’s bloated enterprise.

The original Rubio provision called the Obama team’s bluff after they falsely asserted that the “risk corridors” would be budget neutral. Their promise was that these provisions would only shift money away from profitable health plans to help cross-subsidize the plans that experienced greater losses. This is how the law was written. The White House argued that the risk corridors wouldn’t skim extra money from the taxpayers. Then they sought to renege on that pledge.

Rubio’s prior measure held the administration to the plain text of the law.

Now Rubio is taking aim at another provision that’s being similarly stretched as a way to subsidize ObamaCare’s losses. His new letter concerns ObamaCare’s “reinsurance” program, designed to protect insurers against losses when they get their actuarial math wrong. Under the program, the feds collect money from profitable insurers and then redistribute it to health plans that end up enrolling more high-cost patients, and experience losses.

ObamaCare required that in its first year, the reinsurance program would collect $10 billion to reallocate to insurers. Another $2 billion would to go back to taxpayers. But not enough money was collected. So the Obama Administration, (through regulations) prioritized giving money to insurers over the $2 billion to the Treasury. This sleight of hand once again conflicted with the law’s plain reading.

Learn more: Marco Rubio is a new kind of Republican. Really

“This is unacceptable,” Hatch and Rubio write. “The statute in question is unambiguous, and the… regulation and recent practice violates its clear directive.” They point to a report they commissioned from the nonpartisan Congressional Research Service to back up their claim that the White House is violating the law.

The CRS report found that the Obama Administration’s interpretation “would appear to be in conflict with a plain reading” of ObamaCare. That text states that the $2 billion “shall be deposited into the general fund of the Treasury of the United States and may not be used for the program established under this section.”

ObamaCare’s proponents want to subsidize their way out of the law’s many woes, rather than reveal the law’s structurally flawed features. By systematically peeling away ObamaCare’s mask of subsidies, Rubio is forcing a constructive reckoning.