Topics: Clark Gregg, marvel's agents of shield, ming-na wen, Entertainment News

Plenty of TV shows have spun off from movies — “M*A*S*H,” “Alice,” “Friday Night Lights,” “Clueless.”

But perhaps none of them have come with quite so much anticipation as “Marvel’s Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.,” a serial drama set within the superheroic world of “The Avengers” that debuts on ABC September 24.

Unlike other such spinoffs, “S.H.I.E.L.D.’s” source material is very much a part of the contemporary culture — Marvel’s “Avengers” franchise continues to spawn hit movies, with “Iron Man 3″ drawing crowds this summer and a “Thor” sequel due in November. One of its creators, Joss Whedon, is hard at work on the sequel to “The Avengers”; the show’s being run day-to-day by Jed Whedon (Joss’s brother) and Maurissa Tancharoen (Jed’s wife).

Thor, Captain America, Iron Man and the rest of the Marvel superhero crew don’t show up, at least in the pilot of the show; it’s centered around Agent Coulson, the government liaison to the Avengers whose seeming death in the film catalyzed the superheroes’ fight to save earth. He’s back, and played by Clark Gregg, the television and film vet (of “The New Adventures of Old Christine” and the upcoming film “Labor Day,” as well as four Marvel movies).

Gregg admitted some initial trepidation about resurrecting a character who’d seemed to have died a hero’s death onscreen. After all, Coulson’s death was hardly a tossed-off moment — it was the emotional high point of the movie. And though hourlong action or sci-fi serials have had trouble sustaining themselves of late (from “Heroes” to “Terra Nova,” the list isn’t short), Gregg was confident that the show would be swell, though he admitted “I should really get scared about that, but I just can’t.”

His castmate, Ming-Na Wen, made the case for “S.H.I.E.L.D.’s” likely success yet clearer: “Thank God we have a healthy budget, which is really key — ABC is doing an amazing job in realizing, if you’re going to provide a show with the expectations of a Marvel movie, they have to offer us the chance to put it onscreen.”

And Gregg provides a vital tie to the movies — movies whose stars, like Robert Downey Jr., Samuel L. Jackson, Chris Hemsworth, and Scarlett Johansson, are contractually tied to enough projects to make weekly appearances on a TV show unfeasible. Gregg is just about the only person from the Marvel universe who could make a TV show work, though Wen made clear the Marvel DNA will be evident throughout: “People now know there are superheroes out there, there are aliens out there. That is part of [the show’s] universe, as much as the Internet and iPhones are just part of our daily lives.”

Marvel has been the dominant force in big-budget cinema since the summer of 2008. That year, the grim, grave “The Dark Knight” outgrossed the fun, sunny “Iron Man” — but “Iron Man’s” tone was the one that went on to be the house style of successful superhero movies. (“Man of Steel,” this year, aimed for the portentous tone of the Batman franchise, but seemed to miss that target slightly, underperforming “Iron Man 3″ at the box office.) Now, with a family-friendly series, Marvel moves one degree further from the comic-book trade — and, they can only hope, towards conquering one more medium. Gregg, on whose shoulders the bet rests, spoke to Salon.

I think a lot of people are dubious about the fact that your character in “The Avengers” had died, and now you’re back. Are you worried that people won’t be able to go along for the ride with that?

When you say go along for the ride, you mean like they won’t buy it?

Right.

I was a little bit concerned about it, honestly. Even though, this was my very first call with Joss Whedon, when he called about doing this, was—I thought that his sacrifice in “The Avengers” was so important. It made “The Avengers” work for me, as a fan of the comics and those movies, because it grounded it. You know, unless somebody you care about can be hurt, it’s not really a war. And, you know it’s hard to talk about, because I can’t really talk about, you know, the story that’s going to unfold about what I’m still doing here.

And I don’t even know it all, part of the fabric of the story is…the pilot is very clear that Phil Coulson believes he had a very close call, and that’s just turned out be…there turns out to be a lot more to the story than that, and it’s a lot darker and a lot more complex, and you don’t just come back from what he went through the same. And to me, that’s got weight and that’s the kind of comic book stuff I was always into, the stuff that had enough metaphorical or allegorical significance or weight.

To me, that was what hooked me. You know, I know Joss now. I know what really works for him, and know that when the stuff is just kind of like, fluffy and without darkness and kind of just like “bang, boom, pow,” it has no meaning for him, and it has no meaning for me either. So the movie starts to kind of talk about the rough form of its idea of what I was doing back there. It’s sort of to connect themes of what it’s like to come back from trauma, and how that lives in you, whether you really understand what you went through or not. And that journey, to me, you know, in a time when we have so many people coming home from war, or recovering from personal trauma in their lives—all of a sudden it felt grounded and it meant something to me. So, then to have it also have all the fun stuff, and the great sense of humor that Joss brought to “The Avengers” — once I knew those things, that was the package, I was no longer concerned about “The Avengers,” because I thought if anything, this was going to enhance what happened in “The Avengers,” if I can say that.

“The Avengers” is based upon the Marvel comic b0ok canon, and the television show is based upon “The Avengers.” How many degrees removed is too many — or is the universe expansive enough to handle endless additions?

Because I got involved at “Iron Man,” and I’ve kind of watched the way they’ve unfolded the movie universe, and for someone who actually likes comics, I believe that’s the way they did it because on the one hand it’s really faithful, super faithful, to the comic book fans, but clear they’re trying to basically film a comic book. They’re making them into movies and fully adapting them for that medium. And they found a way, they did it so shrewdly, by starting with Tony Stark, whose technology is just a few steps away from what we already have. And once they kind of landed that, then they moved to the much more ambitious world of Asgard [in “Thor”]. And I thought, oh my god, I know how they pulled off the guy in the iron suit, or the billionaire philanthropist, but how the hell are they going to pull off the long-haired guy with the hammer from Norse mythology. But step by step they kind of stood out, and were true to each specific character and comic book’s own world. Once they built the fabric of the story, it sort of felt like chapters of this epic novel, and now, to me, the idea that they’re going to expand into the television weekly serial part of the genre makes perfect sense, because that’s what “S.H.I.E.L.D.” feels like.