PHOENIX — The Rockies donned red-white-and-blue ballcaps Saturday night at Chase Field, but their Fourth of July was a big dud.

The evening was was capped off by an ugly error in the eighth inning that allowed the Arizona Diamondbacks to turn a close game into a laughing matter.

Arizona put down three consecutive bunts. On the third bunt, Cliff Pennington executed perfectly to score Jarrod Saltalamacchia from third. Meanwhile, charging first baseman Wilin Rosario fielded the bunt, and then whirled, jumped and inexplicably threw the ball to a vacant first base, allowing two more runs to score.

And so, the Rockies lost, 7-3.

The current 10-game road trip, one that could determine the makeup of the team as the July 31 trading deadline creeps closer, is turning out to be a major bust. With one game remaining on the trip, Colorado is 2-7.

Rosario, the former catcher who is still learning the nuances of playing first base, said he would field a similar bunt differently the next time. After the game, he consulted with shortstop Troy Tulowitzki and second baseman DJ LeMahieu about the play.

“They said it’s a tough play, but they recommended to me: ‘Don’t jump and throw,’ ” he said. “They said, ‘If I don’t have a play at home plate, make sure and look to first before I throw the ball.’ That’s what I will do next time.”

It’s rare for a team to bunt three times in a row. And in the ninth inning of Friday night’s game, Arizona’s A.J. Pollock dropped a bunt single between the mound and third base. But Rockies manager Walt Weiss dismissed the idea that opponents are taking advantage of flaws in the Rockies’ defensive set up or fielding skills.

“Nobody is seeing anything,” Weiss said. “We didn’t defend the bunt the last couple of nights. Our guys know how to defend bunts. We just didn’t do it the last couple of nights, it’s nothing more than that.”

For the fourth consecutive game, the Rockies’ offense produce few fireworks and their starting pitching was hardly star-spangled.

The Rockies loaded the bases with one out in the eighth and were searching for timely hit. Though Rosario drove in a run with a groundout, the mini-rally ended when Drew Stubbs chopped out to short.

“Losing in general is just bad, no matter if we get out-pitched, out-hit or out-executed. There is not much more we can say,” third baseman Nolan Arenado said. “We haven’t got that big lately and obviously it’s been hurting us.”

The game turned in the fourth when Pollock hit a two-run double down the left-field line off Colorado starter David Hale, scoring Chris Ownings and Nick Ahmed.

In the first inning, the Diamondbacks put Hale in an early 2-0 hole, and he went on to pitch an uneven five innings: Four runs (three earned) on five hits. With their offense in a mid-summer hibernation, the Rockies needed an ace-like performance, but Hale couldn’t deliver.

“It was rough early with David, but he settled in and did just fine. He kept us in position,” Weiss said.

Hale (2-4, 5.89 ERA) has not won since June 8 vs. St. Louis, a string of fiive consecutive starts.

“I was a little wild in the first inning, but I settled in after that,” Hale said. “If that (double) by Pollock doesn’t sink down the line it’s a different game. The pitch was right where I wanted it, and I wanted him to hit it to the left side, but he found a hole.”

One-time Arizona ace Patrick Corbin, coming back from Tommy John surgery and making his first big-league start since Sept. 27, 2013, was hardly dominant, but he was effective enough. The left-hander departed in the fifth with a 4-2 lead, having given up eight hits. He didn’t issue a walk and struck out three.

Arizona staked that 2-0 lead in the first by loading the base on an error by Arenado and consecutive walks off of by Hale by David Peralta and Paul Goldschmidt. Ysmany Thomas drove in the first run with a groundout, and Jake Lamb followed with a bloop RBI single.

Colorado tied the game, 2-2, in the third on a run-scoring double by Charlie Blackmon, followed by an RBI single by LeMahieu.

With a first-inning double, Tulowitzki extended his hitting streak to 17 games and has reached base in 32 consecutive games. Both marks are career highs, and also are the longest active streaks in the majors.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp