Topics: Barack Obama, Editor's Picks, Iraq, ISIL, isis, Mitch McConnell, Rachel Maddow, Rand Paul, Syria, war powers act, Politics News

If there’s one thing everyone can agree upon when the powers-that-be want to do something potentially disastrous, it’s that there should be a “robust debate” in Congress, particularly when it comes to matters of war. That doesn’t mean that sincere people don’t want a meaningful debate that would tip the scales. It’s just that we don’t ever have them.

Commenters from the left, such as Rachel Maddow, are begging for members of Congress to take the lead and vote on whether or not the country should escalate its presence in the Middle East to fight the terrorist group ISIS (among other things) while leaders on the right such as Mitch McConnell are suggesting the president must come to the Congress for approval (which he guarantees the president will get, by the way). Even the leading libertarian Sen. Rand Paul is saying the most important thing right now is for the Congress to … debate. (He is suddenly unwilling to discuss whether he is personally for this proposed military action for some reason.)

In fact the founders debated all this before they put in the Constitution that the Congress should have the power to declare war. It went like this:

“To make war”

Mr. PINKNEY opposed the vesting this power in the Legislature. Its proceedings were too slow. It wd. meet but once a year. The Hs. of Reps. would be too numerous for such deliberations. The Senate would be the best depositary, being more acquainted with foreign affairs, and most capable of proper resolutions. If the States are equally represented in Senate, so as to give no advantage to large States, the power will notwithstanding be safe, as the small have their all at stake in such cases as well as the large States. It would be singular for one authority to make war, and another peace. Mr. BUTLER. The objections agst. the Legislature lie in great degree agst. the Senate. He was for vesting the power in the President, who will have all the requisite qualities, and will not make war but when the Nation will support it. Mr. MADISON and Mr. GERRY moved to insert “declare,” striking out “make” war; leaving to the Executive the power to repel sudden attacks. Mr. SHARMAN thought it stood very well. The Executive shd. be able to repel and not to commence war. “Make” better than “declare” the latter narrowing the power too much. Mr. GERRY never expected to hear in a republic a motion to empower the Executive alone to declare war. Mr. ELSWORTH. there is a material difference between the cases of making war and making peace. It shd. be more easy to get out of war, than into it. War also is a simple and overt declaration. peace attended with intricate & secret negociations. Mr. MASON was agst. giving the power of war to the Executive, because not safely to be trusted with it; or to the Senate, because not so constructed as to be entitled to it. He was for clogging rather than facilitating war; but for facilitating peace. He preferred “declare” to “make.” On the motion to insert “declare”-in place of “make”, it was agreed to.

The debate about war powers has been with us since the beginning and hasn’t changed much since then. There have been five official declarations of war: the War of 1812, the Mexican-American War, the Spanish-American War, World War I and World War II. Needless to say, those are hardly the only wars America has fought, which means that the president has used his authority under that power to “repel sudden attacks” many times. President Obama forcefully asserted his authority to unilaterally order military action against ISIS just yesterday.

However, while the executive almost always reserves his war-making prerogatives, he will also welcome a congressional resolution endorsing his decision. And in his speech the president explicitly asked Congress to provide more money to implement his decision, a vote that could stand as proxy for congressional approval. War is a risky endeavor and even a commander-in-chief would like to be able to point to his fellow officials as comrades in bad decision-making should things go awry.

And so we find ourselves at another of those moments, where people from all sides are clamoring for that “robust debate” about whether and how the U.S. should deploy its mighty military power in the Middle east. As this usually unfolds, the president, in his role as leader of the armed forces, takes the first step and lays out a plan, asserting his constitutional authority to do exactly what he wants to do. Now it remains for everyone else to decide if they agree with him. So what we’re talking about is really political calculation, which, again, everyone believes should be debated. Robustly.

But nonetheless after this robust debate, Congress is going to vote for war in one way or the other. Even in times of great skepticism about the use of military power, or what seems to be a consensus in one party or another, the end result is the same. If the president wants to go to war (particularly if the people agree, which this week’s polling suggests they do), the Congress is the last institution that will balk.