Brookings, SD

Last year the Jackrabbit women captured their sixth Summit League title resulting in another NCAA Tournament berth. They graduated two starters in Megan Waytashek and Mariah Clarin, but will look to sixth year senior Gabby Boever and Chloe Cornemann to help them reach their expectation of returning to the dance.

"Our expectation is to win," Boever said. "We want to have the best season that we have ever had here. We want to get to the NCAA Tournament again, win the conference obviously, and to advance as far as we can in the tournament," she added.

The Jacks will also lean on juniors Kerri Young and Clarissa Ober, who combined to average 14 points and seven rebounds a game. The team's top returning scorer is sophomore sensation Macy Miller. The Mitchell native set the school's freshman scoring record with 453 points, but even Head Coach Aaron Johnston is skeptical she can match what she did a year ago.

"For Macy the easiest year she will ever have will be her freshman year, because expectations weren't near as high for her and teams didn't really focus on her that much early on. Now as a sophomore she is going to be asked to do more and other teams are going to focus on her more. She is going to have a year where she is going to have to improve her game in some areas and I think she is willing to do that. She will have a good year, but it will be a lot tougher than maybe she thinks it will," Johnston said.

In fact this year in general will be tougher than usual for SDSU. They open up their regular season with three home games, the second against Arkansas, and the third against national powerhouse Notre Dame. They close out the first month of the season with three games in the Virgin Islands where they will square off with another Final Four team, Maryland.

"Oh yeah it's going to be a tough one, but we still have the expectation to win games. We don't care who you are we are going to come after you with the idea to win. We are going to play our hardest and come together to get after it," SDSU Sophomore Guard Alexis Alexander said.

"For our fans this year to see Notre Dame, DePaul, and Arkansas is pretty special. We schedule with the idea of trying to create those special opportunities for our players and our fans, so I am excited it worked out," Johnston said.



The Jackrabbit women will tip off their first of two exhibition games this Thursday when St. Cloud St. comes to Frost Arena. Their regular season gets underway November 13th against Marist in Brookings.

College {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.