National Latino AIDS Awareness Day (NLAAD) 2014

The Latino Commission on AIDS (LCOA) and its partners are the community sponsors for National Latino AIDS Awareness Day (NLAAD, which is observed on annually on October 15. The theme for NLAAD 2014 is To End AIDS, Commit to Act – Para Acabar con el SIDA, Comprometete a Actuar. Tony Ochoa, Program Manager for NLAAD at LCOA has said: “When delivering HIV/AIDS awareness or general messages, it is critical to assess how the communities we are trying to reach are communicating. To increase HIV/AIDS awareness among Latinos, social media platforms are no longer just an option but necessary.”

The NLAAD website has many online resources to view and share. You can find an event near you or learn where to get an HIV test. The site features PSAs, videos, event photos, and podcasts that are also shared on Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram. In addition, you can visit the AIDS.gov NLAAD page for resources to support your online communications about the impact of HIV within Latino communities.

How Latinos are Using the Internet

In 2013, the Pew Hispanic Center reported that the “digital divide” between Latinos and other ethnic groups is closing. Pew surveys indicated that 76% of Latino Internet users use a cell phone, tablet, or other mobile handheld device to connect, at least occasionally. The number rises to 87% for Latinos ages 18-29. Of Latino Internet users aged 18-19, 84% say they use social networking sites such as Facebook and Twitter–60% in English. The data show that reaching Latinos on the Internet and using social media with culturally appropriate HIV messages may be a good outreach strategy.

Act Against AIDS Campaigns to Reach Latinos

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recently launched We Can Stop HIV One Conversation at a Time/Podemos Detener el VIH Una Conversación a la Vez, a national communication campaign that encourages Hispanics/Latinos to talk openly about HIV/AIDS with their families, friends, partners, and communities. Check out its resources, including a video, telenovela, PSA, and more.

The CDC’s REASONS/RAZONES campaign reminds Latino gay and bisexual men that there are many reasons to take an HIV test and that everyone can play a role in stopping the spread of HIV. Its videos feature Latino gay and bisexual men sharing their reasons for getting an HIV test. Widgets, social media posts, a social media kit, and other online resources are also available.

Recursos en Español

AIDS.gov maintains the page Recursos en Español that compiles HIV/AIDS-related Spanish language materials from the Federal Government.

You Can Use Social Media to Communicate about NLAAD

Here are some ideas for using social media to spread the word about the impact of HIV on Latino communities:

Twitter: When you use social media to observe the day, please use the hashtag #NLAAD so that you can be a part of the larger conversation. Are you following LCOA’s Twitter handle, @NLAAD ?

Facebook: Need Facebook cover art? Check out the resources from Greater Than AIDS with the theme ‘Somos Mas Que SIDA, ’ produced especially for this day.

Pinterest: Interested in pinning? AIDS.gov’s NLAAD Pinterest board is live . Another way to use Pinterest to promote NLAAD is the Hispanic Council on Aging’s board .

Mobile Apps: AIDS.gov has apps that can help you share information to bring awareness to HIV in your community. To find places to get tested, you can use the HIV Testing and Care Services Locator app to locate clinics that provide services in both Spanish and English. You can also download the HIV/AIDS Basics app to find out more about HIV/AIDS prevention, care, and treatment facts and resources.

Health-related information on social media in Spanish:

Centers for Disease Control Act Against AIDS: @talkHIV

Affordable Care Act Espanol @CuidadoDeSalud

Office of Minority Health: @SaluddeMinorias

InfoSIDA: @infosida

How are you planning to observe NLAAD? Share with us how you are using your social media networks to promote HIV/AIDS awareness in your community.