By Marianela Toledo | Florida Watchdog

CUTLER BAY — Karelia Stanford sits at one of three tables in the main waiting room in the Doris Ison Health Center in Cutler Bay, where patients — mainly uninsured Hispanics and other minorities — go in search of various treatments.

She is a certified application counselor, a designation given to specially-training staff and volunteers charged with helping people understand apply, and enroll for Obamacare. Standord has everything ready: her computer, informational brochures and a hand-written tally of the visitors.

“At the moment we have zero applications completed,” she told Florida Watchdog. “So far the system allows us to create an account, start the application process and then gets frizzy,” she said.

Her frustration typifies the struggles health centers throughout the country are facing as they attempt to get the new health care program up and running. Read our report of October 9.

“People are eager to have information about the new health program because many can’t afford health insurance in the private market,” Stanford explained.

Since the program began Oct. 1, about 200 people have sought her help with navigating the program. While the federal government has yet to share with the public any of the enrollment particulars with regards to data on race, income or nationality, Stanford estimated the majority of her visitors were either Americans or permanent residents.

But people with visas will be entitled to benefits, albeit with some restrictions.

“People want to know if they qualify for a subsidy and how much the insurance will cost them,” Stanford said.

To qualify for a subsidy, income first needs to be verified. “In the application process they verify that the income they say [they earned] matches what has been reported and we have seen that not everyone qualifies to receive Medicaid, but can apply to buy subsidized insurance,” she said.

Among the people who anxiously await more information is Judy Rosita, a single mother of three from Haiti who has lived in the United States for 21 years.

“I want to know [what it will cost] because I don’t earn enough money to afford health insurance and need help,” she said.

The health center recently received about $600,000 in federal funds to help recruit the uninsured. According to the hospital’s 2012 annual report, 68 percent of its patients didn’t have insurance.

The federal government has already given Florida more than $8 million in its push to get more than 1 million people (44 percent who are currently uninsured) enrolled in the program.

Stanford’s employer used its money to train her and others for that uninsured push. Now, with pen in hand, she waits patiently for the bugs to be worked out so she can do her job.

Contact Marianela Toledo at Marianela.Toledo@FloridaWatchdog.org twitter @mtoledoreporter