Gov. Scott Walker talks to potential voters during a campaign stop at Lori's Cafe Friday in Midland, Texas. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Madison— After soaring high for most of 2015, Gov. Scott Walker's presidential campaign has hit turbulence in recent weeks.

With his poll numbers plummeting in crucial early states, Walker has floundered as real estate magnate Donald Trump has surged. Walker has made comments of late that he has had to clarify or back off from about birthright citizenship and building a wall on Canada's border.

"He doesn't have room for many more mistakes," said Jennifer Duffy of the Cook Political Report.

Many others have taken a dim view of Walker's performance of late, but some have given a sunnier assessment, saying Walker's recent woes reflect the natural ups and downs of presidential campaigns.

Whatever the future holds, there is no denying the past month has been rough. According to polling averages compiled by Real Clear Politics, Walker since early August has dropped from 20.5% to 6.8% in Iowa. Since April, he has dropped from 20.3% to 6.3% in New Hampshire and 15.3% to 6.7% in South Carolina.

Those three states hold the first three presidential nominating contests. Iowa is viewed as particularly important for Walker, who has campaigned extensively there.

The latest sign of difficulty for Walker came in a national poll Thursday by Monmouth University in New Jersey, which found Walker at 3%. That moved him from third place to eighth place among the GOP candidates in one month in the university's national polling.

In the face of those numbers, Walker has been trying to reboot his campaign. In a swing through Texas and in a Fox News interview in recent days, he pledged to "wreak havoc" on Washington, D.C., and special interests if he were elected president.

He will get help with a wave of TV ads starting this week by a super PAC run by former top campaign aides. That group, Unintimidated PAC, is spending more than $16 million in states with early presidential nominating contests, with the bulk of it concentrated on Iowa and South Carolina.

Those ads focus on Walker's stand against unions in 2011 amid massive protests and an attempt to recall him from office. It hits on a core theme that some of his backers say he needs to highlight anew instead of getting bogged down by side issues.

Walker's recent problems began in early August, when he mostly faded into the background during a lively debate featuring him and nine of the other candidates. Walker didn't register with viewers, so the attention went to the other candidates.

In the weeks that followed, he appeared to follow the lead of Trump, whose numbers continued to rise as he pounded on the need for a tough immigration policy.

"There's a little 'let's keep up with the Donald' going on here,'" Duffy said of Walker.

She said he is showing a "tentativeness" that he hadn't exhibited before and reviving early fears that he couldn't withstand the kind of scrutiny that comes with a presidential campaign.

In a conference call with supporters last month, Walker said he heard from people after the debate that they wanted to "feel the passion," according to The Washington Post.

"We need to step it up and remind people that we didn't just take on the unions and Democrats, we had to take on my own party establishment, those who did not want to take on the status quo," Walker said on the call, according to the newspaper.

The idea that he took on the Republican establishment backfired somewhat, as legislative leaders in Wisconsin bristled at the idea they weren't on board with the labor limits they helped Walker write into law in 2011.

Craig Robinson, editor of TheIowaRepublican.com, said caucusgoers in his state have been told Walker is a reform-minded governor, but of late "they're seeing someone who is acting more like a politician, making calculated moves."

"It takes discipline" to run for president, Robinson said. "When you say you're going to build a 5,000-mile wall with Canada, that's not disciplined. That's crazy talk."

Walker is contending he never said he supported building a wall along the Canadian border, but Robinson said Walker should have known how his comments would have been perceived and should not have made them.

Walker last week was asked on "Meet the Press" if a wall on the Canadian border was needed. He said people in law enforcement in New Hampshire brought up the idea to him and it was "a legitimate issue for us to look at."

After being peppered with criticism, Walker on Tuesday on "America's Newsroom" said he had never supported a wall and "this is just a joke in terms of how people react to things." Someone previously involved in local law enforcement had raised the prospect of getting additional federal help for the northern border, and that's what Walker considered legitimate, he said in that second interview.

Walker's campaign would not provide details about who this person was or when or where Walker talked to him or her.

The comments came after a torturous week in which Walker — responding to Trump — signaled he supported ending birthright citizenship, then said he didn't have a position on it and then said he didn't want to change the U.S. Constitution's guarantee of birthright citizenship.

"Of all the problems Walker's had, they're all self-inflicted," Robinson said.

Walker has been too cautious in Iowa and should have seized on his early momentum, Robinson said. Walker has been making a "soft sale" that has made conservative voters like him, but not willing to commit to him, Robinson said.

Walker has visited 25 of the Hawkeye state's 99 counties and has pledged to hit all of them, following a strategy long championed by U.S. Sen. Chuck Grassley of Iowa. That approach was effective for former U.S. Sen Rick Santorum, who won the Iowa caucus in 2012, and former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, who won it in 2008.

But Robinson said it is less powerful this time because more than a half dozen are employing it.

"I don't have any problem with Pizza Ranch, but it's kind of boring," Robinson said, referring to a frequent venue for campaign events. "I fear that Walker might be running campaigns of the past, not campaigns of the future."

Despite his criticisms, Robinson gave high marks to Walker's Iowa team, which includes David Polyansky and Eric Woolson.

Walker in recent weeks has tried to adopt a more aggressive style by calling on President Barack Obama to cancel a state dinner with China's president. He has also argued anti-police rhetoric has increased and racial tensions have worsened under the nation's first African-American president.

Walker has also started rolling out his policy positions. At a stop in Minneapolis, he announced a plan to repeal the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, and replace it with tax credits to help offset the cost of health insurance. In a speech at the Citadel military college in Charleston, S.C., he spelled out his beliefs on fighting terrorism, boosting military spending and establishing a no-fly zone in Syria.

Walker spokeswoman AshLee Strong disputed the criticisms of the campaign.

"Voters like Scott Walker and they like the results he's gotten in Wisconsin," she said in a written statement. "Despite the chattering class wanting to call the race 15 months out, we will continue to share Governor Walker's vision for America and record of results in Wisconsin."

Mark Graul, a GOP strategist based in Green Bay, said the talk of Walker's problems is overblown, noting the Iowa caucus isn't scheduled until Feb. 1.

"All campaigns, particularly these national campaigns, have ebbs and flows. It's never a straight glide path," he said.

Graul said he still views Walker as a front-runner with U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida and former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, who has faced his own set of challenges in Trump's shadow.

At this stage of the race, the most important thing for candidates is to raise money and build support among grass-roots activists, Graul said. And Walker is doing that, he said.

"When you look at his story and the reforms he's been able to implement in Wisconsin, he has, I believe, the best story to tell of any presidential candidate," Graul said.

Of Walker's recent flaps, Graul said: "These are tiny little paper cuts against a guy who is the only governor in United States history to survive a recall. I see those as small little blips."

"All the hand-wringing will be gone in a month," he said.

More on Scott Walker

To read more on the Republican governor's run for the presidency, go to jsonline.com/scottwalker