Colorado’s largest New Year’s Day party celebrating the modern world’s first legal recreational pot sales hit a snag this week, but recovered quickly.

The big Cannabition event originally scheduled at Broadway venue City Hall on Jan. 1 will no longer happen at the Regas Christou-owned space, the club owner said Monday.

“It’s definitely not happening at City Hall,” said Christou, who also owns nightclubs the Church, Vinyl and others along the Broadway/Lincoln Street corridor.

But Cannabition organizers J.J. Walker and Matt Brown said Tuesday they are moving the 21-plus event to downtown club Norad Dance Bar, where pot won’t be available for sale but it will be openly consumed as advertised — a somewhat untested and contested experiment.

“This is a private event, and smoking marijuana within private is completely legal, so we’ll actually be able to consume on site within the boundaries of state and city laws,” said Walker. “We’ll have vaporizing inside, and I believe dabbing is also legal, but I don’t think joint smoking will be inside — but that’ll be out on the patio.”

Growing and holding marijuana in Colorado has been legal for a year, but shops can start selling pot for recreational purposes on Jan. 1.

Organizers will have an open-to-the-public party on Norad’s ground floor with alcohol sales but no smoking/consuming pot for a $10 cover; Upstairs at Norad will have no alcohol but open pot consumption, a private party via an online invitation-request system.

How the private party works: Interested people can request invites at cannabition.com, and then they’ll purchase $5 tickets online via a promotional code emailed to them by one of the party’s sponsors. Day-of invitation requests will be available. Tickets for Cannabition’s private portion will not be sold at the door, but Walker said consumers will be able to request the invite and purchase tickets on their smartphones.

“Having that extra step of going through one of our sponsors to get the invite is our process of keeping this event private,” said Walker.

The Cannabition team and Christou’s lawyers had been in contact with the office of City Council member Charlie Brown and others, they said, but those conversations weren’t enough to make Christou and his team feel safe about hosting the event.

“We wanted to see how this could affect our liquor license,” said Doug Bohm, marketing and promotions director at Christou’s SoCo Nightlife. “But the powers that be are being intentionally vague about the legality of the event.”

Councilman Brown didn’t return messages left Tuesday.

“We’ve been going back and forth with various people in city government for about three weeks now,” said Matt Brown, who runs Cannabition as well as marijuana tourism company My 420 Tours. “We could have planned the event, not told anybody and gone with it, and it would have been fine. But then we realized the city has very few definitions, and nobody knows what you can or can’t do under the current law.”

But Cannabition moves on regardless. And Walker hopes his event has a different aesthetic than the parties that came before.

“Everything in the past has been about protesting,” Walker said, “and I want this to be a celebration of how far we’ve come in Colorado and showing that this is the first day of recreational pot being sold, which has been 70-plus years in the making.”

Ricardo Baca: 303-954-1394, rbaca@denverpost.com or twitter.com/bruvs