Sofia Carpenter gave birth to Alexander David Carpenter early New Year's Day

Alexander David Carpenter, the first baby born in Loveland in 2014, gets plenty of attention from his mom Sofia Carpenter, center, his big sister Cielo Carpenter, 10, and his aunt Maria Gonzalez, far left, on Wednesday, Jan. 1, 2014, at Medical Center of the Rockies in Loveland. Alexander was born at 4:28 am, weighed 7 pounds and was 20 inches long. ( Jenny Sparks )

Sofia Carpenter might have hoped for a New Year's Day baby, but that was the last thing she was thinking about as she labored for 20 hours Tuesday to bring Alexander David Carpenter into the world at Medical Center of the Rockies.

"I just wanted him out," she said through her sister, Maria Gonzalez, who helped interpret Wednesday morning as Carpenter rested in bed with her baby boy.

Alexander was born at 4:28 a.m. Wednesday, beating out another morning birth at MCR and one at McKee Medical Center for the first Loveland birth of 2014.

He was 20 inches long and weighed 7 pounds.

Gonzalez said that the family had a minor competition with a family next door for the first baby of the new year. However, the other child wasn't born until after 7 a.m., Gonzalez said.

Sofia Carpenter holds her newborn baby, Alexander David Carpenter's hand Wednesday, Jan. 1, 2014, at Medical Center of the Rockies in Loveland. Alexander was the first baby born this new year in Loveland at Medical Center of the Rockies. ( Jenny Sparks )

Carpenter's due date was initially Dec. 29. She was told a couple of hours after his birth that her baby had been the first born in Loveland.

"It was a big surprise," she said.

MCR volunteers organized a basket of goodies for the family, which included gender-neutral yellow blankets, clothes, pacifiers and toys for the family.

Alexander's sister, Cielo, cuddled with her new baby brother on Wednesday and slyly told her aunt Maria, "He's mine."

"When I was little, I always asked for a baby brother," said 10-year-old Cielo.

She can't wait to play with, and get in trouble with, her new brother. She plans to teach him to play basketball since that is her favorite sport.

Advertisement

Carpenter is excited to take Alexander home and get a room ready for him. She hopes he grows up to be a good student and play basketball.

The family lives in Greeley and Carpenter's mother, Isabel Gonzalez, will watch the baby while his mother is at work.

According to marketing strategist Jill Clark with University of Colorado Health, Medical Center of the Rockies had 842 deliveries in 2013. Ninety-four of those were delivered in December, which was a record-breaking month for the year. On average, the units at MCR delivered 70 babies a month in 2013. The baby count a year ago December 2012 was 40 births.

Jessica Benes can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 530, or jbenes@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @JessicaBenes. Read her blog at jessicabenes.com.