Time is money for Americans in long wait for generic drug approval

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

As Americans spend hundreds of billions of dollars on prescription drugs, concerns are rising about high-cost medicines and focusing attention on the slow pace at which government regulators approve generic competition.

The Food and Drug Administration has received nearly $1 billion in new fees in the last four years earmarked to help the agency speed its review of generic drugs, which can cut prices of name-brand pharmaceuticals. The money also was intended to help it clear a backlog of thousands of pending applications — including hundreds filed by Mylan NV — but the generic drug industry and some congressional leaders are worried it's not moving fast enough.

While the agency admits that median approval times have increased, FDA staff have made progress on a backlog of pending applications, cutting the number from 4,700 in 2012 down to 3,500 last year, according to Sen. Lamar Alexander, R-Tennessee.

“Some progress has been made on the backlog of applications for generic drugs — some progress, but certainly not enough,” Alexander said at a January hearing before the Senate Health Committee he chairs. “The troubling news is that it is taking longer for the FDA to get drugs through the approval process.”

The median time it takes the FDA to approve an application for a generic drug has steadily risen since companies began paying additional fees in 2012 to boost the agency's funding, according to a survey of member companies by the Generic Pharmaceutical Association, a Washington, D.C., trade group.

In the federal government's fiscal year that ended Sept. 30, 2011, the median approval time was 30 months. By 2014, the time had grown to 48 months, the association found.

“Too many generic drug applications, including potential first generics, have been sitting with the agency for many years before being picked up by a reviewer,” David Gaugh, senior vice president at the association, said in a statement. “These delays contribute significantly to rising health care costs and impact access to pharmaceuticals for millions of patients.”

FDA officials say the agency has restructured its Office of Generic Drugs, hired nearly 1,200 staff and invested in technology with the funding generated from the Generic Drug User Fee Amendments, the federal law implemented in 2012 that charges generic drug companies fees totaling about $300 million a year.

The law, which is up for renewal in 2017, also funds increased inspections of overseas pharmaceutical plants that export drugs to the U.S. market.

Sandy Walsh, an FDA spokeswoman, said median approval times for generic drugs have risen temporarily as the agency digs into the backlog of applications. The agency also has said that it is putting priority on reviewing and more quickly approving the applications for drugs for which there is no generic version and for those in short supply.

“We are confident that the numbers are going to look better now that we're up and running strong under the improvements made from (the law),” Walsh said.

Without generic competition, drug prices remain high, experts say. Once there are several competitors, prices can fall as much as 80 percent. But spending on prescription drugs has increased in recent years, rising 18 percent from $253 billion in 2010 to $298 billion in 2014, according to Kaiser Family Foundation, a California nonprofit research organization.

The rise in spending is attributed to two trends, experts say. Pharmaceutical companies are introducing more high-priced specialty medicines, used to treat cancer and other complex diseases, such as hepatitis C drug Sovaldi, which can cost up to $29,900 a month, according to America's Health Insurance Plans, an industry group. And more people are gaining health coverage under the Affordable Care Act, which gives them access to prescription drugs.

The backlog has affected Mylan, one of the world's largest generic drug producers. The company, based in the Netherlands and run from offices in Cecil, was an outspoken advocate for the new fees in 2011 but has seen several high-profile applications delayed by the FDA in recent years.

The company, which has 265 applications pending with the FDA, declined to comment.

But CEO Heather Bresch has complained of FDA delays on conference calls with analysts after not receiving approval for generics the company had expected.

“Regulatory delays in the U.S. prevented us from launching several significant products we had expected to introduce toward the end of last year,” Bresch said in February 2014.

Two of Mylan's pending applications are for blockbuster drugs for which there are few to no generic alternatives.

Mylan submitted an application for a generic version of the multiple sclerosis drug Copaxone in 2009. The road to approval has been complicated by court battles over patents held by the drug's creator, Israel-based Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, which has tried to block competition for the drug that generates an estimated $4 billion in annual sales. Copaxone can cost about $6,000 a month for a version of the drug that's taken daily. Swiss drugmaker Novartis last year received approval for a generic version, which it calls Glatopa and can cost about $5,000 a month. Mylan continues to wait for its approval.

While Mylan's application for Copaxone has lagged, the company said this year that it could be the first to market with a generic version of asthma medication Advair, which posted sales of about $5 billion for its developer, GlaxoSmithKline, in 2014. A single Advair Diskus inhaler, which delivers the combination of two drugs, can cost more than $330. The price of Advair jumped 67 percent since 2011, according to an analysis by Reuters, which this month found the 10 best-selling drugs in the United States had hikes of 50 percent or higher in the last five years.

Under FDA policy implemented as part of the Generic Drug User Fee Act, the agency accepted Mylan's application for generic Advair in February and said it will decide whether to approve the copy by March 2017.

Alex Nixon is a Tribune-Review staff writer. Reach him at 412-320-7928 or anixon@tribweb.com.