By Dave Andrusko

Continuing our series of posts explaining how pro-abortionists are treating what happened in 2015 and what they are (gloomily) forecasting for 2016, at this point I’d be talking about “Who Decides? The Status of Women’s Reproductive Rights in the United States.”

Ordinarily by this time NARAL Pro-Choice would have produced what will be its 25th edition of how its annual evaluation of the state of the abortion landscape. But as far as I can tell, NARAL hasn’t cranked out “Who Decides,” or at least has not publicized it.

Which brings us to the pro-abortion Population Institute’s “A 50-State Report Card.” You can read its analysis at populationinstitute.org.

Anything interesting? Three conclusions are worth addressing.

#1. I hadn’t taken the time to read any prior Population Institute report cards. So I was stunned to learn that for 2014 it gave the United States as a whole a “C.” Pro-abortionists never give higher than a “D.”

#2. Which is what PI gave the nation for 2015–more specifically, a “D+” And given its grading assessments, we were lucky to get that. According to the report, “Four states received an A (California, New Jersey, Oregon and Washington), but 19 states received a failing grade.” I know the specifics of a few states myself and suffice it to say, even from a rigidly pro-abortion position, the state did not merit an “F.”

#3. “Last year was a terrible one for reproductive health and rights in the U.S., but 2016 could be even worse,” was the conclusion drawn by Ms. Magazine’s Jennie Wetter. For example, Wetter notes that 2016 kicked off with a vote in the House of Representatives that (in my words) would have re-directed most of the federal dollars from PPFA to community health centers and repealed many parts of Obamacare, including the program that provides tax-based subsidies for about 1,000 health plans that cover elective abortions.

President Obama’s vetoed H.R. 3762 –“The Restoring Americans’ Healthcare Freedom Reconciliation Act”–which only underscores both Wetter’s summary and the implication of the Population Institute’s report card: they are counting on electing another pro-abortion President.