The Weehawken and Union City police departments are working together in searching for the intruder who triggered lockdowns at schools in Union City and Weehawken, according to Weehawken Public Safety Director Jeff Welz.

On Thursday an intruder was caught on camera at George Washington Elementary in Union City, prompting a lockdown of the school that drew hundreds of concerned parents to the school.

The intruder is believed to be between 30 and 40 years old, and was seen wearing gray pants, a gray long-sleeve shirt, and a backpack, Union City Police Chief Robert Molinari said Thursday.

The man was not captured leaving the school located at the corner of 39th Street and New York Avenue. Welz believes that the intruder then went directly to Daniel Webster Elementary School, on Palisade Avenue near 28th Street.

Welz said the Weehawken school was on lockdown at around 3:30 p.m, and police officials are investigating exactly what time the intruder entered and left the school.

At George Washington Elementary School all faculty are required to buzz in at the beginning of the school day using the buzzer system, says Union City Public Schools Superintendent Stanley Sanger. All students and faculty go through the same door.

Sanger said the district used the 64 cameras that monitor the school to learn that the intruder entered the building and they also traced his steps.

According to Sanger, 25 percent of students at George Washington school did not attend school — but he attributed the high number to the start of the Memorial Day weekend.

"Today we were more vigilant, trying to create and reflect a sense of normalcy," Sanger said.

Molinari could not be reached for comment yesterday.

Meanwhile, at Daniel Webster school, where is was annual "school pride day," there were detectives inside the school and unmarked cars and additional officers outside the school.

"We want kids to enjoy their annual pride day with no fear," said Welz. "From my understanding it went off without a hitch."