A study, “Dressing Disruption is a Major Factor for Catheter Infections,” published in Critical Care Medicine, confirms the relationship between multiple catheter dressing disruptions/changes and the increased risk of MCRI and CRBSI.

To provide nurses and other medical professional with cutting-edge technology to minimize catheter dressing disruptions, Biolife introduces StatSeal Disc. Using the same FDA-cleared formulation of potassium ferrate and hydrophilic polymer found in StatSeal Powder, StatSeal Disc creates an instant seal to stop the flow of blood and exudates from PICC and central line insertions. The seal keeps access sites dry, intact and protected from contamination.

While traditional access dressings (sponges, gels, gauze) absorb blood and exudates, mandating dressing changes three times in seven days on average, one StatSeal Disc application lasts seven days to dramatically minimize dressing disruption.

“Like we’ve seen in our hospital, the study reports that disruption of the catheter’s dressing increases the risk of colonization or infection, as much as 12-fold,” says Louis M. Guzzi, MD, a critical care physician in Orlando, Fla. “Since keeping the site pristine and sterile is paramount to a healthy outcome, I’m glad that a proven powder we already use to seal access sites is now available in a convenient disc that fits securely around the catheter. This easy-to-use application will definitely prove beneficial to our nurses, patents and even our purchasing managers.”

Currently, StatSeal Powder is used in hospitals around the country, including six of the top 10 children’s hospitals. According to Lauren Blough, RN, at Biolife, the new disc is being clinically tested in many of the top hospitals in the country

“From my own experience as a nurse for over 25 years and then traveling the country to meet with doctors on behalf of StatSeal, I see firsthand how big an issue dressing disruptions are,” says Blough. “For the first time, medical professionals have an effective and proven alternative to absorbent dressings including the CHG sponges and gels. When these products are left soiled and unchanged, they can contribute to infections.”

Based on feedback from the company’s own testing, Blough states, “The use of StatSeal requires less training, leads to shorter product evaluation, is less disruptive to the access site and provides patients with greater comfort”.

“The StatSeal disc is a game changer,” says Guzzi. “For PICC and central line insertions, the disc keeps the sites dry and intact. It is truly the future of vascular access care.”

Free samples of StatSeal Disc are available by contacting Biolife at customercare@biolife.com.

Reference: Jean-François Timsit JF, et al. Dressing disruption is a major risk factor for catheter-related infections. Critical Care Medicine. Vol. 40, No. 6. 2012.

Source: Biolife, LLC