By Moe Lane | Watchdog Arena

There’s a saying: If you sit down to play poker, and you haven’t figured out within a half hour who the idiot is, then you’re the idiot. It would appear that the United Auto Workers union has never heard of that rule. Or perhaps the people running the UAW have, but simply could not believe that it could ever apply to them.

Well, it turns out that the UAW seems to have miscalculated. The Detroit News explains the situation, with no small amount of amused disdain.

One of the hallmarks of Obamacare is the ‘Cadillac tax,’ which is a hefty, 40 percent tax starting in 2018 on any plan that is too generous. Needless to say, the government determines what is ‘too generous’–and the tax has always been a political football.

The auto unions particularly hate the Cadillac tax because generous health care coverage is a recruitment tool for the unions. Which leads one to wonder why they signed off on it in the first place…well, actually, no: the reasoning was clear. When Obamacare was first put together in 2009, it was probably assumed by the unions that this provision could be amended or quietly dropped long before 2018 rolled around.

Only, that did not happen. So as of right now the auto workers unions are negotiating with the Big Three automakers to make some sort of deal on the subject. The first problem with that–the Big Three are already likely spending more per worker/family on health insurance than the tax threshold that activates the Cadillac tax. The second problem with that–the Big Three have no intention of paying the extra 40 percent tax. And the third problem with that–union members are underpaying their share of their health insurance coverage, compared to the rest of the population.

The fourth problem? The UAW doesn’t actually have a clue on how to handle this. They’re currently trying to convince the automakers to pay union workers more, which is quite possibly the most tone-deaf, Crazy Eddie proposal that you are likely to see all year.

While it is entertaining to watch a key Democratic ally slowly discover that gratitude is worth its weight in gold, the Cadillac tax is actually going to become more and more of a problem. Politico explains why: Democrats linked increases to the future tax threshold “to the consumer price index plus 1 percent.”

Projected increases in the inflation rate and health care costs suggest that more and more companies will get hit with the Cadillac tax as time goes on (that Politico article projected one in three employers in 2018, and a supermajority of employers by 2022). Which means more companies will start dumping their employees on the exchanges.

I need hardly point out that the American people were promised that they would be allowed to keep the plans that they liked. Turns out that was a lie.

This article was written by a contributor of Watchdog Arena, Franklin Center’s network of writers, bloggers, and citizen journalists.