In an interview aired on Monday's NBC Today, President Obama discovered that speaking to an actual journalist was a bit tougher than having YouTube celebrities lob softballs at him. In the exchange – conducted prior to the Super Bowl on Sunday – co-host Savannah Guthrie grilled the President over his handling of the war on terrorism: "You said in your State of the Union that American leadership is helping to stop the advance of ISIS in Syria and Iraq. But your critics say that is delusional, that in fact they've gained more territory since the air strikes have begun."

Obama defensively replied: "That's not accurate. In Iraq what we've seen is the Iraqi security forces and Kurdish forces continue to push back against ISIL. And those same critics that you suggest I imagine would have us redeploy tens of thousands of U.S. troops-" Guthrie interrupted: "But isn't that kind of a straw man? You often say that-" He testily shot back: "Hold on, Savannah, let me – it's not a straw man. Let me finish what I'm saying."

In part, Obama argued: "So this takes longer, but it's the right way to do things." Guthrie countered: "But aren't there things you could be doing right now, short of a huge presence of ground troops inside Syria or Iraq, that would help this goal of what you say is to defeat ISIS happen more quickly? Couldn't we be doing more?" He declared: "Anything that we're doing – anything that we could be doing, Savannah, we are doing."

Not satisfied with such assurances, Guthrie kept up the pressure: "The criticism that I hear a lot of you, even from your political allies, is you came into office, you were the president that was going to end the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and that you are so focused on doing that and not getting the U.S. entangled in another war that you are sometimes slow to react, that you're passive."

Obama again showed his frustration at having someone hold him accountable: "Savannah, you've repeated that comment three different ways..." He proceeded to take a shot at critics "who want us to shoot first and aim later" and "typically get this country into really bad situations."

Guthrie pointed to the reality in the Middle East: "Haven't the forces of militant extremism, Jihadism, grown stronger on your watch? If you look at Syria, Iraq, Libya, Yemen – a place where Al Qaeda's – that branch is so active and vicious and now the government, our ally, just collapsed."

After the President admitted that "Yemen's a tough situation," Guthrie pointedly asked: "Are we safer under your watch?" Obama claimed: "I believe we are safer."

In a separate live interview during Sunday's Super Bowl pre-game coverage, Guthrie pressed Obama on politics:

You gave your State of the Union a couple weeks ago. People noticed you had pep in your step, you were confident, your critics say maybe a little cocky. I guess the question is, you know, your party lost in November but you went in there with such swagger. Should you have been more conciliatory? Is it – to borrow a football metaphor – is it kind of like you're the quarterback, you're doing the end zone dance when it's the other team that got the touchdown?

The President laughably asserted: "Well, actually, nobody was doing an end zone dance. What we were talking about was the success that America's had and in digging itself out of a really tough recession. And that's a celebration of the American people, that's not about politics."

She continued: "The economy is doing better, but you laid out a bunch of proposals that you know cannot get through this Congress that is run by Republicans now. Isn't that kind of counterproductive?...you're offering tax hikes, you know, for the wealthy, that's something that couldn't even get through the Congress when it was run by Democrats."

Obama proclaimed: "Savannah, my job is to present the right ideas. And if the Republicans think they have a better idea, they should present them. But my job is not to trim my sails and not tell the American people what we should be doing, pretending somehow that we don't need better roads or we don't need more affordable college."

There were lighter moments in the pre-game exchange, which was conducted in the White House kitchen so the President could show off the executive mansion's micro-brewed beer. At the end of the segment, Obama remarked: "Savannah, enjoy the beer. You should finish it before our full interview, it'll make it go smoother." Guthrie replied: "I don't think that's gonna happen..."

Based on how tough that full interview was, she kept her word.

Here is a full transcript of the interview aired on the February 2 Today show: