Peter Foley for the Wall Street Journal Actress Rosie Perez, center, and Rikki Klieman, wife of Police Commissioner Bill Bratton, left, listen to the 109th Mayor of New York City, Bill de Blasio, speak during the inauguration ceremony.

Greater New York’s first winter weather event arrives on Thursday and could deliver up to a foot of snow to some areas before tapering off on Friday.

This prolonged storm is the result of a coastal system set to develop near Cape Hatteras on Thursday. The storm will then track southeast of the tri-state area on Thursday night before moving out to sea on Friday.

Snow will begin very late Wednesday night and early Thursday morning as a broad swath of low pressure develops south of the Mid-Atlantic States. Once the flurries begin to fly, at least one to two inches of snow are possible across the region by Thursday afternoon, with three to four inches of snow possible across far northern zones.

The heaviest snow will impact Greater New York late Thursday afternoon and evening; a Winter Storm Watch is in effect for the region from 6 p.m. Thursday to early Friday afternoon. Near blizzard conditions will be seen along the coast of Connecticut, in New York City and across Long Island. In addition to the snowfall, blustery northeast winds will blast the region on Thursday night. Sustained winds of 20 to 30 mph and gusts up to 40 mph are possible across the five boroughs, Long Island and southeast Connecticut. Blowing snow will cause poor visibility, making travel on Thursday evening extremely treacherous.

Though the snow may make going outside seem inviting, temperatures on Thursday will be well below normal. The day’s high will rise only into the lower 30s. Across Greater New York, nighttime lows plunge into the teens; these temperatures will feel even more brutal thanks to a dangerously low wind chill of minus two degrees.

Snowfall should taper off from west to east by the middle of Friday, but blowing and drifting snow will continue through the day, thanks to continuing high winds at 20 to 25 mph. Total snowfall accumulations depend on the exact track and intensity of the storm, but the potential exists for five to nine inches along the coast and seven to 11 inches across interior zones.

Thursday’s Greater New York forecast roundup:

WSJ Headquarters in Manhattan:

Actual High: 32; RealFeel High: 21

Actual Low: 14; RealFeel Low: -13

Weather: Clouds and snow

Brooklyn: 33/16

Queens: 33/14

Bronx: 32/14

Staten Island: 33/15

Poughkeepsie, N.Y.: 24/16

Trenton, N.J.: 36/12

Islip, Long Island: 32/14

New Haven, Conn.: 28/12

Rebecca Fowler is a science writer at Columbia University’s Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory.