Recovery is ongoing in Collinsville and with each passing day more help comes to those who are left with heavy damage.

"In response to obviously the severe storms that came through earlier this week, we've been in the area just helping with the basic needs," Disaster Program Manager Angie Grajeda said. "We have been feeding individuals that are out accessing their homes and doing some clean-up. We've also been provided some bulk items such as trash bags, rakes, work gloves, and those type of things that people who are doing clean-up can come pick up."

The red cross is occupying the Collinsville United Methodist Church and helping those who need it with case work. It's a long process, but with two dozen volunteers on hand and neighbors helping neighbors, everything is going smooth.

"We're here to alleviate human suffering during times of disaster," said Grajeda. "It's what our volunteers come out to do. They want to be here to help their neighbors and friends in those communities that have been affected. We can't take away the disaster, but we can make it easier to get through."

The Red Cross, says East Mississippi is no stranger to tornadoes and no matter the damage each time it's still the same answers being sought by those affected by storms.

"Tornadoes just come through this area," Grajeda said. "It's just sort of the same scene each time. We do know that each family that's affected, it's a disaster in their own world. It's always so hard to see that damage that's happened and to know that family is so severely affected."

The Red Cross says they will continue to work with those affected and do case work over the coming days.

The American Red Cross has a temporary set up at Collinsville United Methodist Church. That address is 9114 Church Road in Collinsville. If you weren't able to make it to the church today to begin casework, The American Red Cross will be there through the weekend. You can also call 601-485-5151. The Meridian Red Cross Office will be open to assist victims as well. If you would like to make financial donations, you can online at the red cross's website, or drop off a donation at the Meridian office.