HIV Treatment Works is a national campaign that was launched today by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to encourage people living with HIV to get in care, start taking HIV medications, remain in care, and stay on treatment as directed. People from across the United States who are living with HIV joined this campaign effort to talk about their own experience on how sticking to treatment helps them stay healthy, protect others, do what they love, and live a longer, healthier life.

Get in care, Stay in care, and Live well.

People living with HIV may not engage in care or drop out of care for a number of complex reasons, including stigma, shame, perceived or real concerns about taking HIV medications, and being able to afford HIV medical care. HIV Treatment Works looks at the barriers to care and treatment and ways to overcome them. The campaign features testimonials from people living with HIV showing how they overcame personal barriers to care and treatment and how treatment improved their lives.

The campaign provides resources on how to live well with HIV.

HIV Treatment Works provides access to information and resources to help people living with HIV enter and remain in care. This campaign supports the National HIV/AIDS Strategy and the White House’s Continuum of Care Initiative which seek to identify people who are living with HIV, link them to care, and ultimately to increase the proportion of people with a suppressed viral load.

A comprehensive campaign website includes information encouraging people to get in care and stay on treatment, as well as resources on how to live well with HIV.

View the HIV Treatment Works PSA and watch digital stories to hear how campaign participants living with HIV overcame barriers to care and treatment as well as their advice to others living with HIV.

We invite you to help promote the HIV Treatment Workscampaign. There are a number of actions you can take:

Share this blog post with your networks . Share the news about the new campaign and website throughout your network via an e-mail or posting on your organization’s website.

. Share the news about the new campaign and website throughout your network via an e-mail or posting on your organization’s website. Visit the campaign website . View the campaign public service announcement (PSA) and digital stories of how people overcame barriers to care and treatment. The site contains information and resources about the benefits of getting in care and staying on treatment for people living with HIV.

View the campaign public service announcement (PSA) and digital stories of how people overcame barriers to care and treatment. The site contains information and resources about the benefits of getting in care and staying on treatment for people living with HIV. Download digital banner ads, posters, palm cards, and videos from the campaign website to add to your organization’s website and social media channels. Request printed posters and palm cards from CDC to distribute at community events and to provide to local venues in your city by sending an e-mail request to ActAgainstAIDS@cdc.gov.

campaign website Request printed posters and palm cards from CDC to distribute at community events and to provide to local venues in your city by sending an e-mail request to ActAgainstAIDS@cdc.gov. Like the Act Against AIDS Facebook Page . Share or respond to our campaign posts, and direct your followers to check out our page and our website.

. Share or respond to our campaign posts, and direct your followers to check out our page and our website. Chat with us on Twitter. Spread the word about the campaign through Twitter by using the campaign hashtag #HIVTreatmentWorks and by following our account @TalkHIV .

Spread the word about the campaign through Twitter by using the campaign hashtag and by following our account @TalkHIV . Incorporate HIV Treatment Works into community events and educational presentations, underscoring the importance of care and treatment for people living with HIV.

As with all of the campaigns under the Act Against AIDS initiative – we need your support for and involvement with HIV Treatment Works to ensure people living with HIV Get in care, Stay in care, and Live well.

To learn more about HIV Treatment Works, visit www.cdc.gov/HIVTreatmentWorks.

For inquiries about HIV Treatment Works, email ActAgainstAIDS@cdc.gov.