Prior to Ben Carson's comment to Chuck Todd on "Meet the Press" that he "would not advocate putting a Muslim in charge of this country," the neurosurgeon and author had been listed as extremist by the Southern Poverty Law Center, which tracks hate groups around the country.

He was only removed a few months ago by the grace of Laurence Leamer and Morris Dees. Leamer, best known for his books on the Kennedy family, is currently writing a book about the SPLC and its founder Dees titled "Lynching: How a Southern Lawyer Destroyed the United Klans of America". Carson was on the SPLC's list of extremists until Leamer got involved, according to a recent post on Facebook by Leamer.

A few months ago my friend Chris Ruddy, the founder of Newsmax, called to tell me that Ben Carson was on the Southern... Posted by Laurence Leamer on Monday, September 21, 2015

"A few months ago my friend Chris Ruddy, the founder of Newsmax, called to tell me that Ben Carson was on the Southern Poverty Law Center's extremist list and could I do anything about it. I am writing a book to be published next May titled The Lynching: How a Southern Lawyer Destroyed the United Klans of America. That lawyer is Morris Dees, cofounder of the SPLC.

I checked the whole business out and decided Carson was no more an extremist than half the Republican candidates and it was a bad business for the civil rights law firm to put the one black candidate on their list. I called Morris and told him so and in a few hours Carson's name was off the list. Chris called to thank me and said someone from Carson's operation would call to thank me. The next morning Carson called himself. That's pretty unusual, and I thought what a genial, gracious man.

It's just a pity his ideas are so far out, and he seems ignorant of some fundamental realities. Yesterday he said a Muslim couldn't be president. Sounds like he would have impeached the theist Jefferson for not being a true Christian."

As the online magazine Slate pointed out, the soft-spoken neurosurgeon has a history of promulgating paranoid conspiracy theories. In 2013, he compared the Affordable Care Act to chattel slavery. He is currently sitting at second in the polls.

Follow Laura Goldman on Twitter: www.twitter.com/laurasgoldman