The Affordable Care Act mandates that private plans provide FDA-approved contraceptives at no cost, but many insurers are skirting the law's requirements, critics say. Getty Images/Onoky

President Barack Obama's health care law aims to expand women's access to contraception by providing it without a copay, but a new study shows what many American women have already discovered when they go the pharmacy: There appear to be numerous exceptions to the provision.

“We hear from women every day who have trouble getting the benefit,” Gretchen Borchelt, vice president for health and reproductive rights for the National Women’s Law Center, said during a panel discussion at the Kaiser Family Foundation on Thursday after the findings were presented. “These women are spending hours on the phone with their insurance policies trying to figure out what their benefits are. They get the runaround. They get conflicting information."

Though specific data aren't available on how many women have been unable to obtain birth control without a copay, the study, conducted by the Kaiser Family Foundation, shows significant variations in how the provision is carried out.

[MORE: Study: Obamacare Hasn't Solved Health Care Disparities]

To arrive at this conclusion, researchers from the Kaiser Family Foundation and the Lewin Group, a health care consulting firm, reviewed 20 health plans for 12 contraceptive methods in five states: California, Georgia, Michigan, New Jersey and Texas. Researchers declined to specify which companies they had queried, because much of the information had been provided on the promise of anonymity, but said the patterns were occurring at a national level, among large insurers that represent a trend that would be seen around the country. ​​​​​ ​

The health care law, the Affordable Care Act, aims to make contraception more affordable for women by having health insurance plans cover ​ Food and Drug Administration-approved contraceptives without any costs. The methods include emergency contraception like Plan B, long-acting contraceptives like implants and intrauterine devices; hormonal methods like the patch and the ring, and even permanent methods like sterilization.



Clare Krusing, spokeswoman for America's Health Insurance Plans, a trade association that represents the industry, says the guidelines in the health care law allow some flexibility in what forms of birth control are covered. For example, carriers may interpret the law to mean that they do not have to cover every kind of pill or patch that is on the market.

"While the [Affordable Care Act] preventive service requirements specify that FDA-approved contraception is a covered benefit, that benefit still has an impact on the overall cost of coverage," she wrote in an email. "If plans were required to cover every single birth control option under all of those FDA-approved methods, the costs to consumers would be significant."

Insurance companies manage costs through various methods, including covering only generics or requiring that a patient try other means before agreeing to a particular form of contraception.

Obamacare guidelines do give payers permission to apply reasonable management techniques to “control cost and promote efficient delivery of care." Still, the Department of Labor specifies that carriers have a formal process in place for waiving specific coverage, and researchers for the study say the processes are not in place.

If consumers already know their preferred method of birth control, they should pick a plan that covers it, Krusing says.

But Dr. Edward Anselm, consultant medical director for Health Republic Insurance of New Jersey, said at the panel that it was difficult for consumers to find out what was covered in health plans and what was not, particularly for Americans who have never had insurance before.

While most health insurance plans comply with the provision, which went into effect August 2012, the study found various limits in the types of contraceptive methods that are covered. No plan provided all forms of contraceptive without some limitations.

The study revealed that the vaginal ring was the least likely to be covered – one plan didn't cover it at all, while five covered it with cost-sharing, meaning that some was covered by insurance and the rest was out of pocket.

Dr. Peggy Peng Ye, an OB-GYN for MedStar Washington Hospital Center, said at the event that patients find out the cost-sharing information when get at the pharmacy, and sometimes as a result choosing to forgo contraception.

[RELATED: U.S. Medicine Spending Hits Record High]

Other types of birth control showed various limitations. When looking at implants and the patch, researchers found that two carriers failed to offer coverage and three covered it with cost-sharing.

IUDs, considered by doctors to be the most effective method to prevent pregnancy, were mostly covered. One plan, however, didn't cover the copper, nonhormonal version of the device, called ParaGard. Out-of-pocket costs for IUDs can be around $500 to $600, Peng Ye said.

Emergency contraception also was mostly covered except for a particular kind – the ella EC pill, which does not have a generic equivalent but has a longer window of effectiveness and can be preferred for women with a higher body mass index. The study found that two carriers do not cover it.

The most common type of contraceptive, birth control pills, are also included in the FDA-approved list, though they were not included in the Kaiser Family Foundation study – while all the other approved methods were.

Borchelt said women end up calling their health insurance companies to dispute the charges.