Shelor Automotive

Shelor Motor Mile is the Premier New and Used car dealer in Southwest Virginia, serving Virginia, West Virginia, North Carolina and Tennessee. Shelor began as a single point Chevrolet dealer in 1974 and has grown to 11 new car franchises and a Used Car Super Store, all in ONE convenient location. Shelor is the number one privately owned Used car dealer in the state of Virginia and provides exceptional service. The success of the Motor Mile has come from dedicated employees and loyal customers. We understand that customers can buy from any dealer and the difference is the people. We are committed to the training and development of each employee so they will provide an extraordinary experience to keep our customers coming back year after year. At the Motor Mile you will find a vast selection of new and used vehicles on over 70 acres. Don't let the size be intimidating. Even though our size is large, you will find exceptional service you would expect from your hometown dealer. We are committed to providing a hassle free, professional buying experience with total transparency in the sales experience and operate with the S.T.A.R approach: S- Straightforward Pricing Less Back & Forth to get Numbers Offer to Purchase Trade even if no purchase made Menu Selection for Optional Financial Products T-Total Integrity Certified Pre-Owned Cars Shelor Limited 90-day Warranty 48 Hour Exchange Policy Clean Pre-Owned Cars-No Frame or Flood Damage Vehicle History Reports A-Award Winning Dealership Trained & Certified Sales & Service Staff 98% Customer Satisfaction Rating Leader in Sales & Service Volume R-Real Value $500 Additional Trade-In Value Guarantee Lifetime VA State Inspection with Purchase Loaner Program for Warranty repairs with New Vehicle Purchase Extended Service Hours at Express Care Future e-marketing Savings Coupons for Parts & Service Our impressive Sales departments are followed by equally impressive Parts and Service Centers. Our modern Service Center provides convenient drive-in access and you will be greeted by highly trained Customer Care Reps. We are a strong community partner and we look forward to serving the community for many years to come. Thanks to all our loyal customers and employees for making our first 40 years so rewarding.