Reprinted from HEALTH PLAN WEEK , the most reliable source of objective business, financial and regulatory news of the health insurance industry. Sign up for a $91 two-month trial subscription today .

Harken Health is what an integrated provider-sponsored health plan looks like, sort of. Spawned from UnitedHealth Group’s innovation lab, the Kaiser-like entity (sort of) has operations in the Chicago and Atlanta metropolitan areas and is attempting to be something the corporate parent has never built before: a self-contained, retail-facing one-stop shop for consumers who want a lot of touch and lot of feel to their health care.

What is Harken, then? The company is an independently run unit of UnitedHealth that seeks to attract individual and small-group business on and off the Affordable Care Act (ACA) exchanges by offering gold, silver and bronze plans in its two markets. Plan membership revolves around Harken Health Centers, where provider care teams working for partner Iora Health coordinate medical management and involve the member with wellness activities like yoga classes and weight control. Monthly premiums include free, unlimited visits at these centers. Harken works with OptumRx, another UnitedHealth subsidiary, to manage the prescription drug needs of its members.

An example of the marketing plan for Harken is seen on its website, which emphasizes the impact its centers have on the benefits cost structure. For instance, an individual buying a gold-level plan in Georgia for the 2016 plan year would see no deductibles for care at the Harken offices, but a $1,750 deductible for care at preferred networks, and even steeper cost levels for out-of-network providers.

There is no breakout of its financials in UnitedHealth’s overall reports in order to measure how well it is doing. The company also would not provide enrollment figures, but market sources say Harken has around 150,000 signed up, while a sure indication in the coming months of its success or failure will be if the entity expands into other markets.

Marcus Robinson, vice president of sales for Harken, tells HPW thus far the demographics of Harken’s members tend to reflect the general demographics of exchange buyers, which is what they expected. “More importantly, we see that people who are attracted to Harken Health are people that are not satisfied with their current health care providers. They sign up with us because they want a more caring, personalized care experience, along with the simplified insurance process and the value they get through the unlimited, no charge visits at Harken Centers,” he says.

The basics for Harken are about listening (harken means to listen) to members and forming a relationship whether they frequent the health centers a lot or a little. The health insurance is offered under a PPO open access model and features the same drive for simplicity as the medical side of the business. “Our plans do not have copays….You have unfettered access included at no additional cost,” Robinson says.

Only in Chicago and Atlanta now, there are plans for expansion, including looking at other benefit and network designs beyond the PPO in place now, he adds.

UnitedHealth’s push into the Harken construct is a result of its more than decade-long effort for actionable innovations from both within the company and acquisitions, says Ash Shehata, a KPMG partner who heads advisory services for U.S. health plans.

“For United this is less of a knee-jerk reaction than it is something they have been building and investing in for over a decade. This is not only within UnitedHealthcare, but through the whole Optum capabilities they have really been adding more and more and more on the consumer capabilities,” he tells HPW. “And if you even go back just a few years ago they have always been complimentary, as many people have, of Kaiser. But people have also realized that Kaiser is not highly portable in many other markets so what is interesting about Harken, and many other models like Harken, is that there is the opportunity to make it a portable model in metropolitan markets.” Shehata says people have even compared the Harken design to Chipotle and other retailers with a highly replicable business plan.

United Is Applying Lessons Learned

There also are certain asset purchases that have made a difference. “I would say the other kind of indication that United was learning over the last several years started when they acquired Sierra Health in Nevada (HPW 3/19/07, p. 1), which is essentially a managed care model in that market. They really started to understand what it meant to have a coordinated care network with primary care help in coordinating care specialists if needed.”

Now that Harken is up and running, Shehata says it will be interesting to see how it progresses as part of UnitedHealth, and if any of its operational functions are adopted by the traditional insurance arm of the company.

“These models are meant to test and prove different things. You are starting to see how you take a model like this and commercialize it….The biggest question is at what point and time do they become part of the general health care model or do they maintain as a separate entity,” Shehata says. As an example from another industry, he says Toyota started the Scion brand some years back to go after younger professionals. It did very well at first but faded over time and now is under the Toyota umbrella. “At what point and time does Harken Health become part of United again? And at what point and time do the features of Harken Health become part of the core or does it maintain and stay separate like Lexus and Toyota?”

If Harken does expand, expect that effort to focus on certain locales where incumbents on the ACA exchanges may have pulled out, Shehata says. UnitedHealth, Aetna and other insurers, like Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans, may exit ACA marketplaces but there is a chance Harken may fill some of that void. “Maybe they don’t pull out entirely and come back in with a Harken capability,” he adds.

Harken’s ability to thrive also may be a result of how it makes its case in the market as a unique player, not tied to any other particular model or brand. “Many provider-held plans can say they have similar models with primary care networks well covered in a regional community. The difference is how they emphasize what they are offering,” Shehata says. The consumer for the most part still sees an entity owned by a hospital system or a provider system as a hospital or provider entity.

“But what is interesting about startups is they might be considered more of a retail entity,” he says. This could make the important part of their business plan how consumers come to a Harken, such as because they like the company’s ease of scheduling or no copays or use of technology. “It is the ideas that could break through versus who owns the entities,” Shehata explains.

UnitedHealth may soon face competition for Harken since most of the top publicly traded carriers have the parts to make their own Harken, and retail clinics in the pharmacy setting, like at CVS, could move upscale quickly and offer primary care plus capabilities in a physical location, he says. “But the unique advantage of United is that they have Optum,” Shehata adds.

And anything related to Optum drives intense interest from Wall Street. Sheryl Skolnick, Ph.D., managing director and director of U.S. Equity Research for Mizuho Securities USA, tells HPW “the entire focus of a whole part of Optum is the acquisition, management and transformation of physician practices. As part of that whole, it [Harken] has the potential to be a very significant business for Optum.” She cannot currently, however, size the market for Harken and notes the unit is not mentioned during UnitedHealth quarterly earnings conference calls or presented in company materials.

“They’ve acquired a lot of very small companies, as well as physician practices over the last several years, and they really don’t mention any single one of them in any great detail,” she adds.

© 2016 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The AIS E-Savings Club offers regular opportunities to buy AIS products and services at substantial savings. Click here to see the current specials — including $250 off a subscription to Health Plan Week.