WASHINGTON -- Congress passed a $1.15 trillion spending bill and a $620 billion “tax extender” bill on Friday morning that will determine how the government doles out its dollars through next September.

The package includes a $2 billion spending increase for the National Institutes of Health (NIH), postpones implementation of a medical device tax and the controversial “Cadillac tax” — a tax on high-cost employer sponsored health plans — for 2 years, and delays the health insurer excise tax for 1 year.

The House passed the tax bill and the spending bill separately, after weeks of negotiation, between Thursday and Friday morning. Then the Senate lumped the two bills together approving them in a 65-33 vote on Friday morning.

The tax extender bill, one portion of the package, made several tax cuts permanent, including a provision that would eliminate $113 billion in taxes on research and experimentation over 10 years.

Several "deal-breaker" riders, including a provision to defund Planned Parenthood, were not included in the final package.

The bill is a win for Republicans because it ramped up military spending and nullified a 4-decade ban on exporting U.S. oil. But far-right conservatives who pledged a full repeal and not a delay of some Obamacare provisions, such as the “Cadillac tax” and the medical device tax, may be disappointed.

Democrats also reaped important gains, winning concessions from Republicans in the form of tax cuts for low-income families and small businesses. Many center-leftists who were never thrilled with the tax on high-cost insurance plans will also view the Cadillac tax postponement as a victory.

"NIH really was the big winner here,” said Loren Adler, research director at the Committee for a Responsible Budget.

Two things led to this giant payout for the agency: the sequester release deal, which gave Congress the flexibility to raise NIH’s budget; and the broadly popular 21st Century Cures Act — a bill that aims to hasten the development of new medical therapies, which relies heavily on NIH investment.

With regard to the Affordable Care Act, G. William “Bill” Hoagland, senior vice president for the Bipartisan Policy Center, said he was disappointed by the two-year delay to the Cadillac tax.

While acknowledging that the design couldn’t have worked, Hoagland said, “If we’re really truly talking about controlling costs we have to have something like the Cadillac tax redesign going forward."

But such delays “kick the can” down the road until the next election.

Hoagland also worried that a provision of the package which bans the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) from helping to cover risk corridors — a policy Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) equated to a taxpayer “bailout” of insurance companies — could keep private insurers out of the marketplace.

Hoagland continued, “All it does is add more confusion and uncertainty to the healthcare marketplace in 2017."

Adler noted that while the risk corridor provision deals a $2.5 billion blow to insurance companies, the delay to the insurer excise tax, which was 5 times as costly and affects largely the same players, will relieve some of the financial pain.

"They basically get a $12 billion windfall to make up for the fact that they just lost $2.5 billion," Adler said.

Gail Wilensky, PhD, a senior fellow at Project HOPE in Bethesda, Md., said in an email to MedPage Today that the bill landed somewhere "between a compromise and a loss."

Wilensky, a former administrator at CMS, recognized a bill needed to be passed, and saw the boost to NIH as a plus.

She noted that the medical device and insurance excise taxes “never made policy sense” but were intended to raise revenue. “Now the revenue is gone for the two years.”

Likewise, the “Cadillac tax,” a “clumsy version of a tax cap” on how much of employers’ contributions individuals can exclude from their taxable income, would also be postponed.

As one of only a handful of containment measures in the ACA, Wilensky said the Cadillac tax was “better than nothing.” Now, it’s not certain it will ever be implemented. “That’s a loss” for ACA backers, she said.

Marilyn Tavenner, president and CEO of America’s Health Insurance Plans, said in a press release, “Suspension of the health insurance tax is an important step in providing relief to millions of seniors, employers, and families.”

She continued, “We appreciate the bipartisan support for this effort and look forward to working with both parties to ensure quality, affordable coverage for consumers.” Tavenner is also a former CMS administrator.

The American College of Radiology said, in a press release, that it was pleased to see protections for access to imaging for sick and injured Medicare beneficiaries. “This [Multiple Procedure Payment Reduction] rollback eases the impact on access to needed imaging care for auto accident and stroke victims, those with widespread cancer, and others who often require interpretations by different doctors to recover.”