ISTOCK

ROSABETH MOSS KANTER: By the 2020s, traffic congestion could be a whole lot worse, and only the affluent will be able to afford to live, work and be entertained in central urban districts where it’s possible to get around on foot or on e-bikes. In developing countries, and increasingly in U.S. cities, cars will move at bicycle rickshaw speed, thereby continuing to provide an occupation for street vendors who can sell you nearly anything while you’re stuck in traffic, including that night’s dinner.

Or we could innovate our way out of traffic jams by investing now in the infrastructure for solutions that already exist. By improving physical mobility, we would improve economic and social mobility by increasing access to a good education and jobs.

In this second, more hopeful, scenario, highways, bridges, tunnels and city streets will be sensor-laden, interacting with smartphones and vehicles over wireless networks. Apps will help cars spot bicycles and refuse to open doors until bikes have passed. Apps will tell blind people when they’ve wandered outside the lines at a street crossing–I call this a seeing-eye phone. Apps will permit you to order dinner from a digital billboard you pass that knows your menu preferences and will organize delivery by the time you get home. And there will be less traffic because sensors will provide better information and better management, to keep things moving and cleverly reroute autonomous vehicles even before human passengers–formerly drivers–notice the situation, because they’ll be busy doing office work through in-vehicle connections.

Regardless of who owns vehicles–more likely you’ll own a timeshare in a pool of vehicles, summoned when needed–or who is driving, a person or the software, there will be fewer cars and trucks on the road at any one time, contributing to fewer delays and cleaner air. Dynamic pricing (roads that charge higher user fees at times of high demand) will discourage casual venturing out. Autonomous vehicles wirelessly connected to parking information will zoom directly to a spot without clogging streets. And there could be a big prize: more and better mass transit.

More people will use mass transit and feel that it’s personalized to them and their needs. For example, Bridj, a 2014 startup using big data to map routes, offers on-demand bus service that promises to pick up and deliver passengers within a five-to-seven-minute walk. Kiosks at bus stops will make them desirable destinations, not just places to wait. Hybrid vehicles will include flying cars; a Massachusetts company already sells models classified as air transportation and requiring air strips, but imagine when they could lift us over the traffic. This is better than drones.

The Holy Grail of integrated data will enable seamless connections across modes of transportation. A single bar code will get people from office to bus to train to flight and back, and each will “know” when others are delayed, to make changes faster.

Entrepreneurs are ready. The auto industry is climbing on the smartphone-connected bandwagon. Industries creating software are eager to be in the transportation business. The wild card is public support. Apps can be developed quickly, but for projects modernizing rail or making roads and bridges smarter, the lead time can be 10 years just for approval. So I’m hedging my bets about the future in the U.S., until there’s political will to create a smarter, more mobile future.

Rosabeth Moss Kanter (@RosabethKanter) is the author of “MOVE: Putting America’s Infrastructure Back in the Lead,” to be published May 11, 2015. She is a Harvard Business School professor.

Read the Future Report.