U.S. Senator Ron Johnson (R-Wis.) spoke in 2014 to reporters about his lawsuit challenging the Affordable Care Act. Credit: Jim Matthews / Green Bay Press Gazette

By of the

A federal appeals panel sided with a lower court Tuesday to throw out a lawsuit over Obamacare brought by U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson and one of his aides.

Johnson's suit attempted to force members of Congress and their staffs to stop getting subsidies for their health insurance under the Affordable Care Act, which is widely known as Obamacare.

In July, U.S. District Judge William Griesbach in Green Bay threw out the case, saying Johnson and aide Brooke Ericson didn't have legal standing to bring their case because they hadn't been injured.

The two appealed. In a 24-page ruling, a three-judge panel of the 7th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals in Chicago on Tuesday unanimously agreed that Johnson and Ericson didn't have standing to sue.

Johnson, a Republican from Oshkosh, can't sue because the federal rule at issue provides him a benefit — not something that harms him. He is free to reject that benefit, the panel noted.

"Respectfully, we do not see how Senator Johnson's reputation could be sullied or his electability diminished by being offered, against his will, a benefit that he then decided to refuse," Judge Joel Flaum wrote for the panel. "He could not be accused of participating in an illegal scheme if he declined to participate."

Flaum was joined by Judges William Joseph Bauer and Ann Claire Williams. Flaum was appointed to the appeals court by President Ronald Reagan, Bauer by President Gerald Ford and Williams by President Bill Clinton.

In a statement, Johnson expressed frustration at losing for a second time because of a "legal technicality."

"We've lost a battle in court, but we will continue to move forward in our effort to return sanity, fairness and balance to government on behalf of the American people," his statement said.

Johnson said he was reviewing what to do next. He could drop the matter, ask the full appeals court to review the decision or appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court.

In 2013, the federal Office of Personnel Management established regulations for how members of Congress and their staffs could get insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act.

Under those rules, staff who are deemed to work for the official office of a member of Congress must get their coverage through an insurance marketplace set up for small businesses in the Washington, D.C., area. Staff who are not considered part of the official office receive their insurance as an employee benefit, just as they had in the past.

Johnson contended that those rules created a loophole for members of Congress to sidestep Obamacare provisions on providing insurance to their employees.

Johnson has said he bought his health coverage directly from a private insurer, rather than going through an exchange or getting it from the federal government. He has said he has a staff of about 40 and most of them are getting their insurance through the Washington business exchange.

The suit has caused a rift within Johnson's party. U.S. Rep. Jim Sensenbrenner of Menomonee Falls has called it "an unfortunate political stunt" that would cause top congressional staff to quit if Johnson won.

If Congress doesn't offer health benefits and can't recruit the best staff, it would ultimately weaken the legislative branch and increase the power of the presidency, Sensenbrenner has argued.