Vice President Joe Biden attended the wreath-laying ceremony at the Tomb of the Unknowns during Veterans Day observations at Arlington National Cemetery on Tuesday in Arlington, Virginia. Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

Good Tuesday Morning, and Happy Veterans’ Day, a holiday that began in 1938 to honor those who served in World War I - the so-called War to End All Wars - and now has expanded to pay respect to all those who donned an American military uniform (click here for a quick video tutorial). Here’s today’s Three Minute Briefing Book, all you need to know in 180​ seconds or your next one’s free:

Vet’s Day Tribute: Vice President Joe Biden delivered remarks at the Tomb of the Unknowns in Arlington National Cemetery today. The unofficial Veterans’ Day centerpiece, however, comes this evening with HBO’s much-publicized Concert for Valor on the National Mall, a free show with big-name acts like Bruce Springsteen and Dave Grohl of the Foo Fighters saluting the military.

[READ: The Biggest Problem Veterans Still Face]

Asia Trip Continues: Meanwhile, Biden’s boss, President Barack Obama, continues to blend trade and diplomacy at the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation meetings in Beijing today. In addition to trade talks with China and Asian nations, the president met briefly with Russian President Vladimir Putin and will have sideline meetings on how to further deter both Iran and North Korea from obtaining nuclear weapons.

Setting the Standard: Obama’s pro-net neutrality statement yesterday, urging the Federal Communications Commission to regulate the Internet like a public utility, is causing ripples not only here but across the pond. The Guardian has a story declaring the president’s statement would influence governments and cable providers around the world.

Collision Course: Back on Capitol Hill, the big talk these days is around immigration: newly-empowered Senate Republicans are parsing Obama’s promise to use executive action to not only slow deportations but allow some undocumented migrants to stay in the country and forge a path to citizenship. Bloomberg’s Dave Wiegel has a pretty good take here. The GOP has a counter-strategy, though: use the issue to beat down Loretta Lynch, a pro-reform Brooklyn fededral prosecutor and the president’s pick to replace outgoing Attorney General Eric Holder.

Voters sidelined by laws?: A week after the Great Elephant Stampede that was the 2014 midterm elections, the parsing continues: the Brennan Center for Justice reports that new voter ID laws in several states may have influenced the outcome in elections: in some places, the percentage of voters who didn’t have access to the polls came close to the winner’s margin of victory.

[ALSO: U.S., China Reach Trade Deal in Beijing]

Ebo-what? The U.S., gripped by fear after four confirmed cases of Ebola made front-page headlines, is now officially Ebola-free. A New York doctor - the last of those known cases - was released from the hospital, effectively cured of the deadly virus.

Ready For Her Close-Up: Elizabeth Warren, a Massachusetts Democrat, consumer advocate and liberals’ dream president, took her progressive economic message to Hollywood last night, accepting an award from the American Civil Liberties Union. She told the audience that “the game is rigged” against ordinary Americans because Wall Street has Congress in its thrall.