As of Monday, the word "chumps" has finally made it into an opinion issued by the Supreme Court.

"What chumps!" Chief Justice John Roberts wrote in his dissenting opinion on Arizona Legislature v. Arizona Independent Redistricting Commission, referring to the advocates who fought for the 17th Amendment which moved the election of senators from state legislatures to the voters. "[A]ll they had to do" instead of going through the amendment process, "was interpret the constitutional term 'the Legislature' to mean 'the people'," he wrote -- which is what the Court's majority did in AZ Legislature. It's the sort of "interpret the Constitution rigidly" plea that defines the Court's conservatives.

Usually. But it seems like only this morning that Roberts was being compared to an Iranian ayatollah in the conservative media for rejecting his roots in last week's Obamacare decision. It seems like that, because it was only this morning.

"[T]he Supreme Court has firmly established that it does not matter what the law says or does not say—," the National Review Online's Kevin Williamson wrote in "Ayatollah Roberts and His Sharia Council,' "what matters is what they want." Roberts' siding with the majority in King v. Burwell was seen as traitorous to the right, a George W. Bush appointee who refused to hew to the letter of the law in his interpretation of the Affordable Care Act.

At The Hill, Charles Keckler throws Roberts' words from his confirmation hearing back in his face. "'If the text is clear, that is what you follow, and that's binding. And you don’t look beyond it to say, well, if you look here, though, maybe this clear word should be interpreted a different way'," he quotes Roberts as saying. Keckler adds, "We're not sure what happened to that John Roberts, who spoke eloquently about humility, textual fidelity, judicial independence, strict neutrality, and the design of our Founders."

Roberts'd dissent on Monday does a decent job of saying, Oh, that John Roberts is still here.

At question in today's decision was whether or not Arizona's independent committee for drawing congressional lines, mandated by a state referendum, was constitutional. Roberts, in short, argues that the Constitution's elections clause -- Article 1, Section 4 -- allows only legislatures to finalize the "times, places, and manner of holding elections." Arizona can have an independent body draw its state legislative districts to its heart's content. But federal lines, in his interpretation, must be drawn by a legislature -- and an independent commission is not the legislature.

In their dissent, Justices Clarence Thomas and Antonin Scalia offer another sort of contrast. They argue that the majority is very willing to uphold state electoral democracy in the Arizona case even after having rejected it in Obergefell v. Hodges, Friday's decision on same-sex marriage. "Just last week, in the antithesis of deference to state lawmaking through direct democracy," Thomas writes, "the Court cast aside state laws across the country—many of which were enacted through ballot initiative—that reflected the traditional definition of marriage." They go on to outline other times the Court has showed disdain for ballot initiatives. "I would dispense with the faux federalism and would instead treat the States in an evenhanded manner," Thomas writes. "That means applying the Constitution as written."

Roberts seems more sympathetic to the goals of the independent commission -- just as he was more sympathetic in his Obergefell dissent. "The majority today shows greater concern about redistricting practices than about the meaning of the Constitution," he writes. "I recognize the difficulties that arise from trying to fashion judicial relief for partisan gerrymandering. ... This Court has stressed repeatedly that a law’s virtues as a policy innovation cannot redeem its inconsistency with the Constitution." In other words? He'd like to remind his colleagues that it's the letter of the Constitution that matters.

The beauty of being a Supreme Court justice is that you don't need to worry about losing your job. Mike Huckabee called for term limits after the court upheld Obamacare, but that's not going to happen. Roberts will be a justice for as long as he wants to be, no matter how he rules.

But it's still hard not to think that part of his dissent today may have been aimed some tiny amount at public relations, and to serve as a reminder to conservatives that he's not the one who's losing his head with hyperbole over these recent decisions.

That "chumps" line notwithstanding.