Giving birth was a snap for Nina Knight Fredericks, who served 11 months in Iraq

At University Medical Center of Princeton at Plainsboro, Patricia and Ariel Matos Sr. of Trenton welcomed Ariel Matos Jr. at 2:34 a.m. Jan. 1. (Photo: Courtesy of University Medical Center of Princeton at Plainsboro) Story Highlights Mother, daughter doing well at Raritan Bay Medical Center

Nihia Elizabeth Fredericks weighed 8 pounds, 1 ounce at birth

Compared to what she's been through, giving birth to the first baby of the new year in Central Jersey was a snap for Nina Knight Fredericks.

Fredericks, who lives in the Avenel section of Woodbridge with her husband, Lloyd, gave birth to a second daughter at 12:28 a.m. on New Year's Day at Raritan Bay Medical Center.

For Fredericks, giving birth was easy compared to her service in Iraq. An Army veteran who served in the military from 1995 to 2010, she spent 11 months in Iraq in 2003.

Her baby, Nihia Elizabeth Fredericks, weighed 8 pounds, 1 ounce at birth.

"Everybody is doing well," said Lynette King-Davis, vice president of marketing at the hospital.

Nihia joins an older sister who was born on Jan. 9, 2014.

Like her sister, Nihia was not due until Jan. 9, but her mother's contractions began late Wednesday night.

As her contractions increased, "she was watching the ball drop in Times Square," King-Davis said.

The second baby born in Central Jersey in 2015 was at Saint Peter's University Hospital in New Brunswick. Ana Martinez-Flores and Jose Colon of New Brunswick welcomed a baby girl at 1:08 a.m., hospital spokesman Phil Hartman said.

Ten hours later, at 11:10 a.m., the first baby was born at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital, New Brunswick, according to spokesman Peter Haigney.

At University Medical Center of Princeton at Plainsboro, Patricia and Ariel Matos Sr. of Trenton welcomed Ariel Matos Jr. at 2:34 a.m. The baby measured 20 1/ 2 inches and weighed 8 pounds, 7 ounces.

Princeton HealthCare System presented a gift basket to the family containing baby clothes, blankets, baby-care items, a photo album, toys and books.

Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital Somerset and Hunterdon Medical Center reported no births in the new year as of 5 p.m. Thursday.

According to nj.com, the first baby born in the new year in New Jersey was at Morristown Medical Center, where Tamura Gidado, of North Bergen, gave birth to a 10-pound, 10-ounce baby at 12:09 a.m.

Though many New Jersey hospitals publicize the first baby of the year, many hospitals throughout the country are shying away from the practice.

Community Health Systems — one of the country's largest health-care operators — recently ordered its 207 facilities to stop publicizing the first baby of the year, citing the potential for abductions and identity theft.

Other U.S. hospitals have either removed themselves from the new year's tradition or limited the amount of information provided to the media.

"We know the birth of the New Year baby is a joyous and exciting event, but protecting patient safety and privacy is our most important responsibility," said Tomi Galin, a spokeswoman for the Franklin, Tennessee-based company.

She pointed to guidance from the National Center for Missing & Exploited Children, which has suggested that health-care providers obtain parental consent and eliminate home addresses and other identifying information from birth announcements or stop providing them to the media.

Still, the head of the center's missing children division said that the tradition of publicizing a hospital's first birth of the year is relatively low-risk.

"We've never given direction to hospitals that they shouldn't do it," said the center's Robert Lowery, stressing caution, not overreaction.

The Geisinger Health System, which competes with Community Health in Pennsylvania, said it would eliminate hometowns from its 2015 New Year's birth announcements.

Galin said Community Health's policy change came after several of the company's hospitals stopped publicizing New Year's births on their own. She described it as a preventive measure and that it was not a reaction to threats or abduction attempts.

The Joint Commission, a health-care accreditation organization, suggested hospitals stop providing birth notices to local newspapers more than a decade ago, after a rash of hospital abductions, but it has not required that they be eliminated.

Contributing: Associated Press

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1Bf6nlT