Wellness and Safety Programs Expand to Embrace Employee Wellbeing

HR managers can leverage their position in highlighting the value of employees and use their knowledge and skills to drive positive outcomes.

There is emerging evidence that many work-related factors and health factors outside the workplace greatly influence the safety and health problems confronting today's workers. Traditionally, workplace safety and health programs have been divided not only by program objectives, managing departments but budgets as well. Safety programs have focused on reducing worker exposure to risk factors in the work environment itself. And most workplace wellness programs have focused on reducing or managing off-the-job lifestyle choices that place workers higher in risk categories.

A growing number of research and surveys support the effectiveness of incorporating these efforts into a more holistic approach that addresses an employee's overall well-being. Employee health status directly influences employee work behavior, attendance, and on-the-job performance. Therefore, developing healthier employees will result in a more productive workforce.

Comprehensive employee well-being programs are not limited to managing safety and health risk factors, but also promoting the emotional, social and financial well-being of the employee as well. These programs are being put into practice by:1

Engaging employees

Adopting healthy benchmarks and metrics

Supporting workers' financial security aspirations

Aligning meaningful incentives

Helping people get the best of a work-life balance

HR professionals play a pivotal role in health and work behavior management. Programs that are closely integrated with related human resource functions, such as health care benefits administration, employee assistance programs and worker's compensation, tend to positively benefit when administratively situated in HR. HR managers can leverage their position in highlighting the value of employees and use their knowledge and skills to drive positive outcomes. They can help by making sure the organizational culture is suitable for building and sustaining a proactive, employee-centered well-being program and its affiliated policies, incentives and strategies within an integrated HR network.

This article originally appeared in the September 2015 issue of Occupational Health & Safety.