Colorado declared shelter dogs and cats the state pet earlier this year at the behest of school children. “It’s important,” implored one young advocate, “to honor the voice of the voiceless.” Given this official designation, it is a sad irony that eight Colorado cities with breed- specific bans consign hundreds of dogs each year to shelters and, in many cases, an untimely death.

Members of the Breckenridge Town Council, now considering adopting a breed-specific ban, should keep a few facts in mind. Pit bull bans have cruel consequences and should be rejected in favor of stronger breed-neutral penalties for irresponsible dog ownership. The council should also promote public education efforts as a more effective and humane answer to public safety concerns.

No breed is more misunderstood than the pit bull. According to the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, “pit bull” refers primarily to two dog breeds: the American Pit Bull Terrier and the American Staffordshire Terrier. Pit bulls are athletic, hardworking dogs used for a variety of purposes, from search and rescue operations to cattle herding, drug and explosive detection to service work for those managing a disability.

A pit bull can also be an excellent companion. Famous owners of the breed include Presidents Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson, General George Patton, Helen Keller, Fred Astaire and Humphrey Bogart.

Unfortunately, breed bans deter thoughtful, law-abiding people from owning pit bulls while increasing the breed’s prestige among lawless individuals.

Pit bull ownership is only for responsible individuals. Pit bulls are not poodles. They were developed in the 19th century for fighting. While not more aggressive than other breeds, once provoked they are less likely to give a warning and less likely to stop fighting before inflicting harm. Pit bulls were not, however, bred to be aggressive to people. Just the opposite, in fact: Breeders favored dogs that could be easily handled even when agitated or wounded.

Breed origins contribute significantly to dog behavior. According to Denver dog trainer and behaviorist Lisa Lucero, 30 percent of a dog’s temperament is the result of genetic coding while 70 percent comes from environmental factors such as treatment, training and socialization. The 30 percent can be managed but not eliminated.

“What this means for pit bull owners,” says Lucero, “is they need to be extra judicious in the kind of situations and environments they place their dogs. The best temperamented pit bull in the world is still a pit bull.”

Owners of pit bulls are not the only ones who should be mindful of their dogs’ pedigree. Powerful guarding breeds such as shepherds, Rottweilers, Shar Peis, Chow Chows, Great Danes, and mastiffs require diligent owners who have their dogs under control at all times. Potential and current dog owners should learn about dog breeds and understand their capabilities and limitations. Not every family situation is the right fit for every dog breed. Dogs should be spayed or neutered. The vast majority of serious and fatal dog attacks involve non-neutered males. Finally, obedience training is important for all dogs.

If Colorado wants to honor its official pet, it’s time to reconsider breed-specific bans. Not only should the Breckenridge Town Council reject its proposed pit bull ban, other municipalities should repeal their bans as well. Educating owners — not euthanizing dogs — is the answer to public safety concerns.

Krista Kafer is director of Colorado’s Future Project, co-host of “Backbone Radio,” airing Sundays from 5 to 8 p.m. on 710 KNUS.