President Obama comes up at every debate and just about every stump speech by all the candidates on both sides of the aisle. That’s usually the way it is when an incumbent steps aside after eight years on the scene.

But it’s the things that the candidates haven’t been saying that may be most telling. In different ways, each remaining candidate has been a creation of an Obama effect.

Let’s start with the Democrats. Hillary Clinton is the easiest reflection of Obama to see. (Also, up top is the best place for me to remind readers that my wife is vice chair of the Clinton campaign.)

She is making the argument that this isn’t a revolutionary moment in American life, but a time to stay the course. Sustained economic recovery, success against terrorism and a plummeting rate of uninsured — yes, thanks to Obamacare — are good reasons to run as essentially the incumbent.

She won’t say the words, “If you liked the last eight years, I got more of that for ya,” but she is benefitting from the sentiment because Obama — now at 52% approval nationally — is especially popular among Democrats.

The implicit message has its benefits and, of course, its limits. Hillary is also seeing how difficult it is to not only carry her own record but that of her former boss (not to mention her husband’s).

Bernie Sanders is too smart to say it out loud, especially in states where he needs more black voters to have a chance at winning, but his message is an unspoken rebuke of Obama. His eloquent cry for a revolution is appealing to those who think there’s been far too little change over the last eight years and want much bigger things to happen right now.

Just as Hillary is careful not to be overt in owning too much of the Obama legacy, so is Bernie careful not to trample on it directly. But Sanders is saying that the “half a loaf” doctrine of Bill Clinton and Barack Obama should be repudiated in favor of something bolder. (Interestingly, this is kind of how Obama quietly contrasted himself with Bill Clinton when he ran in 2008.)

On the Republican side, the President’s name is thrown around with such contempt, the four remaining candidates are leaving zero room for that odd swing voter who remembers 2008 and isn’t blinded by Obama derangement syndrome. But each of them is unwittingly saying complimentary things about our current President if you read between the lines.

Ted Cruz brags of his purity in leading the “never do anything” wing of the Republican party. His daylong quasi filibuster and gleeful shutting down of the federal government is a proof point to his followers who are contemptuous of anything that looks like government.

But to the rest of the world, his proud obstructionism points out how amazing it is that President Obama got anything done at all. And it reminds citizens of the value of the type of quiet, adult leadership that the modern presidency requires.

In a way, Marco Rubio unwittingly exposes the same thing. He has been reduced from “the future of the party” to an afterthought in part because he had the audacity to participate in an actual attempt to legislate a solution to the eminently solvable problem of illegal immigration.

His “crime” to his rivals was sitting in a room with the likes of Chuck Schumer and forge a compromise. He is a walking, breathing answer to the question of why so many people agree on the framework of immigration reform — roughly 65% of Americans in most polls — yet nothing happens.

So the Rubio campaign is exhibit A in the argument that Obama did what he could, but Republicans in Congress, even when they played lip service to governing, were never on the level about being genuinely constructive partners.

The last governor standing brags about how good the economy is under Obama. Well, John Kasich may not say those words but most of his rationale revolves around his record in Ohio.

Behind his talking points is an immutable fact: Ohio is doing well, just like the rest of the country, is in no small part because Barack Obama is President.

Federal policies championed by President Obama have dramatically increased domestic oil production in places like Ohio. Kasich’s Ohio got a big boost by participating in the Affordable Care Act’s Medicare expansion. And the auto rescue. I could go on...

The Republican front-runner has been peddling the least subtle subtext. Donald Trump , like so many of his supporters, has never been happy about having a black President. When he says “make America great again,” Trump is harkening back to his last campaign — the one where he succeeded in convincing so many lemmings that Barack Obama was born in Kenya and therefore an illegitimate President.

Yep, Obama isn’t on the ballot. But it’s hard not to hear his name even when the candidates aren’t saying it.

Weiner represented Queens and Brooklyn in the City Council and U.S. Congress.