RAISE YOUR VOICE: Share your own opinion online at dallasnews.com/sendletters. Sign up for Sounding Off or submit a guest column (and include your full name and contact information) by visiting dallasnews.com/voices.

Will increased toll lanes on area roads affect the routes you take? Besides tolls, in what ways do you think the state could alleviate shortfalls in the transportation budget?

Thomas Allen, Lancaster: Congestion pricing is a fair way of making sure that those who use the highways pay for them. It would not be fair or equitable to raise the gasoline tax on drivers who seldom or never use these highly traveled corridors.

State Sen. John Carona’s complaint that the tolls will raise the cost of using these corridors, while true, should not be a concern. Those who use the congested corridors and gain the extra benefits from using them will not be subsidized by drivers who never use them. Neither should the tolls subsidize any other transportation infrastructure.

If excess tolls accrue, more lanes should be added, or the tolls should be reduced in off-peak times to lure drivers to change their schedules. Businesses along the corridors should realize the benefits of letting their employees begin work during off-peak hours. The gasoline tax should be exclusively used for the shoulders, embankments, overpasses and traveling surfaces in uncongested corridors.

Extra amenities, such as designer archways, museums, decorated piers, painted concrete, landscape plantings, bicycle lanes or walking trails, should either be purchased from locally generated general funds or they should be financed with a user fee. I will avoid tolled routes if possible.

Donna Barnes, Duncanville: I don’t see a big problem with toll roads in and around Dallas. If people can afford it, then they’ll use them. If not, then they won’t. But I sure think that raising money for roads and highways could have come from other places other than tolls. Like State Sen. John Carona said, raising the tax on gas would have been one way.

I know that gas prices are very high. I remember paying about $1.20 a gallon not that long ago. It would cost about $10 or $11 to fill up and now it costs around $35 or $40. That is a big change and it hurts a lot of people. According to a Texas A&M report, we pay 20 cents per gallon, which is about $9.50 per month. That is a lot cheaper than tolls. But we all know that raising taxes of any kind is a sin to the Texas Legislature.

Mike Conner, Grand Prairie: I can remember when Interstate 30 between Dallas and Fort Worth was part freeway and part toll road. While the portion of the road that was toll was still in existence, it was maintained on a regular basis. A few years after the road became freeway, it needed some repairs, but if I remember correctly there was not enough money to make the repairs necessary to bring the road back up to a condition that would let drivers safely navigate their vehicles, and some people complained about the slowness of repairs. They were told that if they hadn’t decided to remove the toll, then there would be plenty of money to make the repairs.

The state should make sure all companies that move and ship products within and through the state are paying their fair share of taxes. All personal vehicles should pay a tax based on the value of the vehicle. Commercial vehicles should probably pay a tax based on the value and weight of the vehicle.

Our state lawmakers should know that if taxes are taken for the purpose of maintaining roads, then that is where they should be applied.

This practice of robbing Peter to pay Paul has got to stop. We are in this situation now because lawmakers won’t apply dollars received as taxes appropriated for the purpose of road repairs. They are giving or applying those dollars to some other group or fund. Let this group create and raise their own funds.

Ernest Cuellar, DeSoto: This is just great, another way for out-of-control big government taking my dollars. High taxes are collected in the state to pay for roads and bridges, on top of the very high gas taxes collected at the pump. So now, I have to pay to drive on a road I already paid for twice. Where will it end?

James Finger, Duncanville: I don’t understand how these managed lanes are going to work. Sounds too complex and probably expensive. But I’m retired and probably won’t be affected much. We must add to the gasoline tax to pay for some of these roads. It’s wrong to continue to let that revenue shrink due to inflation and car efficiency.

John Wheat Gibson, Dallas: The toll for driving on a public road is a tax, just like the sales tax. Already all of us Americans, except the very rich, pay taxes out the nose. Texas easily could alleviate the shortfall in the transportation budget without imposing another tax on us.

Texas should demand that its senators and congresspersons join with other states to force the federal government to use our tax money for purposes that benefit the American people, like roads, health care, education, dignified jobs, etc., instead of handouts to insurance companies like Obamacare and murdering men, women, and children all over the world in endless wars that benefit only the international banking elite and the war profiteers.

Wayne Johnson, Duncanville: Since the North Texas Tollway Authority introduced cashless toll roads I’ve avoided all toll roads in North Texas and intend to continue to do so. The state of Texas should stop diverting gasoline tax money to non-transportation projects and raise the gasoline tax to pay for upgraded and new highways. I know many of our duly elected officials are against new/increased taxes but aren’t tolls a tax and not just an innovative way to build the roads we need?

North Texas drivers deserve more than a Twilight Zone mishmash of toll roads, managed lanes, express, TEXexpress, registering online before driving your intended route, etc., from our politicians.

Barbara Kazlowski, Cedar Hill: Increased toll lanes will not affect the routes I take. This is an appropriate, pragmatic solution to the inadequate transportation budget. Texas could also add 1-2 cents tax to each gallon of gas sold, until the budget is properly funded. Drivers should be willing to contribute to increasing the state transportation budget. Safer, properly maintained roads will benefit us all.

Gene Lantz, Oak Cliff: It’s no surprise that they are trying to privatize the roads we already paid for, because they are trying to privatize the schools and everything else. Every time somebody takes a drink of water or wiggles around, somebody tries to privatize it.

Crazy people have been starving the transportation budget just as they starve all other government functions. Then their idea of solving the problems they caused is to make people pay again for what we already paid for! The worst example in Dallas right now is the way the mayor and others are trying to privatize the schools. If they succeed, we can expect every kind of gouging there is.

Kevin Loyd, Grand Prairie: I couldn’t wait until Highway 161 was open so that it would only take a few minutes to get into Irving, but when the $40 charges started appearing on my credit card (which seemed like every other month), then I went back to taking the back streets to get to where I wanted to go. I only use the toll roads now if I need to get to someplace faster.

It seems that sooner or later, nothing is going to be free anymore. I fear that highways that don’t have tolls or have been paid off and made free will eventually be made back into them and that someday, we will even have to pay just to cross into other states. Then, the ones who will still use them on a regular basis will be those who can afford the tolls or the one who don’t pay their tolls and have no intentions of ever paying them.

Those are the ones that the state needs to go after because there are thousands of unpaid tolls. The monies collected from them could make an impact and take some burdens off of all us who are footing the bill.

Gary Moon, Duncanville: The biggest problem I have with toll roads is that they never stop charging for them. How long does it take to pay off a toll road? It seems that once we opened Pandora’s box, it cannot be shut. Managed toll roads are a joke. Carpool lanes are effective, if only the driving public would choose to ride with more than just themselves in the vehicle.

So, we are going to kill the idea of carpool lanes, which were created to alleviate traffic, and instead open toll roads? How does that alleviate traffic? The same amount of people will be on the highway, and the majority will still be in the main lanes of traffic, because with today’s gas prices, who can afford to pay more to travel on what our taxes have already bought?

Joyce Pinter, southwest Dallas: Texas roads used to be the best and free. I don’t know how these toll roads became so pervasive. We pay gasoline taxes that should cover road repair. I think tolls are a way to gouge the taxpayers. I don’t and won’t take toll roads. This whole scenario just doesn’t seem equitable and someone is making a lot of money. We should be able to vote whether we want toll roads. More power to the people!

E. B. Pope, Lancaster: Frankly, I avoid toll roads totally. I do not have a TollTag and do not plan on getting one. I find I can get anywhere I need to visit without using toll roads. I would prefer Texas adopt casino gambling to supplement our waning road budgets.

Douglas Rose, Grand Prairie: Living here in Grand Prairie, I must say that Highway 161 has greatly expedited travels for us north of the mid-cities and we have found it most useful. That being said, additional toll fees are never a welcome sight. Although they may assist traffic from getting from point A to point B, they also often discourage others from going that way due to the additional costs, etc.

Jesse Vasquez, southwest Dallas: As to the topic of toll roads, I really cannot comment since I do not use the toll roads if avoidable. The only thing that I can say is that the NTTA is too lax with the offenders. Impound their cars!

The last toll road that I drove on was the 130 in Austin some years back. It is a farce! It was the Fourth of July in 2009, and I was returning to Dallas from San Antonio. I had heard about this road, so I took it on the southside of Austin and drove almost to Brenham, where they make the ice cream, then back to I-35 in Georgetown! I must have driven an extra 50 miles, through about eight toll gates, only to bypass downtown Austin.

Since it was a Friday, there was no traffic anywhere. So how does this save people time?

Kirby Warnock, Oak Cliff: If I am in a big enough hurry, I will take the quickest route no matter if it is on a toll road. If I have the time, I avoid them. Texas needs to either raise the gas tax a few pennies per gallon or find a new source of revenue.

Our roads are getting worse by the day, but some people think we shouldn’t raise taxes on anything. To that I would ask, “What costs the same as it did 30 years ago?”

You get what you pay for, and we must increase taxes somewhere to pay for our roads. Everyone uses the roads, so it will benefit all of us to see them improved.