After my foray yesterday into the specific case of Paul Ryan, let me return to broader critiques of reform conservatism, picking up threads from E.J. Dionne’s long essay on our little movement and some of Andrew Sullivan’s comments this week. I first read Dionne’s essay some time ago and intended a long point-by-point rejoinder; I’ve read so many (far harsher, less thoughtful) critiques since, however, that upon re-reading the essay seemed marvelously fair-minded, and worth recommending even if I obviously have disagreements with its substance. But here’s a prescriptive passage that’s worth commenting on:

… the Reformicons, who are diverse in their views on social issues, need to be bolder in approaching cultural modernization. To have a future, conservatism cannot view an increasingly diverse and tolerant America as a horror. A Burkean traditionalism honors the gifts diverse communities bring to a nation.

And here, from Sullivan, is a more expansive version of the same argument:

And then the reformicons are operating at a disadvantage in a culturally polarized America. It would be great if this were not the case – but since a huge amount of both parties’ base mobilization requires intensifying the cultural conflict, and since the divide is rooted in real responses to changing mores, it will likely endure. And that kind of climate makes pragmatic conservatism again less likely to get a hearing. So, for example, I’m perfectly open to new ideas on, say, helping working class families with kids. But some pretty basic concerns about the current GOP on cultural issues – its open hostility to my own civil marriage, its absolutism on abortion, its panic at immigration, its tone-deafness on racial injustice – push me, and many others, into leaning Democrat for a while. And it’s important to note that even the reformicons are die-hard cultural and religious conservatives in most respects.

One answer here — and it’s an important one — is that for intertwined reasons of policy and politics, reform conservatives aren’t actually trying to win over Sullivan, or at least we aren’t trying to win him over first. The immediate reformist priority, the raison d’etre of the movement, is serving the interests and winning the votes of those “middle class parents with kids” (and people who might want to be middle class parents with kids) on economic issues; the question of how the Republican Party should adapt (or not) on the issues Sullivan lists is an important but ultimately second-order concern.

My friend Pascal-Emmanuel Gobry made a version of this case yesterday, which I’ll quote from here:

Leaving aside the tendentiousness of some of his formulations (if there is one absolutist party on abortion in America, for example, it is the Democratic Party …) … Sullivan is certainly right: the GOP’s cultural populism turns off voters like him. But, well, the reform conservative disposition says that the GOP should not court voters like him (by which I mean highly educated, urban, coastal). First because, as much as they wish it were not so, they do not decide elections in America … Second because reform conservatives see the main domestic policy challenge facing America as … the problems of working and lower-middle-class Americans, and that some of [their] concerns are cultural in nature, and that while these concerns may “come out” in unproductive and/or mistaken ways, lashing-out, they are also the expressions of real serious concerns with regard to (mainly) the slow disintegration of what used to be regarded as the pillars of The Good Life in America, namely marriage and the family and religiosity. Perhaps another way to phrase this is that reform conservatism thinks that the GOP should be a populist party because, well, the populists are roughly right about what went wrong, at least in a few key respects, even if they sometimes are wrong about the particulars or about how to fix it. The Democratic Party already has the upper-middle class locked up, precisely because it panders very well [to] their cultural prejudices … A Republican Party that tried to go after its slice while dumping its base, which happens to be a plurality of voters in America, would, ipso facto, become a rump. Needless to say, this is not something reform conservatives favor.

So that’s one possible and partial answer. Another, more conciliatory one, is that both Dionne and Sullivan are correct to cast cultural outreach as a necessary and difficult aspect of conservative renewal, but that there’s room for disagreement about what form this outreach should take. (Even a figure like David Frum, for instance, whose relative social liberalism Dionne highlights, wants the G.O.P. to shift on abortion and same-sex marriage … but not, emphatically not, on immigration or marijuana legalization.)

So, for instance, while I’m personally skeptical of the “pass immigration reform to win Hispanics” theory of Republican modernization, I’m quite invested in the “make an actual pitch to African-American voters on issues they care about and stop obsessing over voter ID” theory. And I think both reform conservatives and our close cousins, libertarian populists, have pushed Republicans (many of whom, from Rand Paul to even a Chris Christie, haven’t needed that much pushing) to take up causes like sentencing reform and drug law reform that might further this kind of outreach. It’s not a complete strategy, it obviously exists in tension with other impulses and ideas within conservatism — but it’s a first step, at least.

On same-sex unions, meanwhile, I understand that surrender is not exactly the same thing as outreach. But I do think reform conservatives share the near-universal assumption that Sullivan’s civil marriage will be recognized in all fifty states within the next few years, and our “die-hard” social conservatism is mostly manifested in support for religious-liberty protections in a post-Windsor world — an issue on which I know Sullivan himself has at least some sympathy for our perspective. There will not be a Cameron-style preemptive strike on gay rights, it’s true, where the G.O.P. leapfrogs the Democrats to somehow back gay marriage even more strongly. But neither will there be some conservatism-wide outburst of hostility and rage, I expect, when Anthony Kennedy settles the debate for this generation.

I could be wrong about this; perhaps, as Greg Sargent argues (hopes?), the next G.O.P. primary will be consumed by a debate over a federal marriage amendment and other anti-S.S.M. unicorns. But most likely not: The typical religious conservative of my acquaintance considers the battle lost, Fox News and other tub-thumping outlets have never much cared for the issue anyway, and ambitious Republican politicians will be happy to stop talking about it (as they mostly have already). Which is why I expect that meaningful public opposition to the redefinition of marriage will be largely depoliticized soon enough — confined to polite, mostly marginal intellectuals and clerics and impolite but equally marginal agitators. Where the G.O.P. is concerned, that may not be modernization enough to satisfy Sullivan, but it will be a pretty striking transformation nonetheless.

Then more broadly, I think both Sullivan and Dionne might do well to ponder the possibility that having a more substantive economic agenda would itself be a significant form of conservative outreach to a more diverse America — a way of showing greater respect for the everyday interests of non-conservatives on the one hand, and a way of channeling certain forms of right-wing populist grievance in more productive directions on the other. If you’re talking about pro-family tax policy, for instance, you’re talking about an issue that’s as relevant to single mothers and middle-class Latino parents as it is to married white women who already tend to pull the lever for the G.O.P. If you have a plan to address long-term unemployment, you’re giving disaffected blue-collar whites a reason to vote for you that doesn’t require encouraging a kind of white identity politics on cultural issues. If your social conservatism comes equipped with a substantive socioeconomic vision, it’s less likely to devolve into xenophobia or figure-wagging reaction — and less likely to be successfully caricatured as such by an opportunistic liberalism. There isn’t a bright line between economic and cultural outreach, in other words; the two aren’t identical, but they run together more often than you might think.

Then a final point, building off Gobry’s own last line: As much as cultural outreach matters, I wouldn’t want the kind of conservative political party that essentially declines to represent populist and social conservatives at all on many issues, enforcing an elite consensus instead of representing its own constituents wherever those constituents seem too disreputable or insufficiently cosmopolitan. This is what you have on the center-right in many European countries, Sullivan’s native isle at times included, and I don’t think it’s worked out particularly well: When it hasn’t led directly to disaster (see Eurozone, disastrous anti-democratic expansion of), it’s often shunted important issues (immigration, religious identity, crime, multiculturalism, etc.) to a back burner, where they simmer and simmer until some crisis makes them boil over, and the next thing you know you have to deal with a Marine Le Pen (if not a Golden Dawn). And to a lesser extent this is the dynamic that’s made the Tea Party so angry, uncompromising and intermittently destructive in our own politics — the sense, often somewhat accurate, that their leaders want their votes but not their ideas, and that there are semi-deliberate conspiracies to deceive them about what their elected representatives are really after.

The reality is that, except in truly exceptional cases, our politics is better off in the long run when views held by large proportions of the public are represented in some form by one of our two parties. Right now (to run down a partial list of divisive cultural issues), a plurality of Americans want the immigration rate decreased; about half the country opposes affirmative action; more than half supports the death penalty; about half of Americans call themselves pro-life. Support for gay marriage and marijuana legalization has skyrocketed, but in both cases about 40 percent of the country is still opposed. Even independent of my own (yes, populist and socially conservative) views, I think these people, these opinions, deserve democratic representation: Representation that leads and channels and restrains, representation that recognizes trends and trajectories and political realities, but also representation that makes them feel well-served, spoken for, and (in the case of issues where they’re probably on the losing side) respected even in defeat.

Because without that representation, populism doesn’t go away; it festers. Just ask David Cameron, Sullivan’s example of a modernizing conservative, a politician whose agenda has had a number of admirable features … but whose style and approach also helped roll out the red carpet for UKIP and Nigel Farage. In the United States, a more populist and conservative and religious country than Britain, the Farage scenario would look wilder and stranger and much, much worse for conservatism and the country. And so Republican politicians interested in outreach and coalition-building and modernization have an obligation to make sure they don’t also create a pervasive sense of populist disenfranchisement along the way.

It’s not an easy challenge to meet, and it’s one that — notwithstanding all of liberalism’s weaknesses — could keep the G.O.P. out of the White House in 2016 and beyond. But both practically and, I would submit, morally, it’s one that simply cannot be evaded or escaped.