Sioux Falls, SD

Big changes are coming to the Sioux Falls School District. Pam Homan, who's been working with the Sioux Falls Schools for 25 years, is retiring from the district. Parents across the community say the superintendent is leaving behind a quality academic environment.

"I think she did some pretty incredible things in the district, she really advanced, moved it forward," Brent Eliason said.

"We've got the Spanish Immersion Program which is really impressive. We've got the Challenge Center that is a real, real gift to this community," Greg Veerman said.

Homan says programs like Spanish Immersion are highlights of her long career as superintendent, as well as opportunities for high-achieving and struggling students. Tychicus McClain says he is grateful for how the district has helped his son learn to become a better reader after struggling earlier in school.

"They hired extra teachers and stuff for him to learn and stay ahead of class and everything and he made it to the second grade. I think they're pretty good," Tychicus McClain said.

While some parents think the school district has done great things for the community, they also believe some works need to be done.

Brent Eliason, who's a former teacher in Washington, hopes to see the workload for teachers decrease.

"With the push of test scores and No Child Left Behind, sometimes we've almost left the teachers behind in trying to not leave the students behind," Eliason said.

Greg Veerman was disappointed in how the district handled the naming of the new Susan B. Anthony Elementary school. He thinks the next superintendent needs to lead a more open school board.

"I congratulate her on the conditions of the schools she leaves behind. I wish from a organization standpoint that there was more transparency and a more clear willingness to embrace what parents and public have to say about operations," Veerman said.

Challenges that the next superintendent will have to tackle.

Homan says the process to find the next superintendent will begin Monday at the next school board meeting.