State Rep. W. Curtis Thomas cast the only no vote on a resolution supporting the elimination of the beleaguered Philadelphia Traffic Court in the state House of Representatives. The final vote was 190-1.

Thomas voiced dismay that his colleagues would vote to kill the system when it could instead be rehabilitated and saved.

“When there is a problem with something in your house, you don’t blow up the entire house,” said Thomas, D-Philadelphia. “The municipal court is already overburdened with its own cases. The bill did not include any funding to accommodate the transfer of the over 200,000 additional cases the traffic court handles annually.”

In a memo circulated with the legislation, state Sen. Dominic Pileggi outlined several reasons for the termination of the court system in a memo and 35-page report documenting a legacy of corruption.

“No other county has a separate traffic court, and there is no objective evidence that the continued existence of the Philadelphia Traffic Court would serve the public interest,” said Pileggi, R-9th. “Whatever reason may have existed in the past for Philadelphia to have a separate traffic court no longer exists.”

Thomas noted that under state law, the elimination of the traffic court must be approved by Pennsylvania voters in a statewide referendum, and questioned why Pileggi would target a court in Philadelphia.

“Philadelphia residents should have a say in their court system and whether there should be an independent court to handle traffic matters in the city,” Thomas said.

Fattah turns to labor in re-election bid

Embattled U.S. Rep. Chaka Fattah is taking the challenge to his power seriously, and has tapped District 1199C Executive Vice President Chris Woods to serve as the campaign’s labor chairman.

Fattah has been indicted in a federal corruption probe, with a trial scheduled to start around the time of a spring primary election for his seat.

State Reps. Dwight Evans and Brian Sims are challenging him for the nomination. Fattah’s son, Chaka “Chip” Fattah Jr., was convicted last month in a separate federal corruption trial and is awaiting sentencing.

“Congressman Fattah has been serving the public for over 30 years and in that time he has consistently maintained a 100 percent voting record with the AFL-CIO,” Woods said. “Moreover, he has been a leader on important issues like health care, a higher minimum wage, housing and education; these are the issues working families care about and they’re the issues Congressman Fattah has spent his career working on. That’s why we are going to organize to make sure every labor household in the district is actively involved in this campaign.”

Fattah said the turn toward labor for his campaign was a natural one.

“The improved conditions of working families has always been the focus of my work in Congress,” Fattah said. “Chris Woods is a labor leader with superior political experience and I’m honored to have him on our team.”

Affordable Care Act deadline approaching

Gov. Tom Wolf has reiterated that Pennsylvanians have until Dec. 15 to sign up for health care through the marketplace for the policy to go into effect on Jan. 1.

“This marks one week until the deadline to enroll in a health insurance plan that will have you covered starting Jan. 1, 2016,” Wolf said. “So many of us forget about health insurance until we need to use it. Life is full of surprises. Insurance helps you prepare for the unexpected. And, if you do not have insurance, you may have to pay a penalty to the federal government when you file your taxes.”

Most people can only shop for insurance during the open enrollment period, during which prospective clients can purchase a new plan or make changes to existing insurance plans. Open enrollment for 2016 health insurance coverage began Nov. 1 and runs through Jan. 31, but shoppers must purchase by Dec. 15 in order to have coverage that begins on Jan. 1.

Ex–footballer Jon Richie declares state Senate bid

Former Oakland Raider, Philadelphia Eagle and broadcaster Jon Ritchie has announced his candidacy for the 31st senatorial district seat, currently occupied by State Sen. Pat Vance, who is not seeking re-election.

“I am proud to announce my candidacy for the state Senate because I want to give back to the community that has been so good to me,” said Ritchie, adding that he will have big shoes to fill if successful in succeeding Vance. “Growing up in Cumberland County with my parents, my father was a car salesman and my mother was a guidance counselor and taught for Cumberland Valley School District, I learned the values of hard work, honesty and the importance of giving back to our community. I love this area and that is why my wife and I chose to raise our family here.”

Ritchie played fullback in the NFL with the Oakland Raiders and the Philadelphia Eagles from 1998-2004.

City pols come out for Katie McGinty

Philadelphia’s Democratic leadership has endorsed former Wolf Administration Chief of Staff Katie McGinty in her campaign for the U.S. Senate.

City Controller Alan Butkovitz, City Council President Darrell Clarke, Mayor Michael Nutter and City Council members Cindy Bass, Jannie Blackwell, Blondell Reynolds Brown, William Greenlee, Bobby Henon and Mark Squilla have all embraced McGinty, as she looks to unseat Republican Sen. Pat Toomey in next year’s general elections. To get there, McGinty must first prevail in the spring primary.

“Katie McGinty knows better than any candidate in this race what hard-working Pennsylvanians need and what makes our commonwealth run,” Nutter said. “Born and raised in Northeast Philadelphia and the first in her family to attend a four-year college, Katie has proven herself a pragmatic, dedicated public servant. As a U.S. senator, I know Katie will fight for Pennsylvania’s middle-class families, children and seniors.”

Brown, a greening and sustainability advocate, hailed McGinty for working on climate change “long before” it became trendy in politics.

“She was already ahead on that issue and we need her forward thinking in the United States Senate,” Brown said. “Pennsylvania has never elected a woman to the U.S. Senate and we have an opportunity to make history by electing Katie who will stand up for working families, the environment and give a voice to the more than 6.5 million women who live in our commonwealth.”