<p>Paul Fain</p>

Next to budgeting, probably the least titillating topic in personal financial planning is protection planning — insurance.

You work hard to build wealth, and you don’t want to put your financial security at unnecessary risk. In broad terms, risk is the possibility of harm, injury, loss or destruction.

To manage risk you need to: identify the risks to which you are exposed; identify the potential losses associated with each risk; map out a strategy for dealing with the risks you’ve identified; and implement and periodically review the strategy.

Some people choose to avoid certain types of risk altogether. For example, you might avoid hang gliding. You might opt to retain part of other risks. For example, you might choose a higher deductible on your medical insurance. Some risks cannot be reasonably retained such as the risks of a major health care crisis, loss of income or premature death.

Perhaps the best way to manage your risks is to purchase insurance. By weighing the price of protection against the potential benefits, most people conclude that insurance offers the most effective, cost-efficient way to cope with risk.

Some insurance policies are mandated by laws or lenders. Homeowners and automobile insurance, for examples. But don’t overlook the need to protect value of jewelry, computers and antiques.

Protecting your finances from the ravages of illnesses and accidents is a primary risk management need. Fortunately, the Affordable Care Act has made health care available to many more individuals. Of course, there are limits on coverage and costs, but you get what you pay for. Still, something is better than nothing in this vital area.

What is your greatest asset? It has to be your human capital, the ability to earn income. Have you protected it? Disability insurance coverage might be one of the most needed but underappreciated types of protection.

The specter of premature death frightens us the most, though it might be statistically a lower risk. Life insurance, in one of its various forms, can protect your survivors and fulfill your family’s dreams to own a home, afford college and secure a regular income after a tragedy.

Folks ask me if the risk of a stock market crash keeps me up at night. I respond, “No, but I do worry about people’s long-term care planning.” As we age we need to think about impairment, consider our options, and make a plan that might include some form and amount of long-term care insurance.

Finally, but critically, one of the best protection tools is to build up a cash reserve. So many financial crises occur when people have to go into debt to deal with short-term emergencies.

So manage life’s risk wisely with insurance. Make a place in your budget for insurance premiums. They are not “throwing away money,” on the contrary, purchasing insurance is an expression of preparation, love and caring.

Paul Fain, a certified financial planner and president of Asset Planning Corp., may be reached at pkf@assetplanningcorp.com.