Just to be clear, Kenneth Faried wants you to know he doesn’t belong lumped in this category. The Nuggets forward says he’s always understood just what his role on the basketball team was.

But many of his teammates didn’t.

That lack of clarity was one of the biggest sore spots on the Nuggets team that had gone unchecked, then festered, and ultimately had to be addressed. Individual player meetings held Thursday made that crystal clear to the head coach, Brian Shaw, who at that point, was spot-on with the belief that additional communication was more necessary than running any drill.

Evan Fournier and Nate Robinson were among the players that needed the most clarification. Each stewed in his own way about inconsistent playing time. Both needed reassurance that they were important parts of the team. And they got that.

“I can’t lie, it feels good to be on the court,” said Fournier after the Nuggets win over Memphis. “Especially in a win. I’m glad I’m a part of it.”

Fournier’s 21 minutes played was his second-highest total of the season. He responded with a season-high tying 12 points.

Fournier said he was “unclear” about his role before mid-week.

“I was on the bench,” Fournier said. “A lot of negative thoughts. I think it wasn’t good for me, for the coaching staff or for the team. So, just feels good to talk to the coaches and know what they are expecting so I can get better and just be happy. That means a lot.”

Robinson’s 23 minutes were the most he’s played in a game in three weeks. He said meeting with Shaw and the coaching staff “was just much-needed that everybody get whatever it is they need to get off their chest.”

And with that no longer a burden on his mind, Robinson responded with 15 points, his highest point total in a game in nearly a month.

“It was a liberating feeling for them,” said Shaw of Fournier and Robinson. “We played nine guys. I talked about cutting the rotation down and playing eight or nine guys, and that means some other guys minutes are going to go up.”

Shaw was pleased at what he saw from a minute-distribution standpoint when he looked at the box score after the Nuggets win over Memphis.

“I look at the distribution of minutes between those nine guys and I think everyone would feel pretty good about the amount of time they got to play,” Shaw said. “They don’t feel like they’re getting yanked out. I don’t feel like I’m trying to make sure that everybody is happy and everybody gets a little bit of time instead of guys being able to get into more of a rhythm — five or six-minute runs at a time as opposed to three, four and then you’re coming out.”

Darrell Arthur praised the impact of the meetings and the clarity in role responsibility that came out of them, saying now players “mindset is great.”

Shaw’s search for productive players and effective lineups played a huge part in some of the constant shuffling early on. But he’s settling in on players he likes.

“Well, if I’m getting that production out of them, even when they are tired or playing a little bit more, it outweighs having a guy come in for three or four minutes, not being able to really get into a rhythm,” Shaw said. “I think that was a big part of why some of our guys were struggling because they aren’t getting that consistent run.”

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dempseypost