2 leading Bay Area children's hospitals unite for efficiency

Improved health care for Bay Area children is the promise of the latest alliance in the hospital industry.

UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital and Children's Hospital Oakland announced Wednesday a joining of forces that "brings together two leading Bay Area children's hospitals, strengthening their abilities to meet marketplace expectations, including the Affordable Care Act."

The agreement, two years in the making, combines UCSF's 800 pediatricians and pediatric specialists with Children's 750 physicians and specialists in a combined 23 separate sites, forming the largest network of pediatric providers in Northern California, stretching from the Oregon border to San Luis Obispo and east to Reno.

"The synergies created by these two respected institutions coming together allow children and families to benefit from greater depth and breadth of pediatric expertise as well as innovation that is possible by working together," said Children's Oakland CEO Bert Lubin.

The agreement is particularly welcome for Children's Oakland, founded in 1912 as the Baby Hospital by a nurse, Bertha Wright, and a group of East Bay women. Financial losses, the cost of seismic upgrades and other issues had forced Children's, an urban hospital with a large percentage of low-income Medicaid patients, to seek a medical bigger brother.

The "evolving and volatile times," Lubin wrote in a 2012 letter to the staff, make it "increasingly important for us to carefully consider how we can be sustainable in the long run. In all likelihood, this will require a strong partner."

Complicated alliance

He now has one with UCSF, an internationally known medical center with Salesforce.com CEO and major philanthropist CEO Marc Benioff (and wife Lynne) behind it. "We've had a significant turnaround financially, but it's still very expensive to serve the most vulnerable," Lubin said in an interview Wednesday. "We knew we had to scale."

Children's retains its separate status, although its top four executives, including Lubin, are now on UCSF's payroll and "leased back" to Children's. There are no plans to bring other Children's employees under UCSF's wing. "That's all we anticipate," said Mark Laret, CEO of UCSF Medical Center. The UC Board of Regents joins Children's board of directors as the corporate member.

The negotiations, which began in February 2012, were not without their hiccups. At one point they looked to outside observers to be falling apart, and early talk of a full-on merger quickly died.

"It was complicated on a number of fronts," Laret said. "Whatever we did, we had to be sure wouldn't harm the services Children's provide. But also making sure the arrangement works for UCSF. Plus there were a host of regulatory issues to work through."

Now comes the test. Will the partnership be able to deliver on the marketplace expectations - lower costs, better care, operating efficiencies?

"It's not an uncommon announcement," said Jan Emerson-Shea, spokeswoman for the California Hospital Association. "Driven by the Affordable Care Act, hospitals all over California and the nation are looking for partners."

"This is particularly important in the Bay Area, especially regarding an alliance between an academic medical center and a children's hospital, two of the highest-cost types of facilities," said a health policy consultant, who did not wish to be named on account of his ties to Bay Area medical centers.

"It has to be done," Laret said. "There's an imperative to reduce costs and provide better care. The only way to do it is to find synergies and serve markets we haven't served in the past."

Cost-saving measures

Lubin noted that UCSF is already providing new pediatric services, including orthopedic and urology surgery, and sports medicine and dermatology at Children's facilities. Cost-saving measures are being explored. The partnership, which officially took effect Jan. 1, already had its first board meeting.

"We're feeling very positive right now," Laret said.