Photo by Meredith Parnell

Our synagogue is next door to an affordable housing property for seniors, which was founded by the synagogue and the local Catholic Archdiocese. One night last week, our cantor, one of our rabbis, a couple of musicians and I went next door for their Chanukah party, which consisted of songs, candle lighting, and a dinner (which was, in large part, provided by generous donations from local merchants).

The community center was packed, with all the seats taken and several of us standing in the back. Some of the residents who participated were Jewish, but a good number of them were not. It was, I thought, a great way to share our tradition with those who grew up with it as well as those who had not.

Then, at the dinner, the woman sitting next to me asked, “You’re the president of the synagogue?” I told her I am, and she said, “You’re not a rabbi?” I said no, and she followed up with, “So what do you do as president?” I explained that I am president of the Board of Directors, which oversees the finances of the synagogue, sets policy, and is responsible for the vision.

She then asked, “Did you approve that big sign you had out front?” I asked her what sign she was talking about, and as she described it I realized she was referring to the sign we have which says, “Kol yisrael arevim zeh bazeh,/All Jews are responsible for one another/We stand as one with Israel/Learn more. Act more.” I told her the Board doesn’t approve signs; that is something the staff takes care of.

She said, “They would never get away with something like that in front of a Catholic church.” I asked her what she meant by “get away with” it. She explained, “Putting up a political sign.” I put down my forkful of latke.

I told her, “All Jews are responsible for one another” is an old Jewish saying. It isn’t political.”

She clarified, “That sign was up during the Gaza war. It isn’t right to say all Jews support Israel. A lot of Jews don’t.”

I replied, “It doesn’t mean we agree with everything the current government in Israel does, but we do believe Israel has a right to defend itself.”

Gaining steam, she countered, “They did a lot more than defend themselves. You should read the progressive media reports about what was going on.”

At this point, I was having a hard time believing I was having this conversation at a Chanukah party dinner. I didn’t come there prepared to defend Israel. I read a lot of reports during the war, both “progressive” and otherwise. I find it a bit sad that she would think it would be impossible for someone to read those reports and not still stand with Israel. I wondered whether she had read anything from Israel’s point of view. But, I suppose, with the amount of disinformation swirling around social media and elsewhere, one who supports Israel should always be prepared to defend her.

Part of me thought, “My father and his family had to flee Hungary. She has no idea what it means to me to know there is a safe place Jews can go when they’re persecuted.” Part of me thought, “I have friends, we have congregants, who have children who served in the Israeli Defense Forces and risked their lives for Israel during that war.” But I knew nothing I said would make her change her mind. I knew by her tone and her body language that she was convinced Israel was in the wrong and she had no interest in hearing any other point of view.

So what I said to her was, “The sign represents what our synagogue stands for. I don’t want to talk politics.” She said she agreed she didn’t want to talk politics either, and I turned and chatted with others at the table for the rest of the meal.

----------------

"Like” the Religious and Reform Facebook page to see additional photos and behind-the-scenes comments, and https://twitter.com/SusanBarnesRnR on Twitter.

COMMENTS

View our privacy policy and terms of service.