SEATTLE — Depending on the wind, the removable roof over Safeco Field takes 12 to 18 minutes to roll away. During “The Star-Spangled Banner” on Sunday, with the morning rain having passed, the cover was lifted and the sun suddenly shone on Kyle Kendrick.

The Rockies’ veteran starter — a durable figure over eight seasons in Philadelphia but a beleaguered pitcher in purple — looked like himself again.

Kendrick gave up just three hits and two runs over five innings, leading the Rockies to a 3-2 victory over Seattle.

“He’s always been a very durable guy,” Rockies manager Walt Weiss said. “That’s one of the reasons we got him. He can eat up innings.”

Kendrick has started 20 or more games in seven of his nine big-league seasons. A shoulder injury last month sidelined him for the first time since 2011. Through 23 starts before Sunday, Kendrick struggled to a 5-12 record and a 6.25 ERA. He’s a flyball pitcher throwing for a groundball team.

But away from Coors Field — where his numbers are considerably better — and back near where he played baseball at nearby Mount Vernon High in Washington, Kendrick seemed at ease.

“My dad used to take me to games here as a kid,” Kendrick said. “Coming here brought back those memories.”

He faced the minimum number of batters through the first three innings. He struck out Nelson Cruz looking to end the first. He struck out Seth Smith with the bat still upright to end the second. And he whiffed James Jones without a swing to finish the third.

“It looks like there’s more finish to his pitches,” Weiss said. “His fastball has more life. He’s healthy and strong.”

Logan Morrison was the first Mariners hitter to reach base, in the third, after he bunted. But catcher Dustin Garneau threw him out trying to steal second.

The Mariners scored twice in the fourth when Smith looped a single to center field just shy of Charlie Blackmon’s toes to score two. Kendrick left after the fifth with four strikeouts and two walks.

Kendrick threw 72 pitches — 45 for strikes — with a mix of two-seam fastballs, changeups and sliders.

“It’s funny. On the road, it should move more,” Kendrick said. “You know Denver. This year, it hasn’t moved as much as I’m used to. But on the road, when I feel good, it’s where it should be.”

The Rockies took a 1-0 lead in the third on Nolan Arenado’s sacrifice fly to right that scored Blackmon. Wilin Rosario and Justin Morneau hustled home to score on a throwing error in the fourth.

In the eighth, Rockies left fielder Brandon Barnes slammed his head into the dirt while making a diving catch down the left-field foul line off Kyle Seager’s line drive. Barnes then slinged a relay throw to double off Ketel Marte from first.

“I’m going to do everything I can for our pitchers,” Barnes said.

Said Kendrick: “It saved the game for us. That got us a W.”

John Axford, against the meat of the Mariners’ order, struck out Cruz to open the ninth, gave up a single through the middle to Robinson Cano, struck out Mark Trumbo and got Smith to pop out to center to save the game.

The Rockies (60-83) won just their fourth series since the all-star break.

And Kendrick — a 31-year-old whom the Rockies signed to a one-year, $5.5 million contract before the season — is 2-0 with a 3.86 ERA in three starts since returning from injury.

“I feel a lot better. And when you feel good, you can make your pitches more consistently,” Kendrick said. “That’s a good thing for me going into the winter, to show teams I’m healthy.”

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke

Steamrolled

The Rockies took two of three from the Mariners over the weekend to finish interleague play this year. But Colorado struggled to the worst interleague record (5-15) in the majors. A look:

Rockies vs. the American League

30th: MLB rank in interleague play

3-7: Record at AL ballparks

2-8: Record at Coors Field

70: Runs scored

122: Runs allowed

0-4: vs. Houston Astros

0-4: vs. Los Angeles Angels

1-2: vs. Oakland Athletics

3-3: vs. Seattle Mariners

1-2: vs. Texas Rangers