With Kompany’s assertive captaincy, Manchester City has won two of the last three titles in England’s Premier League after a drought of 44 years. For Belgium’s national team, Kompany is the most accomplished of an emergent generation of superbly skilled players, responsible for forging individual talent into a cohesive group.

Many consider Belgium a dark horse in the World Cup, even if its attack has been more plodding than alluring so far.

Photo

Defensively, the Red Devils conceded a lone goal — on a penalty kick — in the group phase.

“Vincent is a natural-born leader,” his fellow defender Jan Vertonghen said. “He’s the leader on and off the pitch. That’s how everyone sees him. He’s not fake. He’s like the father of the team, taking care of everything and everyone.”

Yet Kompany has also been frequently unavailable because of injury. According to Le Soir, a French-language Belgian newspaper, he has missed 700 days to injury during his 11-year professional career with his club and national teams. Another newspaper, L’Avenir, calculated that Kompany’s 61 appearances for Belgium might have been 100 by now, except for 39 absences, many because of injury.

During World Cup qualifying, Belgium won three away games without Kompany. Belgium’s team doctor suggested to Le Soir that as Kompany had built his body to accommodate the physical play and demanding schedule of the Premier League, he might have inadvertently become more susceptible to injury, though no more so than any other player.

“He’s seen as the leader of the band,” said Marc Degryse, a newspaper columnist and retired forward who played in the 1990 and 1994 World Cups for Belgium. “He’s a motivator. He’s really aware of his responsibility of taking his team forward. That’s his only weak point. He has to stay fit.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The son of an activist who left the Democratic Republic of Congo as a political refugee, Kompany was born in Brussels and made his first appearance for the Belgian national team at 17. It was not his dream simply to play in the World Cup, he told reporters recently. It was his dream to perform.

“I want to prove something,” he said.

It may be hard to believe now, but as a teenager, Kompany could be casual toward training, arriving late and sometimes appearing indifferent, said Eddy Snelders, who was an assistant coach for Belgium in Kompany’s early years. But as he moved up the club-team ladder from Anderlecht to Hamburg to Manchester City, his resolve matured with his skills.

“He was not the same Vincent Kompany as he is now,” Snelders said. “He’s taking much more responsibility and he’s much stricter in his behavior.”

And he has developed a social conviction, perhaps unsurprising for someone whose father fled to Belgium after being imprisoned for protesting against the protracted Congolese dictatorship of Mobutu Sese Seko.

Pierre Kompany, his father, later drove a taxi in Brussels and put himself through school to become an engineer, according to news accounts.