LONGMONT — In Roger Pomainville's 40 years of building apartments here and in the surrounding region, there have been plenty of undulations in the regional housing industry.

But amid all the busts, booms or periods of stagnation that the decades brought, it's the current market that has the Longmont developer astonished.

"I've never seen it like this," he said. "This is unbelievable."

The northwest Denver metro region, like much of the nation, is in the throes of a multifamily housing boom, and Longmont is no exception.

Late last month, the 115-unit Roosevelt Park Apartments — the largest apartment complex to be built in Longmont since the 434-unit Grandview Meadows was approved more than 10 years ago — was unveiled to the public. On the city's eastern edge, Mill Village, a 220-unit "resort"-style community being developed by Pomainville and Wendell Pickett is under construction with a completion date of January.

And if preliminary plans move forward for the former Butterball site off First and Main in downtown, a few hundred more apartments could be added to the city's core.

A favorable lending environment has helped to fuel the rise of new apartment complexes throughout Boulder and Broomfield counties. The projects that were log-jammed during the recession combined with new arrivals are meant to address the demand that has ratcheted vacancy rates to historic lows.

"Longmont is basically full right now," Pomainville said, noting that the city's vacancy rate has been in the 2 percent range.

Colorado's population increased more than 22 percent from 2000 to 2013, according to U.S. Census data. The Centennial State's growth outpaced that of the nation by roughly 12 percentage points.

"The Front Range of Colorado has the first authentic housing shortage in my lifetime," said Lou Barnes, 65, mortgage banker with Boulder-based Premier Lending Group. Barnes also serves as a member of the Daily Camera's editorial advisory board.

Construction on multi-residential buildings is seen Thursday, at Ironhorse at Mill Village in Longmont. Go to timescall.com for more photos. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

The multifamily market also is seeing additional pressures as young adults in their 20s and 30s are seemingly averse to wanting to buy a home, Barnes said. Hoping to satisfy the demand, developers have responded with multitudes of multifamily projects, he said.

It's a situation that could lead to an overbuild, he said.

"We can measure how many are built and how many are building," he said. "You never know how many are on the drawing board."

Considering the population gains, the strong employment market, and the fact that builders are playing catch-up — development slogged along during the recession despite a growing number of residents — there might not be a drastic situation where there becomes too much housing stock.

"We may build too many apartments in some places, but the kind of regional overbuild that happened in the mid-'80s and again in the 2000s, that is not in the cards," he said. "We're not building enough."

Filling needs

1600 Ironhorse at Mill Village, located off Ken Pratt Boulevard and Third Avenue, is the final leg of the multi-phased Mill Village development, which started with an office building then expanded into single-family homes and now apartments.

1600 Ironhorse consists of 220 apartments in 11, three-story buildings. The units, which start at $1,100 for the one-bedroom apartments and $1,600 for the two-bedroom apartments, were outfitted with features such as 200-square-foot decks, granite countertops and insulated walls, windows and floors.

The units were designed to complement the property's resort-like atmosphere that includes an outdoor spa, dog park, great room, business center, indoor-outdoor fireplaces and outdoor barbecue.

"We upped the bar on apartments," co-developer Wendell Pickett said.

As of last week, just over 40 of the 56 finished units were rented, Pickett said. The remaining units under construction are expected to be completed by January.

1600 Ironhorse's arrival comes on the heels of the completion of Roosevelt Park Apartments, a mid-rise apartment complex off Longs Peak Avenue and Main Street in downtown.

Construction on the roof of the clubhouse is seen Thursday at Ironhorse at Mill Village in Longmont. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

The final multifamily direction for Roosevelt Park Apartments spawned out of what was occurring in Denver, Burden said. Burden's son, a commercial developer there, saw the potential to bring urban apartment living to Longmont.

Coming out of a recession, however, Burden and crew didn't know what to expect and what might fare well.

To prove out the idea, Burden Inc. conducted a market study in 2010. The results showed a need for several hundred to 1,000 more housing units, he said.

"When we got the city and the Downtown Development Authority involved, it seemed to work for everybody," Cotton Burden said. "(Both entities) were looking for a catalyst project downtown, something that would change the landscape and promote other opportunities downtown."

The first tenants of Roosevelt Park Apartments moved in February, and by the end of September, the building was 96 percent leased, Burden said.

"It's exceeded our expectations," he said. "We got lucky, the rental market turned out to be even stronger than anybody else expected."

In a way, the Roosevelt Park Apartments also might have served as a test case for other potential developments, he said.

"I think our success played some role, I'm not sure how big, in the purchase of the Butterball facility," he said. "Seeing our demand, seeing that we were successful in (developing) it, I'm sure it gave the developers of that site some level of comfort."

On deck

PFP Longmont Holdings acquired the 27.57-acre cluster of properties earlier this year for $4.46 million. PFP Longmont and developer 150 Main LLC are targeting a multi-phased construction project that likely would have a build-out of five years, said Brian Bair, of 150 Main LLC.

Preliminary plans for the first phase, which would encompass the 6.5-acre parcel off First Avenue and Main Street, are expected to include 250 to 300 multifamily units in addition to some retail and office space, Bair said. The project would be an urban mid-rise, four-story building with amenities such as rooftop decks and gathering places, he said.

The second phase of the project — tentatively named First & Main — could consist of more apartments in addition to some high-density single-family residences as well as a brewery and "creative office space," he said.

Some leases have been signed, but officials are not disclosing the tenants at this point, he added.

Officials hope to submit the plans to the city later this year and, if all goes well with that process, construction on the first phase could start by the middle of next year and wrap up in another 18 to 24 months, Bair said.

The development of the Butterball site would complement other efforts including the extension of Boston Avenue into downtown, the new Dickens Farm Park and the installation of a transit station near First and Main, Bair said.

"All of these things add up to a real transformation of that area," he said.

David Starnes, the city of Longmont's redevelopment manager, said he's aware of a few development proposals in the wings. Properties such as the Times-Call building, which recently sold for $2.4 million, and the empty Walmart and Kmart properties also could be targeted for redevelopment, he said.

"I think given Longmont's boundaries are constrained, I think we'll probably be seeing more redevelopment/infill opportunities," he said.

A project that remains on the books is one that failed to get the necessary go-aheads earlier this year.

In February, the Longmont City Council nixed the Copper Mill plans by a 5-2 vote with the sentiment that the 252-unit project would fill a need, but that the 18-acre site to the west of Mill Village was not an ideal landing spot.

Officials with the Inland Group, the Spokane Valley, Wash.-based developer behind Copper Mill, said they intend to still move forward on the project somewhere in Longmont, and are in the site selection process.

"There definitely seems to be a need for more multifamily housing in Longmont," Scott Morris, a developer with the Inland Group, said, adding that Copper Mill, being an income and rent-restricted affordable housing community, would fill a significant need.

Inland Group officials are considering a couple of sites within the city, Morris said; however, those locales are not zoned for multifamily housing and would require additional city approvals.

"We have flexibility and an open mind," he said. "We're trying to find a good site that works both for the neighborhood and the residents."

The multifamily activity in Longmont might not rise to that of Boulder or surrounding areas, but it's hard to say just how much might be built, said Burden Inc.'s Cotton Burden.

"We don't know right now what the threshold is," he said.

Burden Inc. will continue to explore development opportunities in Longmont but will do so in a calculated manner, he said.

"The question is, how much can it absorb?" he said. "Before we do anything more, we'll be doing more market studies."

Contact Camera Business Writer Alicia Wallace at 303-473-1332 or wallacea@dailycamera.com