Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius (left) speaks with Noelle Stordock of Milwaukee, who signed up at the Progressive Community Health Center for insurance under the Affordable Care Act. Credit: Michael Sears

By of the

With the Obama administration reeling over the botched rollout of its signature health care law, Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius came to Milwaukee on Friday to highlight ways that people can enroll for insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act.

During a media event at Progressive Community Health Centers' main clinic at 3522 W. Lisbon Ave., Sebelius spoke with two people who were shopping for a health plan on the healthcare.gov website and met with a 23-year-old woman with a pre-existing health condition who became insured two weeks ago under Obamacare.

Sebelius' appearance came a day after President Barack Obama announced a rule change that would let insurance companies keep people on health plans that don't meet the minimum benefits required by the law.

At a news conference, Sebelius said the rule change probably would have little effect in states such as Wisconsin, where insurance companies are allowing customers to renew their policies this year, thereby avoiding the regulations that could increase the cost of their coverage next year.

Sebelius, a former state insurance commissioner, said state insurance regulators have the final say. Whether insurance companies will offer the plans is another question. But she said, "These are their customers. They don't want to lose them."

The people affected by the new regulations are just a sliver of the overall market, Sebelius said, adding that some people who buy health insurance on their own have been locked into health plans because health conditions prevented them from moving to a different plan.

In response to Sebelius' visit, the Republican Party of Wisconsin issued a statement attacking the Affordable Care Act.

"A failed website and a false promise from President Obama has led to massive problems for Americans," spokeswoman Jesse Dougherty said. "Wisconsin can't afford a law that is broken beyond repair."

Community health centers — in low-income neighborhoods and rural areas — provide primary care and other services mostly to people who are covered by government health programs or who are uninsured. Sebelius on Friday was surrounded by people who support the health law, particularly its provisions that expand health insurance coverage.

"This is what we've been waiting for," said Tina Chang, a financial counselor at Progressive Community Health Centers. "This fills our gap."

Earlier in the day, the community health center held a groundbreaking for a clinic that will be more than four times the size of its main clinic. The new clinic is projected to cost $11.5 million and is being partly funded with a $5 million grant included in the Affordable Care Act to expand community health centers.

Froedtert Health is contributing $2 million to the project.

Sebelius — who has come under scathing criticism for the problem-plagued healthcare.gov website — used the visit to draw attention to improvements in recent weeks that she said have reduced errors and increased the site's speed.

The community health center's application counselors confirmed that the website is running more smoothly.

Progressive Community Health Centers enrolled seven people in health plans sold on the marketplace as of Thursday, though several hundred people were enrolled for coverage in BadgerCare Plus, the state's main Medicaid program.

The low enrollment numbers mirror what occurred when Massachusetts rolled out its plan that served as a model for the Affordable Care Act, Sebelius said. People frequently visited the site but held off on choosing a plan.