POLITICO New Jersey Playbook, presented by Nuclear Matters: ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS -- OBAMA’S justice reform call -- CHRISTIE’S ‘peak’ prediction

By Matt Friedman (mfriedman@politico.com; @mattfriedmannj)

Happy Election Day!

Story Continued Below

How low can we go? I think that’s the biggest question today. Bigger than who’s going to control the Assembly come January, since nobody seems to think Democrats are in any real danger of losing control.

The number to beat (or, rather, not beat) is 24.5 percent. That was the turnout for the October 16 2014 special election — held on a Wednesday — that made Cory Booker our senator.

Here’s a rundown of the districts to watch today by me and Brendan Cheney: http://politi.co/1k6QqtY

QUOTE OF THE DAY: “(Matt) Kopko visited the HQ again a short time later with a Jersey Journal photographer. Kopko stood outside the building for a few seconds, and then someone inside the office walked to the front door and locked it from the inside. Afterward, (Angela) McKnight's campaign released a statement saying Kopko had been ‘yelling and cursing’ and that her staff ‘had to force him out and lock the door to prevent him from re-entering.’ The photographer said Kopko didn't yell, curse or try to enter the building on that visit.” — The Jersey Journal’s Terrence McDonald http://bit.ly/1NNFF9t

WHERE’S CHRISTIE?

PREZ POLLS

NATIONAL — NBC/WSJ poll puts Christie at 3 percent, in a four-way tie for sixth place. This is actually good news for Christie, per Patrick Murray, as this puts him at 2.5 percent average in the last four polls, which is the minimum he needs to be in the next prime time debate. We’ll see if any more polls come out before the Nov. 4 cut-off. The debate occurred as this poll was still in the field. http://on.wsj.com/1NNG4sz

NEW HAMPSHIRE — Monmouth post-debate poll shows Christie at 5 percent, tied for 7th place with Carly Fiorina. Favorability has improved to 54 percent from 32 percent two months ago.

Iowa — Public Policy Polling shows Christie in 9th place at 3 percent. But, like in New Hampshire, his favorability has turned around. He’s now at 48 percent positive to 28 percent negative — up from 34 percent positive and 44 percent negative in August. PPP called that an “amazing transformation.” http://bit.ly/1NNH3Jf

Christie says he’ll “peak at exactly the right time,” in December and January. Let’s see. http://bit.ly/20pfr3O

Tips? suggestions? criticism? observations? birthday shoutouts? Email me at mfriedman@politico.com. And be sure to follow @politicoNJ on Twitter.

STATE NEWS

BARAKA-OBAMA (AND BOOKER) — “In Newark, Obama calls for criminal justice reform,” by POLTICO’s Conor Skelding: “Obama met with three residents of Integrity House during his first stop in Newark. He also joined U.S. Senator Cory Booker, a national advocate for criminal justice reform, and Newark Mayor Ras Baraka for a roundtable discussion with former prisoners and criminal-justice officials at Rutgers University-Newark … ‘The federal government is a big employer,’ Obama said during his appearance at Rutgers-Newark. ‘And, like a lot of big employers, on many job applications there is a box that asks if you have a criminal record. If you answer yes, the odds are you’re not getting a call back. We’re going to do our part in changing this.’” http://politi.co/1NNHwLk

—“Ex-cons: Obama's speech at Rutgers 'strikes a chord deep down'” http://bit.ly/1NNHVNW

I THINK I HEAR THE OBAMACARE WAAMBULANCE —“Newark council fuming after being left out of Obama visit,” by NJ Advance Media’s Dan Ivers: “In a statement, Central Ward Councilwoman Gayle Chaneyfield Jenkins placed the blame with Baraka’s office, saying she had been assured that members of the body would be included in the event, but that no invitation or further details followed. “I am stunned and deeply offended that my colleagues and I were not formerly asked nor invited to participate in one of the most important discussions facing America since Reconstruction taking place in our own city,” she said. http://bit.ly/1NNI2c8

FOLLOWING NEW YORK TIMES’ LEAD, OBAMA TRIES TO GIVE CHRISTIE A BOOST — “White House rips Christie for saying Obama doesn't back police,” by The Hill’s Jordan Fabian: “Press secretary Josh Earnest called Christie’s claim that Obama does not support police ‘particularly irresponsible,’ suggesting it's an attempt to ‘turn around’ his struggling presidential campaign. ‘They’re not surprising for somebody whose poll numbers are closer to an asterisk than they are double digits,’ Earnest said.” http://bit.ly/1NNkdS1

—“Christie lashes out at White House spokesman, calls him 'hack'” http://bit.ly/1k6TUwz

THIS HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH 2016 — “Christie tries to upstage Obama, from sunrise to sunset,” by POLITICO’s Ryan Hutchins and Katie Jennings: “Gov. Chris Christie has been dogged for months by inaccurate claims he gave President Obama a hug after Hurricane Sandy, just days before the last presidential election. He’s been slammed by pundits and told by political analysts the false-memory has tarnished his reputation with conservative voters. So it would have been logical for the Republican, now running a White House bid of his own, to steer clear of Obama’s visit to Newark on Monday. But Christie didn’t use the cover of a busy schedule in New Hampshire or Iowa to quietly excuse himself. Instead, he scheduled his own event in New Jersey — an official event as governor, not candidate — to talk about the same subject as the president: Criminal justice reform.” http://politi.co/1NNIIOW

——“Christie raps Obama on criminal justice issues” http://politi.co/1WsAFyp

—Republican candidates from Camden County protested Christie and his relationship with George Norcross http://bit.ly/1NNKlMo

** A Message from Nuclear Matters: Providing more than 62% of America’s carbon-free electricity, existing, state-of-the-art nuclear energy plants play a vital role in achieving our clean-energy and carbon-reduction goals. The industry also supports more than 475,000 jobs nationally and provides critical tax revenue locally for roads, schools and other public priorities. Learn more at NuclearMatters.com. **

MR. POPULAR — “Republican leader defends Christie’s absence from Assembly campaign trail,” by POLITICO’s Matt Friedman: “Three weeks ago, Assembly Republican leader Jon Bramnick said he wanted to have Gov. Chris Christie headline public events for Republicans’ efforts to take control of the Assembly. It hasn’t happened … Asked why it never happened, Bramnick bristled. ‘He’s invited anywhere and we love him. He’s got his schedule,’ Bramnick said. ‘That’s not going to be my focus. Everyone’s focus should be the fact that the [New Jersey Education Association] is now a new political party in the state, spending more money than the Democrats and Republicans together.’” http://politi.co/1NNJBqI

BECAUSE HE ALWAYS WORKED SO HARD FOR LEGISLATIVE CANDIDATES — “Christie: Unfair legislative redistricting map to blame for uncompetitive election,” by The Burlington County Times’ David Levinsky: “Gov. Chris Christie said the lack of competitive races has nothing to do with the incumbents or challengers and everything to do with the legislative boundaries drawn up more than four years ago by the state's redistricting commission. ‘I understand the politics in this state as well or better than anybody. This is an unfair map. The fact you're seeing not a lot of competitive races is because the map is unfair,’ Christie said Monday.” http://bit.ly/1H2lOnn

—Here’s an analysis I wrote in 2013 of the election results, which shows nuance that’s not in Christie’s arguments. That year turnout was higher in GOP areas than Democratic districts. And in competitive districts, many voters simply split their tickets between Christie and Democratic legislative candidates. http://bit.ly/1H2m4CD

—“Super PAC ‘still running’ anti-Angelini ad, despite lawsuit threat” http://politi.co/1NNJOtV

—“Bramnick not giving up on DiPisa, but ignores Cappola” http://politi.co/1NNJRWB

WOULD IT BE A HUDSON COUNTY ELECTION WITHOUT CALLING SOMEONE A KLANSMAN? — “Flier calling GOP Assembly candidate a 'klansman' adds drama to Hudson Co. race,” by The Jersey Journal’s Terrence T. McDonald: “No one is taking credit for the campaign literature, which features a black-and-white photograph of Assembly hopeful Matt Kopko altered to look like he is in KKK garb and alleges he ‘wants to close down the Urban League’ and ‘move minorities from their homes.’ … Chiaravalloti said he didn't know about the flier. Asheenia Johnson, spokeswoman for McKnight's campaign, said her campaign had no hand in creating it or distributing it, adding that she wouldn't be surprised if Kopko made it himself to tarnish McKnight's campaign … The flier led to a confrontation this morning between McKnight and Kopko at the Ocean Avenue headquarters of Angela Cares, the senior services nonprofit McKnight runs. McKnight's campaign said Kopko "stormed" the office and threatened her, an allegation Kopko called "ridiculous." He said he asked McKnight about the flier and left when he was asked to leave.” http://bit.ly/1NNi4FJ

IN OTHER WORDS, HE’LL WAIT UNTIL WE FORGET TO ASK — “Christie: Decision not to renominate Bergen County Prosecutor Molinelli ‘long overdue’,” by The Record’s Dustin Racioppi: “Governor Christie said Monday that his decision not to renominate John Molinelli as Bergen County prosecutor was a move that was ‘long overdue,’ but would not elaborate on the reasons why in his first comments on the matter. ‘The fact is that it’s time for a change in Bergen County. It’s long overdue,” Christie said following a meeting in Camden where he was highlighting police reform. “When that change is officially made, I’ll give you all the reasons why.’” http://bit.ly/1NNkZhU

ASSUMING CHRISTIE MAKES IT ON TO THE MAIN STAGE NEXT TIME — “GOP rivals not on same page about debate controversy,” by POLITICO’s Nick Gass: “While many of the GOP campaigns came together in a show of force Sunday night to protest the debate process, Monday brought some discord, with Chris Christie and Carly Fiorina publicly saying it's time to move on.” Christie: “you know, stop complaining. You know, do me favor. Set up a stage, put podiums up there, and let’s just go.” http://politi.co/1NNjsZd

DEMS NEED 7 REPUBLICAN VOTES — “N.J. Assembly sets vote on override of Christie gun bill veto,” by NJ Advance Media’s Samantha Marcus: “The state Assembly is expected to hold a vote to override Gov. Chris Christie's veto of a gun control bill on Dec. 3, Assembly Speaker Vincent Prieto announced Monday.” http://bit.ly/1NNlatv

—Montclair State political science professor Brigid Harrison keeps tabs on all those Democrats who endrosed Christie in 2013 http://bit.ly/1NNlwAr

A SILVER LINING FOR THE SILVER METEOR? — “Hudson rail tunnel could benefit Amtrak,” by The AP: “A cancelled Hudson River rail tunnel project that cost New Jersey millions of dollars could wind up paying some dividends … Amtrak is considering using the same route through northern New Jersey as part of a plan to build a new tunnel … Using the route could save time and money since environmental studies were completed for the previous project.” http://on.app.com/1NNIM11

BIOFUELS — “Payne, Congressional Black Caucus members urge no biofuels cuts,” by POLITICO's David Giambusso: “Rep. Donald Payne led 15 other members of the Congressional Black Caucus in urging late last week Environmental Protection Agency Administrator Gina McCarthy not to reduce the biofuels requirement in the national renewable fuel standard. The renewable fuel standard, long opposed by the oil industry, requires a certain amount of biofuels, such as corn-based ethanol, to be mixed with gasoline. The EPA is conducting an examination of the ethanol and biofuel requirements, which many see as a first step towards reducing them.” http://politi.co/1GIwbN3

AT LEAST WE’RE NOT #1 — “The Worst States For Taxes,” from Forbes: http://onforb.es/1H2mUzu

WHELAN’S FANTASY — “N.J. lawmaker wants to regulate fantasy sports,” by NJ Advance Media’s Brent Johnson: “Less than a week after Gov. Chris Christie belittled the idea during the third Republican presidential debate, a state lawmaker is seeking to regulate fantasy sports in New Jersey. State Sen. Jim Whelan (D-Atlantic) said Monday he will soon introduce a bill that would require daily fantasy sports companies like DraftKings and FanDuel — as well as casinos that offer fantasy sports — to be regulated and vetted in New Jersey the same as online gambling companies.” http://bit.ly/1NNloRr

FORGET THAT BOOK HE WROTE — “Cappola: Black Lives Do Matter,” by PolitickerNJ’s Alyana Alfaro: “‘I don’t think the movement is misguided,’ Cappola told PolitickerNJ. ‘Let’s be honest. Who is sitting in these jails? It is young, black men. I support the ethos and the will to have to do something about this because it is insanity what is going on. Who is suffering the most here? It is young, black men and their lives do matter.’” http://bit.ly/1NNk40P

WHAT ABOUT WHEN CHRISTIE SAID COMMON CORE WAS NOT WORKING? — “Education commissioner recommends PARCC scoring standards,” by POLITICO’s Linh Tat: “State education commissioner David Hespe this week is expected to recommend scoring benchmarks for the PARCC standardized test that are consistent with the guidelines set by the creators of the exam. Specifically, students must place in levels 4 or 5 — that is, post a score of at least 750 — to be considered meeting grade-level standards, according to a resolution the state Board of Education will be asked to approve Wednesday.” http://politi.co/1NNHOSs

NOT SURE IT WAS REALLY A PROMISE — “FEMA blows by ‘90 day’ promise to shorted Sandy victims,” by The Asbury Park Press’ Russ Zimmer: For homeowners like Anthony and Sharon Colucci, FEMA's failure to meet its own self-imposed deadline for reviewing potentially underpaid superstorm Sandy flood insurance claims is just another broken promise. The Coluccis, who own a home in the flood-torn Ortley Beach section of Toms River, are one of more than 17,000 homeowners who believed they had been cheated out of the full extent of their flood coverage and asked the feds to take a second look … After a 30-day extension to try and boost low enrollment, the Sandy Claims Review program closed to new applicants on October 15. Despite opening more than 160 days ago, less than 200 people have been paid out, according to figures provided by FEM … .’We believe we can conclude most reviews within 90 days of the policyholder requesting the review,’ Brad Kieserman, who developed the review process for FEMA, told Congress in June.” http://on.app.com/1NNmHji

AFTER THE OMNIA PR DISASTER — “Insure.com ranks Horizon BCBSNJ as best U.S. health insurance company,” by NJ Biz’s Anjalee Khemlani: “Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey was ranked as the top health insurance company based on customer satisfaction in the country. Insure.com conducted a survey of 4,000 U.S. insurance customers for the categories of car, life, health and home insurance.” http://bit.ly/1NNndO6

BEEN SPENDING MOST THEIR LIVES LIVING IN A GANGSTER’S PARADISE — “A Gangster’s Paradise With Views, Thick Walls and a Slaughter Room,” by The New York Times’ Matt Chaban: “Mafia blood has stained many corners of this metropolis. Five Points. The Red Hook docks. The Meadowlands. Harlem. The South Shore of Staten Island.While the North Jersey borough [of Ft. Lee} might seem an unlikely capital on the gangland map, in the mid-20th century it was home to some of the most notorious mobsters around: Joe Adonis, Willie Moretti, Longie Zwillman and most famous and feared of all, the head of Murder Incorporated, Albert Anastasia. For those wanting to live like a Mafia don — and willing to live with a few ghosts — Guernsey’s will auction off the old Anastasia estate on Dec. 8, with a minimum price of $5.5 million.” http://nyti.ms/1SkvXNn

TRENTON — “Collusion alleged for $2.4M-IT contract offered by Trenton Mayor Jackson administration,” by The Trentonian’s David Foster: “The music starts up like a beat from the 1990s. The website, fccconsultingservices.com, is mostly filled with blue space, but the navigation is compacted at the top center of the page with a slogan that reads, “IT Solutions NOW and into the FUTURE.” This is the website of the company Mayor Eric Jackson’s administration selected to provide IT and data processing services for Trenton … ‘They have the worst website of any IT company I’ve ever seen,’ said Joseph Harris, whose company performed data processing for Trenton over the past 28 years before FCC was chosen … Harris, who runs Princeton-based Associated Data Processing Consultants (ADPC), alleged Monday there is something more sinister in the city’s selection process.” http://bit.ly/1H2jGvJ

‘THANKS’ SAYS MIDDLESEX COUNTY — “Judge Gerald Council gets boot from Mercer County,” by The Trentonian’s Isaac Avilucea: “Faced with a possible monthlong suspension without pay for mistreating a former drug court worker, Gerald Council, the presiding criminal judge who has overseen Mercer County’s drug court for the last eight years, is being moved to Middlesex County as a result of withering criticism from state officials and attorneys who have questioned his fitness to remain on the bench … Council will be assigned to the family division in Middlesex.” http://bit.ly/1H2k9hC

MILLVILLE — “Five Millville employees sue over treatment by city commissioner,” by The Press of Atlantic City’s Thomas Barlas: “Five city employees charge in a whistleblower lawsuit that they were harassed, disciplined and lost overtime for complaining about City Commissioner Lynne Porreca Compari.” http://bit.ly/1H2la9c

PROBLEM SOLVED — “‘Trenton rally calls for peace among all religions,’ by Lindsey Rittenhouse for NJ.com: Leaders from various faith groups in Trenton invited the community to come out Sunday to take a pledge vowing to ‘Stand Up for the Other.’ The rally – held at the New Jersey State Museum – is also being held in cities around the world, including Paris, Morocco, Berlin, London and New York City.” http://bit.ly/1H2lzsm

QUICK HITS

—“Public service for Pinky Kravitz scheduled for Wednesday” http://bit.ly/1NNmT1Z

—“Port Authority police union joins Tarantino boycott” http://bit.ly/1NNiaNN

—“Kean & Byrne: Gun bill override no signal of weakening Republican solidarity” http://bit.ly/1NNjTCE

—“Have you seen the walking bear? Wildlife officials need help finding him” http://bit.ly/1H2kAbI

—“Court: Revel can keep sewer service, for now” http://bit.ly/1H2kIYC

—“Prosecutors: N.J. pastor fabricated claims about church attack” http://bit.ly/1NNljwW

—“Outgoing Republican mayor: Vote for the Democrats” http://on.app.com/1NNJrj1

—“Tinton Falls teachers force school closing” http://on.app.com/1NNJsUg

R.I.P. — Michael S. Curwin, former longtime Gloucester County first assistant prosecutor http://bit.ly/1NNKgIL

R.I.P. — Terrence P. Farley, former Ocean County assistant prosecutor http://bit.ly/1H2kSPT

** A Message from Nuclear Matters: Some of America’s existing nuclear energy plants face early closure due to current economic and policy conditions. Providing more than 62% of America’s carbon-free electricity, existing, state-of-the-art nuclear energy plants play a vital role in achieving our clean-energy and carbon-reduction goals. The industry also supports more than 475,000 jobs nationally and provides critical tax revenue locally for roads, schools and other public priorities.

If we want to keep America working, we need policymakers to support policies that will keep safe and reliable nuclear energy plants working for all of us. Voice your support for sensible policies that drive our national economy and join us at NuclearMatters.com. **

FOR MORE political and policy news from New Jersey, check out Politico New Jersey’s home page: http://politi.co/1JiYTDg

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1phAeAC … New York Playbook: http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook: http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook: http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook: http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook: http://politi.co/1N8zdJU and our friends at POLITICO Brussels Playbook: http://politi.co/1FZeLcw