By Kyle Keeney

Special to KyForward

As health care in the United States continues to evolve, one goal has remained at the forefront: ensuring Americans have access to the care and treatments they need to lead healthy lives.

This shared goal prompted Congress to create the 340B drug pricing program back in 1992.

The program, which is little-known among the general public, was put forth by Congress to help uninsured and low-income patients obtain much-needed prescription medications at a price they can afford. It was also a way to ensure that both hospitals and pharmaceutical manufacturers share in the cost of providing treatment and medication to the uninsured.

Under 340B, pharmaceutical companies are required to offer prescription medications to certain hospital systems and health clinics at deeply discounted rates. The savings can then be used to provide care for uninsured or underinsured patients.

340B has been in place for more than 20 years, helping millions of uninsured and financially vulnerable patients across the country. But during this time, few changes have been made to the program – even in the wake of significant, nationwide health care reform. I doubt many 20-year-old programs are still perfectly aligned to the modern times.

Since the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, the number of Americans without medical coverage has fallen dramatically. In fact, Kentucky experienced one of the nation’s sharpest declines in uninsured adult residents.

Theoretically, we would expect to see this rise in coverage slow the growth of 340B. After all, the program is meant to serve the uninsured – and as more Americans obtain coverage, fewer will need to rely on the program to access affordable medications.

Experts, however, are predicting just the opposite – but why?

While this seems counterintuitive at first glance, the issue lies in 340B’s guidelines for determining which providers can receive the drug manufacturer discounts. Currently, one key factor in hospital eligibility is the number of Medicaid patients treated at the facility on an inpatient basis.

This means, paradoxically, as more individuals gain access to Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, more hospitals will become eligible to receive 340B. Fewer patients will need 340B assistance, yet the program will continue to expand.

Hospitals have been vital in caring for the uninsured – and 340B has given them the resources to provide additional care among those who need it most. But health care in America is changing, and our existing efforts to improve access to care must change with it.

340B was created before the implementation of the Affordable Care Act and the resulting increase in access to health insurance. Coverage is considerably more available to patients today than in the 1990s.

Although the number of insured Americans has risen significantly in recent years, work remains to be done. Many individuals continue to live without insurance and struggle to access the treatments prescribed to them by their physicians.

The 340B program still plays an important role in keeping these patients healthy, and should stay in place to help those who need it most.

But when examined in the context of our current health care landscape, certain parts of 340B – the criteria for determining hospital eligibility – have become outdated and even contradict the original intent of the program.

Simply put, the program needs a refresh.

As is the case with all government programs, there is only so much money allocated to 340B. Each dollar that’s dispersed unnecessarily is a dollar that cannot be spent helping a patient without coverage obtain the medication she needs.

If the health care industry truly wants to achieve its goal of ensuring access to care, the 340B program must be reevaluated to align more closely with the state of health care today.

Dr. Kyle Keeney is the Executive Director of the Kentucky Life Sciences Council (KLSC). For more information, please visit kysciencecouncil.org.