It is hard to describe the suit that a charity run by Colorado nuns has brought against the Affordable Care Act without wondering if one has been closed into a small room with reflecting walls. The Little Sisters of the Poor Home for the Aged, in Denver, has challenged the law’s contraceptive-coverage mandate; this might make more sense if the nuns did not already have a way around the mandate: they just have to fill out a form saying the home has a religious mission and objection to paying for contraceptives. The essence of their challenge is that, by saying so, they become complicit—because then others will make sure that their employees have coverage. (The insurance company pays for it, with some help from the government.) They asked for an emergency stay from the Supreme Court before the mandate was to go into effect on January 1st, after losing an appeal, writing in their filing,

Without an emergency injunction, Mother Provincial Loraine Marie Maguire has to decide between two courses of action: (a) sign and submit a self-certification form, thereby violating her religious beliefs; or (b) refuse to sign the form and pay ruinous fines.

At issue was “Mother Loraine’s religious belief that God does not want her to sign and tender the forms.” On New Year’s Eve, Justice Sonia Sotomayor, who deals with such requests for the Tenth Circuit, gave the nuns their stay. She said that the Department of Health and Human Services had until Friday at 10 A.M. to file its response.

Is there any other form of health care around which one could build a suit based on the supposed taint of proximity? The suggestion here is that birth control has such a dirtiness to it that even the formal and financial separation of religious employers from the coverage—they don’t manage it, they don’t pay for it, even though their employees get it—is inadequate. (Purely religious institutions, like churches, have an even broader exemption.) They know about it—know, that is, that the women who work for them have choices that they would prefer they did not have. But they do have them; a Catholic charity can’t insist that the nurses or cleaning women who work for it don’t use contraceptives. (The home has sixty-seven employees.) What the religious-affiliated groups are insisting is that the women bear a heavier economic cost for the sake of their employers’ beliefs—even though the Church groups wouldn’t pay more either way.

In that sense, the suit embodies the irrationally passionate objections to not only Obamacare but also women’s access to contraceptives and, more broadly, reproductive rights. There is, perhaps, an argument to be made that the true irrationality is having a national scheme of health insurance built around employer-based plans, rather than, say, a single payer. But that’s what we’ve got, and what women who go out in the workforce and the world have to live with.

Other religious organizations have filed similar challenges; often, they argue that certain types of birth control, like Plan B, are really forms of abortion, though that’s not how they work scientifically. It’s also the case that women take certain kinds of birth-control pills for medical reasons that don’t have to do with preventing pregnancy—they are simply a prescription drug for which they would have to pay, essentially, an ideological tax. These suits are distinct from one brought by Hobby Lobby, a chain of craft stores, that the Supreme Court recently agreed to hear. Hobby Lobby is a secular company, and is asking for an exemption from buying plans that cover contraceptives because of the personal beliefs of its owners. (I wrote about the Hobby Lobby case in November.) But they share a presumption that there is something distinctly alarming about contraception, or at least about women not having to pay out of pocket for it. And yet the legal logic would seem to open the doors to a whole range of ideological objections to various medical treatments.

There are broader absurdities, too: can a private company also withhold taxes that will be used in ways that repel its owners? Does being exempt also mean being able to disrupt? The nuns’ petition said that to just fill out the form letting their insurer know they qualified so it could proceed was to “abandon their religious convictions and participate in the government’s system to distribute and subsidize contraception, sterilization, and abortion-inducing drugs and devices.” It is worth noting that, according to the filing, fully half of the funds the nuns use to run their home, according to their filing, come “from government payments (chiefly Medicaid and Medicare) for the care they provide to the needy elderly.”

It is a good guess that the litigation surrounding Obamacare will still be tangled when healthcare.gov, the Web site that seems to have put its worst, early days behind it, is an old and reliable machine. But people have begun to be covered now; these are the months when we will begin to see what it looks like, and what works badly or well, and what could be better. When does the goal of the debate around Obamacare become about a healthier nation with fewer bankruptcies caused by illnesses, rather than about sparing employers’ feelings about what women might be doing in their own homes and doctors’ offices?

Photograph by Nieves Mares Pagan/Getty.