FLINT TOWNSHIP, MI – From Congressional gridlock to an appearance on "The Colbert Report," Dan Kildee has had an eventful freshman year in Congress.

The U.S. Representative from Flint Township won the seat last November after his uncle, Dale Kildee, opted not to run again.

With his first year under his belt, the Democrat already is gearing up to campaign for a second term.

"I'm convinced that I can make a big difference down there but not just by sort of getting involved and waiting my turn and in 15 years being a ranking member and being a subcommittee chair. ... We're getting organized for 2014," Kildee said. "I haven't announced my re-election but I don't think anyone would be surprised to say that we're planning for it."

Stephanie Stikovich, chairwoman of the 5th Congressional Republican District, said she was not surprised to hear that Kildee would be campaigning for another term.

Even though Genesee County is heavily Democratic, there are conservative areas still throughout the congressional district that stretches through mid-Michigan, Stikovich said. By March there should be an announcement for who will be running as a Republican candidate, she said.

The first year in Congress has been a year of learning for Kildee.

"It's important to kind of be simultaneously patient and persistent," said Kildee, D-Flint Township. "The patience part is the hardest part because things take time."

Political analysis Bill Ballenger said Kildee's first year in Congress went smoothly but said it's hard for Kildee do much when he's in the minority.

"He doesn't have the ability to really do anything dramatic in terms of policy and votes. It's a very frustrating time for anybody in Congress right now," Ballenger said.

Ballenger said Kildee has been limited by the fact that his party is in the minority in the House.



"Even if he was a freshman in the majority he would still be way down in the totem pole. ... All he can do I think is get his feet set and start learning," said Ballenger.



Dale Kildee, who retired after 36 years in Congress, had a nearly perfect voting record during his tenure -- a mark his nephew has almost matched missing just three of 614 votes.

The first year

Kildee said two of his bigger successes this year were helping bring $100 million in demolition funds to the state and preserving some of the Farm Bill.

Kildee's first bill introduced in April was aimed freeing up federal money to eliminate blight and improving neighborhoods in Flint and other rust belt cities around the nation. Where his bill ended up being moot, it did push the U.S. Treasury to sign off on a proposal that would set aside $100 million in federal funds for demolition that was originally there for mortgage relief.

Flint received $20.1 of the funds, while Saginaw received $11.2 million.

"It's enough to make a difference. That's no question," Kildee said. "I introduced legislation that would free up this money and that was enough to make administration to take a second look at what had been a previous interpretation. We got three-fourth of what we asked for. We might go back and ask for the rest of it."

With the Farm Bill, Kildee said preserving local sugar production was a major success. Kildee said he lead the effort to protect American sugar growers by continuing to guarantee that 85 percent of domestic consumption come from American sugar growers.

Kildee took a stand on comprehensive immigration reform with a bill he co-sponsored in November.

A comprehensive approach to the system must be taken to move forward, said Kildee in a previous interview. It's more than just border control and cracking down on undocumented workers, however, Kildee said.

Looking at the system as a whole could help strengthen economy, bring in more businesses and help create a stronger country, he said.

Beyond that Kildee has also been strongly advocating for Amir Hekmati's release and has been in constant discussions with Iranian officials to free him. Flint native and former Marine has been detained for more than two years in Iran, under allegations that he was working as a U.S. spy.

Kildee has recently taken the opportunity to use nuclear negotiations with Iran to renew the plea for Hekmati's release. The next six months will be critical, Kildee said.

Kildee also put himself out there in the public's eye over serious matters and not-so-serious ones.

He appeared on various radio and television shows, including the Better Know a District segment on "The Colbert Report," where Kildee joked about many aspects of the 5th District.

Just a few days into his freshman term, Kildee was appointed by House Minority Whip Steny Hoyer to serve as an assistant whip for the 113th Congress.

In that role, Kildee assisted the House Democratic leadership in managing legislative matters on the floor.

Kildee was also appointed to the Financial Services Committee and was elected to be the freshman representative on the Steering and Policy Committee.

From the Genesee County Republican Party’s perspective, Kildee could be more consistent, said Tammy Allen, party chairwoman. But there isn’t too much to go on after only a year.

“As far as his first year of Congress goes, he doesn’t have that long of a track record yet, in my opinion,” Allen said.

His stance on health care and the Affordable Care Act is conflicting, Allen said. She said earlier in the year he supported Obamacare and now it seems like he has some concerns about it and its roll out.

With millions of Americans losing health care coverage, Allen said she would like to see Kildee focused on making some changes.

“If the congressman was a little more clear that would really help. We would like to see that,” Allen said. “We really want to see (the health care issues) cleared up first and foremost.”

Also when it comes to Hekmati still being imprisoned, Allen doesn’t believe Kildee is holding a strong enough position. Where he is actively advocating for Hekmati’s release, Allen said she believes that an unconditional release needs to be part of the nuclear deal with Iran.

“We have a stronger stance on that than the Congressman does,” she said.

Kildee plans to continue working off of what he's learned his first year.

"There's just a lot of work to do here. There's a lot that needs to be done. We'll always to rely on a Congress that will work for the people," Kildee said. "Right now what we need is people that are willing to work across party lines. The main reason I'm running again is we just have a lot more work to do."

Looking to 2014

Looking forward Kildee wants to put a focus on policy change.

"We can deal with these issues from crisis to crisis and sometimes come up with solutions that kick the ball down the road a bit, but we're not dealing with the really big questions," Kildee said. "And I don't think the issues are that hard. I think it's the political system itself that is broken."

The hyper-partisanship fueled by the state's legislature creating congressional districts that are essentially partisan havens and the influence of outside regulated money in the political system are two big issues that need more attention, Kildee said.

The policy side of things is what drives Kildee, he said. If redistricting takes places, for example, it could create more competitive seats and more moderate voices in elected positions, Kildee said.

"As I now begin to sink my teeth into all of this, we can work on all of this, all the issues that are important to our district and to the country," Kildee said. "The political system is what changed more than anything else."

A focus on urban policy is also on Kildee's horizon. Kildee said he wants to push for officials to start thinking about the importance of cities as being longterm and not tied to population variations.

"Cities produce something you can't get in other places. You don't get the kind of innovation and invention. You don't commercialize big ideas (other places). You do it when people are in proximity to one another. It's still really important to have cities that are vibrant," Kildee said. "So what I've been arguing for ... is a system of government finance that recognizes that there's a need to maintain a base level of support for our productive cities that can weather the variations or the ebb and flow of our economy."

Kildee said he expects to still get criticism, but it seems less personal now than when he was in local government.

"It feels less personal to me now because it's part of a much bigger institution and I'm making decisions that are bigger policy issues," Klidee said. "I got more criticisms when I worked for the Land Bank and I think it's still the best that that I've ever done and so there's sort of a lesson for me that the things you are actually most criticized for might actually be the most significant thing that you do.

It's less personal now than it was then, but I still have to listen."