With the opportunity to advance to the third round of the 3-A playoffs for the first time since 1984, the West Henderson Falcons were on the march deep in East Rowan territory with an opportunity to take their first lead of the night.

Unfortunately for the Falcons, that furious second-half rally fell 13 yards short, as William Crouch's fourth-down pass was batted down in the backfield, giving the 15th-seeded East Rowan Mustangs a 27-21 road victory on Friday night.

“That's a special group of seniors. They were down 27-7 at the half and could have folded their tents to go play basketball or wrestle. They just came up one drive a little short,” said Falcon coach Paul Whitaker.

Flashing the potent, spread offense that put up 50 points on second-seeded Freedom last week, the Mustangs (7-6) raced out to a quick 12-0 lead with Samuel Wyrick connecting with his brother Seth on a 38-yard scoring pass and Max Wall slashing in from seven yards out on the Mustangs' next possession.

Utilizing the powerful running game that has carried the Falcons (9-5) all season, Cody Jackson (16 carries for 158 yards) broke loose for a 51-yard run to cut the lead to 12-7.

Capping off a 70-yard drive, Sam Wyrick hit paydirt on a QB keeper from the 1, and Wall scored his second TD of the game midway through the second quarter to extend the Mustang lead to 27-7.

After forcing a pair of Mustang stops on defense, the Falcon offense started on the comeback trail in the second half.

“Our coaching staff made some great adjustments at halftime,” said Whitaker.

Showing his versatility, Dustie Fender (16 carries for 138 yards) connected with Taylor Geyer on a 33-yard halfback pass to cut the lead to 27-14.

On the very next possession, Wall coughed up a fumble at midfield.

The opportunistic Falcon offense promptly marched down the field, leading a powerful 4-yard scoring run by Brendan Goings (16 carries for 57 yards) to make it a one-touchdown score.

“This group of seniors has set the bar high for these underclassmen. After not having a lot of success as freshmen, they knocked on the door this year. My hats off to them,” said Whitaker.

The Cinderella story continues for 15 seed East Rowan next week as it travels to No. 6 seed South Point, which upset previously unbeaten Concord in the second round.