Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal said Monday he disagreed with fellow Republican presidential hopeful Donald Trump’s controversial comments about Mexican immigrants, but refused to join those who have condemned the New York business executive.

Bobby Jindal Bobby Jindal (R) is a candidate for president in 2016. More

Jindal spoke to reporters near Manchester City Hall before being escorted by Mayor Ted Gatsas in visiting several businesses on Elm Street. He was in the second of a three-day visit to the state.

Jindal said he does not “view people as ethnic groups or by their economic background. I see people as individuals.”

Trump has been criticized by other Republicans running for president since he said, while announcing his candidacy on June 16, that Mexico is “sending people that have lots of problems, and they’re bringing those problems to us. They’re bringing drugs. They’re bringing crime. They’re rapists. And some, I assume, are good people.”

“I do think we need to secure our border,” Jindal said, “and I do think that immigration can either make our country stronger or weaker.”

Jindal said that his top priority on the immigration issues is securing the border.

After that is accomplished, he said, “We do need to make it easier for people who want to come here legally. But people who want to come here should have to come legally, should have to learn English, should have to adopt our values and then roll up their sleeves and get to work.”

“I’m tired of all the hyphenated Americans,” Jindal said. “I disagree with the comments. I view people as individuals, but I also think we need to adopt a stronger, smarter immigration policy.”

Jindal would not say whether he believes Trump disqualified himself from running for president with his comments.

“I’m not here to police the other candidates,” he said. “I’m here to beat the other candidates.”

Jindal also said he is concerned about the United States’ “descent into socialism. The path we’re on now is to turn the American dream into a European nightmare.’’

“Our future is Greece if we don’t change our ways,” he said. “Stop spending money we don’t have. We need to shrink the size of government and grow the private sector economy."

“If we don’t do those things, we’ll become Greece,” Jindal said.

Jindal said Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders, a U.S. senator from Vermont, “is honest. At least he’s willing to call himself a socialist. That’s where Hillary Clinton wants to take us. She just doesn’t call herself that.”

“The Greeks gave us democracy,” Jindal said. “Now they are trying to kill one off by spending beyond their means. We need to get off that pathway.”

Jindal said he is confident that he can distinguish himself from the other candidates in the crowded field.

“We need a doer not a talker,” Jindal said. “You have a lot of talkers running for president. You already have a talker in the White House. If talk was good enough, we’d be doing great as a country."

He said his “proven track record” includes having cut his state’s budget by 26 percent and eliminating 30,000 state government positions. We’re a top 10 state for private sector job creation.”

Jindal said Republicans “need to embrace our own principles.”

Jindal noted that former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush said in December that a Republican nominee should “lose the primary to win the general without violating your principles.”

“I disagree with that,” Jindal said. “What I hear when he says that is that we have to hide our conservative principles, and try to get the left and the media to like us. That never works.”

“Let’s be true to our principles,” Jindal said. ”Let’s show the American people we are willing to fight for what we believe in. Let’s shrink the size of government, but let’s also win the war against ISIS, stand with Israel and stop allowing Iran to become a nuclear power.”

“Lots of Republicans will promise things,” Jindal said. “We have done things. I’m the only one with a specific plan for repealing and replacing Obamacare, for example.”