A photo is pinned to a utility pole near where 37-year-old Rasheem Palmer was shot and killed early Friday. (Photo: NICQUEL TERRY/STAFF PHOTOGRAPH)

A man who was fatally shot while visiting relatives early Friday has been identified by county authorities as Rasheem Palmer, 37, of Red bank.

Palmer was shot around midnight Friday near the entrance to the Country Club Apartments, according to Monmouth County Prosecutor's Office spokesman Charles Webster.

Police responded to a report of shots fired at 12:13 a.m. near the apartment complex and found Palmer's body lying on the ground, Webster said.

Palmer was taken to Jersey Shore University Medical Center, Webster said. He was pronounced dead at 2:47 a.m.

Webster did not immediately release additional information about the shooting.

Florence Mayberry told the Asbury Park Press Friday that Palmer was her nephew. She said he was visiting relatives at the time of the incident.

Several residents told the Asbury Park Press Friday morning they woke up around midnight to the sound of numerous gunshots.

"It sounded like fireworks," said Robert Coss, 15, a resident of Country Club Apartments. "This morning I found out it wasn't fireworks and that someone was shot."

RELATED: Red Bank man killed in Eatontown shooting

Subsequent efforts to reach family members were unsuccessful.

Red Bank natives who grew up with Palmer remember him as an encouraging friend and mentor who imparted his wisdom to the neighborhood kids.

Jasmere Rogers, 22, said Palmer would show up to his football games or show students support at other sporting events.

"You could always catch him at a football game or basketball game," Rogers said. "He was a supporter of Red Bank in general. That's what I loved about him."

Rogers' favorite memory of Palmer is when the Oakland Raiders and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers faced off at the Super Bowl in 2003. Rogers was 10 years old.

Palmer walked into a local barbership asking if anyone wanted to wager on the game, Rogers recalled. Rogers said he liked the Bucaneers, so Palmer bet on the Raiders.

"He told me if I won then he would give me $20, but if he won then I would have to give him 50 push-ups," Rogers recalled. "Sure enough, I won $20 from him after the Bucs stomped all over the Raiders."

Another Red Bank native, listed as Moore Tashama on Facebook, said she also grew up with Palmer.

"He was everything a friend or family member can ask for," she wrote.

A makeshift memorial was set up Friday for Palmer on a utility pole near the apartment complex entrance. Pinned to the pole was a photo of a man with a woman and child.

The Monmouth County Prosecutor's Office and Eatontown police are investigating the death. Anyone with information is asked to contact Detective Kevin Condon of the Monmouth County Prosecutor's Office at 800-533-7443 or Detective Aaron Shaw of the Eatontown Police Department at 732-542-0100.

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1MpGXWp