Lucas Conlin, 11, smooths the sides of his coil clay pot at the Boulder Explore home-school program in Boulder on Dec. 16. ( Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera )

Boulder Explore, a part-time program for the Boulder Valley School District's home-schooled students that's in its third year, is still looking for its niche.

The K-8, part-time home-school program's founding director, Sonny Zinn, left after the first year for full-time work. Last year's director, Brian Nelson, left after a year for the same reason. Families also moved, or their children went on to high school or returned to their neighborhood schools.

Enrollment has stayed in the 30- to 40-student range, while the program's goal is at least 80 students to allow for expansion to two days a week.

This year, the program switched to a lead teacher model, with two lead teachers sharing administrative work and overseen by Diana Gamboa, Boulder Valley's director of online learning. Along with the two lead teachers, who cover art and STEM, the school has a theater teacher.

"This structure will give Boulder Explore the consistency it needs to blossom," said lead teacher Lisa Boston. "As lead teachers, we're more engaged with parents. Working with parents makes a good team."

Gamboa, who also oversees the online school Boulder Universal, said she refocused this year on what home-school families said they wanted when the program started. The program clarified its class offerings, providing art, theater and STEM classes with an emphasis on collaborative, project-based learning.

Advertisement

"We've been given the gift of no assessments," she said. "What we really wanted to focus on was to work with our kids in a collaborative environment and developing creative skills. We want content that's project- and problem-based."

Boulder Explore was designed to replace the Boulder Options program, which was administered by Aurora Public Schools and enrolled about 125 students three years ago. Altogether, Boulder Valley has about 350 registered home-schooled students.

Mia Manniko, 11, works on a coil clay pot at the Boulder Explore home-school program. (Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera)

For Aurora, the program helped boost student enrollment — and the amount of state per-pupil revenue the district received. The Boulder Valley program is expected to break even, not make money, district officials said.

Along with changing its leadership model and clarifying its class offerings, the program is sharing more resources with the district's online school. Several students use the district's online classes as their home-school curriculum, then attend Boulder Explore for enrichment.

The program is renting space at East Boulder Baptist Church, with plans to move into a permanent location, possibly at the Boulder Valley Education Center, that will be shared by Boulder Explore. The new space will be paid for through the $576 million bond issue approved by voters in November.

Now, each week, the teachers must set up the school and, at the end of the day, return everything to a storage room.

Gamboa said she's visited similar programs in other districts to gather design ideas, including using a combination of large and small spaces.

"The opportunity to create a space from zero is just awesome," she said.

The day is divided into morning classes and an afternoon "exploratorium" when students work in small groups on areas of interest.

Boston, who teaches art and has been with the program since it opened, said the program is looking into starting beginning filmmaking and writing grants to buy equipment.

Boston said she's also dabbled in blended learning and wants to incorporate more. One way she's used blended learning was to provide online lessons on exhibit art before a field trip to see the Chihuly exhibit at the Denver Botanic Gardens. After the trip, the students created pieces and held an art show.

Field trips, she said, also are a staple of the program.

Students who attend said they like the social aspects and the subjects, with theater being a favorite. The students recently performed "The Commedia Cinderella" using the stage at a nearby middle school.

"It's like going to school, but it's more fun," said sixth-grader Mia Manniko, who also takes district online classes.

Her brother, seventh-grader Evan Manniko, said his family started home-schooling so they could do more of what they loved, skiing and motorcycle trials. He said he likes the social aspect of Boulder Explore.

"Coming here turned out to be a really good choice," he said.

Added seventh-grader Jameson Driscoll, "It's something to keep your mind busy."

Teachers said they're hopeful they're now on the right path.

"What we're doing right now is really working," Boston said. "We have a bunch of happy students and parents. It took awhile for us to get there, but we've become a real community."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa