A single-payer health plan and a bank breakup are political pipe dreams.

Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders on Jan. 17, 2016. (Photo: Stephen B. Morton, AP)

At Sunday night's Democratic debate, the candidates spent huge chunks of their time arguing over Bernie Sanders' calls for a single-payer health plan and an enforced breakup of the nation's major banks.

Both ideas are, to put it mildly, political pipe dreams.

A single-payer plan has never received a serious debate because it lacks the requisite public and political support. Even a light version, one with a government option offered alongside private plans, was considered and rejected as part of the Obamacare debate.

A bank breakup was debated and rejected as part of the Wall Street reform measure, known as Dodd-Frank, passed in 2010. Lawmakers and regulators decided instead to reduce risks in a less disruptive fashion, by requiring the biggest banks to set aside more capital to protect against losses.

The lesson here for all but the most delusional Democrats should be clear. If these radical changes couldn’t get through Congress in 2009 and 2010, when Democrats had huge majorities in Congress and the financial crisis was fresh, they’re not going anywhere now.

The spectacle of Sanders and Hillary Clinton arguing over them, both in formal debates like Sunday’s and increasingly on the campaign trail, is hardly likely to help a party whose principal advantage so far has been sanity. Most Republican candidates have been madly fleeing the political mainstream to demonstrate their ideological purity to base voters. Now Democrats are joining in.

Sanders, who calls himself a democratic socialist, is clearly the more serious offender. His call for massive new entitlements and equally massive new taxes would be an impossible sell to voters in the general election. His "Medicare for all" health care plan would cost the government an estimated $14 trillion over a decade, or more than 10 times the price of Obamacare.

Clinton sensibly called for building on the Affordable Care Act rather than trying to replace it with single-payer, and for enforcing the Dodd-Frank law to rein in Wall Street. But, in the face of a stronger-than-expected challenge from Sanders, she is lurching to the left on trade, energy and other issues.

Sanders tries to gloss over the impracticality of his ideas by contending that corporate money, not widespread opposition, is keeping them from gaining widespread acceptance. Corporate money, flowing like water in the post-Citizens United era, is unquestionably a problem. But so far it is having surprisingly little impact in this election. .

The Democrats have a real chance to buck history in November and retain control of the White House for a third straight term. They are not as torn by divisions as the GOP. And their candidates and officeholders are less likely to take positions that are extreme or offensive to large numbers of voters.

But Sunday’s debate showed how that advantage could easily be squandered. In perhaps its most revealing moment, Sanders acknowledged that “nothing real will get (done) unless we have a political revolution.”

The voters who will pick a president in November — a group likely to be more than twice the size of the electorate of party primaries and caucuses — are typically less interested in revolutions and pipe dreams than they are in a candidate with practical solutions for improving their everyday lives.

USA TODAY's editorial opinions are decided by its Editorial Board, separate from the news staff. Most editorials are coupled with an opposing view — a unique USA TODAY feature.

To read more editorials, go to the Opinion front page or sign up for the daily Opinion e-mail newsletter.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1RyAQVZ