Elam Habumukiza (Photo: Special to the Register )

An African refugee college student with legal permanent resident status sits in the Polk County Jail awaiting deportation. He would be sent to a country he has never seen, for a crime he says he did not commit.

People who know the nation of Burundi say his life could be in danger there. Even the immigration judge calls the Hoover High School graduate candid and credible, but the judge is bound by the strict legal criteria for waiving a deportation.

If the story Elam Habumukiza and his family tell is correct, his situation resulted from a perfect storm of being in the wrong place at the wrong time, being racially profiled and placing trust in bad legal advice.

This is one family's American dream turned into a nightmare. It's a case that should keep us up at night.

Elam's parents left Burundi separately decades ago because of civil war. His mother, Evance Ndayahundwa, lost her father to murder by ethnic Tutsis for being a Hutu. Their family home was burned. Elam's father, Ezinoel Shwilima, returned home from high school in the 1970s to find his family had fled. He fled, too, but never saw them again.

Evance and Ezinoel met in Rwanda and then moved as refugees to Tanzania, where Elam was born in 1994. They were relocated to the United States by the U.N. refugee agency in 2008. Elam was 13 then.

Today, at 20, Elam is described as a good student who coached others in math in high school, was a member of the soccer team and drew praise at parent-teacher conferences. Dennis Prather got to know him at Simpson United Methodist Church, which members of the Burundi community rent for services. He said Elam helped with the sound system, played guitar and watched younger kids. The church had such confidence in him, it gave him a Des Moines Area Community College scholarship.

But Elam's fate was sealed on Sept. 26, 2012, when the 18-year-old went to ride his bicycle before noon on a day off from school. Near his home, around Hickman and 40th, he was intercepted by a police officer. He asked why he was being stopped. The officer made a call. Elam told his parents he overheard something about his being a black man. That would describe two of three suspects who had attempted to break into a home around 10:30 a.m. but fled when the owner confronted them.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Ezinoel Shwilima and Evance Ndayahundwa, parents of 20-year-old Elam Habumukiza, were relocated to the United States from Tanzania by the U.N. refugee agency in 2008. Their son faces deportation to Burundi, where he could be in danger.

The victim was brought over by police and identified Elam as one of the intruders. Elam was booked and charged with second-degree attempted burglary. Because of the family's low income — his father works in a meat-packing plant in Marshalltown — he was assigned a public defender.

Had the case gone to trial, he should have had a strong one. He had never been in trouble before, and why would anyone who had fled from a crime scene be cruising around the area in plain view? But Prather says the public defender advised Elam to take an Alford plea, which is not an admission of guilt but is an acknowledgment that the evidence could result in a conviction. The public defender also did so without an interpreter present, as the law requires, though Elam had spoken English for only five years.

Elam was told he would get a deferred judgment and two years of probation for an aggravated misdemeanor and then the offense would be expunged from his record, says Prather. So Elam initialed the papers, paid all the court and restitution costs and reported regularly for two years to his probation officer.

Then at his March 3 probation meeting, two months from when the case should have been closed, a U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement officer was there to detain him. Even legal permanent immigrants can be deported if convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude within five years of arrival.

"When you sign an Alford agreement, you sign away everything under the sun," Prather said.

Good lawyers schooled in immigration issues are in high demand. Some prey on desperation by charging high fees for cases they are unlikely to win. The family hired an immigration attorney who charged $300 an hour and demanded a minimum of $10,000 to fight the deportation order on the grounds Elam would face persecution in Burundi, where his family's property had been illegally seized.

In his ruling, immigration Judge Daniel Morris called Elam a credible witness, "candid, responsive and internally consistent," and acknowledged his claim of mistaken identity. He also acknowledged the likelihood that Elam would "face significant challenges" in Burundi, where he has no social ties. Yet, unconvinced he would be persecuted, the judge denied the claim.

Now the attorney wants another $3,000 to file an appeal by the July 31 deadline.

Political foes of President Obama are in a frenzy to deport people, even though this Democratic administration has done more of that than its Republican predecessor. But each case must be judged on its merits, and this young man with a promising future has been through enough and deserves a reprieve.

HOW YOU CAN HELP

To help Elam Habumukiza legally or financially, contact Dennis Prather at Simpson United Methodist Church, 2600 Capitol Ave., Des Moines, 515-262-7518.

Ezinoel Shwilima and Evance Ndayahundwa, parents of 20-year-old Elam Habumukiza, were relocated to the United States from Tanzania by the U.N. refugee agency in 2008. Their son faces deportation to Burundi, a country he as never seen and a place where he could be in danger. (Photo: Special to the Register)

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1mJuIdb