Buy Photo Education (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

Most of us don't expect to retire at the age of 55. Uncle Sam won't provide a Social Security check or allow you to enroll in Medicare at 55. Even people who socked away a ton of money in their retirement accounts may be too young to get access to it without a penalty.

So-called "early retirement" incentives are generally offered only during times of financial stress when an employer is trying to cut the budget by reducing the number of workers or encouraging higher-paid, veteran employees to leave.

But the Des Moines Public Schools have been offering an early retirement plan for so many years that employees have come to expect it each year, even when the district is growing. School administrators are considering scaling back the program for younger employees, but that has touched off controversy, with teachers accusing officials of breaking a covenant with them.

The early-retirement package has been offered for more than a decade in Des Moines to employees who are at least age 55 and have at least 10 years of service in the district. It has been so routinely approved that the package has essentially become another benefit that teachers expect each year.

The school district allows early-retirees to collect a hefty sum of money they have "banked" by not using sick and personal days during their working years. The early-retirement package is a good deal for teachers, but it's not such a good deal for taxpayers or the school district, because early retirement does not save the district money.

The Des Moines school board should scale back the early-retirement plan when it meets this week. But that's not enough. The practice of allowing government retirees to collect a pile of money for not using their sick days is troubling. This time off is offered so workers don't spread illnesses to other people. It is not intended to be a savings account for employees. Yet teachers have a financial incentive to go to school when they are sick because they are adding to their savings.

Unfortunately, Iowa law dictates that public school districts must give employees a minimum of 15 sick days per year after six years of employment. The law also requires districts to let employees accrue 90 sick days.

In the first place, lawmakers should leave such decisions to local school boards. Beyond that, allowing employees to "cash out" their sick time at retirement is a bad policy that strains school budgets, costs taxpayers a fortune and treats school employees in ways that are out of sync with private employers.

When most of us call in sick, our boss doesn't bring in a temporary worker to do our job that day. Yet when a teacher calls in, a school district pays the teacher and pays a substitute to fill in. If the teacher doesn't use a sick day, the school eventually pays her for not using that sick day.

Des Moines is more generous than state law requires. Teachers receive 15 days of sick leave annually beginning their first year. They can "bank" up to $3,100 of unused sick days (plus $900 for unused "special leave" days) each year. A teacher can accrue more than $100,000 that can supplement her retirement savings or pay for the cost of health insurance for five years during retirement.

Since 2003, Des Moines has spent nearly $40 million for unused time off.

The money collected by retirees for unused sick leave is in addition to their pensions. And the retirement benefits are in addition to very generous perks Des Moines school employees enjoy during their working years — including premium-free dental insurance, premium-free family health insurance and a free master's degree for new teachers.

None of this makes sense to taxpayers.

Read or Share this story: http://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/opinion/editorials/2014/06/01/teacher-retirement-deal-needs-trimming/9830903/