Dr. Lloyd Hamilton operates medical center on a shoe-string budget and charges no fee

Buy Photo Lloyd Hamilton is pictured at his practice, Health Lifeline, in Nyack on April 2. The 86-year-old runs the free medical clinic for people with no other access to care. (Photo: Mark Vergari/The Journal News)Buy Photo Story Highlights Dr. Lloyd Hamilton operates medical center on a shoestring budget and charges no fee for care

A staff of dedicated volunteers assists at the clinic twice every week

All patients are uninsured, have no access to care for ailments like high blood pressure, diabetes

Clinic is in desperate need of a nurse who can volunteer once or twice weekly

At age 86 — "87 in July" — most people are comfortably settled into retirement.

Not Dr. Lloyd Hamilton.

The Grand View physician has had a distinguished career — Harvard Medical School, a psychiatry practice then a switch to internal medicine.

Five years ago Hamilton was working as a primary care physician at a clinic run by the Rockland Department of Health for people with no health insurance. The county pulled the plug on funding for the clinic and Hamilton was left without a job.

So the octogenarian created a role for himself and a new resource for people without access to medical care.

Health Lifeline opened in 2009 in a building owned by St. Ann's Roman Catholic Church in Nyack.

Hamilton accepts no salary and runs the operation on a shoe-string budget with a crew of volunteers. The $34,000 or so annual budget comes from donations

Since Hamilton opened the clinic, additional health care centers that charge on a sliding scale have opened in Rockland.

But Hamilton has a devoted following of patients, 15-20 of whom file into the stately former convent on Third Avenue for care every week.

The clinic is open just 2 days each week to keep down the cost of malpractice insurance — its largest expense.

"We don't turn anyone away," Hamilton said.

Tell us about your career.

"When I first started in the 1950s, it was the era of psychosomatic medicine. There was a real interest in merging psychiatry and internal medicine.

I trained in psychiatry and psychoanalysis at Columbia University. I was then clinical director at Hillside Hospital (a psychiatric hospital in Queens now part of the North Shore-LIJ system.)

In 1979 he decided to go back for internal medicine training and did a second residency at Stamford Hospital. In 1981, he opened an internal medicine practice in Nyack while maintaining a psychiatry practice at Columbia.

"I did internal medicine in the morning and psychiatry in the afternoon," he said. "I had to drive over the George Washington Bridge and when I got stuck in traffic I would meditate and listen to Bach."

He ended that commute around 1990 and focused fulltime on internal medicine in Nyack.

How do you manage to run a free medical clinic with a budget of just $35,000 per year?

"We are very frugal," he said. "We cut every corner we can." The clinic relies on volunteers and is in desperate need of more registered nurses who can work for several hours once or twice a week. There is also a staff of volunteer administrative workers.

Tell us about your volunteers:

"They are the most wonderful group of people who give generously and selflessly to help poor people. They amaze and inspire me. They really enjoy helping people. Around here, we say 'If you don't enjoy it, don't come,' and they are a testament to that every day."

Tell us about your typical patients.

"Our patients are getting younger," he said. "Most of our original patients who were older have died or gotten some type of insurance."

The average clinic patient now is under 50. All are uninsured. Most are immigrants who are not helped by the Affordable Care Act.

Type 2 diabetes is the most common problem he treats, along with hypertension. Hamilton and his staff work with local pharmacies to make sure people get the medication they need at a price they can afford. Nyack Hospital has also been very helpful, he said.

Tell us about your family:

"Patricia and I have been married since 1952. We live in Grandview. We have three children scatter across the country in Philadelphia, Indiana and San Francisco. We have six grandchildren."

What do you do for fun?

"Sailing. Both my wife and I love to sail. We had our honeymoon on a sloop on the coast of Maine. We have been sailing together ever since. We have made four trans-Atlantic voyages on our boat. We are members of the Hook Mountain Yacht Club. We're getting a little too old for sailing."

You are almost 87 years old. Do you have any plans to retire?

"I will have to if I begin to slip mentally but as far as I can see I can still practice medicine. Physically it's getting more difficult because I have arthritis and neuropathy. I have no intention to retire in the foreseeable future.

But if I do, I don't know what will happen to the clinic. I haven't been able to recruit any replacements from the medical side of things.

I'm going to keep the clinic going as long as I can. I use a cane and if I have to walk more than a block, I use crutches. My gait is not facile.

I'm creaking and bowed, but not broken. I'm like the Tin Man on the Wizard of Oz — I just need a little oil and I'm good to go."

The clinic is open from 8:30 a.m. until 5 p.m. on Mondays and Wednesdays. Health Lifeline is at 150 Third Ave., Nyack. Appointments are required. For more information, call 845-358-5433.

Read or Share this story: http://lohud.us/1gG8AsK