BOULDER — Every basketball schedule has red-circle dates that become brighter in March than they are in November. Colorado had one of those Sunday afternoon at the Coors Events Center. It can now add some red underlines and a red exclamation point.

Against a Harvard team favored to make a third consecutive NCAA Tournament, CU used a 19-2 surge in the second half to slip past the Crimson 70-62.

“We needed a big win,” forward Josh Scott said. “We’d played Arkansas State. And Harvard, they’re not Arkansas State.”

No, under coach Tommy Amaker, Harvard (4-1) is winning more than just debates. It has four starters back from the team that beat New Mexico in last season’s NCAA Tournament.

It has the Ivy League preseason player of the year, guard Wesley Saunders, who nearly signed with Colorado, and a three-time all-Ivy League pick in Kyle Casey.

“I know it’s too early to say there are must wins, but at the end of the year, you have to have some good wins on your résumé and avoid bad losses,” said Buffaloes coach Tad Boyle. “This wouldn’t have been a bad loss. But it is a good win.”

Good especially, Boyle said, because of “how we did it.”

What Boyle called “a deficiency” became a habit to open the game when Colorado’s shaky perimeter defense saw Harvard hit 6-of-12 shots beyond the 3-point arc for a 42-30 halftime lead.

Call it fatigue. Call it altitude. Dare call it a revived defense. But the Crimson only hit 1-of-11 in the second half.

“Harvard is such a good ball-movement team,” Boyle said. “If you’re not moving on a pass, you’re going to get beat. That’s what happened in the first half.”

Down 50-41, the Buffs flexed their muscles against a Har- vard team with no starter taller than 6-foot-7. The 6-10 Scott gathered nine of his 11 rebounds and scored 10 of his 12 points during the 19-2 run.

Xavier Johnson and Spencer Dinwiddie, who had a game-high 17 points, hit three consecutive 3- pointers. And when Johnson scored inside, the Buffs had a 62-54 lead with 2:43 left.

“Fifteen, 16 minutes had expired (in the second half) and they’d scored 10 points,” Boyle said. “That’s how you get back in games — then hitting three 3-pointers helps.”

The Buffs (6-1) play at Air Force (3-2) on Saturday at 2 p.m.

John Henderson: jhenderson@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnhendersondp