ELMIRA, N.Y. -- Experts say cervical cancer is highly treatable if diagnosed early on.

"Women think, even as they get older, they think, they're not sexually active, they're done having children, there's no reason for them to worry about it. Cervical cancer just appears. It doesn't matter [what] age," said Cancer Services Program Public Health Coordinator Denise Argetsinger.

The American Cancer Society says there's been a recent increase in the number of women getting diagnosed early with cervical cancer. Reseachers say that's largely due to the fact that the Affordable Care Act allows dependents to stay on their parents' insurance plan until they're 26.

"Folks can afford to come for their mammograms and their pap smears with the insurance," said Deborah Dininny, Arnot Health registered nurse.

"They've been putting it off for years because they didn't have insurance and now they have it," Argetsinger said. "They're getting it done, and they're being diagnosed sooner."

But Argetsinger says many people still can't afford the Affordable Care Act coverage, and need another way to get their pap smears and mammograms.

"A lot of people don't realize even if they don't have health insurance, they can get screened," Argetsinger said. "And there are services out there that will pay for it. The state does provide funding for these women. That's what my program is about."

The Southern Tier Cancer Services Program offers free pap smears, mammograms, and colorectal cancer screening to uninsured women older than 40. In collaboration with Arnot Health for Cervical Cancer Awareness Month, the hospital will do free screenings.

"The free Friday program we're doing at the health center is for women who do not have insurance or who have high deductibles," Dininny said.

Health care officials say giving everyone -- even uninsured people -- access to cancer screenings will ensure more people are diagnosed early.

Every county has a cancer services program. To find the one closest to you, click on this link.