KRASNAYA POLYANA, Russia — When Russian snowboarder Vic Wild won Olympic gold in the parallel giant slalom last week, he got an e-mail from Hans, a kid he was mean to more than 20 years ago.

“I was at a loss for words. Dude, even this guy was stoked for me,” said Wild, relishing the opportunity to made amends.

Not everyone is stoked on Wild, but that doesn’t bother him. When you excel, he said, “People are going to hate you.”

Three years ago, the professional alpine snowboarder left his Washington state home for Moscow. He married a Russian girl. He became a Russian citizen.

On Saturday, the 27-year-old became the first snowboarder to win two medals in the same Olympics, taking gold in the Olympic debut of parallel slalom. The crowd in the packed stadium erupted as Wild delivered for his new country. His second gold helped Russia take the total medal lead over the U.S., 29-27. As he whipped through the gates, thousands chanted “Russ-See-Uh! Russ-See-Uh!”

Afterward, facing a phalanx of reporters, it was time to set the record straight. Wild said he didn’t go country shopping when he moved to Russia, became a citizen and began training with the support he never had while racing in the U.S.

After a frustrating career in the U.S., traveling with random teams to World Cup events and fighting for financial scraps to support his training after the dissolution of the U.S. alpine snowboard team, he was ready to quit the sport. He started thinking about college. Maybe studying architecture.

Then opportunity knocked. It was Russia.

“I chose to continue snowboarding because I thought I could do something special. I wanted to see how good I could get. That’s why I continued snowboarding, and that’s why I’m a Russian,” said Wild, who spent years training with the Steamboat Springs Winter Sports Club.

A whole new world

In Moscow, he was fully funded to train year-round. Coaches pushed him. He had the best equipment. Doctors from the hockey team helped him through an injury. An osteopath from the figure skating team assisted. He has a tech who sharpened and waxed his board. Administrators arranged his World Cup travel so he could focus on snowboarding.

He finally had the team behind him that allowed him to fulfill his potential. He had support in the U.S., but nothing like he has now. And, when he traveled, he was on his own.

“When I was on the road, I didn’t have anything. I traveled with the Japanese team, actually,” he said.

Much will be made about how Russia unleashed Wild’s greatness. But friends and family say there was a larger factor in his sudden rise from the middle of the pack to twice-golden Olympic superstar.

His wife, Alena Zavarzina, certainly played a major role. She won bronze alongside her husband’s gold in Wednesday’s parallel giant slalom.

“Vic has really developed as a person. In Steamboat, he was able to develop his riding and his technical ability and his philosophy about riding and grow as a person. And then when he fell in love with Alena, I think the love relationship helped him to mature,” said Thedo Remmelink, the coach who helped Wild during his years with the Steamboat Springs Winter Sports Club.

Wild’s brother, Michael, concurs.

“She’s the reason he’s doing so well,” he said.

Wild too, not surprisingly, said his wife has done more to improve his riding than Russia’s well-oiled Olympic machine.

“I have a great wife to come home to, and that’s something that most of the guys I compete with don’t have,” Wild said. “It’s very important for them to have results, whereas for me, I have a great wife. Either way, my life is going to be great, with or without the medals, and that does help ease the mind and allows me at least to move and not be so tight.”

U.S. funds lacking

Justin Reiter, the lone American alpine snowboarder competing in the Sochi Winter Olympics, spent months sleeping in his truck to support his training. When Reiter came to Russia — without a coach, without a wax tech, without a teammate — other snowboarding athletes asked if he was a coach.

Reiter did not move beyond qualifying in the parallel giant slalom. In Saturday’s slalom, the Steamboat Springs rider missed a gate and was disqualified in his first run. He wouldn’t blame the lack of his support for his struggle in Sochi. But it played a role.

“Without a consistent team, without a consistent support staff, makes it really difficult,” he said Saturday as he served as a coach for his friend Wild. “Then all the sudden, you show up at the big game and everything changes, whereas for a guy like Vic, it’s just another race and he’s able to focus on what he needs to focus on.”

The U.S. Ski and Snowboard Association allocated more funds to halfpipe and slopestyle than to alpine snowboarding and the investment paid off, with the U.S. winning 12 medals in freestyle skiing and snowboarding.

“Our strategic focus on new events like halfpipe and slopestyle had clear athletic success for us in Sochi and are very relevant to what kids are doing at resorts around the world today,” said Luke Bodensteiner, executive vice president of U.S. Ski and Snowboard Association.

Wild isn’t bitter at the association.

“You can’t focus on everything,” he said.

But he hopes the association turns more focus toward snowboard racing.

“You need all the pieces of the pie to be complete, and if you only focus on one or two disciplines, you are not going to have well-rounded athletes,” he said.

Jason Blevins: 303-954-1374, jblevins@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jasontblevins