A brown trout caught during a fishing outing in the Driftless Area of Vernon County on Thursday is photographed before being released. Credit: Paul A. Smith

By of the

Should the Wisconsin early trout season begin Jan. 1 instead of the first Saturday in March? Should the early season be expanded to all waters in the state?

These are two of six trout management questions on the ballot of the 2014 Spring Fish and Wildlife Hearings held April 14 in each Wisconsin county.

Results of the questions will guide the Department of Natural Resources as it modifies its trout management program.

The agency began a comprehensive review of Wisconsin trout fishing in 2011. Its expressed goal: improve anglers' trout fishing experiences without jeopardizing the quality of the fishery.

"We are trying to provide more fishing opportunity for trout anglers," said Scot Stewart, the DNR fish supervisor leading the review effort. "At the same time we are trying to respect regional desires throughout the state. We are using the advisory questions to focus in on those desires."

The advisory questions will address a range of issues, including the length of the early catch-and-release season. In recent years, the season has started the first Saturday in March and run through the last weekend in April. The questionnaire will ask if the season should begin Jan. 1.

It will also ask if the early season should be statewide. Right now, much of northeastern Wisconsin and selected waters elsewhere are closed.

Other questions ask whether the early season should end the day before the regular season begins, eliminating the five-day closure between the two seasons.

Anglers are also asked if they want the regular season to end Oct. 15 rather than Sept. 30, with options of making the extra two weeks open to harvest or to catch-and-release only.

Finally, anglers are asked if they favor a uniform gamefish season for so-called put-and-take trout lakes and ponds, where catchable-size fish are stocked every spring but where the lakes and ponds may not support survival over winter.

Paul A. Smith