Voters on both sides of the aisle in the 7th Congressional District will have choices to make Tuesday.

U.S. Rep. Patrick Meehan, R-7, of Chadds Ford, has held the seat since 2010, when he defeated former Democratic state Rep. Bryan Lentz to replace outgoing Democrat Joseph Sestak.

The former Delaware County District Attorney faces a challenge from Montgomery County businessman Stanley Casacio, who plants himself to the right of Meehan on issues like immigration, healthcare and the national debt.

“My Congressman, who I worked to get elected back in 2009, 2010, has been a disappointment,” said Casacio, 68, of Flourtown. “Since 2010, as a conservative, as a Republican, we worked very hard to obtain control of the House and then the Senate, and then the question becomes, ‘What has changed?’ Nothing has changed.”

Advertisement

Casacio, a U.S. Army veteran, handles the real estate commercial end of a Huntingdon Valley family business, N.C. Construction Corp., which owns and manages shopping centers throughout the area.

He said he wants to bring his experience as a businessman to Washington, D.C., where he has vowed to reduce taxes on families and small businesses, implement a school voucher system, and restrict immigration policies. He is also staunchly pro-life and has vowed to defund Planned Parenthood, which he refers to as an “abortion mill” on his website.

Meehan, 59, has also vowed to defund Planned Parenthood and noted he has voted to do so in the past. He defended a recent budget vote that included Planned Parenthood funding because he believed it would have been irresponsible to shut down the government based on a rider attached to what he deemed a “must-pass” bill.

Meehan, a former U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, further backed up his conservative bona fides by pointing to his repeated votes to repeal the Affordable Care Act and restructure Social Security benefits.

Currently a member of the influential House Ways and Means Committee and House Ethics Committee, Meehan said he is poised to work with the next president, Republican or Democrat, and pointed to several instances of bipartisan efforts he has spearheaded in the past.

The make-up of the district has changed since Meehan first took office to include larger portions of Montgomery and Chester Counties, as well as new areas like Berks and eastern Lancaster counties.

Meehan noted that whatever the make-up of the district, he has handily won reelection twice and expects to be able to do so again this November. The most recent victory came by a margin of 145,869 to 89,256 over Democrat Mary Ellen Balchunis, who is vying for the seat again this year.

Balchunis, 60, of Haverford, said she never expected to win the seat in the last election, but was able to begin building a network of support that is showing dividends now.

Balchunis noted she has the official backing of party leadership in most of the district and will take time off from her position as a professor of political science at La Salle University in the fall to campaign in earnest should she win Tuesday.

A member of the Pennsylvania Democratic Party State Committee and former vice chair of the Delaware County Democratic Party, Balchunis said she understands the needs of the district as a working mother and resident for more than 40 years.

Balchunis acknowledged Meehan has worked with Democrats in the past, but said he has stuck with the GOP on important issues like reducing student loan rates, Social Security, Medicare, raising the minimum wage and pay equity.

Balchunis also noted that if elected in the fall, she would be the only woman of a 20-member Pennsylvania Congressional delegation.

“The evidence shows that when you have a woman in office, you get more legislation that benefits not only women, but also children and families,” she said.

Balchunis faces political newcomer Bill Golderer, a self-described “principled progressive” who founded the non-profit Broad Street Ministry to address the needs of those struggling with poverty, hunger and homelessness.

Golderer, 47, of Devon, is a former regional vice president for Equifax who grew up in Wayne and returned to the area in 2005. Golderer said he believes his fiscal background and ability to create opportunities is appealing to Republicans, while his more liberal social values will draw in Democrats.

Golderer noted he was able to build Broad Street Ministries into a $3 million charitable enterprise with just $8,000 of seed money, which now serves 9,000 individuals annually with a staff of more than 25. He also serves as senior pastor at Philadelphia’s Arch Street Presbyterian, which provides 100 families with early education programs regardless of income.

Golderer said he has championed LGBT rights for 20 years and does not understand attacks from Republicans including Meehan against organizations like Planned Parenthood, which mostly provide health services to women without means.

He pointed out that former Philadelphia Mayor Michael Nutter appointed Golderer chairman of the Food Access Collaborative because of his ability to bring people together, a trait he hopes to employ in Washington D.C.

“I feel like we have lost our way and our ability to disagree without being disagreeable,” he said. “I feel like members of Congress don’t know each other as people anymore, all they see is party, and that’s not sustainable. People’s problems are bigger than our partisanship, or at least they should be.”

Polls will be open from 7 a.m. to 8 p.m. Tuesday.