Buzzer speed, and serious smarts, punch their ticket

Members of the Fairview High School team, preparing to compete on on Rocky Mountain PBS's Colorado high school trivia show, "Matchwits." ( Courtesy Photo / BVSD )

It's doubtful a squid will ever be as important to Sam Weissman, a junior at Boulder's Fairview High School, as it was last Sunday night.

Locked in a tie with Denver's Thomas Jefferson High School's team on Rocky Mountain PBS's Colorado high school trivia show, "Matchwits," the win depended on the proper identification of a "decapod dibranchiate cephalopod"—more commonly known as a squid.

With his answer, Weissman guaranteed his five-person team would move forward to the second round with a score of 130 points and a ten-point lead.

Though Fairview High has participated at regional Knowledge Bowl competitions against Summit, Adams 12, and Jefferson County, this is the first time the team has competed in the statewide challenge that quizzes students on academic subjects, like science, math, and history. In total, sixteen schools participated in the tournament filmed in Pueblo, with the trophy winner to be determined after the fifth round.

"Going in, we didn't know what to expect," said Weissman, who admitted the deduction of points from interruptions — interrupting the host with a wrong answer before he has finished asking the question — threw him off.

"He's pretty trigger happy," said Susan Wang, the team's coach and a world languages instructor at Fairview who competed in Knowledge Bowls during her own high school days.

But buzzer speed, she says, is crucial.

The team, which consists of high school senior and team captain Justus Leben, senior Rodrigo Guadarrama, Weismann, junior Sruthi Raguveer, and sophomore Harrison Pearl, typically practices twice a week, covering everything from buzzer technique to memorization of facts.

"Other teams around the state have mandated expectations from their students, so it's very rigid," explained Wang. "I think that just sucks the fun out of having Knowledge Bowls."

Instead, Wang encourages students to find an angle they're passionate about and research the topics.

Some students specialize in particular subjects — Leben has a penchant for chemistry, while Pearl enjoys geography. Others prefer to take an all-inclusive approach.

"When I took chemistry, I memorized the periodic table for the fun of it — and a bit to stroke my ego," Leben said. "But when it comes to subjects, I try to be a jack of all trades."

Leben noted learning isn't restricted to preparation, it's also a part of the game. When he hears an unexpected answer to a question, it sticks in his mind, which could be helpful in the future if any of the students end up on one of their favorite game shows.

"I always watch 'Jeopardy,'" said Weissman. "I would definitely want to [go on the show."

But before her team members can become the next Ken Jennings, Wang hopes to raise awareness of the team's presence here in Boulder.

"It's been here for 20 or so years and I don't think a lot of people are aware we have such a strong academic sport," she said, citing the team's third-place ranking in the Matchwits qualifying exam. "We hope we can have the support of the Boulder community, not just the Fairview community."

So far, Grand Junction, Edison, Delta, Colorado Springs, and Fairview High schools have made it to the second round.

Fairview's next episode will air at 6:30 p.m. March 15 on Rocky Mountain PBS.