Swift-water rescue crews have again called off their search for a 20-year-old man who flipped off his inner tube near rapids known as Union Chutes, a stretch of the South Platte River that is perilous in high-water conditions.

Crews stopped looking in the water at dark Saturday night, but continued to patrol the river banks, Sheridan Police Sgt. Paul Wszolek said.

“They’ll be back again around 8:30 or 9 a.m. Sunday to search again,” he said.

Sheridan Police were called to the river around 4:30 p.m. Witnesses said they saw the man surface and go under several times as he was swept north of where the river passes under West Union Avenue in Sheridan.

He was last seen floating in the river about a quarter mile north of Union.

“People were trying to get to him, but the water was too fast,” Sheridan Police Chief Mark Campbell said.

The man was one of four people trying to float the river. The three other tubers got out of the river.

Rescue crews combed the banks of the river and were using a line strung between two firetrucks flanking the river in a stretch between Union Chutes and Hollywood Hole to aid their search.

Rescuers from the Sheridan Police, Denver Fire, Englewood Police, Arapahoe County Sheriff, Denver Police and Arapahoe Rescue Patrol departments were looking for the man. Denver’s Air 1 police helicopter also was used.

The rescuers were focused on an area that is popular with kayakers and tubers during ordinary river conditions. However, when the water is high, the area is treacherous.

At 6 p.m. Saturday, the South Platte was flowing at 3,660 cubic feet per second at Englewood, according to the U.S. Geological Service water data site. Most experienced kayakers consider anything above 600 cfs in the area to be challenging.

Earlier this weekend, USGS hydrologic technician Sue Hartley said the recent rainfall has created some of the highest water levels seen in Colorado since 1995.

Rainfall caused water levels to rise — Clear Creek was running at 2,000 cfs Friday, enough to fill an Olympic-size swimming pool in 45 seconds — but experts are now focusing on snowmelt, which Hartley says could bump up rivers and creeks this weekend.

Hartley said many people lack experience with fast water. The combination of inexperience, rushing flow and debris creates dangerous conditions.