During summer, homeowners at age-55-plus Anthem Ranch in Broomfield have a 32,000-square-foot community center with pools and sports courts, plus 48 miles of trails and 735 acres of open space to wander. But you’re as likely to find them 25 miles west in the Rockies, climbing into Fourth of July Basin or fishing Boulder Creek. “These people are doers,” says Katherine Erstad, activities director at Aspen Lodge community center. “They develop passions and they pass them on to others.”

Last week Erstad took a call from a woman in New England, musing about moving west into one of Anthem Ranch’s luxurious ranch designs by Toll Brothers. “Tell me about the hiking,” she asked. “I’m not the type that just walks up to the base of the mountain and then turns around.” Erstad assured her she’d have plenty of company at Anthem Ranch. Last month, she added, 45 residents biked for three days around the Elk Mountains near Aspen and Carbondale; while others packed into the Ten Mile Range for a hut trip. Another group launched a fly fishing club, teaching fly casting to 70 residents and grandkids.

“If it’s not here you can create it,” Erstad adds. Meanwhile, Anthem’s nurturing approach to neighborhood groups (both Anthem Ranch and non-age-restricted Anthem Highlands have their own rec centers and activities directors) lures huge participation at special events, including at an annual Clam Bake last month — a classy affair that drew a record crowd that consumed 100 lobsters and other maritime fare flown in. “I really think that so many people are coming from places where they’ve had strong roots — that’s what they see here, a place where you can grow roots quickly,” says Erstad.That’s doubly true, Erstad says, in the newest Toll Brothers neighborhoods, where everyone moves in more or less the same time. “They’re really embracing that cul-de-sac and the people they meet,” she adds. But if you imagine yourself becoming part of that scene, now is the moment to see Anthem Ranch, experience the action-oriented ambience, and tour Toll Brothers’ six ranch-style models.

“In this market, ranches are in demand everywhere — much more so with our lifestyle components,” says Melanie McKenna, who with Leslie Reed can orient you to the community today. “We can already see the end of Anthem Ranch’s supply of home sites, and we need to get you on a qualified interest list, so we can include you as home sites are released.”

You’ll also find ranch designs available in non-age-restricted Anthem Highlands by Richmond American, Standard Pacific, and Ryland Homes. Anthem Colorado is ten minutes from Interlocken, 25 minutes from downtown Denver, 15 minutes from Boulder, 25 minutes from DIA via 470. Take I-25 north past 470 to Highway 7, turn west three miles to Lowell and south. From Broomfield, head north on Lowell, continuing past 144th. Or from Boulder County, head east on Baseline past U.S. 287, continuing on Hwy 7. Anthem’s builders are at AnthemColorado.com.

Anthem Colorado, master-planned community in Broomfield near Denver, Boulder; 14 model homes by Richmond American, Ryland, Standard Pacific, Toll Brothers; 2 comprehensive rec centers, 48 miles of trails, 735 acres preserved open space. Hwy 7 at Lowell, Broomfield; take I-25 north past 470 to Hwy 7, west 3 mi. to Lowell, turn south, follow signs (or from Broomfield take Lowell north)

Ryland and Toll Brothers from upper $300s, Richmond American, Standard Pacific from mid-$400s

Today noon until 6 p.m., daily 10-6

Richmond American 720-482-5195; Ryland 303-926-3980;Standard Pacific 303-428-4007;Toll Brothers 303-926-4140

Mark Samuelson writes on real estate and business; you can email him atmark@samuelsonassoc.com. You can see all of Mark Samuelson’s columns online at DenverPostHomes.com.Follow Mark Samuelson on Twitter:@marksamuelson