Patrolling the streets and looking out for the safety of the public is not the same as it use to be decades ago. Lauderdale County Sheriff Billy Sollie says with each passing year, as technology becomes improved upon the officer's word is no longer the only evidence needed in court.

"In today's society and today's courtroom, if that officer does not have an audio or video, if it has some technical issues with their equipment; they're immediately labeled as covering up," Sheriff Sollie said. "What are you lying about, you have all this technology available to you, why did yours coincidentally break on that day.?"

Sheriff Sollie says because of that, the intimidation, and the mindset that they are no longer the good guys he would tell young people not to get into law enforcement, but then he says while that is the case officers are still needed everywhere. He gives some advice as to what to do if you are ever stopped by a member of the law enforcement, where so many officers can end up threatened or killed as was the case with Officers Benjamin Deen and Liquori Tate out of Hattiesburg.

"When the officer gets to that vehicle, listen to what the officer is asking you to do and do only what the officer is asking you to do," said Sheriff Sollie. "Arguing on the side of the road, whether you are guilty or innocent is not the location nor the time to have that conversation."

Sheriff Sollie says there are places to have that conversation though.

"If you believe you are innocent and you believe that you are wrongly charged, take that fight to the courtroom," said Sheriff Sollie. "Do not enter into a conversation of innocent or guilt with that officer on the side of the road."

At the end of the day Sheriff Sollie says officers are there to protect and while everyday they don't know what they'll face, all officers wake up each day in hopes of being there at the right time

"Having that mindset of you can make a difference that day, for that person, is what drives every officer to get up, get dressed, and pray they come home at the end of their shift," stated Sheriff Sollie.

Sheriff Sollie says after being the law enforcement business for nearly 41 years, he has seen the attitude towards cops change from being the good guys to just looking to frame someone.