All-star outfielder Carlos Gonzalez underwent an emergency appendectomy in Denver on Friday night, which could impact his early spring training schedule with the Rockies.

Gonzalez, 28, was discharged from the hospital Saturday afternoon, with doctors prescribing complete rest for two weeks.

It was not a standard appendectomy, because he also needed a minor hernia repair, meaning his recovery could take closer to two months rather than the typical four weeks.

There’s no reason to rush back. The calendar is his friend. The Rockies’ position players don’t have to report for physicals until Feb. 21 with the first full squad workout on Feb. 22, giving Gonzalez a six-week window. If he needs more time, spring provides it. The Rockies don’t break camp until March 29 before opening the season two days later in Miami against the Marlins.

Gonzalez recorded only 37 at-bats following the all-star break last year because of a nagging finger injury.

The news was first reported on CarGo’s twitter account, @CarGoMedia5, and confirmed by the Rockies.

The three-time Gold Glover, who is expected to move to center field full time, will likely lose strength, if not weight as he recovers. He should have time to recondition, even if it means adopting a cautious approach during the first part of spring training.

He is the third Rockie in the last three years to undergo an appendectomy, joining pitcher Drew Pomeranz (since traded to Oakland) and closer Rafael Betancourt. Pomeranz recovered in roughly three weeks in 2011, making a start in the rotation. Betancourt took a month after having his appendix removed last July 21, but was 37 when it happened and was dealing with a lingering groin injury. He returned to the team and pitched on Aug. 17.

Gonzalez has enjoyed a productive winter. His sprained left middle finger healed without surgery, and he’s experienced no issue swinging the bat over the past the past five weeks. He held a toy drive for kids last month and recently filmed a root beer commercial in Venezuela with American League most valuable player Miguel Cabrera.