I have a birthday this month, and every year when I push more time behind me than I see ahead, I am reminded that Life’s Too Short.

So I rummage through my scattered notes to compile my annual LTS List.

LTS (after a certain age) for surprise birthday parties that might trigger cardiac arrest.

LTS to listen to New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie bathe in a $1 million taxpayer-funded whitewash of his role in Bridgegate, a report compiled by his own lawyer, Randy Mastro. Christie’s presidential road trip still won’t make it past the George Washington Bridge tollbooth.

LTS for another story about George Zimmerman.

LTS for me to read one more story about the housewives of any city, except maybe Pompeii.

LTS for sore losers to keep saying that Obamacare is a flop. Yes, it had a rollout like the 2014 Mets and Yanks, but with 7.1 million people enrolled, we’re talking about the population of Los Angeles, Chicago and Boston combined. That’s a lot of medically protected lives.

LTS for people who still doubt climate change. These are the same cementheads who believe the dinosaur bones in the American Museum of Natural History are fakes.

LTS for the MTA reprimanding motorman Christopher Chase for posting a Facebook photo of himself in his skivvies on the No Pants Subway Ride with 4,000 others. (Facebook) LTS for the MTA reprimanding motorman Christopher Chase for posting a Facebook photo of himself in his skivvies on the No Pants Subway Ride with 4,000 others. (David Wexler for New York Daily News) LTS for the MTA reprimanding motorman Christopher Chase for posting a Facebook photo of himself in his skivvies on the No Pants Subway Ride with 4,000 others.

LTS for chain stores that ask you to scan your own purchases. This practice eliminates cashier jobs and offers customers no discount for doing the store’s work.

LTS for the United Parcel Service firing 250 workers for staging a 90-minute work stoppage to support a co-worker they felt was unjustly sacked. Next time I think of using Unjust Parcel Scabs, I’ll go Postal instead.

LTS for another story about George Zimmerman.

LTS for me to read one more story about the housewives of any city, except maybe Pompeii.

LTS for the meanspirited Sanitation Department’s firing of a trash collector for taking a $20 tip while our City Council members can accept gifts valued up to $50. That’s junk justice, literally. While covering the post-Sandy carnage, I can’t tell you how many citizens applauded the yeoman efforts of our sanitation workers.

LTS for the MTA reprimanding motorman Christopher Chase for posting a Facebook photo of himself in his skivvies on the No Pants Subway Ride with 4,000 others. While he was on vacation. The Metropolitan Transportation Authority emperors have no clothes on this one.

LTS for Eva Moskowitz and her hedge-fund backers who can afford to spend millions on TV ads blasting Mayor de Blasio for keeping a campaign promise to limit charter schools. But they don’t want to spend those same millions to rent space in taxpayer-financed public school buildings. Is this the new math taught in charters?

LTS for Eva Moskowitz (right) and her hedge-fund backers who can afford to spend millions on TV ads blasting Mayor de Blasio for keeping a campaign promise to limit charter schools (Barry Williams for New York Daily News)

LTS for people insisting that de Blasio’s landslide victory isn’t a mandate because only 28% of those registered voted. That 28% were the ones with enough civic pride to participate in the greatest gift of democracy — voting. Those who didn’t vote should keep quiet now because they were silent when they had their turn to speak loudly last November. De Blasio won 75% of the voters who lined up to be counted. That’s a mandate.

LTS ever to forget the veterans of our latest wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, who still walk, limp, steer their wheelchairs, wander homeless and commit suicide among us. Where is all the flag-waving and cheering these brave troops witnessed when President George W. Bush sent them marching off to war?

LTS to forget as you spring-clean the barbecue that one in five people in New York City needs provisions from food pantries run by great charities like City Harvest to make up for a $5 billion food-stamps cut.

LTS to forget that Teddy Atlas (right, with then-Councilman James Oddo) was voted into the New York Boxing Hall of Fame last week for his career. (Todd Maisel/New York Daily News)

LTS to forget that Teddy Atlas was voted into the New York Boxing Hall of Fame last week for a career in which he helped steer Mike Tyson and Michael Moorer to heavyweight championships. But Atlas does his most important fighting out of the ring, for the forgotten, sick and luckless of New York, through the Dr. Theodore Atlas Foundation.

LTS for the new Supreme Court decision barring limits on campaign contributions. The race for the White House will now become a shootout between dueling billionaires.

LTS for another LTS list — for at least another year.

dhamill@nydailynews.com