Big Government: A 20-year-old memo says Hillary Clinton backed a single-payer socialist health system, believing ObamaCare-like mega-regulation to be “a crock.” As president, she’d double down on government control.

It’s buried over 60 paragraphs into Alana Goodman’s investigative article in the Washington Free Beacon this week about unpublished documents exposing Clinton’s ruthlessness.

Among the papers of Hillary adviser and close friend Diane Blair at the University of Arkansas is an account of a Feb. 23, 1993 White House dinner Blair attended.

The first lady had just launched her secretive health care task force pushing a “managed competition” approach to reform. Hillary commented “at length” to President Clinton, revealing she “thinks managed competition” is “a crock; single-payer necessary; maybe add to Medicare,” in the clipped wording of Blair’s memo.

As Goodman noted, that’s “at odds with public statements by the former first lady that she never supported the single-payer option.” In a New York Times interview during her 2008 presidential campaign, the ex-Obama administration secretary of state claimed: “I never seriously considered a single payer system.”

This might be Hillary’s version of “if you like your plan, you can keep your plan.”

Like Hillary, Obama prefers single payer. Speaking to an AFL-CIO conference a decade ago, Obama declared: “I happen to be a proponent of a single-payer universal health care program … that’s what I’d like to see, but as all of you know we may not get there immediately.”

When he ran nationally, knowing Americans opposed socialized medicine, Obama moved away from that. But as president he unsuccessfully pushed a “public option” — direct government coverage competing with private plans — which in Obama’s first year in office was called “the best way to reach single payer” by former Democratic Rep. Barney Frank, because it “demonstrate(s) the strength of its power.”

On the day the ObamaCare exchanges began, “Sicko” filmmaker and admirer of Cuba’s collectivist health system Michael Moore declared in The New York Times that “ObamaCare is awful,” but was signed into law by a president “who knew in his heart that a single-payer, Medicare-for-all model was the true way to go.”

With ObamaCare in force, repeal can be ridiculed as going “back to the old days when insurance companies could just jerk you around,” as Obama said during the 2012 campaign. This leaves a false choice between the new ObamaCare status quo or the end of private health insurance and competition.

Many ObamaCare supporters may indeed have known it would be the catastrophe it is, planning to “fix” what they wrecked by going totally socialist with a Canada/Britain/France-style single-payer system, where you wait forever for major treatment Americans are used to receiving promptly.

The evidence suggests Hillary was among them. A vote for Hillary Clinton in 2016 may well be a vote for single payer to replace ObamaCare’s failures.