Facing declining reimbursements and intensifying bottom-line pressure, health care providers are racing to shave millions from their supply chain costs. One Irving-based company claims to have created an online solution for hospitals to do just that.

The Aptitude online marketplace allows hospitals to view pricing for hospital supplies, negotiate contracts with suppliers directly, and track their purchases and contracts online. Irving-based Novation LLC, a health care supply chain contracting company, launched the site in April 2013.

“You get to do business with vendors directly, and there’s nobody in between,” said Tim Ingram, director of materials management at Longmont United Hospital in Longmont, Colo.

The vast majority of health care providers in America traditionally participate in group purchasing organizations (GPOs) for better prices on their supply chain expenses.

The organizations pool the purchasing power of thousands of hospitals to get discounts from equipment suppliers. However, hospitals can negotiate contracts outside of GPOs directly with suppliers.

“Aptitude fills in those gaps for products that do not have a GPO contract,” said Ingram, whose hospital uses the platform.

Ingram said he gets better prices with Aptitude by buying locally or from smaller vendors. He said these vendors don’t often have the opportunity to participate in group contracting.

“They’re very motivated to give you a competitive price for a product,” Ingram said.

More pressure to save

Troy Kirchenbauer, general manager of Aptitude, said financial challenges and developing technology in health care created the opportunity before the platform’s January 2013 pilot program.

“In terms of the market conditions, obviously the Affordable Care Act is putting tremendous financial pressure on health care providers,” Kirchenbauer said.

Kirchenbauer said Novation’s support for Aptitude totals more than $10 million. He said the effort began seven or eight years ago with investments in data and data collection technology. Through these investments, he said Aptitude minimizes the time invested in contract negotiation.

“We remember the choices [hospitals] have made in the past, and we [automatically] cross-reference those items for future bids,” said Kirchenbauer.

Hospitals that use Aptitude average savings of about 15 percent on their contracts, Kirchenbauer said. Ingram said his hospital saves around 18 to 20 percent per agreement.

Aptitude costs subscribers $50,000 a year to use. But that’s pocket change for hospital supply chain budgets, especially for larger hospital systems, said Justin Hibbs, the platform’s senior director for marketing and research.

“Any software that pays for itself, you won’t see too many CFOs that won’t back you up,” Ingram said.

$55B opportunity

Hibbs said Aptitude started with eight employees and now has 30 employees after its first year.

Aptitude began with a pilot program with five hospitals and five suppliers last January. Hibbs said Aptitude now serves more than 600 hospitals and around 40 suppliers.

Kirchenbauer said this growth has been mainly through hospitals affiliated with Novation, also one of the largest GPOs in America. But he said Aptitude plans to expand to other hospitals.

Kirchenbauer said skeptics often ask if Aptitude’s approach puts Novation’s GPO business model in jeopardy.

Other GPOs have launched digital platforms, such as Premier Healthcare Alliance’s PremierConnect. But Kirchenbauer said Aptitude’s approach goes after more of the market than others. He said Aptitude can tap into the billions hospitals spend on supply chain purchases outside of GPOs.

“That’s a $55 billion market opportunity, and [others in the industry] are doing it with paper and pencil and email and Microsoft Excel,” Kirchenbauer said. “We can absolutely pave a much better way for the future.”

Follow Daniel Salazar on Twitter at @imdanielsalazar.