Political sports fans: It was a beautiful early evening for a ballgame. The June sun stayed high in the sky. Every so often, Washington looks like a spectacular movie set of itself. Light falls on marble just so and the gold-green trees shimmer. Thursday was one of those days.

Then came a classic conflict of leading players. Hollywood could do no better character drama. Unscripted, no less. This was no ordinary ballgame.

The first scene. The Capitol wrapped up its business early for the annual Congressional Baseball Game. You could feel the excitement in the halls. Good clean fun: a team of Democrats vs. a team of Republicans, held at the Washington Nationals' ballpark. Everybody was going, at least on the House side. House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi came to cheer on her Democratic caucus.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

For once, levity would take the place of bitter partisan politics. Or so people thought.

Enter the president. President Barack Obama had to show up with his motorcade, stealing thunder, at the ballpark. He came late to the game – what a surprise – and it wasn't clear whose side he was on. Another surprise. He came desperately seeking help from lawmakers on the next day's big trade vote on fast-track authority, so crucial to finalizing the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership. He came bearing his dazzling charm and White House beer – because it worked so well at the "beer summit" in 2009 with the Harvard professor and the police officer who arrested him.

Encounters with friends. Often the reluctant politician above the fray, Obama has reached the sluggish eighth inning of his presidency. There are zero points on the board since, well, years. So Obama had to reach out to lawmakers and find new friends. In other words, he had to be in there pitching for lost goodwill within his own party.

[READ: Obama Splits With Democrats on Trade]

For Obama has just belatedly realized politics is a team sport. Up until now, he seemed to think mixing with Congress was slumming. He frequently forgot to invite members over to the White House to socialize. And he hates listening to other people's speeches, another reason he avoided Capitol Hill at all costs. Even as a freshman senator, Obama looked down on the place. It was time for a change of heart in the eighth inning.

Obama knew this because his own party seriously rebelled against his proposed trade deal. Pelosi tried to help the president's position and work out a middle ground for America's workers, their unions and her colleagues. But by Thursday night, it was clear herculean efforts could not save the day for Obama and his prized trade package. Not even Pelosi would go his way the next day. Since she helped save Obamacare with her finesse in 2010, this was a real defeat for the president.

Awkward encounter with Republicans. At the ballpark, congressional Republicans, gleefully chanted "TPA," to signal they planned to vote with the president on trade. Obama flashed a thumbs up and smiled – not a great way to court support among allies. It didn't go over well with his home crowd.