RALEIGH, N.C. (AP) - A long-negotiated agreement to sell state government property where a mental hospital stood since before the Civil War was finalized Tuesday, and city leaders hope to transform the land into North Carolina’s “Central Park.”

The 10-member Council of State, comprised of top elected executive branch officials, voted to sell 308 acres at the old Dorothea Dix site near downtown to the city for $52 million. Raleigh city council members approved the agreement late last month.

As the hospital was closing, city government and business leaders pushed the idea of using the land for a regional park in the model of those in Atlanta and New York. They said it would improve the area’s quality of life and attract businesses.

“It has come to fruition now because we’ve worked so hard over these 10 years - and longer for other people - to have this destination park,” Greg Poole Jr., president of the park booster group called Dix Visionaries, said. “It’s North Carolina’s Central Park - that’s what it’s going to be.”

A 2012 agreement between the city and then-Gov. Beverly Perdue was scuttled when legislators balked at the sale price, saying it was too low. Successor Gov. Pat McCrory re-opened negotiations with city leaders. The deal was announced in January.

The agreement allows the state to lease back about one-third of the property for up to 10 and 25 years - depending on the tract - for essentially nothing. The delay gives the state time to move the roughly 2,000 state workers - the Department of Health and Human Services headquarters are housed there - elsewhere.

“Frankly I’m looking forward to the day when they’re working in conditions that are a heck of a lot of better than they’re in right now,” the governor said. He called the agreement a win for “the city of Raleigh, the citizens of the state of North Carolina and the taxpayers of North Carolina.”

The hospital, named after Dix, a 19th century advocate for the mentally ill, took in its first patient in 1856. The last one left in 2012.

Current senators threatened again to block the deal this year, filing a bill to require an open bid process for the property. But the senators pulled back last week, saying they had received assurances concerns were being addressed, such as ensuring proceeds benefited mental health programs. The land’s 1848 acquisition designated its use for people with mental illness.

The governor’s proposed state budget directs proceeds be placed in a trust. State Budget Director Lee Roberts said some have suggested the money purchase equipment for the replacement Broughton state mental hospital in Morganton.

Republicans on the council who opposed the 2012 agreement - Agriculture Commissioner Steve Troxler and Labor Commissioner Cherie Berry - didn’t speak against the new deal.

Raleigh now must locate financing for the purchase by Dec. 31. Raleigh Mayor Nancy McFarlane said a municipal bond referendum may be required.

The park is still an empty canvass, but she expected the grassland in sight of Raleigh’s skyline to be a big draw.

“The sky’s the limit,” she said. “We know we really want to save this open space, but we also want it to be something that people really want to come to see.”