Gov. Jerry Brown delivered a characteristically uncharacteristic State of the State address.

His speech was brief and plainspoken. There were no special guests in the gallery to introduce, no rhetorical flourishes, no grand visions of transformation — not even an obscure reference to philosophy. His bullet lists highlighted recent accomplishments, not new initiatives.

Brown’s theme was prudence, the watchword of his budget plan for 2016-17.

He counseled caution in a state flush with cash, warning that an economic downturn is inevitable and urging fellow Democrats eager to spread the wealth to instead hold the line.

“Historically,” he told a joint session of the Legislature, “California budgets have been built around forecasts that assume uninterrupted growth. Just looking at the last two recessions, we notice that ongoing state spending accelerated right into the downturn.”

Yet this wasn’t simply an exercise in lowering expectations.

Brown, serving his fourth term as governor, is a cagey and experienced politician who gave his first State of the State speech before some of the legislators in attendance Thursday were born.

He inherited a fiscal catastrophe five years ago and is building a legacy of fiscal responsibility. But California’s revenue stream is notoriously sensitives to shifting economic winds, so his success may depend on avoiding hard-to-reverse increases in state spending. For programs that must grow, most notably health care and road maintenance, Brown is seeking dedicated funding sources. That’s smart policy, but it’s tricky politics.

To succeed, Brown must overcome pressure from fellow Democrats to beef up programs while the state is flush and overcome Republican opposition to raising taxes that’s amplified by the state’s fiscal health.

Brown devoted much of his speech to warnings about the impact of an economic downturn and responding to critics in his own party who say he has shortchanged safety-net programs and ignored growing disparities in wealth and income.

Brown noted that California raised the minimum wage to $10 an hour and established an earned income tax credit this year, that it has mandated paid sick leave for employees and expanded student aid, welfare-to-work and in-home care programs. He noted that spending on K-12 education and community colleges has increased 51 percent since 2011.

“As the economic recovery reaches its end point and turns downward,” he said, “it is crucial that we honestly face and plan for these increased costs.”

To that end, he wants to funnel more money into the state’s rainy-day reserve fund and direct discretionary spending increases to debt relief and one-time projects such as reducing the deferred maintenance backlog at state parks and universities.

The governor’s line-item veto gives him an upper hand in budget battles, but he won’t prevail on taxes without a two-thirds vote in the Legislature. That will require support from a handful of Republicans even if he gets all the Democrats.

California has dramatically expanded its Medi-Cal program and reduced the number of uninsured residents since the Affordable Care Act passed, but the state stands to lose $1 billion in federal money unless it replaces a tax on Medi-Cal managed-care plans that provides matching state funds. Brown says the new mechanism he has proposed “is not a tax increase, no matter what anyone tells you.”