Robert Wheelwright and the Badgers are moving the ball on offense, but need more conversions in the red zone. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

Madison — The issue is not a secret.

Wisconsin's offense, hampered by too many changes on the line because of injuries and too few consistent playmakers, keeps hitting a red light in the red zone.

The solution is a cliché but true:

"We just need to finish," redshirt freshman offensive lineman Michael Deiter said.

That won't happen until UW stops making mistakes — mental and physical — at crucial times.

"I just always feel like there's one play every drive whether it's a penalty, a missed opportunity to make a play," senior wide receiver Alex Erickson said after UW's 24-7 victory over Purdue.

"There's just something like that that's just stopping us or putting it to a halt. But we'll watch the film and clean it up and we'll go from there."

The cleanup crew will need a variety of tools, as well as a combination of patience and persistence, because the mistakes UW made in the victory over the Boilermakers ran the gamut.

UW's second possession ended at the Purdue 16 when quarterback Joel Stave overthrew Robert Wheelwright, who was open running a crossing pattern. Strong safety Leroy Clark made an easy interception and his 66-yard return to the UW 29 led to a 7-7 tie.

One play before the interception, tailback Dare Ogunbowale was called for a false start, which put UW in a third-and-13 hole.

A penalty on tight end Troy Fumagalli (chop block) contributed to UW settling for a field goal instead of a touchdown on its third possession.

Instead of facing second and 7 at the Purdue 9, UW faced first and 25 at the 27 after the penalty.

UW's final possession of the first half ended with Purdue cornerback Anthony Brown penetrating over the left side of the Badgers' formation and blocking Rafael Gaglianone's 35-yard field-goal attempt.

Those miscues cost UW at least 10 points.

"I thought we did a great job moving the ball," Stave said, "a great job sustaining drives, converted a lot of first downs.

"But again, when we got down in the red zone, we didn't come away with as many points as we need to. That's something that we just got to keep working on."

UW scored touchdowns on both its red-zone chances in the second half, but two other possessions illustrated the mistakes that have plagued the offense.

The Badgers faced third and 5 from their 42 on their first series of the third quarter.

Right tackle Beau Benzschawel drew a flag for a false start, and Stave followed that with a delay-of-game penalty. On third and 15, Stave threw incomplete to George Rushing, though a holding penalty would have wiped out the play had it been successful.

On the next series, Stave went deep to Erickson on third and 9 from the Purdue 36.

Erickson got behind Clark but appeared to slow just a bit as the ball was in the air. Clark hit Erickson before the ball arrived, though no flag was thrown. Erickson still got both hands on the ball but could not make the catch.

"That one is going to eat at me all week," Erickson said. "I was trying to catch it over the shoulder and hold him off a little bit. I thought he grabbed me a little early, but the ball still touched my hands.

"It is one of those ones where you're going to watch the film, and it is going to eat at you until you get another shot at it."

In other words, if a receiver gets his hands on the ball he has to finish the play.

"Absolutely," Erickson said. "That is our motto."

The Badgers (5-2, 2-1 Big Ten), who face host Illinois this week, are 12th in the Big Ten in red zone offense with a conversion rate of 80.6% (25 of 31). They have 20 touchdowns, tied for the No. 1 mark in the Big Ten, but only six have come in league play.

"We kind of have our moments, and that's where we have to be strong enough to overcome the adversity," head coach Paul Chryst said.

"I think the group owns it. I like that about them, and so I feel like we can get better and I think we will."