Photo

WASHINGTON — Ben Sasse and Tom Cotton have a lot in common: Republican candidacies for the Senate, Ivy League advanced degrees — a Yale Ph.D. for Mr. Sasse, a Harvard law degree for Mr. Cotton — and a tour of duty in the white-shoe world of management consulting.

One more thing: They are running as common-man conservatives from the heartland under the banner of the Tea Party.

The résumés of Mr. Sasse, who won the Republican primary in Nebraska on Tuesday, and Mr. Cotton, who is challenging Senator Mark Pryor, Democrat of Arkansas, do not exactly fit the profile of populists. That is especially true for the lines dedicated to the Boston Consulting Group and McKinsey & Company, firms that advise corporations on strategy, efficiency and ways to increase profitability.

In Mr. Sasse’s case, he has used ties to McKinsey to burnish his private sector credentials, but in the process, he has stretched the point. He says on his campaign website that he “joined McKinsey & Company, advising leaders in times of crisis.” He was actually a “special adviser” to the firm, on an hourly contract — never an employee.

“Ben did a variety of work for a cross-section of clients while he was an external adviser to McKinsey,” said Jordan Gehrke, a Sasse campaign official, who suggested that it was a distinction without a difference.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Sasse’s video biography is titled “The Outsider: Leaving the Influence Peddlers Behind,” though consulting firms like McKinsey have shown outsize influence in staffing the White House and doing studies for government agencies.

Mr. Sasse has spent most of his adult life either in doctoral study, working at the Department of Health and Human Services during the Bush administration, teaching at the University of Texas or serving as the president of Midland University in Nebraska.

Yet his campaign website features a March 20 appearance on The Blaze, a conservative television network, during which the host, Glenn Beck, asked him to identify himself. “I’m a 42-year-old nonpolitician,” Mr. Sasse responded. “Most of my background is in business turnaround projects. So I’ve worked for Boston Consulting Group and McKinsey & Company.”

Photo

Yolande Daeninck, a spokeswoman for McKinsey, confirmed that Mr. Sasse served as an external adviser. She declined to comment further.

Most of Mr. Cotton’s adult life has been in academia and the military, and he has spent a year in Congress. His time at McKinsey was also barely more than a year, during which time his group leader, Bob Kocher, immersed him in the intricacies — and the value — of the Affordable Care Act. Mr. Kocher, as a senior Obama White House official, was one of the law’s primary architects.

The global offices of McKinsey are far more likely to empty into the Obama White House than Tea Party meetings. Beth Cobert, the deputy White House budget director for management, came from McKinsey, as did Byron Auguste, the deputy director of the National Economic Council.

Mr. Auguste’s predecessor at the council, Diana Farrell, also came from McKinsey. She helped write the Dodd-Frank Act, which overhauled regulation of Wall Street after the 2008 financial collapse.

This campaign cycle, McKinsey employees have favored Democrats only slightly, giving Democratic candidates $74,400 and Republican candidates $72,800. But in 2012, 64 percent of McKinsey employee contributions went to Democrats. In 2010, it was 57 percent, according to the Center for Responsive Politics.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

That Democratic tinge has not stopped Arkansas Democrats from trying to use McKinsey against Mr. Cotton. First, Democrats accused Mr. Cotton of working for health insurance companies to undermine Medicare and the health care law. Then, when Mr. Cotton refused to divulge his client list — discretion required by McKinsey — a former State Supreme Court justice filed an ethics complaint to force the release of the information.

David Ray, a Cotton campaign spokesman, said such gambits were having little impact on the race, though he did note that Arkansas Democrats were not attacking Chelsea Clinton for her stint at the firm.

“We think it’s a positive thing that Tom actually has experience working in the private sector,” Mr. Ray said. “I don’t think Mark Pryor can remember working in the private sector.”

Mr. Cotton and Mr. Sasse are not alone in seeking high office on a wave of Tea Party support. Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, educated at Princeton and Harvard, was propelled in his campaign by Tea Party activism.

Mr. Sasse stormed to victory in his three-way Republican primary, in large part because he was able to secure the endorsements of Washington groups aligned with the Tea Party, such as the Senate Conservatives Fund and the Madison Project. FreedomWorks, another Tea Party contributor, initially endorsed his opponent, Shane Osborn, a former state treasurer and himself a Tea Party activist, then switched to Mr. Sasse.