The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services released a report last week showing that Missouri can greatly improve access to behavioral health services for its residents by expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act. Substance use disorders and mental illness are prevalent and serious public health problems in American communities. In Missouri, 91,000 uninsured people with a mental illness or substance use disorder had incomes that could qualify them for expanded Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act in 2014, the most recent year for which data is available. The report also finds that people with behavioral health needs made up a substantial share of all low-income uninsured individuals: in Missouri, about 34.2 percent. While some of these individuals had access to some source of health insurance in 2014, many will only gain access to coverage if Missouri expands Medicaid, and others would gain access to more affordable coverage.

“Today’s report shows that Medicaid expansion is an important step Missouri can take to address behavioral health needs, including serious mental illness and opioid and other substance use disorders,” said Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell.

The report highlights that, along with its other benefits, Medicaid expansion would dramatically improve access to treatment for people with mental and substance use disorders, thereby improving health outcomes. Research shows that low-income adults with serious mental illness are significantly more likely to receive treatment if they have access to Medicaid coverage, with benefits for their health. The report estimates that if Missouri expanded Medicaid, 17,000 fewer individuals would experience symptoms of depression and 25,000 additional individuals would report being in good or excellent health.

To date, 30 states and the nation’s capital have expanded Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act. However, 20 states – including Missouri and many of the states that would benefit most – have not yet seized the opportunity. Previous studies have found that if these states do not change course, over 4 million of their citizens will be deprived of health insurance coverage in 2016.

States that choose to expand Medicaid may achieve significant improvement in their behavioral health programs without incurring new costs. State funds that currently directly support behavioral health care treatment for people who are uninsured but would gain coverage under expansion may become available for other behavioral health investments.

States can also expect to have a more productive workforce, because expanding treatment will permit a reduction in adverse workforce outcomes stemming from mental and substance use disorders. Research shows that depressed employees incur significantly more disability days than do otherwise similar employees, and substance use disorder treatment was associated with $5,366 annually in employer savings from reduced absenteeism alone.

President Obama recently proposed an extra incentive for states that have not yet expanded their Medicaid programs, which would provide any state that takes up Medicaid expansion the same three years of full Federal support and gradual phase down that those states that expanded in 2014 received.