Beyond specific recommendations, proposals and legislation for fixing the nation’s medical liability issues, there seems to be a growing sense—and mounting evidence— that “tort reform,” broadly construed, may not be effective at accomplishing what it’s supposed to. So where does that leave reformers and physicians?

Malpractice reformers have pursued many strategies in an attempt to rein in the nation’s malpractice costs and craft a system that benefits physicians, patients and the healthcare system as a whole. A growing body of evidence suggests that many “tort reform” efforts simply don’t accomplish what they’re intended to.

In fact, earlier this year the American College of Physicians (ACP) released a detailed position paper on malpractice reform that revisits many old ideas, according to some experts who follow reform efforts.

“It’s a pretty standard list of tort reform proposals,” says David Orentlicher, J.D., codirector of the Hall Center for Law and Health at the Indiana University McKinney School of Law.

Another malpractice expert goes further. “There’s nothing new here. Some of this stuff is literally decades old,” says Keith Hebeisen, J.D., former chairman of the American Bar Association’s Standing Committee on Medical Professional Liability.

Even the “newer” reforms on the ACP’s list typically are at least 10 years old, though some, such as safe harbors, have not been tried much in the United States, says Allen Kachalia, J.D., associate professor at the Harvard School of Public Health.



Patient safety

In its first recommendation, the ACP paper nods to quality control, then switches to “We should make it harder to sue doctors,” followed by suggestions how, says Bernard S. Black, J.D., of Northwestern University’s School of Law and Kellogg School of Management. “We don’t learn from our mistakes,” he says. “We need incentives for safety that are stronger than what we have now.”

For example, Black suggests, if a hospital makes a mistake, it should have to fix it at no cost to the patient. As things stand now, he says, “Hospitals get paid more if patients get complications.”

Orentlicher agrees with the paper’s emphasis on patient safety, but adds, “The medical profession hasn’t done enough to police itself.”

On a more positive note, both men like the ABIM Foundation’s Choosing Wisely campaign that aims to help patients choose care that is supported by evidence, does not duplicate other tests or procedures, is free from harm and is truly necessary.

Next: Damage caps