The Internal Revenue Service may be heading toward a dramatic reduction in personal interactions between the agency and taxpayers, the IRS’ in-house watchdog warned.

National Taxpayer Advocate Nina Olson said the future of taxpayer service is the most serious problem faced by taxpayers as part of an annual report to Congress that was released on Wednesday.

ADVERTISEMENT

The report identified and made recommendations about 24 of the most of the most serious problems taxpayers encounter.

Olson’s report describes two main concerns with the IRS’s “future state” plan, which lays out how the agency will operate in five years.

The first is that it implicitly intends for the IRS to substantially cut back on telephone and face-to-face service — an intention made explicit in internal discussions. The second is that the IRS is developing plans that would allow third parties like paid return preparers and software companies to do more to help taxpayers in cases where the online accounts are insufficient, which could increase costs for taxpayers.

“Reading between the lines of the IRS future state vision, the IRS appears to replace traditional IRS employee-to-taxpayer interaction with online and third-party interactions,” Olson said in the preface to the report. “That is, the vision essentially eliminates IRS-taxpayer personal interaction except in the context of enforcement actions.”

Olson said she understood why the IRS would want to adopt a system that deals with taxpayers en masse given its budget and workload constraints. However, she argued that “this approach transforms our tax system into a pay-to-play system” where only those with the expertise to navigate the self-help options or the resources to pay a third party to help them will be able to protect their rights.

Olson supports online taxpayer accounts but said that they won’t dramatically reduce demand for telephone and face-to-face interactions with the IRS.

Taxpayers have made more than 100 million telephone calls to the IRS and more than 5 million visits to walk-in sites annually in recent years. A large number of these contacts take place after tax returns are filed, which require IRS personnel to examine the details of a taxpayer’s account to respond, according to the report.

Olson also said that a focus on online accounts would put pressure on the IRS to allow unregulated return preparers access to them.

“The IRS should not even consider giving tax return preparers access to taxpayer account information until it is able to establish minimum standards for competence, to suspend preparers who engage in improper conduct, and to conduct background checks to weed out preparers with criminal records,” the report said. “To grant all preparers access to taxpayer accounts is to put taxpayers’ confidential tax information at risk.”

Olson recommended that the IRS publish the future state plan and seek public comment. She also suggested that Congress hold hearings in the next few months on the future state of IRS operations.

In addition to discussing problems with the future state plan, the report also discusses problems that undermine taxpayers’ rights, problems that waste IRS resources and problems that contribute to noncompliance with earned income tax credits.

Two of the problems concern ObamaCare.

Olson expressed concerns that the IRS’ implementation of employer provisions of the healthcare law could burden both employers and employees if certain issues are aren’t addressed. She also said that the IRS is compromising taxpayer rights as it implements provisions relating to ObamaCare’s premium tax credit and individual shared responsibility payment.

The report also stated that hundreds of thousands of taxpayers who file legitimate tax returns experience delays in receiving their refunds because of an increasing rate of false positives within anti-fraud filters.

The IRS said that Olson's report "does not paint a full picture of these evolving future state efforts," and the agency defended its interest in expanding online services.



"The IRS remains fully committed to personal service to taxpayers, and the IRS believes increasing the availability of self-service interaction frees up in-person resources for taxpayers who truly need them, including those who are not comfortable online or don’t have personal access to a computer," the agency said in a statement.

—Updated at 11:14 a.m.