A filthy kitchen in a house at Gilles Plains, the centre of a current child neglect case.

I WOULD challenge anyone to spend a day, a week or a month in a front-end team — go out into filthy houses and see dirty, hungry children with dead eyes who will cling to you indiscriminately for some kind of acknowledgment or affection.

Children who will ask you if they can come home with you, or will you be my mummy, to know that newborn babies are remaining at incredible risk in the care of totally inadequate, irresponsible, uncaring and drug-addicted parents.

And you can’t do anything about it because you don’t have the evidence you need to remove a baby straight away.

Try working with a child for years after they’ve been removed from neglectful and abusive parents, and they’re disabled, and they only have a few years of life due to the lack of care and protection they were entitled to.

Try going to their funeral when they haven’t reached puberty. See what it feels like to take a six-week-old baby to hospital because you’ve assessed he’s starving — the skin is hanging off him in folds, he makes no eye contact, he doesn’t take any notice of what’s happening around him because there’s no point, no-one has adequately responded to his needs.

When you ask the mother to accompany you to the hospital, she says she can’t because she “needs to clean up’’.

The infamous ‘House of Horrors’ home at Parafield Gardens, where children were cruelly treated.

So you take this poor little baby to the hospital and watch in horror as a nurse undresses him and you see his skeletal frame. You ask for a bottle to feed him and, when you do, he sucks furiously at the bottle because his mother couldn’t be bothered feeding him and he knew he’d have to take in as much as humanly possible before she got bored and stopped feeding him.

Picture what it’s like to go into a house where you can’t see the floor because of all the rubbish — there’s a rabbit with broken legs pulling itself along on the lounge room floor because it’s been abused by unsupervised children who simply act out what they’ve seen mum and dad do to each other and themselves.

“There’s a rabbit with broken legs pulling itself along on the lounge room floor because it’s been abused by unsupervised children who simply act out what they’ve seen mum and dad do to each other ...”

Go on a visit and see starving and ill-treated animals as well as children. Look into a client’s fridge and see no food for the children except a bowl of cooked rice and an old cabbage.

See children’s bedrooms with stained dirty mattresses on the floor and a rug or blanket to cover them. No sheets or pillows here. Try not to gag when you go into houses where the sun and fresh air never make their way in, where the smell is foul, there is faeces on the floor (and yes, not always from pets), where you can see cockroaches crawling up the floor.

You pick up a baby or child and notice their heads are covered in head lice so you try not to hold them too close.

Child-abuse victim Chloe Valentine.

Try not to be judgmental when you make a home visit and children are unsupervised and climbing on high furniture and jumping off, where you see little ones with nappies hanging down to their knees because they haven’t been changed since the previous day.

Turn up unexpectedly and you can interrupt a violent situation, remember what you need to do to protect yourself because you know last week someone was assaulted in the same circumstances.

Go to a hospital and see newborn babies who were conceived purely as a meal ticket for a mother who is so totally unable to parent — now or at any time in the future — and has been abusing alcohol and drugs throughout the pregnancy.

Inside SA’s ‘House of Horrors’

See the babies who you suspect have foetal alcohol syndrome, or the ones you know are a product of incest and will have lifelong disabilities.

Try making a home visit and there’s no answer, you become more worried, you call for police back-up, they break in and they find the body of your client who has overdosed.

You go to his funeral and sit there holding the hand of his drug-addicted partner who is due to give birth any day and who you’ve been trying to support and ensure that when the baby is born there will be adequate support in place.

Try going to work and having some violent client who is coming down from ice, threaten to kill you and threaten to steal your children. Try sleeping at night when that happens.

Try having nightmares about what you’ve seen and experienced and having to debrief with your supervisor, colleagues, friends, partners or your own psychologist so that you can resolve it enough to keep on working.

No, this isn’t New York or a Third World country or an impoverished community. This is Adelaide. This happens every day.

A neglected toddler is removed from a home at Parafield Gardens. Rabbits are removed from the house at Parafield Gardens.

It’s easy to go on a Families SA “bashing’’ exercise but spare a thought for the many, many committed social workers who do the most incredible job every day in caring for the most vulnerable in our community.

If only the public really understood what is happening in Families SA and how much extreme pressure social workers are under, there would be an absolute outcry for justice.

If only they knew how much professional, absolutely brilliant, positive and caring work is undertaken every day by workers who have their own families, their own issues, their own struggles and an unfailing commitment to their work, you would hang your heads in shame for standing by and not supporting them.

I’ve now moved on to another job because I need time for my heart and my soul to recover from the years of relentless stress in an organisation which is on its knees.

My pay is less, my job satisfaction is certainly not the same but I now have to look after myself and put myself and my partner first.

— as told to Political Reporter Lauren Novak

A day in the life of a typical Families SA social worker

8.30am/9am — arrive at office, check emails and overnight notes for any urgent cases.

10am — leave office or an access meeting between child in care and biological parents. May collect child for meeting, which usually lasts an hour and a half, before returning child to care placement.

1pm — back at office for lunch at desk, checking more emails and reports.

2pm — write up access meeting notes. May also arrange medical appointment or transport for a child, refer parents to support services, liaise with schools, attend staff meeting etc.

3pm — case meetings, such as for reunification of children with biological parents, or meeting with a family which has concerns. Record and distribute minutes from meetings.

Many workers report having to update files or complete other paper work after hours.

In some cases, workers remain at work until late evening trying to find a placement for a child or responding to emergencies.

Over a typical 39-hour week spend an average:

12 hours a week transporting children to contact visits

further 12 hours travelling to other meetings

7 hours attending contact meetings with families

7 hours on case notes, feedback to parents/carers, research, updating files, making phone calls

Finding better ways to defend the defenceless

Jennifer Rankine — Education and Child Development Minister

For most of us, the love and care of our parents is a given. But for some children in our community, this is not the reality. When details of child abuse and neglect hit headlines, it is deeply shocking. It’s hard to comprehend that anyone could treat a child so badly, and as a community we rightly seek answers.

For our part, the State Government has a strong commitment to strengthening child protection. When we came to government in 2002, child protection was a small part of the Department of Human Services. It made up $90 million of an enormous budget that included Health, Housing, and Youth Justice. Now, child protection is a large part of a department that is focused on young people and their families, from birth until age 18. We have more than tripled the budget to $325 million and doubled our care and protection workforce.

But no dollar figure can be put on the importance of the work of our frontline care and protection staff. Often, it is a thankless job where there is no clear-cut, simple answer. Every day they are faced with the extraordinarily difficult decision of whether to remove a child from their mum or dad. The decisions they make have long-lasting consequences for children and their families.

That’s why the best thing we as a community can do is find ways to better support families, before they get to crisis point. The Redesign Project in Families SA is about just that — focusing more on targeted, early intervention so that fewer children are in the situation where they have to leave their parents.

The challenges we face in child protection in South Australia are not unique — they are being felt across the nation. The answers will never be simple because the needs of those families we deal with will always be difficult. But our primary focus will always be what is in the best interests of those children we are there to protect and support.