Buy Photo The election for Nashville mayor is not until Aug. 6, with early voting beginning July 17. (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins / File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

If you don't care about the Nashville's mayoral race — or aren't ready to pay attention just yet — you're out of luck.

Anyone who watches television in the Nashville media market is in for pitches from candidates who want to be the city's next mayor. Some viewers have heard them already.

It's been a television advertising frenzy among a trio of contenders over the past week that has required big bucks. One has made an especially expensive play. And for several candidates who aren't on television yet, it's a calculation to determine how long to wait.

The wave began with an ad from Jeremy Kane that touted academic results of LEAD Academy, the Nashville charter school he founded. Then came attorney Charles Robert Bone with the first piece of a nearly $1 million plan to stay on television through election day — a 60-second commercial built around a neighborhood-centric campaign jingle. And on Wednesday, Bill Freeman joined the party with a TV spot that traces his upbringing in Donelson to his rise as a real estate giant.

Story continues below videos.

The game has started a full month before Karl Dean launched his presence on television in the 2007 mayoral race, which helped him go from a behind-the-scenes Metro law director to mayor of Nashville. But instead of one candidate controlling the tube like eight years ago, three have taken part.

It's all about first introductions. And despite the emergence of social media, television is still the dominant medium for political campaigns.

"The truth about this race is most of the candidates are not well known, and even those that are better known still aren't known well enough," said veteran political consultant Tom Ingram, who is working for Bone. "And so, the first act of the play is to build name identification. The second act is to build it in a positive way.

"The race is early, but if you're able to get to the play early, it's an advantage. If you're not it's a disadvantage that you have to overcome in some way later."

The election is not until Aug. 6, with early voting beginning July 17. The early focus on television shows why candidates with the deepest pockets have placed the bar as high as $2.5 million to compete through a likely September runoff. This race is on pace to shatter spending levels of eight years ago, and TV ads are the main reason why.

Early ads called an advantage

Former Democratic political operative Jim Hester, who served as campaign manager for Dean, called getting on TV in April a "big part" of why Dean was seen as a top alternative to former U.S. Rep. Bob Clement, who was the early front-runner in the 2007 race.

"One thing that was different about that race was that we had it to ourselves," said Hester, who is not working for a candidate this year. "We went up early, but that meant we had the field to ourselves for quite a long time. That multiplies the impact when you're able to do that. As you get into the summer, there's going to be so much clutter that it becomes more difficult to cut through — the clutter of all the advertising, the clutter of all the different campaigns.

"The closer you wait until election day, the harder it is to penetrate. So the campaign that has the ability to go on early, it's very helpful. The difficulty, of course, is the ability to sustain that over time."

Keeping a commercial on air is expensive. And money expected in this year's race has prompted a public response and strategy from one candidate — Davidson County Criminal Court Clerk Howard Gentry, Nashville's former vice mayor, who is expected to finish last in fundraising and yet might currently lead the pack of candidates in name recognition.

"While millions may be spent and promises made by others, remember this," Gentry said in a robocall that went out to Nashvillians last weekend. "I am Nashville. I'm one of you. I'll never forget where I come from. Together, we are Nashville.

"Vote Howard Gentry for mayor," it continues. "I won't buy your vote. I will earn your vote."

So far, only Bone has made a significant media play. He's outlined plans to pay $923,000 to stay on television until election day and has reserved slots on all major networks and Comcast cable channels, including targeted time during the NCAA Men's Basketball Tournament, which began this week. In January, he reported having only $491,556 campaign cash on-hand, raising the possibility of another personal loan on top of a $200,000 loan from last summer.

More are likely to follow Bone's television path. While Freeman, a wealthy real estate executive, has started with a $39,670 television buy for two weeks, he has said he will spend whatever it takes to be competitive. Kane, on the other hand — while the first to officially go on TV — started with just a $25,000 buy and isn't expected to have the money to continue his ads like Bone and Freeman.

On Friday, Kane announced a series of 11 town-hall-style meetings across Nashville called "Just Jeremy" that will feature only himself and voters.

"Some candidates will spend their millions on 19 weeks of television," Kane spokesman Darden Copeland said. "We will spend the next 19 weeks hosting town hall meetings with voters across Davidson County. Instead of 60-second advertisements, Jeremy will have 60-minute conversations."

What do others have planned?

The sudden arrival of commercials has fueled speculation about plans of others. Former hedge fund operator David Fox is probably best positioned financially to spend early on television, having pumped more than $1 million in personal resources into his campaign this past winter.

But Chris Turner, campaign manager for Fox, questioned the early television buys of others — "too early, too pricey for what you get in the long run," he said. He still tipped his cap to his competitors, calling them "sharp folks" who have run successful races. "Maybe they're crazy like a fox," he said.

"For our part, we're focused more on hitting solid singles every day, to use a baseball analogy, rather than swinging for the fences every now and then," Turner said. "Team Fox has a plan. We've set aside a very large, seven-figure number for TV, but we're not going up anytime soon."

Competing on television has long been perceived a hurdle for at-large Councilwoman Megan Barry, who enjoys perhaps the race's most loyal base of supporters but could be limited financially compared with others. (This is the case even though she is trailing only Bone right now when it comes to actual financial contributions from supporters.)

"Megan believes that in Nashville the size of your accomplishments still matter more than the size of your personal fortune," Barry campaign spokesman Sean Braisted said. He pointed to Barry's record of partnership with Dean and her "leading progressive voice on the Metro Council" for creating a base of grass-roots support "that will power the campaign to victory."

Then there's Linda Eskind Rebrovick, a former business executive who needs a boosting of name recognition to be competitive. Some observers believe she is a good bet to begin advertising soon, but her campaign is revealing nothing at this point.

"We have an aggressive TV strategy aimed at engaging Davidson County residents through thoughtful and substantive messaging that highlights Linda's qualifications and ideas for Nashville's smart growth," campaign manager Ally Letsky said.

As they say on television, stay tuned.

Television commercials in Nashville's mayoral race

Candidate: Charles Robert Bone, attorney at Bone, McAllester, Norton

TV channels: WSMV-TV, WTVF-5, WKRN-TV, WZTV-17, Comcast cable channels

Dollar amounts: $923,000 in slots reserved to stay on until election day

Commercial title, message and quote: "Connected." Uses a campaign jingle, recites neighborhoods of Nashville and repeatedly says "Bone."

"A good man. An entrepreneur. Knows business. Knows government. A mayor for all of us to continue Nashville's progress."

Candidate: Bill Freeman, founder of Freeman Webb Co.

Channels: WSMV-TV, WTVF-5, WKRN-TV, WZTV-17

Dollar amount: $39,670 to air through March

Commercial title, message and quote: "Freeman future." Traces upbringing in Donelson to founding Freeman Webb Co.

"I'm Bill Freeman, and just like you, I love Nashville. I have lived the Nashville version of the American Dream."

Candidate: Jeremy Kane, founder of LEAD Public Schools, a Nashville charter school network

Channels: WSMV-TV, WTVF-5, WKRN-TV, WZTV-17

Amount paid: $25,000 for commercial spots through March

Commercial message: "Results." Boasts that LEAD graduated 100 percent of seniors last year.

"I learned firsthand that a good education takes more than a great teacher. It takes affordable housing, reliable transit and safe neighborhoods."

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1C9baq7