By Rachel Feltman

It’s widely accepted these days that cooking helped make us human. It’s easier to use energy from cooked food than raw, so pre-modern humans who dabbled in roasting had the energy surplus they needed to develop better brains, not to mention the time to sit around and think deep thoughts with them.

According to a study in the Quarterly Review of Biology, cooked meat and veggies shouldn’t get all the credit. Without carbohydrates, it argues, the switch to cooked food wouldn’t have packed nearly as big of a punch.

For starters, scientists generally believe that meat and cooking were totally integral to human evolution. To survive on a plant-based diet, especially a raw one, without the aid of modern conveniences like grocery stores and refrigeration, a human would have to spend pretty much all his or her time finding food.

So it’s not news that cooking is important in an evolutionary sense. But based on this study, those set on a “paleo” diet might want to make sure they’re not cutting out too many carbs.

The researchers, led by Karen Hardy of the University of York and the Autonomous University of Barcelona, basically argue that the human brain relies heavily on glucose and that a lack of carbs makes it hard to keep your brain satisfied. That’s true: When your body’s glucose stores are low, your brain starts to look for energy from other sources. The results are less than ideal.

The researchers also point out that humans have around three times as many copies of the gene used to make the enzyme that turns carbs into simple sugars — salivary amylase — as other primates do. Based on genetic analysis, they say, this adaptation cropped up around 1 million years ago.

The spread of cooking is thought to have started around 2 million years ago, or perhaps a bit later. It would make sense, the researchers argue, if the genetic adaptation that made us efficient carb eaters cropped up after a few generations of cooking. Infants whose mothers had more access to glucose from cooked carbs would have had higher survival rates, and carbs may have played a part in the boost in brain size seen about 800,000 years ago.

The hypothesis doesn’t sound too wild, though researchers will certainly have to do more work putting together the archaeological and genetic evidence. But it’s worth considering as you decide what “unnatural” foods to cut from your diet — if that’s what you’re into.

All that being said, it’s important to remember that a roasted potato is very different from, say, a giant bowl of pasta. One may have led us to bigger brains, but the other is probably leading us to bigger bellies.