Opinion

S.F. must act again in fight against tuberculosis



































Photo: Frederic Larson, SFC Image 1 of / 10 Caption Close Image 1 of 10 Dr. Charles Crane examines an X-ray of a tuberculosis patient in 1999. During that time, the disease had been a major health problem in West Contra Costa County. There are concerns about more problems occurring today in California. less Dr. Charles Crane examines an X-ray of a tuberculosis patient in 1999. During that time, the disease had been a major health problem in West Contra Costa County. There are concerns about more problems occurring ... more Photo: Frederic Larson, SFC Image 2 of 10 A woman gets set up for an X-ray in 1955 as part of checking for tuberculosis in San Mateo County. Below: A map from 1960 shows how many tuberculosis cases there were in various San Francisco districts. A woman gets set up for an X-ray in 1955 as part of checking for tuberculosis in San Mateo County. Below: A map from 1960 shows how many tuberculosis cases there were in various San Francisco districts. Photo: SFChron File Image 3 of 10 Image 4 of 10 This map from 1960 shows how many tuberculosis cases there were in various S.F. districts. This map from 1960 shows how many tuberculosis cases there were in various S.F. districts. Image 5 of 10 HEALTH 3/23JUL95/MN/MACOR "SU SALUD" Health Fair at the San Joaquin County Fairgrounds draws 15,000 people for health check ups and information. Line of peolple wait for a Tuberculosis Test. Chronicle Photo: Michael Macor less HEALTH 3/23JUL95/MN/MACOR "SU SALUD" Health Fair at the San Joaquin County Fairgrounds draws 15,000 people for health check ups and information. Line of peolple wait for a Tuberculosis Test. Chronicle ... more Photo: Michael Macor Image 6 of 10 May 12, 1993 S.F. City Health worker, Chris Zanca, (a former travel agent) provides medication to a patient with Turberculosis as part of a program which includes a daily visit from a health worker who makes sure he takes his medication. This program is helping to prevent the spread of the disease in San Frnacisco. less May 12, 1993 S.F. City Health worker, Chris Zanca, (a former travel agent) provides medication to a patient with Turberculosis as part of a program which includes a daily visit from a health worker who makes ... more Photo: Deanne Fitzmaurice Image 7 of 10 Ma, 12, 1993 S.F. City Health worker, Chris Zanca, (a former travel agent) provides medication to Stephanie Wiles in her tenderloin apartment. Stephanie has Turberculosis and is one of the patients involved in a program which includes a daily visit from a health worker who makes sure she takes her medication. This program is helping to prevent the spread of the disease in San Frnacisco. less Ma, 12, 1993 S.F. City Health worker, Chris Zanca, (a former travel agent) provides medication to Stephanie Wiles in her tenderloin apartment. Stephanie has Turberculosis and is one of the patients involved in ... more Photo: Deanne Fitzmaurice Image 8 of 10 JAN 23, 1955 From L-R Medical social worker Miss Sara Boddinghouse sits with Miss A.R. and vocational counselor Mr. Howard Wolcott. This is a part of the master plan for eradication of Turberculosis. San Mateo County, California. less JAN 23, 1955 From L-R Medical social worker Miss Sara Boddinghouse sits with Miss A.R. and vocational counselor Mr. Howard Wolcott. This is a part of the master plan for eradication of Turberculosis. San Mateo ... more Image 9 of 10 JAN 23, 1955 L-R Mrs. Beckwith, Mrs. R.M. Anderson, Miss A.R. and Mrs. Rowland in Ms. Anderson's room before she leaves. This is a part of the master plan for eradication of Turberculosis. San Mateo County, California. less JAN 23, 1955 L-R Mrs. Beckwith, Mrs. R.M. Anderson, Miss A.R. and Mrs. Rowland in Ms. Anderson's room before she leaves. This is a part of the master plan for eradication of Turberculosis. San Mateo County, ... more Photo: SFC File Image 10 of 10 S.F. must act again in fight against tuberculosis 1 / 10 Back to Gallery

In 1915, the San Francisco Association for the Study and Prevention of Tuberculosis, led by civic leaders including Jesse W. Lilienthal, A.H. Giannini and Ethel Crocker, wife of prominent banker William H. Crocker, issued a plea to the citizens of San Francisco to take tuberculosis more seriously. Their report, suggesting that residents did not fully realize the appalling level of mortality or the real potential for disease prevention, urged that the city would gain "an enviable reputation by fearlessly fighting it," according to the state medical journal.

Just a few years before, San Francisco had finally opened a tuberculosis department on the grounds of the new General Hospital. Seven wooden structures maximized the sunshine and ventilation thought necessary for a cure. The rooms for 150 patients were a big step up from the revamped horse stalls at the Ingleside racetracks and old Presidio buildings where "lungers" had been stashed. But, by the association's judgment, the city's response was still sorely inadequate.

Today, San Francisco is once again confronted by surprisingly high rates of tuberculosis, despite an all-time low of active disease and transmission across the nation. And once again, we can choose to take the lead or suffer a new surge of tuberculosis in our community. Today, public health officials warn, high rates of reactivation among elderly immigrants, missed diagnoses by physicians and declining public health infrastructure pose worrisome risks. Basic drugs and tests are in chronic short supply. It's important to remember, said George Rutherford, a professor of epidemiology at UC San Francisco, that tuberculosis "gets out control really fast."

Young San Francisco dragged its feet in attending to the coughing, gaunt, tuberculous newcomers who first arrived with the Gold Rush and then kept coming. Local boosters and railroad flyers even wooed sickly migrants with promises of the mild winters and refreshing breezes thought necessary for better health. And even though the city had passed an antispitting ordinance, the 1915 association report complained that the law was not enforced by police nor properly punished by fines or imprisonment.

Finally, growing awareness of the infectious nature of the disease - and perhaps pressure from the California Tuberculosis Commission - galvanized residents. By 1927, San Francisco won accolades for its "state of the art" sanitarium facility on 300 acres in Redwood City. The San Francisco Health Farm, according to historians Michael Svanevik and Shirley Burgett, eventually offered 260 beds in 14 villas stepped along the hillside, plus one building just for children. Physicians visited from around the country, and the Pacific Rim learned advanced techniques for care and prevention.

And tuberculosis eventually did recede, in part because of systematic screening and the discovery of antibiotics. Later, San Francisco led other effective interventions, such as a patient-centered approach to help people through treatment with transportation, housing, meals and more convenient clinics.

But in the mid-1980s, the nearly forgotten disease swept back into urban areas. This time, San Francisco researchers quickly responded, applying a DNA fingerprinting technique combined with contact tracing to follow and intercept TB's spread. Their discoveries yielded a fundamentally new understanding of the organism that causes the disease and of better ways to address it.

Since then, San Francisco's TB Control Program has continued to experiment with prevention and care, including improved translation services for immigrants, outreach to people with HIV and screening in homeless shelters. A new program using videos captured on cell phones may make it easier to ensure that patients complete their six months of medication. Tuberculosis experts seem optimistic that new diagnostics and treatments that act more quickly with fewer side effects are on the way.

But public complacency, along with changes in health delivery brought about by the Affordable Care Act, could turn this rosy picture around. The act does put more people into the health system and is likely to create opportunities for infections to be caught earlier and more often. But TB so far is not included as a routine prevention activity. Screening, diagnosis and treatment of the latent form of TB generally are not part of fully covered preventive care, according to Julie Higashi, San Francisco's tuberculosis controller.

Furthermore, Higashi and other TB experts add, primary care physicians need help in diagnosing and treating this complex and often hidden disease. Three times as many people die from tuberculosis under the care of private doctors as die while being treated by the public health system, according to a study of three years of data by California's Tuberculosis Control Branch.

As long as it remains a center of global commerce, innovation and tourism, San Francisco will be susceptible to tuberculosis. Infections come to light routinely in startups, technology companies and multinational corporations, according to Higashi. "It's all over the place," she says.

San Francisco finally came to terms with tuberculosis nearly a century ago. Today, let's remember the city's history of innovation and collaboration in public health and not let this long-forgotten disease come roaring back.