[Updated at 8:30 p.m.]

The Interstate 45 near Corsicana reopened Sunday morning after dozens of miles of the highway were shut down throughout the weekend due to flooding, according to reports from our partners at KXAS-TV (NBC5).

Troopers from the Texas Department of Public Safety shut down 35 miles of I-45 from Friday night through Sunday morning because of dangerous weather conditions, NBC reported.

Levee breach at FM 1126 west of I-45. 1126 will be closed. #dfwwx pic.twitter.com/CicOU5sCud — Navarro County OEM (@NavarroOEM) October 25, 2015

Though the I-45 is clear, street closures throughout Navarro County carried on through Sunday. The Navarro County Office of Emergency Management reported a breach in a levee at FM 1126, just west of I-45, Sunday afternoon.

FM 1126 has been closed including the bridge that crosses Chambers Creek. FM 1126 is a significant road through the main part of the county, said County Judge H.M. Davenport, the director of the Office of Emergency Management.

The bridge will be closed for the foreseeable future, he said. An assessment from TxDOT will have to wait until the water subsides.

Davenport said he does not know of any danger to anyone living in the area.

Here is a list and map of current road closures in Navarro County as of 20:00 Sunday. #dfwwx #DFWTraffic pic.twitter.com/SaYaZe5ah9 — Navarro County OEM (@NavarroOEM) October 26, 2015

According to reports from The Corsicana Daily Sun, the Blooming Grove Independent School District, Dawson Independent School District and Mildred Independent School District canceled Monday classes due to road closures and flooding issues. Classes for all districts are expected to resume Tuesday, according to reports.

Corsicana ISD will have a delayed start of 10 a.m. for travel concerns.

As of 7 a.m. Sunday, Corsicana received just over 21 inches of rain during the weekend’s downpour, according to the National Weather Service in Fort Worth.

Here’s a map of storm total rainfall thru 7AM today. There was an unofficial report of 28.9″ in Dawson, TX. #dfwwx pic.twitter.com/v6XHI1ebjK — NWS Fort Worth (@NWSFortWorth) October 25, 2015

A flash flood warning from the Navarro County Office of Emergency Management remained in effect until 6:30 p.m. Sunday.

Earlier in the downpour, the flooding caused a Union Pacific train in the area to derail late Friday night when a creek overflowed and washed away the tracks.

No injuries were reported in the incident.

Read more from NBC 5 here.