California’s asset forfeiture laws unethical

I am deeply disappointed that the majority of the legislative delegation in our region — State Sen. Connie Leyva D-Chino, Assembly members Ling Ling Chang, R-Chino Hills, and Marc Steinorth, R-Rancho Cucamonga — rejected Senate Bill 443, a bipartisan attempt to reform asset forfeiture in our state.

I find it unethical that law enforcement and municipalities can seize property without conviction.

Asset forfeiture is a controversial tool to reduce crime because the municipalities are given a percentage of the seized property and they are reluctant to give the property back, even when the person is found innocent or not charged with a crime.

Asset forfeiture is legalized theft and the practice needs accountability if it continues to be used by law enforcement in our state.

I know city governments are hurting for cash, but this is one technique that should not be their primary bread and butter.

Cities should learn to recruit business, residents and tourists instead of behaving like Mexican police officers. If you are fed up with this process, feel free to let your legislators know.

— Matthew Munson, Ontario

Why no picture of car owner’s 1970 Camaro?

Re “Route 66 Cruisin’ Reunion in Ontario celebrates classic cars” (Sept. 19):

Am I the only one that was disappointed by the front page story regarding Lawana Copeland’s passion for restoring her 1970 Chevy Camaro?

Wouldn’t it have been nice to see a picture of both her and her car in the story? Instead, we saw pictures of other owners’ vehicles, but not hers. I just thought it would have made a more meaningful story.

— Glenn Norden, Upland

Cal State San Bernardino has a lot to offer students

Re “Cal State San Bernardino kicks off 50th year” (Sept. 21):

The recent 50th anniversary convocation address presented by Cal State University San Bernardino (CSUSB) President Tomás D. Morales summarized the amazing success of the university since its origination.

But beyond that, it was mind-boggling to learn that more than 20,000 students are enrolled in higher-education studies at the beautiful campus.

I am pleased that two of my children hold a Cal State San Bernardino degree, and I was also able to advance my own knowledge within the university’s academic studies program.

Advertisement

As a senior citizen, I want to encourage more “over 50” residents to investigate the educational enrichment that CSUSB has to offer, as I did while a senior citizen.

There should be ample opportunity to learn more about CSUSB during the upcoming year during special 50th anniversary events, academic lectures and conferences, as CSUSB celebrates continuous service to regional communities as well as serving its hometown city of San Bernardino!

— Joan Marie Patsky, Beaumont

Some thoughts on Pope Francis’ visit to U.S.

After reading newspapers, viewing news coverage on TV and then listening to Pope Francis’ address to Congress and the United Nations, it was disturbingly obvious that the Pope has been unduly influenced by President Obama regarding the distribution of wealth, the Affordable Care Act, U.S. relations with Cuba, the bad Iran nuclear deal and climate change — which is a social, political and economic shame.

It was, however, heartening to hear Pope Francis’ strong support of life at conception, traditional marriage, family and America.

— Daniel B. Jeffs, Apple Valley