Yale-New Haven Health System is shutting down a clinic in Branford and another in East Haven in an effort to address significant cuts in state funding.

Vin P. Petrini, senior vice president of Public Affairs at Yale-New Haven Hospital, said after taking a careful look at finances following dramatic state budget cuts, the hospital has decided to close facilities in East Haven on Foxon Road and Branford on North Main Street.

No other facilities operated by the hospital are scheduled to be closed, Petrini said

“We are working very hard to manage the type of cuts that came down,” Petrini said.

Advertisement

Closing the clinics will help the hospital save approximately $1 million, Petrini said. The hospital took a brunt of the cuts made to hospitals in the state: of the $105 million cut in hospital funding, 56 percent, or about $58 million, was for Yale-New Haven Hospital, Petrini said.

Petrini said about 31 employees at the two sites will be affected by the closure and have been informed of the hospital’s decision. He said that the hospital is making an effort to “find positions within our existing vacancies in the health system.”

Clinic Associate Director Debbie Borisjuk confirmed employees at the facility at 317 Foxon Road in East Haven have been informed of the hospital’s plan to shut down the clinic, but declined further comment. An employee at the Branford outpatient facility at 84 N. Main St. also confirmed employees have been told about the closure, without providing further comment.

Patients receiving services from the two sites can continue to receive assistance at the hospital’s clinic in North Haven at 6 Devine St., Petrini said. They also can seek care at other hospital clinics in Hamden and New Haven.

The facility in East Haven provides urgent care and occupational health services, while the Branford location also offers occupational health services in addition to physical therapy.

The hospital system is the biggest provider of Medicaid in the state. Medicaid enrollment has increased significantly after requirements were expanded several years ago, Petrini said, but while enrollment has grown, funding has dropped dramatically.

According to the federal Medicaid website, as of March 2015, Connecticut has 726,253 people enrolled in the program.

David Dearborn, a spokesman for the state Department of Social Services, said that as of May, there has been a sharp increase from the 592,128 enrolled in 2012. More people than ever before are insured due to enactment of the Affordable Care Act, which expanded the Medicaid program, Dearborn said.

“This means that hospitals and affiliated services are seeing more insured patients and fewer uninsured,” Dearborn said in an email. “As more (state) residents have health coverage overall, the more revenue sources hospitals see and the less uncompensated care they have to provide.”

Petrini said the hospital must file a certificate of need before closing the two facilities, which he said hospital officials soon will do. The certificate is reviewed by the state, which makes a final decision.

Petrini said he hopes hospital cuts are addressed when the state legislature holds a special session this month.

Reach Esteban L. Hernandez at 203-680-9901.