Music

Classic: Jon Bon Jovi at ANZ Stadium on Saturday. Photo: Steve Lunam

Most of us wouldn't know if he was an altar boy or choirboy or just Mrs Bongiovi's good boy back in Perth Amboy, New Jersey. But what we do know is that if Jon Bon Jovi said his prayers this week they were heard as a cloudy Sydney Saturday never matured into a rainy night.

When you have asked 50,000-odd people to sit outdoors at ANZ Stadium to watch you play on a stage set up ''under the bonnet'' of a classic American car, when they could be watching the last session of the cricket or sitting on a proper seat in a restaurant somewhere, such things matter. Particularly when the band is missing its other iconic figure, guitarist Richie Sambora, a mysterious absence since quitting mid-tour in April.

But maybe we are doing Bon Jovi a disservice by suggesting anything, even weather, has been left to merely, ahem, living on a prayer. (Come on, you would have said it, too. And since it's the last song of the show, we can't wait all night for the only gag.)

Attention to detail has been a feature of his band since grafting Rod Stewart (the hair, the sex appeal) onto fellow Jerseyite Bruce Springsteen (the working class championing, the heartland rock) 30 years ago. You don't sell millions of albums, inspire a stonewash denim generation and buy yourself a sports league by chance. You certainly don't do it by cracking wise or making life hard for your fans with complex songs, subtle lyrics or wet weather.

Advertisement

So attention was paid to detail such as making sure your support act, Kid Rock, is complementary but not likely to earn so many compliments that attention will be drawn from you.

And detail like if you choose to start with a new song, the oddly named That's What The Water Made Me, you make sure it has the right lyrical cues (''Baby … there's devils in heaven, there's angels in hell'') and the right musical cues (anthemic build, guitars rocking but not too much, synths set underneath) to catch even those fans who haven't bought much since 1986's Slippery When Wet.

Speaking of which, the final detail to open your stadium show is following the new song with one of those ''classics'' from '86, the boom crash schlock opera of You Give Love a Bad Name. Shot to the heart indeed, Bon Jovi play their part and who are we to blame them?

Bon Jovi play again, indoors, at the Entertainment Centre on Sunday.