Monday she appeared on the “Today” show in New York City to announce she was turning pro. Tuesday she spent six hours with her new agent at her family’s dining room table in Centennial, discussing career goals. Wednesday she went shopping at Park Meadows, looking for shoes to match a dress for a gala in Nashville on Saturday where she would be honored as one of Ten Outstanding Young Americans.

That last task might have been the toughest in Missy Franklin’s first week as a professional swimmer. Finding the perfect shoes in a size 12 can be an ordeal.

“Shoe shopping for me is always a mess,” Franklin said during a shopping break. “By the grace of God, I found the perfect pair of shoes, which never happens, so I am extremely happy.”

She also was enjoying the afterglow that came from leading California to an NCAA championship last weekend in her final meet as an amateur. The win was especially emotional because the Golden Bears finished third last year.

“We were really disappointed with how we did last year,” Franklin said. “We made a decision as a team, almost immediately when we got home, that we could be better and we were going to be better.

“The feeling of walking over to your team, hugging everyone, knowing you just accomplished what you’ve been working so hard for, for 10 months, it’s just unbelievable.”

That’s something Franklin will miss as a professional. She loved being part of teams at Cal and Regis Jesuit High School. The races at the 2012 London Olympics that meant the most to her were relays.

“Winning really doesn’t mean anything if you have no one to share it with,” Franklin said. “It’s not going to mean anything unless you have those people who will be so excited for you, who’ve supported you and you know they’ve had a piece in that. When I’m on a national championship team, a high school state championship team, a gold medal-winning relay, I get to do it with people I love, with people I care about. Sharing in that joy and that success and that love, that is incredibly fulfilling to me.

“Obviously I get a huge sense of fulfillment and happiness when it’s individual as well, but for me, it’s even more special and it’s really amplified when I get to share it with other people.”

Now she is on the WME-IMG team, led by agent Mark Ervin, who also represents skier Lindsey Vonn.

“He understands my main goal in my career is to inspire people,” Franklin said. “I need a platform to inspire, and that’s what I think being a professional athlete is going to give me: being able to reach more people, getting myself out there so I can share my story, so I can share other people’s stories who have inspired me. I’m so looking forward to that and what’s going to come.”

So are her parents, Richard and DA.

“It’s going to be fun,” Richard said. “It’ll be fun for us because we can get out of the agency business and just be Mom and Dad.”

This week Missy returns to Cal to finish a semester that ends in May. With the world championships looming in August and her second Olympics a year after that, in Rio, Franklin plans to reduce her class schedule. She never has had the luxury of preparing for major events without carrying a full class load.

She is determined to get her degree, but doesn’t plan to carry a full course load until the spring of 2017.

Franklin hasn’t decided whether to find a new coach or remain with Cal’s Teri McKeever. One problem is that she will be training and racing all over the world, but McKeever’s focus has to be on her college coaching.

“There’s definitely a bit of an unknown,” Franklin said. “I have incredible options, and I still need to sit down with Teri. We need to have a really long talk.”

Turning 20 in May, Franklin figures to have three more Olympics and has begun to talk about the possibility of becoming the most decorated female Olympic swimmer of all time. She has five medals now (four gold). Jenny Thompson, Dara Torres and Natalie Coughlin are tied for the most (12).

“One of the things Teri taught me is that it’s OK to say what your dreams and goals are,” Franklin said. “I think it would be amazing to be the most decorated female Olympic swimmer of all time. That’s a huge goal, that’s unbelievably lofty, and I have incredible women before me who have set the bar so high. I may reach it, I may not, but either way I’m going to fight for it. That’s the exciting part.”

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnmeyer