Topics: Canada, China, Editor's Picks, Hong Kong, Immigration, Narratively, Toronto, Social News, Life News

This article originally appeared on Narratively

“It’s a totally brand new city. I don’t recognize anything,” my mom says, gazing wide-eyed out of the decades-old tram and into the chaotic streets of Hong Kong. “I never used to take the ding ding. It’s so slow,” she complains as the tram operator rings the bell twice to alert pedestrians nearby — emitting a characteristic sound that gives the tram its Cantonese nickname. “But actually it’s kind of nice. You can take your time to see the scenery around you.”

More from Narratively: “Kids, We’re Moving to Greenland”

It’s been 33 years since she moved from Hong Kong to Toronto and four months since I did the opposite. This is how I became my mother’s tour guide in her own hometown.

More from Narratively: “How an International Man of Mystery Scammed My Grandma”

The crowded streets that are familiar to me are now unrecognizable to her. I guide her through the modern subway system, which was constructed after her departure, and advise her on the best bus routes to take when she meets up with her old school friends. We walk together through Central, the city’s financial district, among 70-story skyscrapers and modern steel structures that my mother has never seen before. I introduce her to some of the great local restaurants I’ve discovered; she uses her Cantonese fluency to order dishes that aren’t on the English menu.

More from Narratively: “Can German Atonement Teach America to Finally Face Slavery”

Together, we are the ultimate Hongkonger.

My mom comments on how much my Cantonese has improved while we devour her expertly-ordered meal. This food that I’m enjoying and the language I’m eagerly practicing is in stark contrast to the attitudes of my youth.

I credit my childhood apathy towards my mother’s culture to the whitewashed Toronto suburb I grew up in, where I was one of three Chinese kids in an elementary school of 300. I wanted nothing more than to be just like my white Canadian peers with their Wonder Bread sandwiches and after-school ballet classes. Instead I was forced into weekly piano lessons, which I loathed, and fed traditional Chinese meals of steamed meat and stir-fried vegetables over heaping bowls of rice that I thought were bland.

My mother put me in Chinese school on the weekends to learn her native tongue, but replacing my Saturday morning cartoons with rote repetition of stroke order and Chinese characters instilled in me a repulsion of the language. Whenever she spoke to me in Cantonese, I’d understand perfectly but reply back in English.

There’s a Cantonese slang phrase to describe people like me: jook sing. The term originates from the knot in a reed of bamboo that prevents water from flowing from one end to the other. “You look at bamboo. It looks like it should be all hollow, but actually there are parts where it’s closed inside,” my mom explains. “That’s like you. You look like you’re Chinese but you’re not really Chinese because you do not understand the language and the culture.” It’s meant to be derogatory, and it works. My mother and relatives would tease me, my sister and my cousins for being jook sing when we spoke our accented Cantonese or used our chopsticks incorrectly.

Witnessing her children stuck between two cultures must have been frustrating for my mother too. While she moved to Canada to live and raise kids in a western environment, with western values and beliefs, she didn’t know what the norms were. She had only her own childhood experience to draw from. Growing up in poverty, she adopted an eat-or-be-eaten attitude as the second eldest of six siblings. She witnessed how her father’s strong work ethic brought him from low-level garment seamster to factory foreman and, later, top-level manager. My mother was taught by strict Catholic nuns at an all-girls high school, which undoubtedly influenced her own parenting style. The chaotic city life and incredible academic, societal and economic pressures of Hong Kong are what eventually pushed my mom out of the city.

Between the time my mom left in 1976 and the handover of Hong Kong from the British to the Chinese, a slew of Hongkongers fled to the west. I went to high school in a city that was popular with recent Hong Kong immigrants and their children, who became my classmates. I befriended many but I could never really relate, instead seeking distance from them and my mother’s heritage. When I registered for university and renewed my passport I omitted my Chinese middle name on the application forms, thinking it might make me seem less Chinese and more Canadian.

It wasn’t until I was removed from this environment that I recognized the gap in my identity. In my third year of university, I spent a year abroad, studying in Copenhagen and traveling through Europe. I visited parts of the world where the concepts of immigration and visible minorities were virtually unheard of. I once met a group of young Croatian girls at a bar in Dubrovnik’s Old City, celebrating a friend’s eighteenth birthday. They fawned over my foreign appearance, a rarity in Eastern Europe. “China! You’re from China?” one of the girls asked in a tone that wasn’t racist but inquisitively earnest.

“No,” I said, feeling, for the first time ever, ashamed in my eventual reply. “Actually, I’ve never been.”

* * *

Growing up with my mother and among other Chinese immigrants I never once imagined that I might live in Hong Kong one day. But then I graduated from university on the brink of a recession with no job prospects at home. Hong Kong was a natural destination. I easily found work with an English teaching agency and was trained with 60 other expatriates, mostly white and from the UK.

Skills that I snubbed in my adolescence now gave me an edge above the typical new arrival to the city. Over heavily-accented Cantonese I negotiated with my landlord for cheaper rent. I enjoyed blending in with the crowd, slipping into clothing stores and shopping for groceries unnoticed, until my accented Cantonese outed me as a foreigner. While my new colleagues fumbled with their chopsticks at group lunches, skeptically eyeing the steaming bamboo baskets of curried cuttlefish, shrimp dumplings and pillow-y white buns with mystery fillings, I found comfort in these dishes that were more familiar to me than the strangers I was seated with.

These strangers did eventually become my friends. But over time, as my social networks expanded past the English teachers I first arrived with, I met more and more expatriates like myself — the children of Hong Kong immigrants who were born, raised and educated in the west but settled in Hong Kong for work. While these were the very people I was eager to distance myself from in my youth, in our parents’ homeland I discovered a camaraderie that was missing before. While no one tracks the number of western-born people of Chinese descent living in Hong Kong, data from a 2013 census analyzed by Pacific Prime Hong Kong shows that there are an estimated 301,000 expatriates living in Hong Kong, comprising 4.24 percent of the city’s population. This is a big jump from just 252,000 expatriates living there in 2009.

Hong Kong’s western-born Chinese definitely aren’t considered locals, but we aren’t quite expats either. We navigate the city as in-betweeners, with our varying knowledge of the local customs and norms, the language and food. Yet we retain our western values, among them a sense of individuality and freedom that would be considered a rebellious trait of a traditional family-centric Hongkonger.

Working as an English teacher, I found that my in-between status hindered rather than helped. The schools where I taught English requested an immersive experience for their students, which meant native English speakers. The supervisor of my second teaching job, Pamela Bovitz, instructed me to pretend that I didn’t understand a word of Cantonese.

“She knows what we’re saying!” the kids would say in their native tongue, aware that I was one of them. I feigned confusion and fought the urge to reply back in Cantonese. At the kindergarten where I worked, I was hired to teach these young students English. But through the playground games and classroom conversations I overheard, the students inadvertently helped me improve my second language too. Every morning I listened to them sing their school’s anthem in Cantonese and one day I sang it for my mother. In between fits of laughter, she helped me translate the song and understand the lyrics.