In an issue sure to be discussed in elections this year, Republican and medical leaders argued on Wednesday evening, June 4, that the health care reform law known as Obamacare is taking away citizens’ rights to privacy and choice in their health care. The discussion took place at a New Canaan Republican Town Committee forum held at the Outback Teen Center.

Democrats like U.S. Rep. Jim Himes (D-Conn.), while acknowledging that health care reform has been highly contentious and experienced a number of problems in its implementation, point to more well-received elements such the insurance industry reforms the law enacted or reductions in the number of uninsured. The law, Himes said, is partly responsible for lower increases in health insurance premiums since it was signed into law.

While Republicans call for the law’s repeal, speakers at the forum also discussed what ought to replace it. “Republicans are not looking to deny medical care to needy citizens,” said Kevin Moynihan, the committee’s treasurer and a Town Council member. “We just believe there is a better way to do it than the invasive and ill-conceived Obamacare legislation.”

Dr. Betsy McCaughey, a former lieutenant governor of New York, characterized the law — officially the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 — in no uncertain terms, calling it “corrupt” and charging that it “shreds your constitutional rights.” Further, she claimed, Obamacare is just the kind of thing the Founding Fathers would have balked at.

She cited President James Madison, who said of the young American Republic, “It will be of little avail to the people that the laws are made by men of their own choice if the laws be so voluminous that they cannot be read, or so incoherent that they cannot be understood.” Holding up a printed copy of the 2400-page legislation, McCaughey said, “That is Obamacare to a ‘T.’”

The law should be replaced, she contended, with “a 20-page bill in plain, honest English that members of Congress would actually read” — perhaps containing things like the health insurance industry reforms that Democrats and Republicans agreed on in trying to find common ground in the run-up to the bill’s passage.

One of Obamacare’s main objectives was to accomplish those reforms, but speakers at the forum said they had been tainted by insurance companies’ additions to the law. Health insurance reforms it contains include barring “preexisting conditions” as a reason to deny an individual coverage, elimination of lifetime coverage caps, establishing minimum coverage requirements such as preventive care, and allowing children to stay under their parents’ health plans until age 26.

Privacy lost?

McCaughey touched on minimum coverage requirements, arguing that these force citizens “to enroll in an essential benefits package.” In order to avoid having to provide employees health coverage, she said businesses are hiring more part-time workers. “We’re turning the United States into a part-time nation,” McCaughey said.

But she also had a serious contention that Obamacare has set up a health information system where government and health insurers are monitoring physicians’ decisions and effectively can take note of all that’s said — or at least all that’s reported —between doctors and their patients.

“I’m not against medical records, I’m against government imposing penalties and protocols on physicians’ decisions,” McCaughey said. Also, she added, “We all confide things to our doctor that we wouldn’t with anyone else,” and that information should remain private.

Dr. Richard Amerling, a New York City physician and president-elect of the Association of American Physicians and Surgeons, added that electronic health records under Obamacare get in the way of doctors caring for their patients.

“This is not about convenience or patient care. The electronic health record as it’s being implemented under Obamacare distracts you,” Amerling said. “I’m sitting there typing data into the computer when I could be talking to the patient. You have a right to not put your information on an electronic health care record.”

Starkly opposing views

Amerling also argued that “best practices” and “evidence-based medicine” used as precedent for treatment under Obamacare are based on skewed data and result in care that is not in the best interest of patients. “They take a clinically meaningless result and massively amplify it,” he said. “Evidence-based medicine is really junk science.”

Amerling gave an example of statins, which are routinely prescribed for patients to lower cholesterol, claiming these drugs are stressed in treatment protocols more in the interest of pharmaceutical companies than patients. “I can almost guarantee that none of you need these drugs or will benefit from them,” he said.

Amerling also assailed Obamacare’s coverage requirements for health insurance with a very different take on the best value in health plans. The law, Amerling said, precludes purchasing “a high-deductible, low cost plan that’ll cover catastrophic costs and pay for your routine care yourself — it’s a much better deal.”

A major talking point of congressional Democrats during the health reform debate was that such high-deductible plans essentially amount to no coverage at all, since they fail to cover routine and preventive medical care that could head off more serious health problems down the road. With these kinds of opposite-end views on particular elements of health care reform, it’s left to be seen how Democrats and Republicans will find much agreement on the issue.