Something seems to have changed in the way investors look at prospects for a Federal Reserve rate increase. After all, not long ago any hint the Fed was ready to delay liftoff tended to boost equities and other assets perceived as risky.

But after Wednesday’s dovishly-interpreted minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee’s July meeting, stocks have taken it on the chin. Indeed, the Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA, -0.13% is off 1.4% Thursday, after a turbulent run Wednesday, which ended with a triple-digit loss for the Dow.

Jens Nordvig, currency strategist at Nomura, offers up a compelling rationale, in a Thursday note.

If the Fed indeed doesn’t act in September and some Fed policy makers move their “dots”—points on the central bank’s so-called “dot plot” that represent individual expectations on rates—to 2016, expectations for a December rate increase might stand at no better than 50-50, Nordvig wrote.

If so, that would mean there is room for a rally of around 10 basis points in the January Fed-funds futures contract and a rally of 10 to 15 basis points from Wednesday’s close for the two-year U.S. Treasury note TMUBMUSD02Y, -5.53% Bond yields rise as debt prices fall.

“Normally, this would be considered positive for risk assets, but given that a delay may be partly linked to global economic slowing, it is not obvious that this would be the case this time around,” Nordvig said.

In other words, it is all about context. A rate delay amid a benign global environment has generally been viewed as a positive, but if a hike is delayed because investors fear growth is endangered, it is a different story.

Lately, global growth concerns have been amplified by a sharp selloff in emerging-market currencies and equities, which in turn reflect plunging prices for oil and other commodities. China’s yuan devaluation last week threw more fuel on the fire.

“The big drag from the emerging world will continue into next year, even as growth in the developed world holds up. The result? More disappointment,” wrote economists at IHS Global Insight. After being stuck in a range of 2.5% to 2.8% for four years, global growth might not break out as forecasters had hoped in 2016, they said in a research note.

Meanwhile, the prospects of a Fed delay have implications for other markets as well, with the U.S. dollar, which has soared since mid-2014 on rate-hike expectations, setting back, while gold futures rebounded sharply after weeks of heavy selling that drove the yellow metal to a six-year low.

In a note, Kathleen Brooks, research director at Forex.com, said a more cautious outlook on rate hikes could impact markets in the following ways:

• It could weaken the dollar index DXY, -0.27% which is testing a cluster of moving averages at 96.40. Below here opens the way to 94.60 – the 200-day [smoothed moving average] – and the lowest level since June. • A weaker dollar could fuel a short term recovery in commodity prices, Bloomberg’s commodity index is at its lowest level since 2002, and oil looks desperately oversold. • If commodity prices rally then it could be an Indian summer for commodity FX bulls. • It could keep the euro above water. [The euro] EURUSD, -0.0089% has been stubbornly range-bound around $1.10 and hasn't fallen as much as expected. A weaker buck could support EURUSD downside in the next few weeks, with $1.0850 a medium-term support level. A break above $1.1220 – the high from 12th August – is a bullish development that opens the way for more late summer upside from the euro.

More from MarketWatch