Savor, the new restaurant in Klyde Warren Park, reminds me of the Affordable Care Act.

Its owners had a great idea: Build a wonderful structure to which everyone will be attracted. Provide something that every American needs: food. Create a great deal of excitement and anticipation about the launch.

When Savor opened its doors in late September — exactly one week before the Health Insurance Marketplace began open enrollment — many would-be diners found themselves in an unhappy situation: They couldn’t get a table.

The situation persists.

But there’s nothing wrong with Savor’s website or reservations system. It’s just a hot restaurant, plain and simple. Saturday-night dinners can get completely booked a week in advance. Even prime-time dinner on Tuesday can be a challenge if your table isn’t reserved well in advance.

How frustrating! Everyone who takes a stroll in the park can see right into it; architect Tom Phifer’s design is like a beautiful glass box.

The bar, a glowing, kidney-shaped island, is usually well-populated in the evening with fashionably dressed patrons sipping safe, well-mixed craft cocktails.

What to eat with them? Dainty little fritters of lobster and Comté cheese on a smear of rémoulade make appealing bar snacks — or starters. A small slab of braised pork belly, dressed up with a wee bit of radicchio and watercress salad and shaved pear, gets a nice tang from sherry vinegar and pickled mustard seeds. That’s more like a one-person first course, harder to share.

Were you forward-looking enough to book a table? You’ll be led past the bar, then along a booth-lined corridor with views of the park and its prettily lighted trees on one side and an open kitchen on the other. Maybe you’ll land there, or maybe you’ll be seated in the main dining room. Should you be shown to a banquette, prepare to feel like a little kid all evening: They’re an inch or two too low in relation to the tables.

Lobster puffs notwithstanding, the menu isn’t exactly teeming with exciting gastropub taste sensations. Overcooked deviled eggs came to the table crusted on top; clearly they’d been left sitting too long. Even if they’d been more carefully attended to, the bit of pepper relish on the plate and scattering of spiced pecan brittle couldn’t have lifted them out of their mediocrity. Meatballs fashioned from beef and pork came in a puttanesca-like sauce that clashed with the tender orbs, so tasty on their own. “Crispy” shrimp and calamari in a sticky chile glaze was desperately ordinary (and not crispy). A weirdly tiny wedge salad was overwhelmed by toothachingly sweet “lacquered” bacon.

If truth be told, the pretentiously written menu confounded me on every visit. The interesting dishes must be here somewhere, I kept thinking every time I scanned it. But only one dish called out to me — something called “high marbled pork loin: crispy pork Milanese with wild arugula and caper salad.” Highly marbled? Who knows — it was a well-executed Milanese, though, crisply fried and flavorful, topped with a nicely dressed arugula salad.

Otherwise, there’s a quartet of small scallops, aggressively seared when I sampled them, on a likable ragout of big butter beans and pork belly with baby kale swirled in. A fillet of salmon that had been bourbon-cured then lightly smoked was then roasted a few minutes too long, served with a dollop of celery-root purée and garnished with parsnip chips and bits of fennel-apple-cranberry chutney whose flavor did not get along with the poor salmon.

A grilled flatiron steak was nicely cooked, but smothered in a not-very-nice, super-sweet sorghum and chipotle glaze; a decent braised short rib sat on a bed of chewy macaroni and cheese. What was that weird sweet stuff on top of the short rib? Smoked pecan gremolata. At Savor, random strange touches too often sabotage what might otherwise be reasonably successful dishes. Certain flavors and ingredients have affinities for each other and somehow chef John Coleman, whose last position was as executive chef at the Ritz-Carlton Dallas, hasn’t figured that out.

The one-page wine list is marginally less confounding than the menu. The few bottles that piqued my interest — like a 2011 Le Pigeoulet en Provence syrah blend from the Rhône Valley, or a 2008 Museum Real Reserva from Cigales in Spain, were mostly over

$50, which seems ridiculous in a restaurant where main courses

average half that.

Lunch turned up a couple of nice surprises, including a delightful salad of chopped romaine, sliced radishes, haricots verts and ripe avocado that would have been perfect had it not been hijacked by sharp-tasting green olives. And a sandwich came with really good fries.

But the sandwich — shaved smoked turkey with melted cheese — was thrown off by an apple-fennel chutney, which clashed with crunchy slices of Roma tomato. The red quinoa in another salad had terrific flavor and texture, but it was so loaded with dried fruits and nuts that after a few bites, it started tasting like trail mix.

The dessert menu has a cute conceit: The sweets are small, and $3 each, three for $8, six for $16 or 10 for $24. Pastry chef Julie Vorce has a heavy hand with sugar, and her pastry shells could be more tender. But I was charmed by her pop tart, a flaky turnover filled with apple, goat cheese and honey.

Just as I want the United States to have a world-class health care system, I want Klyde Warren Park to have a really good restaurant. Fortunately, Savor has a lot going for it, starting with its gorgeous bones and fabulous setting. The service is attentive, relaxed and generally professional. Chef Coleman has excellent technique and some good ideas; the kitchen seems solid. I can’t help but wonder how the menu might change if he sat down with a few friends, ordered from the menu and had his sous-chef cook for him.

Follow Leslie Brenner on Twitter at @lesbren.

Savor (2 stars)

Price: $$$ (lunch starters $8 to $14, salads and sandwiches $10 to $17, main courses $15 to $21; dinner starters and salads $8 to $17, main courses $19 to $28; mini-desserts $3 apiece, three for $8, six for $16 or 10 for $24; brunch dishes $7 to $21)

Service: Attentive, warm and relaxed

Ambience: The glimmering dining room, a glass box with views of Klyde Warren Park from every table, is a fashionable meeting place.

Noise level: Tolerable, despite all the hard surfaces

Location: 2000 Woodall Rodgers Freeway, Dallas; 214-306-5597; savor-relish.com

Hours: Sunday-Thursday 11 a.m. to 11 p.m., Friday-Saturday 11 a.m. to midnight

Reservations: Accepted

Credit cards: All major

Wheelchair accessible: Yes

Alcohol: Full bar. The one-page wine list offers few selections with much character; most of the reds of interest are more than $50 per bottle.