Donald Trump outdid himself this time.

The Republican presidential frontrunner said John McCain — former prisoner of war, longtime U.S. Senator and 2008 Republican presidential nominee — was no war hero. Trump, who got five draft deferments during the Vietnam era, said McCain only achieved hero status because "he was captured."

"I like people that weren't captured, OK?" Trump said at an Iowa candidate forum on Saturday.

If you think Trump the candidate is out of control, imagine if he becomes president:

The scene: White House East Room, Jan. 21, 2017. Donald Trump enters on newly installed escalator from Lincoln Bedroom.

Trump: Good afternoon. I hope everyone enjoyed the 1,000 inaugural balls last night. Without a doubt, I showed that nobody has b ... I mean galas, bigger and better than Donald Trump.

Now I just want to take a few moments to announce some new Executive Orders. There's no point bringing in Congress on this because they're just a bunch of wimps.

First, I hereby cancel Memorial Day as a federal holiday. I mean really, a national holiday honoring our war dead? I like soldiers that are alive, OK?

Live soldiers win wars. Dead military just take up space at Arlington National Cemetery. What a waste of real estate. I could build eight towers and a 36-hole golf course on that land, and it would be beautiful, spectacular, the best. Those views of the Potomac! They shouldn't be wasted on the dead.

Second, I hereby cancel Martin Luther King Jr. Day as a federal holiday.

I mean, really, there were lots of civil rights activists, but Dr. King only got to his exalted status because he got shot. I like activists that don't get shot, OK?

Nobody ever talks about the ones that went on to live long, distinguished lives, like Andrew Young and ... well, whoever else was doing that stuff. All great folks, by the way.

Third, I hereby repeal Obamacare, also known as the Affordable Care Act. Health insurance is for losers. I like people that don't get sick, OK? Or at least people who suck it up and keep working and don't complain about a little hangnail, or diabetes, or lung cancer.

Fourth, I hereby order the Federal Communications Commission to revoke the broadcast license of Univision. Adios, as my criminal Mexican immigrant friends say. Ever since those weasels broke the Trump Beauty Pageant Contract, they knew they were on borrowed time. I like networks that don't fire The Donald, OK?

NBC, I'm gonna let you slide for now, but only because Brian Williams is still there. He's my kind of guy: successful, debonair, great hair, knows how to self-promote, doesn't let facts get in the way of a good story. As long as he's around, we're good.

Finally, we need two new holidays to replace the old ones. Vote for your favorite at whitehouse.gov: 1) My birthday 2) My anniversary (to Melania, not those first two loser wives) 3) The date The Art of the Deal became No. 1 on the New York Times Bestseller list 4) The date The Apprentice premiered on TV.

Enjoy the next four years. And may God save, I mean, bless the United States of America.

mmayo@sunsentinel.com, 954-356-4508.