ORLANDO ­— Thousands of Florida Republicans met six of the top contenders for the party’s presidential nomination Friday, with candidates taking aim at President Barack Obama, clashing over immigration and one in the crowded field who is polling poorly vowing to stay in the race.

Florida Sen. Marco Rubio took issue with Texas Sen. Ted Cruz’s criticism of his immigration policy. Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee declared he was still in the race despite poor poll results. Jeb Bush promoted his experience as Florida governor. Donald Trump declared he was the superior candidate. And Ben Carson said his rags-to-riches story made him the best fit for the job.

The comments came during the Sunshine Summit, hosted by the Republican Party of Florida to feature the presidential candidates.

Rubio advocated repeal of the Affordable Care Act and promoted a three-tier tax plan that includes more tax credits for parents with children. He also promised new policy that would use energy resources in the country.

“God has blessed us with oil and other natural resources,” Rubio said. “Let’s use them fully.”

Earlier this week, Cruz said Rubio’s immigration plan was not as conservative as advertised. But Rubio challenged that Friday.

“I’m puzzled, quite frankly, and I’m surprised by Ted’s attacks since Ted’s take on immigration policy is not much different from mine,” Rubio said. “He is a supporter of legalizing people who are in this country illegally and if he’s changed that issue than he should be clear about that.”

Before a jubilant crowd, many holding his campaign posters, Cruz told the audience that anyone who says Washington, D.C. is on the right path should be feared.

“If anyone tells you they embrace Washington, run the other way,” Cruz said. “People up there fear me because I bring change.”

Cruz called for a stronger military and the shrinking of government agencies that he said brought havoc on small business.

“We have this alphabet soup of government agencies that have descended like locusts on small businesses,” Cruz said.

Cruz said he would offer a similar change brought by President Ronald Reagan. He said the two-term president’s tax changes created a business-friendly environment that led to a solid economy.

Cruz said his tax plan, which is a flat 10-percent levy on every American, would create prosperity.

Huckabee used his appearance at the summit to promise a federal government that would no longer strangle small business. He also vowed to have government leaders more accountable to the people they serve.

“If I’m in office, I would station the Department of Homeland Security in Laredo, Texas, and tell him to secure our border,” Huckabee said. “That will bring change fast.”

Like other candidates, Huckabee promised to increase funding to the military to fight radical Islamic jihadists.

“We will have the best trained, best financed, best military in the world,” Huckabee said. “Its strength will keep us at peace.”

There were roughly 2,000 people ticketed to attend the summit at the Rosen Shingle Creek Resort, but not many had waited beyond Rubio and Cruz to hear Huckabee’s speech.

A confident Bush took the stage before a crowd dotted by state leaders supporting him, such as Sen. Joe Negron, the Republican from Stuart who is expected to become Senate president. He was joined by current Senate President Andy Gardiner from Orlando. Bush promoted his track record during his two terms as Florida governor, which he said included plenty of tax cuts and changes to the state education system.

Bush said his experience as governor primed him for the White House, experience that he said is superior to that of other candidates.

“If you want a talker, maybe I’m not your guy,” Bush said. “But if you want a doer, someone who’s done it and been there, then I’m your guy.”

Bush criticized Obama for dividing groups in Washington, which he said helped lead to a Congressional stalemate. Pointing to his days as governor, Bush said he would rebuild bridges Obama tore down.

“I won’t be a divider in chief, I wont be an agitator in chief,” Bush said. “I will be a commander in chief.”

Trump, who has been the target of Bush criticism in recent days, took the stage after making a grand entrance through one of the busiest hallways of the summit, where he shook hands and signed autographs on just about anything his fans could find. It was a unique entrance after other candidates chose more discreet paths.

Trump stood behind a podium and declared the entire audience was there for him.

“I was watching the other candidates on TV and the room looked empty,” Trump said. “Now it’s full.”

Trump discussed his plan to build a wall that he would name after himself. He also proposed changing policy that he said left the U.S. Border Patrol with no way to enforce law.

“They people just walk by them and say, ‘Hi,’” said Trump, referring to his account of border agents seeing undocumented immigrants. “They tell me there’s nothing they can do.”

Ben Carson, the last presidential candidate appearing Friday, reflected on his experience growing up poor in Detroit, and how his experience with children reminded him how children should come first.

“You look at what’s going on right now and you realize they’re not going to make it,” Carson said of children growing up in the U.S. “That’s got to change.”

Carson said he wants to work to help people climb out of poverty, and said he doesn’t want to eliminate any of the federal government’s safety-net programs for the poor.

“That’s just a bunch of crap the left wing puts out to make me look bad,” Carson said. “It’s so a lot of poor people won’t listen to what I’m saying.”

arek.sarkissian@naplesnews.com

(850) 559-7620