Children work with teachers in the learning lab. (Photo: Special to The News-Press )

When the Conservancy of Southwest Florida makes headlines, it is usually because of the organization's position on a critical environmental issue.

Thursday, I learned there is so much more about this nonprofit group and the environmental jewel it calls home in Naples. The facility blew me away. It is an incredible asset for all of Southwest Florida.

The 21-acre nature center across a parking lot from the Naples Zoo and across the street from the Coastland Center mall is an environmental haven of wildlife rehabilitation and preservation, energy conservation, working water quality projects, interactive education and volunteerism. It is the only one of its kind in the state.

The Conservancy, celebrating 50 years, is an environmental classroom for children and adults funded primarily by private donations. It has a $7 million annual budget, recently completed a five-year, $38.5 million capital campaign, a working filter marsh, which is a huge environmental benefit; a gopher tortoise habitat, a state-of-the art wildlife hospital, a dorm for summer interns, a resident scientist, nature trails and educational programs with an emphasis on STEM.

A new, 15,000-square foot administration building, which also will include laboratories and classroom space, is scheduled to open in the next few months.

And this facility is as green as it gets, highlighted by a campus-wide geothermal energy supply that cuts costs by 40 percent, as well as LED lighting. Many of its buildings and walkways were constructed using recycled materials that are stacked with Collier history. The gazebo, which overlooks the filter marsh, was made from wood saved from the conservancy's old wildlife hospital.

The depth at which this place has been thought out and developed is amazing. There are 50 staff, plus summer interns and 600 volunteers who can be seen working throughout the center and in the hospital treating animals.

My tour of the facility:

von Arx wildlife hospital

The full-time staff, volunteers and interns are treating 29 animals, but they will typically care for over 3,000 during the year. That's a dramatic increase from about 400 in the early years of the conservancy. There are several varieties of birds, bunnies, a gopher tortoise that appear to have free run of the hospital when it wants to, snakes and a opossum. People are free to bring injured wildlife to the hospital or call to have someone from the Conservancy pick it up.

The animals' rehabilitation is a several-step process, including surgical and intensive care areas. As the animals rehab progresses, they are moved to larger holding areas, both indoors and outdoors and eventually released into the wild. I was amazed how their care is carefully controlled through temperature, non-see-through glass, as well as insect-free environments. The small cages in the intensive care area, are fitted with small branches or leaves to closely resemble the animal's natural habitat. Many of the bird cages also come with mirrors so the bird can see its reflection and not feel as lonely.

Filter marsh

In my opinion, this is the gem of the facility. It was built by the conservancy to filter out pollutants – mainly nitrogen – from storm water flowing from the mall parking lot. The marsh treats the contaminated water, cleans about 90 percent of it before it reaches the Gordon River, which is part of the greenway that runs through the property. This outdoor lesson book also allows students to measure water quality and see how the marsh works. The marsh also is home to several juvenile snook and is a valuable tool in the conservancy's educational efforts in promoting the engineering component of STEM.

Blair Dorm

It is home for the Conservancy's summer interns who come mainly from Southwest Florida but also from other states and countries. There are about 16 living in the dorm this summer. Many of the interns have come back to work for the Conservancy, including its director of education, David Webb, who is a ninth-generation Floridian.

Gopher tortoise preserve

It is home to approximately 80 tortoises. It also is a great example of attention to detail. The fence around the habitat area goes five feet into the ground, so that the tortoises can't burrow under and escape. The bridge, which is part of the entrance into the facility, is elevated to allow the tortoise access to all of the preserve.

Conservation hall

The building, which opened about a year ago, seats approximately 240 for educational programs. The beautiful cypress wood, which makes up the interior walls is from the original Julian Fleischmann cottage. "It is wood with a story," Conservancy president and CEO Bob Moher said.

Discovery center

Incredibly informative and interactive. When you enter, there is a cleverly produced and eye-opening interactive display showing the shrinkage over time of the Everglades. It's eye-opening because the Everglades was once part of the Lake Okeechobee basin and has been significantly reduced.

The center's tour takes you through the importance of Florida's uplands and its protected species like the panther. It moves further through the ecosystem and the Conservancy's research into the region's system of mangroves. There are live exhibits filled with sea life, plus informative videos. The star attraction swimming in a small tank just might be Betsy the loggerhead sea turtle. She was injured and is going through rehabilitation. The turtle is named for Betsy Sandstrom, who has worked with turtles as a volunteer. She is battling cancer.

Learning lab

The classrooms allow the conservancy to work with students throughout the year and at camps this summer. Approximately 8,000 students from Lee and Collier counties — 4,000 in lab work alone — participated in programs this past school year.

The address is 1495 Smith preserve Way in Naples. Check it out. You will want to go back.

Tom Hayden is community conversations editor of The News-Press.

Reaching the conservancy

Email: info@conservancy.org

Website: www.conservancy.org

Phone: 239-262-0304

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1hsKHLW