By of the

Gov. Scott Walker's biennial budget revives a proposal to expand independent public charter schools that don't answer to school boards — an idea Wisconsin Republicans have pursued for at least the past four years without much success.

Meanwhile, Republican lawmakers in the governor's own party are pursuing an array of other ideas for expanding charter schools — some of which overlap the governor's proposal.

Which, if any of these, has a chance of passing into law? And what impact could that have on traditional public schools?

Sen. Paul Farrow (R-Pewaukee), chairman of the Senate Committee on Education Reform and Government Operations and a supporter of charter schools, indicated some of the ideas might need to be corralled.

"I think we might be over-chartering ourselves and not developing a cohesive picture for what charter schools should look like," he said in an interview.

Independent charter schools are public schools run by nonprofit companies instead of school districts.They have to report all the same data as traditional public schools, but get freedom from some other state rules — such as employing unionized teachers — in exchange for meeting performance goals in a contract with a state-approved authorizing agency. Failure to meet the targets means the agency can close the school.

Republicans often like independent charter schools because they're run like small businesses, often with nonunion staff on one-year contracts. Many Democrats dislike charters because they can deplete enrollment at traditional public schools, often don't employ unionized teachers and may not be able to serve children with the most significant special needs.

In Wisconsin, independent charter schools exist only in Milwaukee and Racine, and they answer to state-approved agencies such as the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee and the Milwaukee Common Council.

Most of the more than 200 charter schools in Wisconsin are run by school boards.

Competing proposals

A variety of ideas on the table aim to change that, including:

■ The governor's budget proposal. Walker is proposing the creation of a state board to oversee the approval of new entities to authorize independent charter schools statewide — essentially, an authorizer of authorizers.

Why not just create a state board with the power to authorize charter schools? Walker already tried that. It didn't pass in the last budget, in part because some conservatives in the Legislature consider any new state board to be more bureaucracy, so Walker's latest proposal is likely trying to skirt that concern.

Alex Medler, vice president of policy and advocacy of the National Association of Charter School Authorizers, said in a recent interview that Walker's plan is a bit unusual.

"Change in Wisconsin would be good, but we'd recommend a single statewide authorizer, with clear language about what the expectations are for authorizers and oversight on the authorizers," he said.

Todd Ziebarth, senior vice president for state advocacy and support for the National Alliance for Public Charter Schools, said he thinks the governor's proposal is innovative.

"Wisconsin is really an outlier," he said, in that most of the charter schools in the state are run by school districts, not independent agencies that can allow the charter schools more freedom.

■ Charter high schools bill. An Assembly bill would allow each Wisconsin technical college district board to oversee charter high schools focused on occupational education or STEM fields. Tribes and tribal colleges would also be able to open charter schools. Lawmakers are still fine-tuning the details on how these schools would be funded.

John Leiber, a legislative assistant for one of the bill's co-sponsors, Rep. Tom Weatherston (R-Racine), said they know that if passed, the governor's budget proposal on charter schools would cover all the relevant points of their bill.

He said lots of people are working independently on their own versions of charter bills, because nobody knows what's going to wind up in the final version of the governor's budget.

"Everyone wants to make sure if that doesn't pass, their ideas are still out there," he said.

■ Using charter schools as sanctions. A contentious Assembly school accountability bill calls for potentially converting low-performing public schools that haven't improved after other interventions into independent charter schools. The amended version of the bill was introduced and scheduled for a vote in an Assembly committee two days later, but the leader of the committee delayed that vote after an outcry from Democrats.

Separate from that effort, two Republican lawmakers — Sen. Alberta Darling of River Hills and Rep. Dale Kooyenga from Brookfield — are exploring the idea of introducing legislation that would allow persistently low-performing Milwaukee city schools to be turned over to charter school operators.

"We are still talking to people and gathering information," said Bob Delaporte, Darling's spokesman.

■ Charter school funding. National and local charter school advocates are talking behind the scenes with lawmakers about changing the funding structure for charter schools in Wisconsin. Funding has been a major hang-up for expanding the schools beyond the Milwaukee area and Racine because independent charter schools are funded by redirecting a small portion of state aid that goes to each school district. Under the funding formula, more kids in independent charters means more money diverted from school districts.

Since at least 2011, Wisconsin Republicans have debated a number of bills to expand independent charter schools statewide. They got a small win in recent years when state law was changed to allow UWM to charter schools in counties adjacent to Milwaukee.

UWM used that new authority to approve a new charter school in Wauwatosa, but it hit a lot of resistance from the Wauwatosa School District, and plans appear to have stalled.

A failed Republican-backed bill last session would have allowed all the University of Wisconsin System campuses, plus technical colleges and regional state education agencies to approve operators to open charter schools.

Department opposed

Department of Public Instruction officials are opposed to the changes being proposed. They note that Wisconsin has the seventh-largest number of charter schools of all states, and the seventh-highest student enrollment in charter schools in the country.

DPI spokesman John Johnson dismisses critics' arguments that those schools aren't "real" charter schools.

"I think the people in Wisconsin like that their locally elected leaders have a say in what their charter schools look like," Johnson said.

"When you have charter schools answering to unelected boards, all of the sudden it's a free-for-all, and in a lot of states that has led to fraud and scandals and criminal complaints."

Johnson said Wisconsin has mostly avoided those troubles.

"For the most part, we have locally elected officials on the front lines to make sure charter schools work for our kids," he said.