Warren County will participate in the annual nationwide count of homeless individuals on Jan. 29.

The Point in Time Count gives the human services community an unduplicated count of our homeless population and information about those individuals who are at risk of homelessness. This information becomes a valuable planning tool in developing federal and local strategies to end homelessness.

In conjunction with the Point in Time Count, Warren County will hold Project Homeless Connect at Saint Philip and Saint James’ Mercy Hall in Phillipsburg, and at the Church of the Assumption in Hackettstown from 10 a.m. to 3:30 p.m.

In the event of severe weather, Project Homeless Connect will take place on Feb. 3 at the same time and locations. Information regarding any changes in the schedule will be available by calling the Warren County Department of Human Services, Division of Administration’s main number: 908-475-6331.

Project Homeless Connect is a one-day, one-stop event in which the community comes together to help those most in need. Individuals experiencing homelessness, or at risk of homelessness, are able to receive a variety of services such as information on housing, emergency social service benefits, health insurance and how to obtain information on the Affordable Care Act, legal services, substance abuse, mental health, medical services and employment. In addition, lunch will be served, flu shots and haircuts will be offered and donations of winter coats will be available. Event coordinators plan to reach out to more community members in need of services in an effort to prevent homelessness.

The Project Homeless Connect event is a true community effort planned and executed through the Warren County Department of Human Services Housing Committee. Members of the planning committee include Catholic Charities, NORWESCAP Food Bank, Family Promise, Warren County Division of Temporary Assistance and Social Services, Easter Seals, Operation Chill Out, United Way of Northern New Jersey, Domestic Abuse and Sexual Assault Crisis Services, local businesses, and faith based communities.

For more information on the Point in Time Count and Project Homeless Connect, contact the Warren County Department of Human Services, Division of Administration at 908-475-6331.