Keith Humphreys is a professor of psychiatry and behavioral science at the Stanford School of Medicine. He has served on the White House Commission on Drug Free Communities, the Veterans Administration's National Mental Health Task Force, and the National Advisory Council of the U.S. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.

Insurance coverage for addiction treatment has been expanded more in the past five months than in the preceding five decades. Contrary to the common complaint that nothing is changing in the “war on drugs”, the U.S. has never been closer to providing universal addiction treatment on demand.

With the government widening coverage, providers are training more staff in outreach and in new treatment methods.

Five months ago the Obama administration released the final regulations for the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act, which President George W. Bush signed just before leaving office. The regulations, which apply to most private insurance plans as well as Medicaid, eliminate the common practice of setting higher co-payments, higher deductibles and tighter visit limits on addiction treatment than on care for other medical disorders.

The parity law does not apply to Medicare, but that program’s coverage of addiction treatment has also been greatly improved because of the final implementation of the 2008 Medicare Improvement for Patient and Providers Act. The outpatient addiction treatment benefit, long set at only 50 percent of charges, has been raised as of Jan. 1, 2014, to the 80 percent level at which all other outpatient care is reimbursed.

The recently implemented Affordable Care Act is the third transformative policy for addiction treatment. It defines care for substance use disorders as an essential health care benefit and fully incorporates the standards set by the mental health parity law. As a result, under Obamacare, the expanded Medicaid population and all plans sold on the health exchanges must provide treatment benefits for addiction and do so at the same level as other disorders.

Collectively these laws touch the lives of virtually every American family. The odds are very good that a family facing addiction today has better insurance benefits for treatment than they had just 6 months ago. But universal treatment on demand is not here yet, due to well-known health care system dynamics.

In our market-based health care system, government policy typically expands access to care only indirectly by expanding insurance coverage, which in turn expands demand for care, which stimulates an increased supply of care providers over time. In response to the huge expansion in insurance coverage, innovators are expanding programs that teach addiction treatment methods to care providers, incorporating substance use disorder screening and early intervention programs into routine clinical care and investing in new treatment facilities. But the national implementation process will no doubt be uneven and take several years to fully flower.



Join Opinion on Facebook and follow updates on twitter.com/roomfordebate.