Buy Photo Jessica Diemer-Eaton demonstrates maple sugar preparation as native Americans would have done it during the 25th annual Maple Syrup Festival at LM Sugarbush in Salem on Saturday. February 27, 2016 (Photo: Jenna Esarey, Special to the CJ)Buy Photo

Celebrating its 25th anniversary, the Maple Syrup Festival at LM Sugarbush kicked off on Saturday, luring thousands to the Salem farm for a celebration of all things maple.

The two-weekend festival continues this Saturday and Sunday with live music, primitive craft vendors, maple-syrup making demonstrations, games, food and more.

Each year, the festival draws large crowds - up to 12,000 by organizer’s estimates. This year could be a record-breaker if Saturday’s crowds were an indicator.

“I’ve never seen it this crowded this early,” said Sugarbush co-owner Jennifer Reisenbichler.

With no admission or parking fees charged, festival organizers can only guess at actual attendance figures. Remaining family and budget-friendly is a priority. People “can come out here and eat, play the games and get a little jug of syrup for less than they’d spend going to the movies,” Reisenbichler said.

She and her husband Nic, along with her sister Emily and her husband Robert Blackman, purchased LM Sugarbush from their parents in 2013 and kept the popular festival going.

Tours to a 40-acre section of the 140-acre farm each day allow guests to witness sap collection from some of the approximately 4,500 maple trees.

With variable weather all winter, the sap run this year has been hit or miss, Reisenbichler said.

Buy Photo A visitor gets a sampling of maple syrup during preparation at the 25th annual Maple Syrup Festival at LM Sugarbush in Salem on Saturday. (Photo: Jenna Esarey, Special to the CJ)

“It’s below average, but better than it’s been the last couple of years,” she said.

To ensure an adequate supply of syrup for their guests, Sugarbush purchases additional syrup from local Amish families.

“They are all within 16 miles of here and they use wood-fired evaporators just like we do,” she said. “It’s identical to what we make here.”

Visitors could follow the changes in maple syrup technique over time as they watched demonstrations of Native American and pioneer preparations. In the sugarhouse, the modern process was displayed as steam rose from the wood-fired evaporator where fresh sap was converted to syrup before being bottled and rushed to the Sugar Store to be sold.

The Sugar Store offers several grades of maple syrup, maple candy, maple cream, maple cotton candy, Amish breads and more.

Hot food, ranging from pancakes and waffles all day to maple-barbecued chicken, pork chops and pulled pork dinners served from noon on, is always a draw with lines often wrapping around the building.

To alleviate some of the crowding, additional food vendors were added last year, offering barbecue, snacks and authentic Italian street food.

A number of games and activities, from tomahawk throwing, rustic merry-go-round rides, handling a cross-cut saw, candle dipping and much more appealed to families.

“This is our fifth straight year,” said Jonathan Reynolds of Georgetown. “It’s just a fun thing to do.”

John Schmitt of Floyds Knobs commended the festival's originality.

“I’ll tell you what’s great about it.," he said, "there’s not an X-Box or Nintendo in sight."

If You Go:

Maple Syrup Festival at LM Sugarbush, 321 N Garrison Hollow Rd, Salem, IN 47167

March 5 – 6, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.

Free admission and parking.

More information: lmsugarbush.com or call 812-967-4991 or 1-877-841-8851.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/2144LFq