FORT COLLINS — Preseason camp doesn’t even last this long.

For the Colorado State football team, the Arizona Bowl will come 31 days (Dec. 29, 5:30 p.m. MST) after the Rams played their regular-season finale at Fresno State. It’s a long delay that the Rams aren’t accustomed to having. But it’s nothing new to first-year CSU coach Mike Bobo; the Georgia teams he helped guide frequently endured a long layoff before going bowling.

“Because it’s new for these guys, I’ve had a few more practices than we normally would in a place like Georgia,” Bobo said Friday. “We went last Friday and Saturday and we’ll go this Friday and Saturday, where normally we’d just have one, like tomorrow, because it’s a recruiting weekend and show the recruits a practice. I went ahead and had four, just because these guys aren’t used to it. They’re used to playing relatively quick after their last game.”

Bobo is confident the Rams (7-5) are on the right track. He credits the team’s strength and conditioning staff headed by Ryan Davis for keeping the players in shape, as well as Terry DeZeeuw and his training staff for getting injured players healthy.

As for the practices, Bobo has made it a point to keep them short and quick paced.

“We’re practicing, but not practicing too long a period of time,” said CSU senior safety Kevin Pierre-Louis. “We’re keeping our mind going, keeping our legs moving and keeping our technique still in our head. We’re still constantly going back to football. We might get a little break, but next day, football is coming.”

The practices will remain that way as long as Bobo sees the type of work he wants. If not, he said he may go to two-a-day workouts when CSU’s finals are completed this week. That’s the changeup for Bobo, who said he was accustomed to bowl practices at Georgia starting after finals were done and he had full control of his players. Now, he said finals become priority No. 1 as he expects the Rams to finish strong academically.

This week the team will practice every day but Tuesday, then after the session Dec. 20 he will send the players home to spend time with their families over Christmas. The Rams will reassemble Dec. 25 in Tucson, where they will play Nevada (6-6) in the Arizona Bowl.

CSU’s players plan to enjoy their family time, but they won’t lose track of why they’re eventually going to Tucson.

“You stay in contact with your teammates and watch film as much as possible when you’re on the road,” said junior linebacker Deonte Clyburn. “When you come back, you’ve got to be sharp. You can’t really be in a Christmas mind-set, even though you’re going to be spending Christmas at home. We need to be homing in on what we need to do to win.”

Everybody has seen teams in bowl games that don’t look sharp after a long layoff. Bobo thinks CSU has the right plan in place, with as much of the process being mental as it is physical.

With the exception of senior safety Trent Matthews (knee injury), Bobo will have a full roster. Still, the Rams will need to have the right approach on the field and off to be clicking against Nevada.

“I want them to be excited when they get to the bowl,” Bobo said. “I don’t want to just grind them all the way up to game time. I want to get our work done, and I want to enjoy the bowl experience and enjoy the rewards for going to a bowl. Again, what makes a bowl really fun is winning the ballgame, so we’ve got to make sure we put in the work to do that.”