Cassandra Giraldo for The Wall Street Journal The first day of classes at the Mannes School of Music in August.

By Corinne Ramey

As music schools have struggled to define their role in a tough market, many have heartily embraced the concept of entrepreneurship: the idea of actively creating one’s own career, instead of waiting passively for employment.

“[Juilliard] is a big proponent of teaching through doing,” says Courtney Blackwell Burton, Juilliard’s director of career services. The school offers courses, grants and various mentorship programs. “Some of this is letting students know it’s OK to come up with ideas and try them out and fail.”

For most schools, the predominate approach to teaching entrepreneurship has been project-based, says Angela Beeching, director of the Center for Music Entrepreneurship at the Manhattan School of Music, and author of “Beyond Talent: Creating a Successful Career in Music.” These projects are usually small, DIY-affairs—examples run the gamut from a blog about jazz club bathrooms to a music festival in Silicon Valley to a superhero opera — and they are more likely to be funded by a Kickstarter campaign (or personal savings account) than a bank loan. “The lean start-up is closer to the way creative artists really operate,” says Ms. Beeching.

And the part that teachers sometimes forget to mention? “As a practicing musician, it’s fun,” says pianist Lara Downes, who started a concert series connecting artists and audiences. “To take the control and take the power to define your life and your future in your own hands, there’s something really wonderful about that.”

Here are tips for musicians, classical and otherwise, looking to give their careers an entrepreneurial bent:

1) When you run into strangers at the airport, know what you’re going to say. “It’s a lot about chance encounters,” says pianist Kimball Gallagher, whose chance meeting in the Mumbai airport led to a concert tour in South Africa. Think about your elevator pitch, and convey the spark or excitement behind it. “The best partnerships and collaborations come from informally talking about your ideas,” says Ms. Burton of Julliard.

2) Build a personal board of directors. Identify mentors, friends and teachers who can help with everything from bouncing ideas around to developing specific skills, whether that’s advice on how to make an Indiegogo video or how to approach ornamentation in a Mozart sonata. And some time-worn rules apply: Help others with their projects, and they’ll help you with yours.

3) Cultivate a brand-new audience. Don’t just rely on traditional music audiences, but use personal connections to build your own. After a show, a performer should have the email address or Facebook information for every attendee in hand. “Keep in touch with them,” says Greg Sandow, a consultant and specialist focusing on the future of classical music, who also teaches at Juilliard. “Keep them interested and build for the next thing.”

4) Fantasize, a lot. Ms. Beeching, of the Manhattan School, has a phrase from the business world that she likes to use with students: Big Hairy Audacious Goal. “That’s absolutely the way artists think!” she says. Kimball Gallagher, the pianist, does an exercise in which he asks musicians crazy questions: a place they want to go before they die, something crazy they want to do onstage, and someone they’d like to meet. Then he takes the resulting scenarios—“playing violin while skydiving in Kenya with Nelson Mandela in the audience”—and brainstorms ways to make that happen. Create the fantasy, and then make a plan to get there.

5) Don’t mind the eye-rolls. Evaluate your core beliefs about the music world, and don’t be afraid to challenge them, says Mr. Gallagher. For example, while some view house concerts as a waste of time, he disagrees: “I’ve gotten a lot of eye rolls: ‘It’s just a house [concert], not that big of a deal.’” But one thing leads to another; Mr. Gallagher’s current spate of house concerts will end with a performance at Carnegie Hall next year.

6) Artistic excellence is non-negotiable. All the Facebooking, tweeting, networking and Kickstartering in the world won’t sell a performance of subpar quality. And view the pairing of artistic excellence and creativity as a way to keep classical music (and your career!) alive, relevant and exciting. “I think [entrepreneurship] totally reconfigures classical music to the outside world, which is something that badly needs to happen to the entire field,” says Mr. Sandow.