ROCHESTER, N.Y., Jan. 19, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Benefit and Compensation Consultants (BCC), an actuarial benefit compensations and human resources consulting firm, and insurance broker, offers quality, competitively priced, comprehensive group medical coverage to both small business owners and individuals, including Medicare-eligible individuals. The BCC plans are the perfect solution for anyone who is fed up with all of the hassles with federal and state regulations surrounding 'Obamacare' plans.

The 2015 open enrollment period for 'Obamacare' runs through February 15. BCC urges eligible participants to sign up now for any of the BCC plans to ensure medical coverage for 2015.

"While 'Obamacare' is well intentioned, it is not for everyone, nor is everyone for it," commented Joel Levy, founder of BCC. "The myriad of forms, regulations, and rules are frustrating, stressful, and totally unnecessary. BCC offers small business owners and individuals affordable, quality comprehensive group medical coverage without all of the aggravation associated with the president's program. There are no medical questionnaires, no personal information to divulge, and no lifetime maximums. And there is a good chance participants can continue seeing their own doctor. That's why we like to say, BCC offers the finest group health insurance, even for those not in a group."

These are true group plans, which previously were only available to employees of large companies, and which cover everything top-notch plans should, including day-to-day medical needs, regular preventive care, and expensive diagnostic testing. Moreover, these plans financially protect subscribers against the high cost of treating a serious injury or illness. New participants are not limited to an annual set time period to make changes to their current coverage. They may switch to any BCC program at any time, even if they have recently renewed their coverage.

Who Should Sign Up

BCC medical plans are designed specifically for small-business owners; self-employed professionals such as lawyers, CPAs, doctors, dentists, or other professionals in private practice; freelancers or independent contractors; and Medicare recipients. Additionally, individuals receiving 1099 income, losing Cobra coverage, or those who have been shocked by a renewal increase in their current medical coverage should look into BCC's coverage. Those without medical coverage at work or are unhappy with their current medical coverage should also explore BCC's options.

Selected Features

Some of the features found in every BCC medical plan include:

An insurance carrier that is one of the nation's leading providers with one of the largest local and national provider networks

Capability for subscribers to keep their own doctor

Comprehensive coverage with no lifetime maximum

Prescription drug coverage, state and federal mandated services

Premiums not based on age, sex, zip code, smoker/non-smoker status, or health history

No medical questionnaire to complete

Referrals not needed to see a specialist

Coverage available for spouse and children

How It Works

BCC comprehensive group medical coverage is set up through the federal government's Professional Employer Organization (PEO) legislation. A PEO is designed to specifically help small businesses and individuals get the services and coverage they need.

As a PEO, BCC combines its clients into a larger group, allowing it to offer group coverage not normally available to small businesses and individuals. By doing so, BCC leverages the power of the group into lower premiums and better coverage.

Easy Enrollment

Getting started in a BCC medical plan is easy. All that is needed is to establish a relationship with the BCC PEO, then select a plan. An "Enrollment Package" file can be obtained by emailing info@opgus.com.

Availability

Benefit and Compensation Consultants' medical coverage is available in the following states: New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.

About Benefit and Compensation Consultants (BCC)

Founded in 1991, Benefit and Compensation Consultants (BCC) is an actuarial benefit compensations and human resource consulting firm and insurance broker. Its clients range from small privately held companies to large public companies. Clients also include high-net-worth individuals and professionals such as attorneys, CPAs, health-care professionals, and business people (i.e., real estate brokers, financial planners, insurance brokers, etc). BCC also has served a number of not-for-profit clients and religious institutions, universities and school districts, state and local governments, and teaching hospitals.

For more information, visit www.onepersongroup.com, call toll free 888-962-5353, or send an email to info@opgus.com.

Media Contact:

Susan van Barneveld

Copernio

714-891-3660

BCC@copernio.com

All products/services and trademarks mentioned in this release are the properties of their respective companies.

©2015 Benefit and Compensation Consultants. All rights reserved.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20141210/163678LOGO

SOURCE Benefit and Compensation Consultants