x of x Jason Burnell, 25, who works in a Senate office on Capitol Hill, was first in line outside the Georgetown Apple Store for the release of the new iPhone 6 on Friday in Washington, D.C. Originally from Boston, he waited outside the store a full 24 hours ahead of the release. "I've always done it since the second-generation iPhone," he says. "This is the first time I'm No. 1. So I feel good." Alan Neuhauser for USN&WR

x of x Apple employees welcomed shoppers to the Georgetown Apple Store in the nation's capital for the release of the new iPhone 6 on Friday. Enthusiasts camped out overnight to be first in line for the phone. Alan Neuhauser for USN&WR

x of x Apple employees shouted and cheered as the first shoppers entered the Georgetown Apple Store in the nation's capital for the release of the new iPhone 6 Friday morning. Alan Neuhauser for USN&WR

x of x One of the first Americans nationwide to buy a new iPhone 6 runs through a line of Apple employees at the Georgetown Apple Store in the nation's capital Friday morning.

Alan Neuhauser for USN&WR

x of x Apple employees offer high-fives as shoppers enter the Georgetown Apple Store in the nation's capital to buy the new iPhone 6 Friday morning. Alan Neuhauser for USN&WR

x of x Paul Yepez, 17, a freshman in business management at the University of the District of Columbia, arrived at the Georgetown Apple Store in the nation's capital 12 p.m. the day before the release of the iPhone 6 so he could be among the first Americans nationwide to buy the coveted phone. "I like new technology," he says. "Every time there's a new one, I come out." Alan Neuhauser for USN&WR

x of x Riham Willis, 22, waits with friend Kyle Johnson, 25, right, outside the Georgetown Apple Store in the nation's capital ahead of the release of the new iPhone 6 Friday morning. The two had been waiting since 7:30 the night before. "I'm not even getting a phone," Willis says. "I'm just here to keep him company." Alan Neuhauser for USN&WR

x of x An Apple enthusiast catches some shut-eye outside the Georgetown Apple Store in the nation's capital ahead of the release of the new iPhone 6 on Friday morning. Alan Neuhauser for USN&WR

x of x Garbage overflowed from a trashcan outside the Georgetown Apple Store in the nation's capital, where people waited overnight to be first in line to buy the new iPhone 6 Friday morning, Sept. 19, 2014. Alan Neuhauser for USN&WR

x of x Apple fans lined up outside company stores around the world, including in Georgetown in the nation's capital, to be among the first to buy the new iPhone 6. Alan Neuhauser for USN&WR

x of x Apple fans lined up outside company stores around the world, including in Georgetown in the nation's capital, to be among the first to buy the new iPhone 6.

Alan Neuhauser for USN&WR

x of x Emmett Williams, 24, center, a student at the Art Institute of Washington, kills time as he waits to buy the new iPhone 6 at the Georgetown Apple Store in the nation's capital Friday morning. "The best parts on the market, from the mobile devices to the computers," he says of Apple. "There's no better." Alan Neuhauser for USN&WR

x of x Senate staffer and Boston native Jason Burnell, 25, arrived at the Georgetown Apple Store in Washington, D.C., at 8 a.m. before the day of the release of the iPhone 6 to be first in line to buy the coveted phone Friday morning. It was his first time being at the head of the line, but he says he doesn't plan to stop camping out for each new Apple phone that he's reached the top. "No way," he says, "It's just getting started."

Alan Neuhauser for USN&WR

x of x University of the District of Columbia freshman Paul Yepez, 17, was surrounded by reporters after emerging from the Georgetown Apple Store with a new iPhone 6 Friday morning. He arrived outside the Washington, D.C., store at noon the day before to be one of the first in the country to buy the coveted phone. Alan Neuhauser for USN&WR