Leader. Decisive. Successful. Brave. Committed. True American.

That’s how voters described Donald Trump in a focus group moderated by Frank Luntz on Monday night. Twenty-nine men and women from the Washington, D.C., region, out of 33 invited, participated in the session—offering impassioned critiques of the GOP establishment.

The sample of supporters included Democrats, Independents, and Republicans: Most were all in for Trump.

Why? “He’s voiced what everyone else is saying,” one male participant said, “America is a brand and the brand has been hurting a very long time, and it takes somebody like Trump to bring that brand back.”

That Trump is competing in a crowded GOP field doesn’t seem to faze his supporters. Since his June announcement, Trump has positioned himself as the Republican frontrunner. And last week, a CNN/ ORC poll also found that he’s closing the gap with Democratic frontrunner Hillary Clinton.

But his surge in the polls hasn’t come quietly. The presidential hopeful has come to be known for calling Mexican immigrants rapists, saying that John McCain is not a war hero, and attacking Megyn Kelly following the first GOP debate. And, while his comments have stirred controversy, they are also generating traction among voters, according to the focus group. Many found his flamboyant style entertaining. Participants reported positive feelings after being shown clips of Trump criticizing Rosie O’Donnell at the first debate, and flaunting his wealth.

“He’s not a politician. I won’t vote for an established politician.”

The panelists ranked Trump’s promise to repeal Obamacare and “restore the balance between U.S. trading partners” highest among his various stands on the issues. Some respondents, including a woman from Mexico, pointed to Trump’s visit to the U.S.-Mexico border as the moment they decided to support him.

But Trump’s biggest selling point isn’t what he’s done—it’s what he hasn’t. A majority of respondents are simply happy that he’s not a politician, based on their negative views of members of Congress.