Natural leader: Wanderers coach Tony Popovic. Photo: Getty Images

Western Sydney Wanderers striker Tomi Juric says his coach Tony Popovic could be the perfect man to repair the Socceroos in time for the 2014 World Cup in June but hopes he sticks with the A-League premiers in favour of the national team.

Popovic is one of three domestic-based coaches that could be in the frame for the Socceroos' top job, alongside Central Coast Mariners coach Graham Arnold and Melbourne Victory's Ange Postecoglou.

Popovic is seen as a potential candidate after winning the premiers plate in his first year in the profession. Juric praised the Wanderers' boss as a potential national team coach but would prefer to see him remain at the helm at Parramatta Stadium.

Belief: Tomi Juric backs Tony Popovic. Photo: Anthony Johnson

"I think definitely he would be," Juric said. "I've seen what quality and what knowledge he has of the game but I wouldn't like him to go because it would mean he goes away from the Wanderers.

Advertisement

"I feel he is definitely the right man for the job and he's the right man for the Wanderers. I would like to have him here at the Wanderers because it helps me develop as a footballer with him and Ante [Milicic] together, which will be great for me and the team."

The 22-year-old striker scored a late equaliser on his club debut against Central Coast Mariners to earn the Wanderers a 1-1 draw in their season opener. As a substitute, Juric struck an 86th-minute volley to earn the Wanderers a share of the spoils in the grand final rematch and says his late leveller raised his personal expectations for the season.

"I think I've set my standards high now and I don't want to go below that," Juric said. "I have a high expectation for myself and the coaching staff. I don't want to let anyone down."

Despite clawing back late into the game, the Wanderers thought they were somewhat unlucky not to leave with all three points against the champions.

Western Sydney spurned a number of chances to take an early lead as Mariners goalkeeper Justin Pasfield produced a number of superb reflex saves to deny the visitors. They lacked sharpness in front of goal, but Juric warned rivals that they would become far more clinical as the season progressed.

"It's only going to get better from here on in. It's a big positive for us and we know we're only going to improve and that's a big factor for us," He said.

The match drew a crowd of 17,134 with nearly 7000 of those Wanderers fans who joined forces with the Central Coast faithful to create a colourful atmosphere inside Bluetongue Stadium.

Juric revealed that the passion from the stands restored belief within the Wanderers team that they could salvage a point in the dying stages of the game.

"Once we went down, they kept cheering us on they cheered even harder," Juric said. "The fans are who we play for. With a big showing like they had last night, it was just fantastic."