Adam Omernick with Zen Fly Fishing Gear (holding a fishing pole), explains to Rusty Bloyd of Loveland, to his right, how to extend the 12-foot long tenkara style of fly-fishing pole on Sunday at the Larimer County Natural Resources Fishing Expo at The Ranch, while others look on. ( Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Rusty Bloyd of Loveland examined a tenkara-style fly-fishing rod on Sunday during the Larimer County Natural Resources Fishing Expo at the Zen Tenkara Fly Fishing Gear booth. Co-owner Adam Omernick explained how to extend the collapsible rod and said that now that he is used to the 12-foot rod, he'll never go back to a 9-foot one.

Amberie Torres and her family checked out fishing racks to hold their poles.

Christine Morgan bought a necklace made of two horseshoeing nails in the shape of a heart from Cindy Clark-Hicks of Wild Sage Creations at the expo.

The Fishing Expo started out as an educational experience to teach people how to fish in reservoirs, according to Parks and Open Lands manager Mark Caughlan, who manages Horsetooth Reservoir.

More than 350 people showed up at the first event 11 years ago and Larimer County staff decided they needed a bigger venue.

Now the expo at The Ranch attracts around 3,400 people over a two-day event.

While lakes remain stable and usually at the same water levels, reservoirs fluctuate quite a bit, Caughlan said, which was why the expo is a great way to reach out people to love to fish to teach them how to do so in the reservoirs.

The expo Saturday and Sunday offered a mix of vendors and talks on all types of fishing and equipment.

"The quality of the speakers here are just as good as expos in Denver," Caughlan said. "You get to meet them in a smaller venue here."

Advertisement

He said that fishing people value that one-on-one attention, which is why the expo is still so relevant.

"This is our 11th year and might be our busiest year yet," he said.

Biologists from Colorado Parks and Wildlife also stopped by to discuss how they manage fish that populate the area reservoirs.

Christine and Mike Morgan were at the expo with their son, Davin Bishop, because they are "fly-fishing addicts."

They even had a fly-fishing wedding one month before the September 2013 flood.

Their pastor wore full fly-fishing gear including waders, and they got married at the Forks Park by Drake. That park is no longer there.

Fishing is "relaxing, even if you don't catch a fish," Christine said. "There's nothing like standing in the river and listening to the sound. I love it."

Karin Miller, the other co-owner of Zen Fly Fishing Gear, explained to customers how the style of fly-fishing rod is easy to use and only needs one style of knot, as opposed to traditional Western fly-fishing.

"You need to know thousands of knots, how to rig the line," Miller said about traditional fly-fishing. "This is simplifying fly-fishing. A lot of women are getting into it."

Her business hosts clinics and private tenkara trips.

The Torres family, from Windsor, likes to go up to Flatiron Reservoir or Lon Hagler on the weekends.

Skye Torres, 5, pointed out that she loves to catch minnows.

"We catch minnows and then our parents use them," she said.

Her mom, Amberie Torres, said that her son, Domanick, loves to catch bass and she herself likes trout.

"We go almost every weekend, except not now that it's winter," Domanick said. "One time we almost caught 300 minnows. We use minnows for bait but just to warn you, don't use minnows because they always fly off."

Lonnie Snyder, vice president of the Colorado Walleye Association with a booth at the expo, stopped by Stumpy's Custom Rods and Accessories to check out the new Loveland-based custom rod company.

"We can get whatever weight we want? We have some guys that are pretty particular," he asked while checking out the rods standing in a custom-built rack. He said the association likes to promote local businesses at its annual dinner.

Kyle and Larry Stumpf, father and son, said that they can build whatever is needed.

Kyle said they started the company in 2014 because he wanted a fly rod and realized it was cheaper to build one then the buy one. So they formed a business based off a nickname of their last name.

Sandy Hewitt, youth director with the Colorado Walleye Association, said that this weekend went a lot better than last year.

"We had more people and it seemed like everyone was happier this year. I'm not really sure why but it seems like there has been a big change," Hewitt said. "Everyone had a great attitude, which made the expo so much fun."

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/jessicabenes.