Texas Christian University officials didn’t organize an official watching party for Sunday morning’s announcement of teams for the new College Football Playoff. The closest thing to Horned Frog central would have been the dining hall at the Brown-Lupton University Union, where at least a couple of hundred students were eating lunch and staring at the television screens.

In the lead up to the announcement, the students cheered every reference to TCU and booed most mentions and footage of their rivals, particularly Baylor. The Baylor Bears gave the Frogs their only loss of the season (61-58) in October.

The crowd quieted as analysts handicapped the chances that then 3rd-ranked TCU would drop out of the top four, the only that make the playoffs.

As they waited for the final spot to be revealed, there was shushing of those who were chatting too loudly and phones held aloft to capture photos and video of the victorious moment. Students with plates of food getting colder stood still in front of the TVs.

The announcement of Ohio State University for the final spot led to groans, at least a couple of out-loud profanities and the scattering of students. TCU had dropped from number 3 to 6 in the rankings that counted most, and Baylor had moved ahead of them to number 5.

Demetrion Amie, a freshman defensive end for the Frogs, sat at a counter near one of the TVs to find out the news. He stood up and quickly left when he saw TCU’s season ended without a shot a national championship.

“You have to keep winning. You can’t lose [referring to the Baylor game],” he said. “We have respect, but it’s about winning.”

Darron Turner, assistant vice chancellor of student affairs and a defensive tackle on TCU’s mid-1980s teams, was in the student union for the announcement. He said he had been confident he would be in the middle of a celebration Sunday morning.

“We made a great showing yesterday,” he said about the blowout win over Iowa State. “We made a great showing all year…I thought we did what we needed to do to get in.”

He said he wasn’t sure what had changed since last week, when TCU was solidly in the top four.

As Turner sat there pondering what happened, students returned to their normal Sunday lunch schedule and the crowd thinned. But there was still talk of football.

Nearly a half-hour after the bad news, one student – scanning social media on her phone – looked up to ask her friends a question: “What does this mean? ‘The Big 12 is getting the shaft.’”

Later it was announced that TCU would face 9th-ranked University of Mississippi in Atlanta’s Peach Bowl, while Baylor would play Michigan State in the Cotton Bowl.

On Twitter:

@jeffmosier