With more than 140 years of providing health care, St. Joseph Medical Center is a well-known asset to the residents of Berks County.

And as Penn State’s health system looks to expand its presence around the state, it hopes to use that reputation.

Earlier this month, the new Penn State Health System finalized the purchase of St. Joseph from its previous owner, Colorado-based Catholic Health Initiatives. The hospital will be the first member of the new system, which soon will include the Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center in Hershey and potentially others around Pennsylvania.

Last week, health system officials traveled to the St. Joseph campus in Bern Township to celebrate the new partnership. Dozens of St. Joseph’s staff clad in blue and white T-shirts led a “We are Penn State” cheer as officials unveiled the campus’ new name – Penn State Health St. Joseph Medical Center – and a lion statue about half the size of the one that famously sits on Penn State’s campus in State College.

St. Joseph president and CEO John Morahan said the acquisition will allow the hospital to continue to carry on the legacy of the Catholic nuns who started a hospital in a former estate at 12th and Walnut streets in 1873.

“This legacy to the sisters of St. Francis, this St Joseph will thrive by placing it into the hands of a great steward we know as Penn State Health,” he said. “St Joseph’s past was, and our future is, building systems of care in transforming times.”

Under the new partnership, patients and physicians at St. Joseph will have more access to specialists from Penn State’s Milton S. Hershey Medical Center. According to Robin Wittenstein, CEO of Penn State Health, the majority of that treatment still will be provided at St. Joseph.

“Our goal is to help good community hospitals like St. Joe’s just take the services they do – it’s a high-quality, cost-effective organization – and just bolster it with the specialized services that are available at Hershey,” she said.

To some extent, collaboration already was taking place before Penn State Health started looking at acquiring St. Joseph last year.

The hospital was the first to be part of Penn State Health’s Telestroke program. When a patient arrives at St. Joseph exhibiting symptoms of a stroke, he can be evaluated remotely by a stroke specialist in Hershey. It enables about 70 percent of stroke patients to remain at St. Joseph, receiving care that previously would have required them to go to a more specialized stroke center.

“A stroke specialist in Hershey can talk to the ER physicians; they can see the patient’s images and their test results, they can talk to the patient, help make the right diagnosis and help get the treatment started here,” Wittenstein said. “And a lot of times, the patient stays here instead of having to be transferred.”

That approach has been partly inspired by the changing health care landscape caused by the Affordable Care Act. Hospitals are being encouraged to place more emphasis on preventive care and predicting what possible conditions patients will face by mining historical medical data – a philosophy known as “population health.”

“The Affordable Care Act has changed our thinking to say, instead of waiting for people to get sick and come to us, ‘How do we help them stay healthier, or stay as healthy as they can?’ ” Wittenstein said.

Morahan said St. Joseph’s Bern Township facility, completed in 2006, is an ideal setting to provide this new kind of care. It features an abundance of private rooms, an easily accessible emergency department and a spacious layout anchored by decentralized nursing stations.

“The design and actual working of the hospital provide operating efficiencies and enable cost-saving work processes, setting St. Joseph apart from its competitors,” he said. “We are a nimble delivery system well positioned for the population health movement that is emerging.”

Of course, some care will have to be provided in Hershey.

Wittenstein said it’s more responsible to provide services such as pediatric surgery and acute care at its nationally ranked Children’s Hospital, with follow-up care in Berks County.

The same approach can be taken with cancer care, she said.

“Some patients may need to go there to get a treatment program started, then come back here for chemotherapy, say. The majority of the care will be provided here,” she said.

Patients will see a gradual transition in the coming months, said Sean Young, chief marketing officer for Penn State Health. He said it is Penn State’s intent to retain as many of the hospital’s staff as possible.

Eventually, the health system will expand to include other partners. It has a partnership with Pinnacle Health in Harrisburg, and others in the state could be a part of the system in the future. Wittenstein said the health system could have looked at starting its own medical center in Berks County but found the partnership with St. Joseph was the ideal way to expand into the region.

“The truth is St Joseph is a great community hospital,” Wittenstein said. “They have great physicians; the staff who work here are incredibly committed. So to us, it’s not important to necessarily build something new, but to work with the right partners.”