A Chinese ship anchored at a port outside Sao Paulo. As China’s largest trading partner, Brazil has suffered amid a slowdown in the world’s second biggest economy. Reuters/ Paulo Whitaker

Despite a strong first half for private equity investments and fundraising in Latin America, the Latin American Private Equity & Venture Capital Association warned of tough times ahead on concerns of a knock-on effect of a slowdown in China.

“We expect to see the worst before it gets better,” said Lavca President and Executive Director Cate Ambrose . “What the world is facing is a lot of uncertainties with recalibrating China’s growth and the price of oil and commodities. It is just going to be a more challenging time for emerging markets this year and next year.”

Expectations that China’s economic growth is slowing–some economists have predicted rates around 4% this year, well below the official target of 7% –have wreaked havoc in the global equities markets over the past weeks.

Although some investors’ worries are psychological, the pain is real for countries like Brazil. China is Brazil’s largest trading partner and has been, over the past few years, driving much of Brazil’s economic growth and asset inflation with its hunt for commodities.

The Brazilian real has lost more than 40% of its value against the U.S. dollar since the beginning of the year, and economists expect Brazil’s gross domestic product, which shrank 1.9% in the second quarter , to record a contraction of 2.1% this year.

Ms. Ambrose said that while the general sentiment is for investors to shun Brazil in the near term, some with a medium-to-long-term view of the market, like sovereign funds and family offices, are taking the opportunity to look at Brazilian assets.

“If you are taking a mid- or long-term view of the region, now is a very attractive time to buy,” she said.

Given the significant devaluation of currencies in Brazil and other Latin American countries, “business owners are more willing to negotiate on valuations,” she said.

Even though uncertainties surrounding China will likely cast a shadow over investments in Latin America countries, private equity enjoyed a good first half of the year. Lavca said $3.58 billion was deployed among Latin American buyouts in the six months ended June 30, compared with $2.57 billion for the same period last year.

Brazil led investment activities with 69 transactions, worth a combined $2.28 billion, Lavca said, compared with $1.89 billion from 50 deals in the year-earlier period.

Mexican deals more than doubled in value, to $978 million, in the six months ended June 30, up from $403 million a year ago. The Andean region of Colombia, Chile and Peru also attracted $304 million of investments, up from $265 million during the same period last year.

Latin American-focused funds raised $4.27 billion during the first six months of the year, marking the strongest start since 2011, when $4.9 billion was amassed.

“But we don’t expect that by the end of the year, we will have as strong a year as 2014, when a record $10.4 billion was raised,” Ms. Ambrose said.

Last year, Advent International raised the largest private equity fund for the region, collecting $2.1 billion. Patria Investimentos– Blackstone Group ‘s investment partner in Latin America–closed on a $1.8 billion fund while Gavea Investimentos pulled in $1.1 billion.

For more on the Latin American deal landscape, including some of the largest transactions of the first half, check out the full story in LBO Wire.

[Correction: The record amount raised for Latin American private equity funds was $10.4 billion. An earlier version of the story misstated that amount.]