SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

HOUSTON, Texas — Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX) tells Breitbart News that if he’s elected President, one of his first actions will be to undo all of President Barack Obama’s unconstitutional executive orders.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

“Absolutely,” Cruz replied when asked if one of the first things he would do if elected would be to undo all of Obama’s unconstitutional executive orders in an exclusive interview with Breitbart News in Houston.

The next 20 months are going to be very dangerous because President Obama, unfortunately, seems to have decided to disregard the United States Congress and disregard the American people and instead is trying to force through as much of his extreme agenda as possible via unilateral executive action—and I think we’re going to see that only accelerate through the end of 2016 with more and more unconstitutional executive orders, more regulatory abuse and more and more efforts to go to the United Nations and foreign war tribunals in an effort to end run Congress. In January 2017, we will have a new president and if I am elected president, the very first thing I intend to do on the first day is rescind every single unconstitutional or illegal executive action from President Obama.

Cruz jabbed at Obama’s line where the current president said he has a “pen and a phone” as well.

“President Obama is fond of saying he has a pen and he has a phone,” Cruz said. “Well, live by the pen and die by the pen. Every illegal executive action that he puts in place can be undone in an instant by the next president through the same mechanism. The proper avenue for creating law in this country is not unilateral decree. It is rather passing legislation through Congress that is signed into law by president pursuant to the dictates of the Constitution.”

Cruz was in Houston on Tuesday for the public grand opening of his presidential campaign headquarters. Cruz, the first announced presidential candidate of the 2016 cycle, spoke along with his father Rafael Cruz and wife Heidi Cruz after supporters were shuttled in and out of his new campaign headquarters office here. This interview came via phone later in the evening on Wednesday, and more from the interview and Breitbart News’ look inside Cruz’s presidential campaign operation will come out in the coming days.

Right before this interview, news broke that Obama is planning executive action to enable and implement U.N. climate rules. “The White House is seeking to enshrine its pledge in a global climate agreement to be negotiated Nov. 30 to Dec. 11 in Paris. It calls for cutting greenhouse gas emissions by close to 28 percent from 2005 levels within a decade, using a host of existing laws and executive actions targeting power plants, vehicles, oil and gas production and buildings,” Reuters’ Valerie Volcovici wrote about Obama’s newest potential end-run around Congress.