Duluth, MN (NNCNOW.com) --- The U.S. Senate showdown intensified in Duluth Wednesday as Sen. Al Franken and his Republican challenger Mike McFadden sparred in their first debate of the election cycle.

The two candidates invoked heated exchanges over numerous topics, including health care issues and mining initiatives.

"I guarantee you that Obamacare is the wrong answer. It is a train wreck," McFadden said. "And that is quoting a Democrat, Senator Max Baucus. This train continues to wreck."

In a crowded auditorium, McFadden went on the offensive, disavowing Sen. Franken's support of the Affordable Care Act.

"I have story after story for you from people where this system is not working," McFadden added. "The 29 year old man who has type two diabetes, who lost his insurance despite the President's promise; he has to go on the exchange where it costs two times more. God Bless him, I hope he didn't have Preferred One."

Franken acknowledged the turmoil in the beginning days of the President's health care overhaul, but says there have been many health care success stories in Minnesota due to the Affordable Care Act.

"Look, there has been problems with the roll out in ACA," Franken said. "I talked to a mom whose daughter has cystic fibrosis, who hit her lifetime limit. Her child is alive today because of the Affordable Care Act."

Republicans need six seats to retain the majority of the United States Senate, and political insiders say this race could determine the outcome.

The two U.S. Senate candidates went head to head on mining initiatives in Northern Minnesota, an issue that often pits environmentalist against Iron Rangers who want good paying jobs.

"Let's do this right. We want this to happen, but let's make sure we do it right," Franken said. "I can understand how frustrating it is especially to people who want those jobs. But the only thing worse than taking a long time to getting this right, is getting it wrong."

McFadden snapped back, saying Franken is tied to the hip of environmentalists who do not want to see Polymet mine precious metals in Northern Minnesota.

"I want everyone in this room to know here today that I support mining," McFadden said. "I will fight for miners. I'm an advocate to get these mines open. The fact that this has taken nine years and over two hundred million dollars in regulatory review is not acceptable. It is crazy"

Steve Carlson, the Independence Party candidate, was not invited by the Duluth News Tribune and Chamber of Commerce to participate in Wednesday's debate.

Steve Carlson is the Independence Party candidate for U.S. Senate.

Carlson describes himself as a Tea Party candidate.

Independence Party leaders in Minnesota have chosen not to endorse Carlson, because they say his platform does not align with the Independence Party's vision.

We reached out to Carlson for comment, but he was unavailable.

We plan on covering his candidacy in this election cycle when his schedule allows.

Nick Minock

nminock@kbjr.com