Which eco products can actually save you money? Our free guide reveals all, plus products to avoid

Some eco products can help you save money and become greener

Do you want to find an easy way to reduce your energy bills? Which? has scoured the market to bring you the eco products that can actually make a difference to how much money you'll hand over to your energy company.

For those of you that want to cut down the cost of your heating, water or electricity, and for those that just want to become a little bit greener, we have outlined a selection of the best eco products out there.

To help you avoid wasting your hard-earned cash on the eco gadgets that aren’t actually going to save you any money, we have also highlighted some products that don’t seem to live up to their energy-saving claims.

This guide is free - use our research to save you money and get the right products for your home and budget. Click eco products Which? recommends.

If you're not yet a Which? member, you can sign up for a £1 trial to get access to all of our online reviews.

The 13 eco products you should buy

We have found 13 different energy products that can help reduce your energy usage. From eco shower heads to radiator boosters, find out how each product can help reduce your heating, water or electricity bills and how much you could be saving.

Many of these products are relatively cheap to buy. The savings on your energy bills mean that most of the products also pay for themselves, often within a matter of months.

We reveal which £25 product could save you £150 a year on your heating bill, and which products you can get free from your utility company - see eco products we recommend.

The 6 eco products you can do without

To prevent you from wasting your money on products that are just going to end up at the back of your cupboard, make sure you read about the 6 eco products that don’t quite live up to their money-saving claims.

Instead of splashing out on each product, we explain what simple lifestyle change or alternative product could help you cut your energy bills.

More on this...