BOSTON - Barbara Anthony, Massachusetts' undersecretary of consumer affairs and business regulation under former Gov. Deval Patrick, has taken a job as a consultant and senior fellow in healthcare for the Pioneer Institute.

Anthony will focus on Massachusetts' compliance with state laws that require cost transparency from healthcare providers and insurers.

"Although the law says they should be transparent, I believe we still have a ways to go," Anthony said in a phone interview with The Republican/MassLive.com.

The conservative-leaning Pioneer Institute has emerged as one of the leading critics of Massachusetts' implementation of the Affordable Care Act under Patrick. Anthony, a Democrat, supports the Affordable Care Act, and says that is one area where she disagrees with the Pioneer Institute.

"I am a supporter of the Affordable Care Act. That's one area I do differ with Pioneer," Anthony said. "But the Pioneer Institute and I agree completely on transparency. That's a common goal."

Under Massachusetts' health care cost containment law, which was passed in 2012, providers must tell customers the price of a procedure, based on that patient's insurance, within two days of a customer's request. Doctors and hospitals are also required to help customers get in touch with insurers to find out how much they will have to pay out of pocket.

Insurers must provide in real time, through a website, information about the price of a procedure at comparable doctors or hospitals and about how much the procedure will cost the patient given their deductible and copay.

Anthony said the ability to get the information is important for consumers with high deductible health plans, so they know how much they have to pay. She said studies show that even individuals whose insurers will pay for a procedure are interested in knowing how much their doctor charges. In addition, she said, there is a value to the market in knowing how much health care costs, since transparent pricing will lead to a more competitive market.

"Health care prices have forever not been transparent," Anthony said. "We can't think of any service we obtain as consumers where we have no idea of what the price is, or the quality."

Under Anthony, the state launched a website http://www.getthedealoncare.org/ to educate consumers about these resources. But Anthony said she has heard anecdotally that it is still difficult for consumers to get pricing information. At the Pioneer Institute, Anthony will focus on ensuring that insurers and providers are complying with the law. She plans to look at what companies are doing to tell people about cost estimator tools, and to identify problems and best practices relating to health care transparency. She will examine whether there is more the state can do to encourage transparency.

"I don't think Massachusetts should rest on our laurels here," Anthony said. "We have a good law in place, but it's not enough. We have a long way to go."

Pioneer Institute executive director Jim Stergios said in a statement, "Markets work best when there is information on cost and quality. I look forward to working with Barbara to make sure consumers and employers have the transparency they deserve and need in order to make informed decisions."

Anthony was appointed undersecretary of consumer affairs and business regulation in 2009. Since leaving office at the end of Patrick's term, Anthony has worked as a senior fellow at the Harvard Kennedy School's Center for Business and Government where she is researching and writing about Massachusetts' health care cost containment efforts. She also teaches a course at Suffolk University Law School. A lawyer, Anthony previously worked for Health Law Advocates, a Boston-based non-profit law firm dedicated to healthcare access, as regional director of the Northeast Regional Office of the Federal Trade Commission, and as chief of the Massachusetts Attorney General's Public Protection Bureau.