China's Yuan Devaluation Complicates TPP The Associated Press What Happened:



China cut the value of its currency three days this week, dropping the value of the yuan 2.8 percent in a move the country’s central bank said was an attempt to make the strictly controlled currency more market-oriented.



But while the move may give a boost to China’s flagging economy, it could have a wide-ranging impact in the U.S. and around the world, advantaging Chinese exports to the detriment of other countries' goods. It also comes at a time when negotiators of 12 Pacific Rim nations, including the U.S., are putting the finishing touches on the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a massive trade deal that would encompass 40 percent of the world’s gross domestic product and is meant to counterbalance China’s economic influence.



Earlier this year, over strong objections from many Democrats, Congress passed fast-track authority granting Obama administration the ability to negotiate the trade deal, limiting itself to an up-or-down vote on the final agreement.



Why It Matters:



Reactions from Congress have been split on whether China’s actions showed the TPP was more necessary than ever or revealed deep flaws in the deal as it currently stands.



“Today's news that China has yet again lowered the value of its currency is another harsh reminder that we cannot afford to sit idly by as China refuses to play by the rules," Sen. Rob Portman, R-Ohio, said in a statement. "Any negotiations on the Trans-Pacific Partnership must prioritize combating currency manipulation by our foreign competitors."



Opponents to the TPP say provisions in the deal that would punish members that manipulate the values of their currencies need to be in place since China might eventually join the pact.



“Given China’s history of devaluing its currency to gain an unfair export advantage, today’s actions by the Chinese government raise serious concerns,” said Rep. Sander Levin, D-Mich., one of the most outspoken House members against the TPP. “We need to use TPP as a key opportunity to write the rules of trade for the 21st Century, this action highlights the need to include a strong and effective obligation on currency manipulation in TPP.”

Clinton Email Scandal Eclipses Benghazi Investigation

Clinton Email Scandal Eclipses Benghazi Investigation The Associated Press What Happened:



Hillary Clinton’s email is the political scandal that keeps on giving. This week, Clinton directed her private server be handed over to the Justice Department as part of an investigation into whether classified information was improperly sent or stored on the server or through her email account.



The State Department maintains that nothing marked as classified was sent to Clinton through her private email while she was serving as secretary of state. It’s not uncommon for State and intelligence agencies to have disagreements over classifications, leading some to speculate that such a conflict may be at the heart of the latest round of questions.



But Republicans jumped on the news this week that classified information had been found among Clinton's emails, calling for thorough examination into whether laws were broken.



"Secretary Clinton's previous statements that she possessed no classified information were patently untrue," House Speaker John Boehner said in a statement. "Her mishandling of classified information must be fully investigated."



Why It Matters:



The House committee convened to investigate the 2012 attack in Benghazi has been criticized as a politically motivated attempt to drag down Clinton’s presidential bid. But committee chairman Trey Gowdy, R-S.C., said recent revelations have lent credence to his panel’s continued focus on Clinton’s communications.



"The fact that Secretary Clinton finally surrendered her email server vindicates Speaker Boehner and Chairman Gowdy's efforts to compel her to do the right thing,” Kevin Smith, a spokesman for Boehner, told the Washington Examiner.



With Clinton's presidential poll numbers plummeting amid concerns from Americans about her trustworthiness, what might have started as a fishing expedition potentially landed the big one.

Southwest Republican Slam EPA Response to Colorado Spill

Southwest Republican Slam EPA Response to Colorado Spill The Associated Press What Happened:



An attempt to clear buildup of wastewater near an old gold mine in Colorado led to a massive contamination of two rivers when an EPA team breached a dam last week while trying to install a drain pipe.



Three million gallons of wastewater, tainted with heavy metals, arsenic and other contaminants turned portions of the ANimas River, north of the town of Durango, a cloudy orange and threatened drinking supply in Colorado, New Mexico and Utah.



"It is really a tragic and very unfortunate incident," EPA Administrator Gina McCarthy said, "and EPA is taking responsibility to ensure that that spill is cleaned up. There are thousands of abandoned mines throughout the West, and EPA routinely works with states to clean up these spills."



Why It Matters:



While the unsightly chemical plume is dissipating, the trouble is likely only beginning for the EPA. A frequent target of attacks from Republicans opposed to regulations they say hurt businesses, the spill has given an opening to those who are already inclined to see the agency dismantled.



Lawmakers in the affected areas have excoriated the EPA for the accident, and for handling the cleanup too slowly.



“Coloradans deserve to know the EPA’s plan for cleaning up the mess they’ve made and their plan for the long-term restoration of the river habitat impacted,” said Sen. Cory Gardner, R-Colo.



“The community has expressed serious concerns about the speed and scope of the EPA’s initial response,” he, along with Rep. Scott Tipton, R-Colo., and Sen. Michael Bennet, D-Colo., said in a letter to McCarthy. “We urge EPA to take full responsibility for this accident, including appropriate compensation to the communities that have been affected by the spill.”

Kerry Reopens Ambassador-less Cuban Embassy

Kerry Reopens Ambassador-less Cuban Embassy Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images What Happened:



Secretary of State John Kerry traveled to Havana on Friday to oversee the raising of the U.S. flag over the newly reopened embassy in Cuba, marking the restart of diplomatic relations that formally began last month.



Kerry said at the ceremony that it was time to put aside more than 50 years of contention between the U.S. and its island neighbor 90 miles off the coast of Florida, but he acknowledged the many issues that remain between the two nations. None of those issues is more pressing than the longstanding economic embargo the U.S. imposed on Cuba.



“The time is now to reach out to one another as two peoples who are no longer enemies or rivals but neighbors," he said.



“Just as we are doing our part, we urge the Cuban government to make it less difficult for their citizens to start businesses, to engage in trade, access information online,” Kerry added. “The embargo has always been something of a two-way street. Both sides need to remove restrictions that have been holding Cubans back.”



Why It Matters:



The Obama administration has taken significant steps to normalize relations between the U.S. and Cuba, but Congress holds the power to lift the embargo and appoint an ambassador – and it's uncertain when lawmakers will consider either of those issues.



Despite polls showing strong support for re-establishing diplomatic relations and ending the embargo (Gallup in February found 2-1 support on both questions), Cuban-American lawmakers remain staunchly opposed.



"I will make sure that the embassy you are opening in Havana will not have a U.S. ambassador unless, at the very least, we see real political reforms and progress on human rights, the return to the U.S. of harbored terrorists and fugitives to face justice, and the resolution of outstanding American property claims and judgments against the Cuban government," wrote Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., in a letter to Kerry this week.



Iran Deal Tenuous as Democrats Take Sides