By

During a college spring break, Jennifer Hupke went to Las Vegas and, as she said, “forgot to come back.” During her 15-years serving in Las Vegas area law enforcement, she also bought land, subdivided it and sold it to developers. Before she knew it, her success forced her to make a career choice. “Since real estate was what I was passionate about, I chose it. Then, we moved back to Wisconsin in 2003 to be closer to family and that’s when I joined Coldwell Banker,” she said during this edited interview.



What do you enjoy about selling real estate?

People asked me how I could move from law enforcement to real estate, but I view it as a lot of the same things. I can’t do something mundane and both careers are different daily, challenging, and keep me on my toes and interested.



How do you consider yourself to be different than other real estate agents?

I have a good relationship with law enforcement because of my previous career. I also represent many of the larger lending institutions with their foreclosure portfolios. Many agents are afraid of foreclosures because they think they’re too much work. I’ve earned my foreclosure certification, I’m a resource to our offices and I help train agents in selling foreclosures.

How do you approach the marketing of properties?

We pay to feature our listings on 17 websites as well as for exclusive presentation on our listings. This ensures the prospective buyer will have an agent knowledgeable on that property. We still give postcards to 100 to 200 neighbors to let them know a home is coming on the market. For my retail listings, we pay to stage the home and to ensure the Feng Shui is set up properly, declutter and make it show in its best light. We also pay to have professional photographs taken.

What role should a real estate agent play for a client?

An agent should be a guide and serve as a resource. We should sit down at a meeting with the client to find out what the seller or buyer is looking for so we’re not hunting, pecking and showing them property they don’t want.

What qualities make for a good real estate agent?

We have to be versatile. We also have to be responsive to our clients. We rarely take more than an hour to respond to an email. It’s all about communication, follow-up and paying attention to detail.

How does your team function?

I have a full-time assistant who is beyond amazing and I don’t think I could function without her. I can’t do this alone and I have two buyer’s agents who work on the team as well.

How you keep yourself current with the various aspects of the industry?

I have a number of certifications in the foreclosure niche. I attend a couple of conferences each year and take continuing education through the Wisconsin Realtors Association.

How have you grown as an agent since you began?

Getting lending institutions to trust me with their listings has been helpful, to the point where we deliver seminars on foreclosures both for other agents from all companies as well as for prospective buyers to educate them. I was just listed as the number three agent in the Milwaukee-Waukesha area and number twelve in Wisconsin by Realtrends.com. We carry about 30 listings at any given time.

What have you learned from your clients?

Everyone is different you have to communicate with them in a way they are comfortable. My assistant, Trisha Vinz, is a millennial and she wants to text everyone. It took me a while to get a phone with texting capability.

What is the biggest challenge clients face today?

Supply and demand. Inventory levels are crazy low in a lot of communities, coupled with new laws that have been passed that cover lending and make it more difficult to get financing.

What is your favorite part of the process when working with clients?

Getting to know customers, clients and their families and getting intertwined with them. We tell customers that once they work with us, they’ll never get rid of us.

Have you had any mentors?

My parents. Both were business owners and they’ve been incredible at keeping me balanced and on track as well at suggesting new ways of doing things and getting me to chill out and calm down when I need to.

What is the best advice you’ve been given?

It’s from Dad, and it’s to work smarter, not harder.

How do you relax in your down time?

I have an 8-year-old son who keeps me busy and I take him to every sport known. We also do a lot of traveling as a family and just got back from a trip to Washington, D.C. and will be going to Brewers Spring Training in a couple of months. I love to go to dinner with my husband and friends.



What professional/charitable organizations are you involved with?

We work with Honor Flight and the Fisher House, which will be a home for veterans’ families. I hope to be an escort on an upcoming Honor Flight. We also work with the Ronald McDonald House.