Topics: Affordable Care Act, Americans for Prosperity, Bill Haslam, Koch Brothers, Medicaid, Medicaid expansion, Obamacare, Tennessee, The Right, Politics News

I’m going to subject myself to a little bit of Pundit Accountability™ and go back to a piece I wrote back in November – the day before the election – arguing that the prospects for Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion were pretty good, even if Republicans governors were to have a good election night. “The governors of Tennessee, Wyoming, and Utah – Republicans all – are working on plans that would allow their states to accept Medicaid expansion funds,” I wrote, exhibiting a degree of optimism that is largely out of character for me. That optimism, at least as it pertained to those states, derived from my failure to take into account one critical factor: the intractability and general dickishness of Republican-controlled state legislatures and the Koch empire.

In Utah, Republicans in the state legislature are resisting governor Gary Herbert’s plan to accept Medicaid expansion funds, which would cover 146,000 people at a cost to the state of $236 million over five years. Instead, state Republicans are backing a plan that costs slightly less ($203 million over six years) but covers only 16,000 people. Thus, the Medicaid expansion in Utah is stalled because the state legislature is hell bent on throwing away money. In Wyoming, the legislature voted down the governor’s expansion plan on Friday.

But that’s nothing compared to what just happened in Tennessee. Gov. Bill Haslam, following the lead of several other Republican governors, worked out a compromise with the Department of Health and Human Services that would allow the state to accept expanded Medicaid funds while implementing some conservative policy tweaks. Haslam’s plan, Insure Tennessee, would cover residents up to 138 percent of the poverty level, require small monthly premium payments (up to two percent of income), and impose a six-month disenrollment for failing to pay. It’s obviously not the liberal ideal, but we’re talking about Tennessee, for god’s sake – this is the best they were going to get.

Anyway, the way the Medicaid expansion works is that the federal government pays 100 percent of the cost at the outset, dropping to 90 percent after a couple of years, leaving the state responsible for the remainder. It’s a good deal any way you slice it, but state Republicans have used this cost burden to argue against the expansion, claiming that state budgets are tight as it is and that the federal government can’t be trusted to live up to its end of the bargain. In Tennessee’s case, though, the state’s portion of the cost was going to be paid by the state’s hospitals. (Hospitals tend to be big fans of expanded Medicaid because it drastically reduces instances of uncompensated care.)