Buy Photo Staci Eddleman, the current principal of Westport Middle, has been tapped to lead Ballard High. (Photo: Sam Upshaw Jr./The Courier-Journal)

The principal shuffle in Jefferson County Public Schools continues: The principal of Westport Middle was tapped over the weekend to become the next leader of Ballard High School.

Staci Eddleman, who has been at the helm of Westport Middle since 2010 and who oversaw the addition of its Montessori program at that school, previously worked as an assistant principal at Ballard.

"We look forward to Dr. Eddleman being back on board," Ballard High staff said in an email that was sent out this weekend to parents. "Just goes to show the school adage is true. Once a Bruin, always a Bruin!"

The email said that JCPS Superintendent Donna Hargens has approved the selection of Eddleman to be principal.

"I am very happy to see Dr. Staci Eddleman at the helm of Ballard," said JCPS board member Steph Horne. Horne's district includes both Westport and Ballard. "I look forward to experiencing her dynamic leadership. She faces challenges with strength, determination and confidence. All of us in the Ballard family offer her our best."

Horne added that she plans to present Eddleman with a congratulatory cake during Horne's "Community Conversations" event at 6 p.m. March 12 at Bowen Elementary.

The principal position at Ballard came open when Jim Jury was chosen to take over at Male High School. Male High, in turn, had a principal vacancy after its former principal, David Mike, was terminated by the district following investigations into testing improprieties.

And now, the search will begin for a principal to take over at Westport Middle.

Hargens has been agitating in recent months for legislation that would allow superintendents to have more power in picking principals. A bill in the Kentucky Senate would allow superintendents to choose principals in the lowest 25 percent of schools.

Here are the open principal positions in the state's largest school district:

Maupin Elementary : This school is technically closing after this school year and reopening as a School of Innovation, meaning Hargens gets to appoint its next principal. The school has been without a principal since the beginning of the school year; June Wade, a retired administrator, is serving as interim principal.

: This school is technically closing after this school year and reopening as a School of Innovation, meaning Hargens gets to appoint its next principal. The school has been without a principal since the beginning of the school year; June Wade, a retired administrator, is serving as interim principal. Phoenix School of Discovery : Principal William "David" Bennett retired in October. Mark Sauer, a substitute retired administrator, has been named an interim principal. It is unclear when Hargens will appoint a new principal at the school.

: Principal William "David" Bennett retired in October. Mark Sauer, a substitute retired administrator, has been named an interim principal. It is unclear when Hargens will appoint a new principal at the school. Alex Kennedy Elementary: Applications have closed for the principal position at the new school, which opens next year.

Applications have closed for the principal position at the new school, which opens next year. Westport Middle: Now that Eddleman is headed to Ballard High, it's time for the more than 1,000-student school to find a new leader.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1AsaSFt