Everything about Emmanuel Sanders happens quickly. His routes, his one-hand grabs, his exits in his Lamborghini. So practice represents a contradiction. He remains on the sidelines working with trainers as his hamstring heals.

“It’s day to day, that’s all I can say,” Sanders said Tuesday afternoon. “Just day to day.”

The Broncos took a conservative approach after Sanders sat out the preseason opener. He missed the Houston Texans game last Saturday, but should return to practice this week.

“That is the expectation,” coach Gary Kubiak said.

Quarterbacks prefer to gain timing with receivers in the preseason, but it is weighed against common sense. The Broncos don’t want to Sanders to suffer a setback that would jeopardize his availability for the season opener on Sept. 13.

WATCH: Trending Now: When will Emmanuel Sanders come back?

Sanders set career highs last season with 101 receptions, 1,409 yards and nine touchdowns.

Center of attention Kubiak remains impressed by the development of the Baby Blockers, especially center Matt Paradis. But he said something interesting Tuesday that foreshadowed the agreement with Evan Mathis.

“You watch them individually, but the thing that is important is how they play as a group,” Kubiak said.

Center Matt Paradis, left tackle Ty Sambrailo and left guard Max Garcia represented the Broncos’ youngest offensive line since 2010. Mathis buys time to develop Garcia, whom the team views as a future starter. It also pairs Mathis with Paradis, who continues to draw raves.

“What’s really encouraging right now is that Paradis has become the leader, getting everybody on the same page and playing really well,” Kubiak said.

There was one significant change among the linemen. Sambrailo’s long locks are gone. After a horrible rookie haircut left odd side patches and a mullet, Sambrailo shaved his head.

About those 49ers? The Broncos pushed to land joint practices with the 49ers, believing they help the development of young players since the starters are expected to play half this Saturday. However, the two-day workouts arrive in week three of the preseason, which demands concessions. The teams won’t practice in full pads either day.

“We have a job to do, they have a job to do, it doesn’t matter who we go against as long as we get the work in,” running back C.J. Anderson said.

Added linebacker Brandon Marshall, “It would have been cool to have it when the fans were out here.”

Footnotes Linebacker Danny Trevathan’s return from surgery on his kneecap should reach another milestone this week. He’s on track to play in his first game since injuring the knee for a third time against the San Diego Chargers on Dec. 14. … Kubiak plans to give plenty of opportunities to Montee Ball and Kapri Bibbs this week. Bibbs is the only running back on the depth chart who has yet to carry the ball in the preseason — not a great sign when attempting to make the team. … Linebacker Lerentee McCray (groin) remains sidelined. … Another day ending in “y,” another interception for cornerback Aqib Talib. In a summer of strong performers, Talib ranks near Von Miller at the top. … The second-string offensive line rebounded against the Texans, with the entire group receiving positive game grades from Pro Football Focus.