As in, a $700,000 cash-on-hand advantage. From a press release the Jeff Landry camp put out this morning…

Landry Outraises Caldwell by Nearly Three-Quarters of a Million Dollars

Former Congressman and attorney, called “the only honest man in Washington,” poised for strong 2015 showing in AG race

LAFAYETTE, LA – In a campaign finance filing made today with the Louisiana Ethics Administration, Republican former Congressman Jeff Landry showed he raised nearly three-quarters of a million dollars more last year than former lifelong-Democrat-turned-Republican Buddy Caldwell.

In filings with the Ethics office, Buddy Caldwell showed he raised $38,645 in total for the entire 2014 calendar year.

Landry’s filing today demonstrated he raised over $764,180 from outside donors for the year. Landry’s total indicates he raised $725,535 more than Caldwell over the same period.

Landry is poised for a strong showing in the Attorney General’s race this year.

Landry, who also personally donated a sum to his campaign, ended the year well over three times the cash-on-hand as Caldwell. Caldwell goes into the race this year with approximately $300,000 in cash while Landry entered the Election Year with over $1,000,000 (one million dollars) on hand.

“Our message is driving our fundraising,” said Landry. “People are looking for an Attorney General who is honest, ethical, and truly conservative. I am a lifelong Republican who believes our party stands for freedom, family values, and job growth.”

Caldwell, a lifelong Democrat who switched to the Republican Party for the sole purpose of trying to win elections, endorsed Mary Landrieu last year. He also said Obamacare did not go far enough because the government needed more control.

While in Congress, Jeff Landry was named the “only honest man in Washington” by the well-known national Examiner newspaper. Landry was also named one of the top 5 most conservative members of the U.S. House by the respected National Journal publication. Landry became a Republican at the age of 18, when he first registered to vote.

Landry resides with his wife Sharon and their son in Acadiana. He is a practicing attorney, a former Sheriff Deputy, and a former Police Officer. Landry has also been a successful small business owner in the oil and gas industry. He served for more than a decade in the Louisiana National Guard.