House T&I aiming for highway and transit markup at month's end

With help from Kathryn A. Wolfe

T&I AIMING FOR TRANSPO BILL MARKUP AT MONTH’S END: Leaders of the House Transportation Committee are prepping a highway and transit bill markup for the last week of October, right around the time the current authorization will expire. In a chat off the House floor Tuesday night, Chairman Bill Shuster told MT he’s still working to nail down exact timing, noting things can change quickly. The committee’s top Democrat, Rep. Peter DeFazio, was a little more forthcoming — he told MT the markup would “probably” happen the week of Oct. 26. DeFazio said he and Shuster are meeting today to "see if we can finalize our policy discussions, and agree or disagree over certain things, and chart a path forward."

Story Continued Below

That of course means lawmakers will have to do another extension, since current policy expires Oct. 29. But that’s no surprise since Shuster has been saying for weeks they’d likely need one more short-term patch to bridge the gap until they can get agreement with the Senate on a long-term bill.

FULL STEAM AHEAD ON FUNDING: It’s one thing for the T&I Committee to push out a long-term transportation bill, but the big question still remains — how do you fund the thing? Well, Ways and Means member Dave Reichert said Tuesday night the committee still plans to move ahead with a six-year highway and transit bill funded with revenue from repatriation, even though talks with Sen. Chuck Schumer seemed to fall apart late last week. “I think that because the talks have reached a point where, you know, we haven’t come to agreement yet, that I think both sides have agreed that they should move ahead with their ideas on both the Senate and the House side so that we don’t lose any time," Reichert told MT, noting that "whether it’s a three-year or six-year bill hasn’t been determined yet.”

Are you gonna go my way? Senate EPW Chairman Jim Inhofe has lots of good things to say about House highway and transit bill negotiations, even as lawmakers in the lower chamber remain pretty tight-lipped. Inhofe told MT he thinks there’s a silver lining to the ongoing chaos surrounding the House leadership race — it actually makes transportation bill negotiations easier. And he thinks House negotiators might be more amenable to the idea of accepting key tenets included in the Senate bill. “I think, you know, that the leadership problems over there in the House probably reduced some of the reluctance or opposition that was there because now they can concentrate on this. And before they were thinking of anything they could think of to where [the bills] could be different from each other. Well that’s behind them now,” Inhofe said.

Let’s talk pay-fors: The affable Okie also said he thinks the Senate pay-fors, which would cover transportation policy for three years, are now a more attractive option for House negotiators following the breakdown of international tax talks last week. “I think the one thing everyone is saying, they are all saying yes [to] a six-year bill, no it doesn’t have to be all six years paid for,” he told MT on Tuesday afternoon following a morning chat with Shuster. “We need to get it done before — they’re shooting to do it before [Oct. 29],” he added.

WE MADE IT TO WEDNESDAY. Good morning and thanks for tuning into POLITICO’s Morning Transportation, your daily tipsheet on all things trains, planes, automobiles and ports. We’re Heather and Lauren, filling in for your regular MT host, Jen, over the next couple of days.

Let’s chat! Send scoops to hcaygle@politico.com and lgardner@politico.com or tweet us: @heatherscope and @Gardner_LM. And to dash away those midweek doldrums, here’s a picture of Heather’s dog, Biggie Smalls, behind the wheel (http://bit.ly/1VBY3Jw). Don’t click if you can’t handle cuteness!

“It's a little too loud on the highway, I wanna pull back in your driveway.” http://bit.ly/1MXdPqH

HAPPENING TODAY — GAME OF DRONES: The House T&I aviation panel is back at it today with a 10 a.m. hearing on drone safety. FAA Deputy Administrator Michael Whitaker will testify along with Tim Canoll, president of the Air Line Pilots Association. Representatives from the U.S. Forest Service and the Academy of Model Aeronautics will also take lawmakers’ questions. Expect the scary number of reported drone near misses and encounters — as of August, pilots reported 650 drone sightings this year — to be at the top of lawmakers’ line of questioning as they continue to mull policy ahead of a multi-year FAA reauthorization.

DeFazio sent a letter (http://politico.pro/1VCfbPg) to DOT in late August asking for specifics on what Congress could do to make it easier for the FAA to prevent collisions between airplanes and drones and step up its policing of bad drone operators.

Do your homework: Want to catch up on all things drone before the hearing? Here’s a nifty summary prepared by staffers on the aviation subcommittee: http://1.usa.gov/1JQrds1

And can’t miss — FAA cracks down on bad drone operators: The FAA wants folks to know it means business when it comes to unmanned vehicles, issuing its largest penalty to date for bad drone behavior. The agency is seeking a $1.9 million fine against a Chicago-based company for allegedly operating drones without its permission. The fine, against SkyPan International Inc., is for operating 65 aerial photography flights between 2012 and 2014 without proper equipment and without proper approvals, many of which were performed in restricted airspace around New York City. Kathryn has more: http://politico.pro/1FRKZss

THUNE HOPEFUL ON PTC: Senate Commerce Chairman John Thune is still holding out hope that Congress can deal with a positive train control extension on the broader transportation bill later this month, rather than moving it solo through the chambers. There are upsides to both approaches: getting bicameral agreement on a PTC-specific bill means the House could pass the legislation under suspension of the rules, positioning the Senate to then clear it by unanimous consent.

But: That can only happen if everyone agrees on a strategy for giving railroads more time to comply. Attaching an extension to another legislative vehicle, especially a mammoth one like the highway and transit bill covering myriad priorities, makes it easier for members to hold their nose and vote “aye” — even if they don’t completely love the PTC end-game. While that’s Thune’s preferred outcome, he told reporters Tuesday that opponents of the House and Senate proposals — he name-checked Sens. Richard Blumenthal and Cory Booker — likely couldn’t maintain an objection for long, “just because they know it's got to be fixed." Read more: http://politico.pro/1L5jPep

MT Mailbag: The U.S. Conference of Mayors endorsed the House PTC bill this week. Read the letter here: http://politico.pro/1MXGQ5K

CAN I GET A WITNESS: House Energy and Commerce Republicans have released their list of witnesses for Thursday’s oversight hearing on Volkswagen’s defeat device scandal. Michael Horn, president and CEO of VW’s U.S. subsidiary, will testify first. Two EPA officials — Christopher Grundler, director of the Office of Transportation and Air Quality, and Phillip Brooks, director of the enforcement office’s air division — round out the second panel.

A background memo (http://politico.pro/1VCgbTx) posted to the committee’s website Tuesday notes that the panel expects to receive documents and additional information as part of its investigation into the allegations “in coming weeks that will illuminate the facts and circumstances of these events.” Lawmakers are sure to press Horn on the details of the alleged deception and its impact on VW customers. Per the memo, they may also address the “EPA’s role in any measures to bring affected VWs into compliance,” a big unknown in the weeks since the agency made its accusations public. The EPA officials may also face grilling on why the agency itself didn’t uncover the alleged wrongdoing.

What about the Senate? Thune said the Commerce Committee hasn’t written off looking into the Volkswagen case, but noted that plenty of other panels and federal agencies were investigating the allegations. “We’re following that issue very carefully,” he said.

Total recall: Reuters reported late Tuesday that VW will begin a recall of affected diesels in Europe in January; a U.S. recall would have to be agreed upon by the EPA. Check it out here: http://reut.rs/1McWWK8

Extra CAFE credit: The New York Times reports that VW pushed for special treatment for its diesel cars before the Obama administration announced more stringent fuel economy standards in 2011. Read here: http://nyti.ms/1WM76EB

POTENTIAL UNION STRIKE LOOMS AT FIAT-CHRYSLER: United Auto Workers put Fiat-Chrysler on notice Tuesday that it may go on strike, days after union members voted down a new contract with the company, reports (http://politico.pro/1Ok1RLc) our Brian Mahoney.

And the Detroit Free Press has more on what could happen if workers walk out: “A strike could begin at just one plant. Workers at all other FCA plants would continue to work until the supply of whatever the striking plant produces forces engine and transmission plants, then assembly plants, to lay off workers. Striking workers would be eligible for strike pay from the union. Those who are laid off would be eligible to file for unemployment compensation. Even so, the strike notification alone raises a host of new questions and escalates the urgency for both sides to reach an agreement on a new contract.” Full story: http://on.freep.com/1OW7OOr

THE AUTOBAHN (SPEED READ):

— Blumenthal, Casey reintroduce criminal penalty bill after GM settlement. POLITICO Pro: http://politico.pro/1MXFU19

— Amtrak may see partial shutdown without PTC extension. The Washington Post: http://wapo.st/1Ok3PLk

— New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo to Big Apple Mayor Bill de Blasio on mass transit funding: Why can’t you be like Mike? POLITICO New York: http://politi.co/1MXff4G

— Iowa DOT steps up its sign safety game. USA Today: http://usat.ly/1KZ3EkT

— New survey finds riders holding off on car buying, relying more on Uber instead. L.A. Times: http://lat.ms/1hp1Cj8

— Former WMATA GM blames Metro’s board of directors for litany of problems. WMAL: http://bit.ly/1LgxQ88

THE COUNTDOWN: Highway and transit policy expires in 23 days. DOT appropriations run out in 65 days. FAA reauthorization expires in 177 days. The 2016 presidential election is in 397 days.

DEBRIEF INTERVIEW: WHAT’S COMING UP IN THE NEW SUPREME COURT TERM? Obama’s former acting Solicitor General Neal Katyal breaks down the big cases ahead. Get up to speed with this week’s Debrief interview from The Agenda: http://politi.co/1FSsJ28

NOW AVAILABLE: POLITICO PRO LEGISLATIVE COMPASS — POLITICO Pro, POLITICO’s premium subscription service, has released a first-of-its kind legislative data analytics and decision-making tool that helps policy professionals manage and act on legislation. Leveraging features such as a personalized dashboard, virtual whip count, bill text comparison and 20 years of data, users will not only save time but benefit from customizing and cross-referencing information, enabling them to make smarter and faster decisions. Schedule your demo today.