A suburban health care consultant sold itself to a bigger firm as consolidation hits health care providers and companies that advise them.

Oakbrook Terrace-based firm Health Directions was acquired Jan. 1 by Los Angeles-based Camden Group. Camden was looking to expand its clinical integration and physician-satisfaction services, two areas in which Health Directions specialized, Camden President Steven Valentine said.

“The demand for our services is outstripping our capacity to serve, so we needed to add resources,” Valentine said. “We needed to add some additional talent, plus Health Directions adds a certain analytic capability.”

Valentine declined to disclose terms of the acquisition. The addition of Health Directions' 23 employees brought Camden's total to about 100, and the firms' local offices merged.

As hospitals work to integrate reform outlined in the Affordable Care Act, health care providers are consolidating in an effort to streamline care. The deal allows the combined firm to better serve those merging health care organizations, said Dan Marino, who was Health Directions' president and now is senior vice president at Camden.

“As health care organizations have started to consolidate, we realized quite some time ago that we really needed a strategic partner that would really allow for a sort of vast amount of services that we can offer to our clients,” Marino said. “Strategically (the deal) positions our two companies really well to support the needs of a lot of these consolidated organizations.”

Health care consulting firms usually stay below 20 employees, said Michael Burzynski of Milwaukee-based accounting firm Komisar Brady and a board member of the National Society of Certified Healthcare Business Consultants.

“Most of the time, health care consulting is usually niche or geographically specific,” he said. “If they get larger, it is because they have a greater number of people and a greater number of specialty areas or a greater number of geographic areas.”

LOCAL CLIENTS

The two firms work for some of the largest health care providers in the Chicago area. Camden, with annual revenue of about $34 million, offers services including advice on finances and improving hospital operations.Clients in the Chicago area include Presence Health, Alexian Brothers Health System and Loyola University Medical Center.

Health Directions, which also has an office in Austin, Texas, has local clients such as Advocate Health Care, Palos Community Hospital, Silver Cross Hospital and Rush Health.

David Anderson, director of planning and development at BDC, a Miami-based health care consulting firm, expects more consultant consolidation.

Firms such as Camden have a broader reach that smaller firms such as Health Directions want to tap into, Anderson said. On the other hand, strategic consulting firms such as Health Directions have relationships on which larger firms want to capitalize, he said.

“It's definitely a trend toward consolidation and creation of bigger health care consulting firms,” he said. “It's also relationships, and size is important in consulting. It's not everything, but it's important.”

This story has been updated to correct client information for the firms.