FARGO – Public health and social service providers are planning for the growing wave of aging baby boomers.

A Fargo-Moorhead task force has been meeting and will draft recommendations aimed at helping prepare for a spectrum of needs as people age and require more assistance.

“The needs are many,” said Jane Strommen, a gerontologist at the North Dakota State University Extension Service and a member of the task force. “There’s a lot of different perspectives.”

Cass County’s population of those 65 and older is expected to jump 88 percent from 15,076 in 2011 to 28,291 in 2025, according to projections made almost three years ago.

Meeting the needs of an aging population emerged as a priority when local health providers conducted a needs assessment three years ago as required by the Affordable Care Act.

Many health and social services already are available, but providers agree they can do a better job collaborating with each other and communicating with the public.

“Where are the missing links?” asked Carol Roth, a public health nursing coordinator at Fargo Cass Public Health and task force member. “Where are people falling through the cracks?”

A common problem among the elderly, especially those without family members living nearby, is a support network, Roth said.

As a result, if they lack home-based or community-based services, they can be heavy users of ambulance services, or police and fire assistance calls.

The needs of the very old, many of whom suffer from dementia or other neurodegenerative illnesses, are especially challenging to deal with, said DeLana Duffy-Aziz, who manages adult services for Cass County Social Services.

“We’re seeing a lot of growth in the number of people with dementia,” she said.

Nationally, about one in nine people 65 and older have Alzheimer’s disease, the most common form of dementia, and one in three 85 and older have the disease, according to the Alzheimer’s Association.

Almost half – 47 percent – of North Dakota nursing home residents had cognitive impairment, according to 2009 data compiled by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

Caregivers strive to keep patients with dementia or other disabilities in their home environment as long as possible, but severe cases require memory care at a nursing home, Duffy-Aziz said.

Even more difficult to deal with are cases in which the elderly have paranoia or delusional thinking that cause them to act out or become physically or verbally abusive.

“That’s an area where there’s sort of a hole in the system and I don’t know what the solution is,” Duffy-Aziz said.

Only two nursing homes in North Dakota, in Valley City and Ellendale, accept residents with those conditions. Otherwise, the last refuge is the North Dakota State Hospital, which requires legal action, Duffy-Aziz said.

“It’s difficult to get those individuals help because they don’t always go to the doctor,” she said. “They tend to isolate themselves.”

Different segments of the population, including resettled refugees and the homeless, might have distinct needs as they age, Roth said.

“Will their needs be different?” Roth said.

Because the large baby-boom generation began reaching retirement age in 2011, the aging is just beginning. The most challenging cases typically involve those in advanced old age, suggesting greater challenges lie ahead, Duffy-Aziz said.

“We better get ready for it,” she said.