By

As a judge, during our violent summer in Milwaukee, I hear questions like the following: "How could that guy not have already been in prison with his record?" Or, "How could that person possibly be on probation?" A person commits a homicide or some other aggravated offense, and often that person has been in court or on probation many times before.

The responsibility to protect the public lies with many parties and agencies. The police, the district attorney and U.S. attorney, and, after someone has committed a crime, the judges in Milwaukee and the state Department of Corrections. Judges become involved in the process at the back end, after an individual has gone through the entire justice system.

In Wisconsin, judges are legally required to consider specific factors for sentencing someone who has been convicted of a crime. We consider the gravity of an offense, the character of the defendant and the need to protect the public. Judges also can consider other factors such as punishment, deterrence and a need for rehabilitation.

How a judge apportions these factors varies from case to case and also depends on the judge. In one case, a need for punishment and incarceration can be most important. In the next case, it might be that a need for rehabilitation is the overriding concern. Considerations include things such as does a defendant have a prior record, and did he plead guilty? How many times has he been arrested? Does the defendant have a job? What is needed to rehabilitate a defendant, while also making sure there are consequences for actions?

The next basic principle of sentencing is that we are required to consider probation, first, as a possible disposition in virtually every case. Of course, just because a defendant is considered for probation, does not mean that he or she receives that opportunity, but it must be considered.

If a judge places someone on probation for a period of time, that order comes with conditions of probation. For example: Stay out of trouble with the law. Maintain a job. Continue in school or get a GED. Meet with your probation agent. Certain cases may have other conditions such as counseling, parenting classes or paying restitution.

When placed on probation, a judge then puts in place an "imposed and stayed" sentence. That means a jail or prison sentence is in place, and if the offender fails on probation and is revoked, he or she serves the time. However, this is where the judge's involvement ends. The decision to revoke or not revoke a convicted offender is not made by the sentencing judge, but rather by the Department of Corrections.

This very serious decision, to possibly take someone out of the community, is not made by a judge, but rather a DOC employee. And does the DOC revoke offenders? Yes. But frequently, in my experience, it is reluctant to do so. The DOC gives offenders chance after chance, and break after break. The person is being supervised and violates the judge's order. The person uses drugs or absconds or has contact with a victim or sometimes even violates the law again, and yet the DOC does not try to revoke that person. Instead, the offender is given an "alternative to revocation" and left in the community.

I have had DOC agents tell me that they did not attempt to revoke an offender because it would be too expensive to put that person in prison. This is unacceptable. The DOC needs to do what is just, and try to help correct the behavior of offenders. But often that correction, if any, must take place in an institution. The department needs to be responsible for its role in protecting citizens and neighborhoods.

I take my position as a judge very seriously. I make decisions that have long-term effects on the lives of defendants and victims. I strive to be fair in each and every case. But I also strive to hold people accountable for their actions, and to help protect the community.

I need the DOC to work with me and my colleagues in a better fashion. It needs more agents and to provide closer monitoring of defendants in the community, and it needs to make sure that the decisions made consider not just the important rights of offenders, but also the needs of victims and the protection of this community.

David Borowski is a circuit court judge in Milwaukee County.