Dr. Paul Song also apologized for the comment, saying it was 'insensitive.'

SANTA MONICA, CA - Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders on Thursday issued an apology after a Santa Monica doctor called Hillary Clinton and other Democrats "whores" at a rally in New York City on Wednesday.

Oncologist Dr. Paul Song, the leader of Courage Campaign, a progressive group in California, was the opening speaker at the Sanders' rally in Washington Square Park.

During his remarks, he railed against the medical inequity in America, despite some improvements under President Barrack Obama's Affordable Care Act.

RELATED: Who Won Thursday's Democratic Debate? Hillary Clinton Tries to Bury Bernie Sanders in Brooklyn

Song, the husband of former "The View" co-host Lisa Ling, told the 27,000-strong crowd the current healthcare system is broken and needs a major overhaul. He then attacked Clinton and other Democrats for caving to special interest groups and not fixing the problem.

"Well, I agree with Secretary Clinton that Medicare-for-all will never happen if we have a president who never aspires for something greater than the status quo," he said. "Medicare-for-all will never happen if we continue to elect corporate Democratic whores who are beholden to Big Pharma and the private insurance industry instead of us."

The Clinton campaign seized on the comment and asked Sanders to disavow the message, which he did Thursday morning.

Dr. Song's comment was inappropriate and insensitive. There's no room for language like that in our political discourse. — Bernie Sanders (@BernieSanders) April 14, 2016

For his part, Dr. Song said he wasn't referring to Clinton specifically and apologized for using the word "whore," calling it "insensitive."

I am very sorry for using the term "whore" to refer to some in congress who are beholden to corporations and not us. It was insensitive. — Paul Y. Song (@paulysong) April 14, 2016

Coincidentally, it was Bill Clinton who, in 2009, secured the release of Dr. Song's sister-in-law, Laura Ling, a journalist who was detained in North Korea, a fact Dr. Song acknowledged.

Both Hillary Clinton and Sanders are campaigning hard in New York this week, ahead of the New York primary race next Tuesday. With 291 delegates up for grabs, a win there for Clinton could put the race mathematically out of reach for Sanders.

Clinton, who formerly represented New York in the Senate, is currently polling ahead of Sanders in the double digits.