Marco Rubio was in Chattanooga Thursday making his pitch to become the Republican presidential nominee in 2016.

The 44-year-old Florida senator spoke to more than a hundred supporters at Lindsay Street Hall downtown.

"This election is a generational choice about our identity, about what kind of country we will be in the 21st century," he said.

He warned that the path the country is on will prevent future generations from attaining the American dream: a house in a safe neighborhood, a dignified retirement and parents able to give their children a better life than they had.

His stump speech focused on the economy, education and national defense.

Technology is changing the U.S. economy and requires government policies that prompt innovation and a simplified tax code, he said.

"The economy we have today is dramatically different than when I was growing up," he said.

Rising entitlement costs left unchecked will lead the country into a debt crisis, he said.

"Medicare and Social Security will look different for me and people younger than me," he said. "It either won't exist because it's bankrupt or because we reformed it and saved it."

He wants to repeal the Affordable Care Act and replace it with tax credits for consumers to buy the health insurance plan of their choosing.

A one-size-fits-all higher education system should be revamped to train more vocational workers and better inform students before they take out debilitating loans, he said.

He said the world today is becoming more dangerous, with North Korean and Iranian nuclear programs and China expanding its military.

"These are threats the next president will meet," he said. "That's why it's important we remain the strongest military power on the planet. Before we fund anything else at the federal level, we should be funding national security."

Rubio received a warm reception in Chattanooga, but he has struggled to break out of a crowded GOP field. Recent polls put his support at 6 percent in Iowa and 5 percent nationally.

Zach Wamp, Tennessee campaign chair, said Rubio's Christian worldview matches his own. Wamp said other candidates don't understand national security like Rubio, who sits on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

Rubio is an attractive candidate to millennial voters and immigrants, Wamp said. Unless the GOP broadens its base, it "will be in the wilderness for a generation," he said.

"We've got to be the party that's in the windshield and not the rearview mirror," he said.

Republican officials in attendance included state Sens. Todd Gardenhire and Brian Kelsey, Mayor Jim Coppinger, and Sheriff Jim Hammond.

The candidate was expected to attend a Chattanooga fundraiser later in the day.

Rubio is the second presidential candidate to come to Chattanooga. Sen. Ted Cruz was here earlier this month. Dr. Ben Carson will be at a book signing in October.