Thought you might find this interesting Submit

White paper from Siemens examines some of the critical success factors for a sustainable population health management program.

Population health management (PHM) has become and will continue to be a top priority for healthcare providers as the industry shifts from the current fee-for-service to new value-based purchasing models. Provisions of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) are driving the adoption of these models, which are designed to improve the quality of American healthcare, while large employers and other payers across the country are also establishing new value-based purchasing models. Delivery of high-value, cost-effective care requires a focus on—as well as a new approach to—population health management. By coordinating the care of a population across the continuum, healthcare providers can deliver improved quality at decreased costs, and share these benefits with their partners in models such as accountable care organizations (ACOs). Performance-based contracts enable providers to gain additional revenue if they meet quality standards. Similarly, by using PHM strategies to reduce hospital readmissions, healthcare providers can avoid costly penalties under the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services’ Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program.

With great potential to deliver a return on investment across multiple federal programs and quality-driven initiatives, PHM is a critical component in today’s healthcare transformation. In order to execute on this enormous and complex undertaking, , however, healthcare organizations must develop and implement PHM strategies that leverage healthcare information technology to successfully manage the unique health needs and risks factors of an increasingly diverse population.

This new shift requires strategies and tools for PHM to evolve toward more efficient and consistent management of an entire population in order to help providers achieve quality and cost objectives as well as keep patients engaged in their wellness. So what are the keys to implementing a sustainable population health management program?

This white paper examines some of the critical success factors for a sustainable population health management program and how the CareXcell™ solution can provide the IT infrastructure needed to address new value-based care requirements.

Download the white paper below to learn more.