Bubba the pug won the Broomfield Days dog costume competition on Saturday. He was dressed as a Donald Duck Pez dispenser. (David Jennings)

At the Best-Dressed Dog Competition, pugs, greyhounds and shelties transformed from canines companions to hula dancers, fairies, fortune tellers and even Dorothy from the Wizard of Oz.





The dog dress-up competition at Broomfield Days on Saturday attracted a dozen dogs and their crafty owners, who competed for the grand prize of free medical care for a year from The Animal Doctor. Dogs could win in the small dog, large dog and overall categories.





The overall winner and small dog winner was Bubba, a pug dressed as a Donald Duck Pez dispenser. Bubba has won several years in a row-- last year, he won for his costume as a kissing booth operator, and the year before that, won for his Operation board game costume.





Owner Dana Oughton said she enjoys going into detail with her dog's winning costumes.

Carlie the Australian Shepherd is among the winners of the Broomfield Days pet costume contest. She was dressed as Little Red Riding Hood, while the other dog in her household, Brodie, a sheltie, was dressed as the Big Bad Wolf. (David Jennings)





“This year, I thought it would be fun to do something candy-themed with Halloween coming up,” she said.







The prize of free veterinary care makes a big financial impact on Oughton's family. They have three other dogs, and also recently welcomed a new baby, Chloe, to their family.







At last year's dog costume contest, the then-pregnant Oughton surprised her family by announcing that she was expecting a girl.





This year's large dog costume winners drew from fairy tales for their costumes. The two dogs, a Australian Shepherd named Carlie and a sheltie named Brody, were dressed as Little Red Riding Hood and the Big Bad Wolf.





Owners Lara and Don Martella said they came up with the costume because Brody sort of looked like a wolf.







“Brody really likes to harass (Carlie) at home, so he is sort of a big, bad wolf at home, too,” Don Martella said.





This year's competitors dressed their pets in some of the most creative costumes to date, said veterinarian Dr. David Sievers of The Animal Doctor, who was the contest announcer.





“The quality of costumes keeps increasing, and I think we see costumes that have never been seen before anywhere.”





Some of the creative, handmade costumes included Nimbus, who was dressed as a fortune teller, complete with a shiny cape, turban and his own mini fortune telling cards. His family has entered him into 14 different dog costume competitions, but he is now going blind and deaf and might not make it to next year's contest, said owner Brie Abrams.





Another dog, an Italian greyhound named Lola, went dressed as a wide-mouth bass. Her owner, Kerry Heib, said the hand-made costume fits her small dog perfectly.





“A friend made it for me, because I don't believe in store-bought costumes,” Heib said.







One family brought their two dogs, and also two cats to the competition. Using a Wizard of Oz theme, Tim and Heather Matthews outfitted their newfoundland, Abby, in a Dorothy dress, and their mastiff, Morgan, as the Tin Man.







Their cats, Three and Mogwai, went as the Cowardly Lion and a flying monkey.







Lupe Monge said the competition was good for her small chihuahua mix, Tez. Tez was dressed as a hula dancer, and Monge wore her own Hawaiian-inspired outfit.

“This is good, because she used to shake a lot and get scared,” Monge said.







Now, Tez seems to be over her stage fright.