Waukesha North’s Jessica Kelliher leads the area in scoring with 31 points per game. Credit: Dave Kallmann

By ,

Cameron Bruce jokes that he isn't taking any credit for the play of Waukesha North's Jessica Kelliher since this is his first season as coach of the Northstars.

"So I had nothing to do with Jessica's development," he said. "That was all Jessica and her dad. I just get to use her talents. It's kind of nice."

It's nice because the 6-foot senior who will play at Lewis University next year leads the area in scoring with 31 points per game. That's four more points than Notre Dame recruit, McDonald's All-American and Divine Savior Holy Angels standout Arike Ogunbowale.

"She's got big, soft hands," Bruce said. "Any time a kid throws her the ball, it sort of sticks in her hand. She also gets herself in position to get the ball so well. Then once it's in her hands, she's usually five or six feet from the basket. She just turns and shoots or turns and puts the ball on the floor. She has little moves to get around people. It's so efficient and so nice, it's fun to watch."

It might not be fun for other coaches in the Classic 8 Conference, but several admit Kelliher is a special talent.

"Jessica's size and strength are impressive," Arrowhead coach Rick Witte said. "But what is more impressive is her athleticism and footwork around the rim. She is surprisingly quick in small spaces."

Kelliher scored a season-low 10 points in her first game against Arrowhead and then had 28 in the rematch. She scored a total of 53 points in two games against Waukesha West. The Warhawks and Wolverines are the only teams to hold her under 24 points this season.

"Jessica is by far the most difficult girl we have had to guard, not only in our conference, but of anyone we have played this season," Waukesha West coach Mark Busalacchi said. "Her combination of size and skill set her apart from her peers. Lewis University hit the jackpot with Jessica."

Kelliher averaged 20 points per game as a junior and then Bruce was hired this past summer after helping the team at Melrose-Mindoro for part of last season.

Bruce knew nothing about Kelliher when he watched her play for the first time in the off-season.

"I don't think anything special stood out, except she was tall, strong and pretty athletic," Bruce said. "I had no idea of her scoring prowess."

The first two weeks of practice, Bruce was more impressed with how good of a passer Kelliher was.

But then the season began.

She had 36 points in the season opener at Milwaukee Languages. And 42 the next game. And then five straight games with at least 32 points.

"When it came to a game, she just put it in another gear," Bruce said. "Her first game she shot a three with no effort. It was at that point I said, 'Boy, this girl can really turn it on during a game.'"

Kelliher has reached the 40-point mark three times, including a season-best 46 on Jan. 10 at Wilmot. She added a 44-point performance Friday in a win at Waukesha South to give her team an 11-9 record and increase her school-record point total to 1,882 in her fourth season on varsity.

Kelliher says her average improved by 10 points per game compared to last season by getting stronger and working on her outside shot. And instead of just a drop-step post move, she added a reverse pivot to face the basket to make moves off that.

Playing with sister Elizabeth, who is 6-1 and currently playing for Michigan Tech, has also helped.

"She's taller than me and has longer arms," Jessica said. "She helped me with my post moves and being able to make shots over players that are taller than me."

Now Jessica gets to help her younger sister and teammate, Jenna, who is a 5-11 freshman.

"I think I've kind of toughened her up a bit," Jessica said. "She's had to start playing post more this year because she grew a lot."