Brothers cover more than a decade of service to the Rams' football program

The Kawulok brothers — Mike, Joe and Chris from left to right — have formed a bridge that covers 12 years of Colorado State football, binding the family in a rather unique fashion. ( Trevor Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

FORT COLLINS — Joe Kawulok can't remember exactly how old he was, but it was before he was in high school. Best guess, he thinks he was about 12.

But there he sat, in his brother Chris' room in a house off campus at Colorado State, telling himself that one day he'd live there, too.

Kids are funny that way, especially those who look up to their older brothers. They have a tendency to be a tag-along, and while it can be annoying at times, the Kawulok story is a bit different.

It was still a long time before Joe would grow into the 6-foot-6, 250-pound player he is today. Little did he know, the green and gold strands were already starting to weave their way into the fabric of the Kawulok family.

It was a group of brothers — four in all — who grew up in the shadow of Folsom Field on the University of Colorado campus. On game days in Boulder, they would all go with their father, Ted, a Boulder dentist, and sell parking spaces to fans attending Buffs games for $5 a pop.

Now, many years later, three Kawulok brothers have bridged more than a decade of Colorado State football history, a 12-year span of time that has seen a stretch of highs and lows for the Rams.

"I've seen three different head coaches in my time here. I remember when Chris first started playing here it was Sonny (Lubick), and his senior year they went to the New Mexico Bowl and winning there," Joe said. "It's crazy how much a program can change. Now as my career is ending, I feel like the last few years we've started to get the program back on the right track."

It was Chris who would first exit Monarch High School and head north, playing tight end for the Rams. When he arrived, Lubick was nearing the end of a legendary run where he built the program into prominence. His redshirt freshman year brought about a trip to the Poinsettia Bowl, but his senior season was the first in the Steve Fairchild era and a trip to the New Mexico Bowl.

Another brother, Matt, decided to play tight end at San Diego State, and Chris and he would wonder if they'd match up on special teams. But the next brother, Mike, joined Chris at CSU in time for a return to the New Mexico Bowl. A few years later — Fairchild's last — Joe had donned a Rams jersey to play defensive end and the Jim McElwain era, and another upswing in the program, was just beginning.

It's been quite a journey, and not just for the brothers, but for the entire family, and it didn't take long for the conversion to be made in full force. Ted said they all grew up CU fans, but in no time at all, any stitch of black clothing in the house was replaced with green. In a snap, "it was a complete migration and a total commitment to CSU and the Rams," he said.

Really, if you want to bring if full circle, include Ted, too. Before he played at Northern Arizona, Lubick was on a staff at Montana that recruited him.

"It's been a long time, you know," Ted said. "It was only recently that ... Well last season that it kind of got in perspective that it's been over a decade of football at CSU. What a fun ride, an unbelievable ride it's been for us and the whole family. To see all the brothers, including Matt who used to wear black and red, wear the green and gold. They are so supportive of Joe, and it's been great.

"I won't know what to do with myself after this year."

Colorado State defensive end Joe Kawulok, left, battles with Tulsa offensive tackle Garrett Stafford on Oct. 4, 2014 at Hughes Stadium. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

All along, going to home games was a must, and Ted has made most of the road trips too, which was tough at times when Matt was playing for the Aztecs. In the past four years, generally Chris, Matt or Mike will join him, and for a few special trips — like the Alabama game two years ago — they all go.

For the brothers, the memories go well beyond the playing field, and the three of them together can compare and contrast on a different level than most.

Chris, who first set the roots, is a father of 12-week old twins and an estimator for Hensel Phelps. He continues to back the program and the university, is still a regular at sporting events (basketball and volleyball included) and is becoming even more involved.

"It's fun, because now I'm on the booster side of things, and it's a whole different perspective from what I'm used to," he said. "It's kind of cool to see the things happening around the university, and I feel it's going above and beyond athletics. I feel like the university has a grand vision, and they're doing what they can to make it come true.

"Family comes first, and we're going to support each other no matter what. Then I'd say after that, we're definitely CSU fans now."

In reality, Joe had his choices. Many of them, in fact. But Colorado State already felt like family to him, and without even knowing it, his mind had been made up.

Both brothers made it a point not to influence the decision, but Mike sensed it wouldn't be necessary at that point.

"Just having him there, you go to the games, and you become a fan of the team because your brother is on the team," said Mike, who unfortunately had his career shortened by a knee injury, but stayed around to help coach the linebackers. "By the time Joe got there, having had both Chris and myself play at CSU, he was definitely a fan at heart and this was the place he wanted to go.

"It's kind of crazy having three brothers there for more than 10 years. It's been a lot of fun. I got to play with Chris, but unfortunately I never got to play with Joe because I was hurt. But we were on the same team at the same time, so that's cool."

For the family, it will be strange not to have an insider's view of the program after this season, but none of them are remotely willing to walk away. They still plan on going to games, of being part of the program that helped them all grow into young men. Mike is back to being a student, pursuing a master's degree in biomedical science with the intent of going to dental school.

With this being Joe's final season, it's not yet in his mental makeup to look at the program from the past, but he knows the time is coming.

"It's surreal. It doesn't even feel like it's my senior season right now," Joe said. "It all goes by so quick. I definitely want to do my best every single game this season and kind of cherish everything."

When that final game is played, he'll go back to his room off-campus in a house that he shares with Mike and teammate George Maumau.

Yes, that room. The very same one Chris once occupied, again making plans for his future.

"It looks better now that I'm in it," Joe quipped.

Some paths just can't be avoided.

Mike Brohard: 970-635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and twitter.com/mbrohard