Mitt Romney greets the lunch crowd at The Varsity restaurant in Atlanta on Wednesday. The former presidential candidate is stumping for Republicans ahead of the midterms. John Bazemore/AP

President Barack Obama hasn’t been welcome in Senate battlegrounds this election cycle, but Mitt Romney – who once worried he'd be a “loser for life” – has proved to be a valuable commodity for the Republican Party on the campaign trail.

[READ: Mitt Romney's Third Act]

Romney’s not on a ballot his year, but he’s using whatever political capital he has left to fire up the GOP base. This week, Romney’s campaigning for Republicans in Georgia, Colorado, Michigan, Louisiana and Kentucky, and his practiced role of criticizing the Obama administration has come in handy as the GOP seeks to nationalize closely contested Senate elections.

In Colorado on Monday, Romney managed to attract hundreds of residents to a local high school, where he attacked Obama for the rise of the Islamic State group and shortcomings of the Affordable Care Act. At a Michigan banquet hall on Thursday, he'll enliven supporters at the “ComMITT to the Comeback Rally.”

Even as a twice-crushed Republican presidential contender, Romney has emerged in the 2014 midterm election cycle as an amicable party elder and a foil on the trail for the unpopular Obama. He’s a stark reminder for voters of what they could have had in the White House, with the goal of reminding them it’s not too late to realize their mistake and elect a Republican-controlled Senate to hold Obama accountable.

“Romney can appeal to swing voters who have soured on the president’s agenda and realize we need a Republican Senate to act as a check on the president’s power over the next two years,” says Ryan Williams, a Republican strategist and former spokesman for Romney.

But Romney’s not just swooping in and stumping for candidates at fundraisers and public events in the final weeks of the campaign – he's been active since the beginning of the cycle. Romney took risks early on and endorsed Republicans in contentious primaries. He even appeared in an ad for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce touting business-minded GOP Rep. Mike Simpson of Idaho.

[ALSO: Chris Christie's Birthday Party and the Elephant in the Room]

Even as the Republican bench of potential presidential candidates in 2016 appears deep with former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and Sens. Rand Paul, Ted Cruz, and Marco Rubio all possible contenders, Romney’s name is still in the mix. His visibility on the campaign trail has caused some to wonder if the former Massachusetts governor might have another presidential run in him, and photographs of a smiling Romney shaking hands at rallies begs the question of whether he's ready to retire for good.

Romney’s fueled the rumors by refusing to completely shut the door on the speculation.

"We'll see what happens," he said in a recent interview with The New York Times Magazine.

No matter what 2016 brings, however, there's no doubt Romney’s efforts in 2014 prove he is a resilient figure.