Women in America’s work force earn on the average 77 cents for every dollar paid to their male counterparts, with African-American women and Latinas lagging further behind, which prompted the White House and Democrats in Congress to proclaim Tuesday as “Equal Pay Day” in Washington, D.C.

Sens. Maria Cantwell and Patty Murray, D-Wash., used the day to promote legislation called the Paycheck Fairness Act, which would strengthen the half-century-old Equal Pay Act with such provisions as preventing retaliation against women who seek data on pay levels for themselves and male coworkers.

“I want young women growing up today to know this is not an issue they are going to have to deal with in the future,” Cantwell said. “They are going to get equal pay.”

But a fellow Washington lawmaker, Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, R-Wash., headlined a Republican news conference at which she urged Democrats to “stop politicizing women.” She argued that American women have unprecedented clout in the workforce.

“On this year’s Equal Pay Day, I want to celebrate and highlight the important role that women are playing in our economy,” said McMorris Rodgers. “When you look at the fact that 47 percent of the workforce now are women, that they make most of America’s consumer spending decisions, two out of three small businesses right now are being started by women.

“They are a majority of our health care workers as well as 85 percent of health care decisions are made by women.”

McMorris Rodgers is chairwoman of the House Republican Caucus, which is charged with giving members advice on such issues as how to counter Democrats’ arguments that the GOP is waging a “war on women.”

Rep. Lynn Jenkins, R-Kansas, Republican caucus vice chairman, delivered a sharper partisan bite.

“Many ladies I know feel like they are being used as pawns, and find it condescending (that) Democrats are trying to use this issue as a political distraction for the failures of their economic policies,” Jenkins said.

Women — and particularly working women — have become a bulwark of the Democratic Party. They have twice put President Obama in the White House.

But they are less likely to vote in mid-term elections, which helped prompt events Tuesday, including a speech by President Obama at the White House.

Alluding to women being paid only 77 percent of what men earn, Obama stated: “In 2014, that’s an embarrassment.”

Cantwell argued, in a Senate floor speech, that whatever the politics, basic issues of social justice and family security are at stake.

“From around the age of 35, through retirement, women are typically paid about 75-80 percent of what men are paid,” Cantwell said. “Over her lifetime, a woman in Washington will earn $500,000 less than her male counterparts.

“Right now, one-third of families headed by a woman in Washington state live in poverty. Closing the wage gap means women in Washington would be able to afford 82 more weeks of food, according to figures from the Partnership of Women and Families.”

Nearly every release from McMorris Rodgers’ office headlines that she is “defending” Eastern Washington farmers or businesses against such programs as the Affordable Care Act and President Obama’s 30-hour order on overtime pay.

But some argue that McMorris Rodgers ought to take a long, critical look at her Eastern Washington district before trimming the social safety net.

The 5th Congressional District is below the national average in pay. Stevens County, McMorris Rodgers’ official home, has an unemployment rate higher than the national average. One in six persons lives below the poverty level, and one in five is on food stamps.

Could it possibly be that some of these people are women who are underpaid compared with their male counterparts?