We asked the 153 members of the Wall Street Journal’s CEO Council to tell us whether they’re positive or negative about business prospects in 2015, and why. Here’s what several had to say:

David Seaton, Fluor Corp.

“Overall I am highly optimistic about our prospects for 2015, despite the recent oil price fluctuation. Global economic growth continues to improve, leading our clients to spend more capital on upgrading, maintaining and expanding their infrastructure. This is especially true in developed economies like North America where Fluor is well positioned.”

“While I am generally optimistic about 2015, my primary concern revolves around issues that tend to delay decision making by our clients such as uncertainty in government policy and regulation, potential decelerating growth in emerging markets and possible escalation of conflicts in various regions.”

Dennis Nally, PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP

Positive: “The US economy is slowly improving and providing much needed stability.”

Yang Yuanqing, Lenovo Group Ltd.

I am positive about the coming year because there are some good economic indicators – likely growth in Global GDP, various efforts among governments to stimulate consumption. With these trends, there will be opportunity for growth. And I think in this environment, we will see innovation thrive, and we will see innovators win.

Not only will product innovation remain critical, but business model innovation will become especially important. Companies will shift from selling products to people to engaging much more fully with customers. This trend has started, but will accelerate significantly in the next year – especially in emerging markets where more people are more connected than ever before. This will give people more power to get what they want – whether in traditional devices or in new categories as the “Internet of Things” expands dramatically. And it gives companies more opportunity to drive truly useful, compelling innovation in their products.

When the market demands innovation, and when companies finally embrace the capabilities of technology, social media and the internet to create fast, meaningful engagement with customers, everyone will benefit, and new avenues for growth will emerge.

I am not negative about the future, but I am focused on the risk that comes when there is a lack of trust and transparency at a global level. We still need to build more trust between nations so that global businesses can thrive. In recent months I have participated in many discussions – from APEC in Beijing to the JCCT in Chicago this week. Definitely we should not create barriers to growth and innovation. Moreover, disruption across countries (politically, socially or economically) may lead to risks in overall market growth and consumer consumption. This would be a steep price to pay.

That said, recent discussions are a good sign. We are very happy to see such exchanges like this happening and we hope they will diffuse some of the tension and allow all companies to do business more freely and openly. We must continue to invest our time and effort to build trust, openness and transparency so that nations can cooperate, companies can grow and thrive, and customers can benefit from the world’s best innovations.

Rob Lynch, VSP Global

“We’re seeing a major upswing in enrollments in our insurance business in the U.S. — up 12% year over year. Vision care is often a voluntary benefit so employees must proactively choose to enroll. Historically, we’ve seen strong enrollments associated with a positive consumer outlook and a feeling of employment security. All of this bodes well for continued growth in the U.S. in 2015.”

Deanna Mulligan, Guardian Life Insurance Company of America

“I’m optimistic about continued economic growth in the US, which is good news for domestic businesses. But the weakness we’ve seen outside of the US could place a drag on companies with global exposure.”

Stefano Pessina, Alliance Boots

“Overall, I am positive because the low cost of energy and money will fuel the American economy. Europe will continue to struggle, maybe with the exception of United Kingdom, but I don’t believe that there will be a strong recession. Nothing substantially different with Asia.”

Fred Tomczyk, TD Ameritrade

“As we look forward to 2015 we are relatively bullish on the US economy and as a result US equity markets. However, we do expect some choppiness with the Fed reducing monetary stimulus and other geopolitical events around the world. As a business we all need to be prepared for some choppiness and embrace the changes being brought to how business is done by leveraging newer technologies such as mobile computing, cloud computing, social media and data and analytics. Businesses that don’t adapt their business model to these new technologies are risking their future.”

Jeff Bewkes, Time Warner Inc.

Positive: “The proliferation of connected devices and growth in on-demand availability is driving greater demand for the very best television and film content. And as the largest producer of that content, we are in a great position to continue to grow our business both here and around the world. “

Roger Crandall, Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Co.

All signs are that 2015 is going to be a mixed bag. The good news is that we continue to see a few important indicators of recovery in the U.S. economy. Although the improvement that we are experiencing in equity markets and pockets of the real estate market is benefiting a relatively small number of Americans, the vast majority of those in Middle America aren’t reaping those same rewards; so it doesn’t feel like a full recovery. Additionally, there hasn’t been – or likely will be – enough sustained economic growth to have a dramatic effect on our underemployment issue. This serves to amplify the unfortunate reality that American consumers still aren’t doing as well as could be expected, and are under-prepared for their financial future. Life insurance ownership is at a 50-year low, more than 35 million Americans don’t even have life insurance and half of workers over the age of 50 are considering delaying their retirement. In general, the life insurance and retirement industry is in a great position to make a difference. The bottom line for us is that MassMutual has been exceeding the pace of growth across our industry and we expect that to continue in 2015.

T.K. Kurien, Wipro Ltd.

We are optimistic about 2015 for the following reasons

a)Improvement in the US economy, though we have concerns around demand shaping up in Europe;

b)Opportunities arising from the shift from run-the-business budgets to business transformation through the shift to digital.

A key concern is the impact of the fall in commodity prices on certain industry sectors and on commodity exporting countries.

Gisbert Ruhl, Klockner & Co.

Positive about business prospects in 2015, and here’s why: USA

Negative about business prospects in 2015, and here’s why: Europe

Vishal Sikka, Infosys Ltd.

I’m optimistic because the world around us is fundamentally being reshaped by software. Infosys is a distinguished provider of software for all kinds of challenges and opportunities in every industry.

Gerry Lopez, AMC Entertainment Holdings Inc.

I am positive about business prospects in 2015 because there’s momentum in employment and finally traction in middle class incomes. The regulatory environment, although ridiculously onerous, is at least stable — not increasing by the month. Lastly, lower energy costs do provide a sense that the gains may be sustainable. For the first time in six-plus years, it seems we’re focused on growth, not on sputtering around waiting for some indicator or another.

Lance Hockridge, Aurizon Holdings

“I remain cautiously optimistic in a subdued global economic environment. Aurizon is significantly leveraged to resources, and while commodity prices are substantially lower, we remain confident in long-term demand for high-quality Australian resource assets required for Asian urbanisation and industrialisation. At a company level for Aurizon, there are good opportunities for margin improvement through efficiency gains, cost reduction and organic growth. Coal volumes in particular remain strong as customers are lowering their unit costs through a combination of higher production in a strong demand environment and cost reduction initiatives.”

N.V. Tyagarajan, Genpact Ltd.

Positive: “We will continue to see a world where companies navigate volatility and strive for growth in every industry. Global corporations are on a journey to transform the way they run, become more agile and nimble, drive efficiency and effectiveness, leverage new technology and data analytics — all things that will become even more important in 2015 than ever before!”

Bernard Tyson, Kaiser Permanente

“I am positive about business prospects in 2015 because the country’s economy is continuing to improve, and I expect to see the private sector generating more jobs in the coming year.

What concerns me about 2015 are the questions I have about what the federal government will do in the coming year. How will the different branches of government function, and will all sides work together to pass meaningful legislation that will help support the economy and help the country move in a positive direction?”

Bob Greifeld, Nasdaq OMX Group Inc.

“There are strong indications that 2015 will demonstrate varying degrees of improvement in the economy and our markets.

First, I’m bullish on the US economy. Over 3 percent GDP growth, declining energy prices, low inflation and an improving job environment provide a constructive backdrop for the US capital markets.

Second, a growing economy translates to investors looking for opportunities, and entrepreneurs looking for capital. And there’s no stronger, safer, more transparent place to realize their ambitions than the US equity markets.

At Nasdaq, there is a robust pipeline of public companies and private enterprises looking for ways to use technology to create greater efficiencies, reshape industries and compete for talent. This creates a vibrant ecosystem for IPOs and private marketplaces, and we operate both.

Third, while there are significant macro-economic and geopolitical issues to contend with, if the Fed can continue to take a data driven approach and maintain transparent communications, the business opportunities are as strong as I’ve seen in my 11 years running Nasdaq.”

Daniel Hamburger, DeVry Education Group

We see increased demand for career-oriented education, as jobs are picking up. Healthcare is especially robust, with large demand for primary care physicians and nurses to care for an aging US population. We also see a “skills gap” in technology jobs.

Darren Huston, Priceline Group

The prospects for global e-commerce are strong in 2015. A number of key policy and macro changes should spur growth in online travel, including lower oil prices, increased supply of e-Commerce-ready product, increased mobile commerce driven by better cross-platform technology, and lower travel barriers in some key markets (intra-APEC, US inbound, China outbound, Cuba (?) ).

Eric Foss, Aramark Corp.

I expect continued economic growth in 2015 despite an uncertain global environment. The fundamental economy in the U.S. and other markets like Asia is healthy. Consumers and companies are generally more optimistic about growth as the economy continues to improve. Businesses, municipalities and other organizations are focusing on their core products or services to satisfy unmet needs for customers while carefully managing costs. That combination creates potential for our industry to provide food and facility services and workplace uniforms. The need for those partnerships means you’ll see continued growth from companies like Aramark that offer clients added flexibility to handle an ever-accelerating pace of change.

John Hammergren, McKesson Corp.

“At some point, every one of us will be in the healthcare system, and demographic and regulatory changes are only increasing demand for a more efficient, consumer-focused experience. As one of the world’s largest healthcare services companies, McKesson is very optimistic about 2015 and beyond.”

Robert Garrett, Hackensack University Health Network

Looking positive:

- More people signing up for healthcare coverage

- Beginning an era of prevention and wellness with a focus on Population Health Management

- Unemployment nationally continues to drop

- New innovation and research continues to be promising

John Noseworthy, Mayo Clinic

Disruptive technologies – ranging from regenerative and genomic medicine to remote monitoring devices – have already begun to alter health care delivery. We’re excited to work with diverse business partners to quickly commercialize these and other novel scientific discoveries so they benefit patients everywhere. These collaborations bring together the combined intelligence and creativity of various industries. Working together accelerates progress far beyond working in isolation, and it just makes sense. The potential is there to have a profound, favorable impact on patient care.

Mark Weinberger, Ernst & Young LLP

At EY we intend to hire nearly 65,000 people globally this year, and are anticipating strong growth across many industries, including financial services, life sciences, public-sector services and manufacturing.

While 2014 was notable for high-profile mega-deals, our Capital Confidence Barometer suggests that middle-market M&A will provide a significant lift to deal activity in the coming months. Almost two-thirds of respondents to the survey – made up of business leaders from around the world – expect deal volume from all market segments to increase further in 2015, leading to a more buoyant deal market than we’ve seen in five years. Stronger equity values, stable valuations, increased liquidity, a desire to grow—all of these are driving factors for these expectations. This, along with new middle-market momentum, should lift M&A activity as companies seek to strengthen – and expand – their core businesses.

Growth will remain strong across the Americas, with particularly strong growth projected in the US. The US growth is driven by continued strong fundamentals such as low interest rates and inflation, low energy costs and an uptick in both hiring and wages. We anticipate those trends continuing. Also, stability in fiscal policy from the recent budget deals eliminates some uncertainty in the medium term. Prospects for trade deals, particularly the Trans-Pacific Partnership, tax reforms and energy legislation – and even further immigration reforms – would be growth accelerators. Cautious optimism that bi-partisan deals could be reached following the recent budget accord provide a glimmer of hope.

Emerging markets are more volatile, but we see good prospects in India, Mexico, and Indonesia in particular, where government and structural reforms seem more likely to open markets and attract investment. We remain bullish on China, even as we anticipate further short-term slowing in growth as reforms are rolled out to liberalize the currency, open up foreign investment opportunities in select sectors and the financial markets. Opening up investment opportunities in state-owned enterprises would accelerate innovation and growth.

Many geopolitical uncertainties and macro-economic issues such youth unemployment, income disparity and public sector debt across Europe make it a more difficult market to predict.

David Holmberg, Highmark Health

I am cautiously optimistic about 2015 given the significant capital investments we have made in Highmark Health in 2012-2014 to build new capabilities that we will be bringing to market in the next year.

Pierre Nanterme, Accenture

Although there is still significant uncertainty and volatility in the marketplace—especially with the recent decline in oil prices—lower energy costs could ultimately boost growth in the global economy. Given what we at Accenture are seeing across a broad range of industries and markets, global companies are increasingly focused on digitization to create competitive advantage and drive new sources of value, as well as rationalization to create productivity and efficiency gains.

Francisco D’Souza, Cognizant Technology Solutions

Digital technologies are increasingly transforming industries and, as a result, will create tremendous economic value. Companies are interacting with their customers and employees in fundamentally new ways using innovative social, mobile, analytics, cloud and sensor technologies.

Mike Gregoire, CA Technologies

“As every business moves towards defining their business models and relationships based on an application economy it spurs great productivity, transparency and innovation that will in turn result in better overall global economic performance.”

Russ Fradin, Sungard Data Systems Inc.

The US economy remains quite resilient, and the positive trends should continue for 2015. Ever since the Great Recession we have been waiting for a big bounce – and for 5 years in a row we have gotten 2-3% growth. We are now at the higher end, so we can withstand a bit more turbulence. I have never seen this many big wild cards on the table – oil below $60 pbbl and its impact on Russia, the Middle East and lots of other unstable places, another year of Abenomics, slowing growth in China and the Emerging Markets, and continued no growth in Europe – and all can shock the system – but I remain optimistic we will skate through.

Donald Jernigan, Adventist Health System

Positive in the care of our enterprise. We have seen benefits from the Affordable Care Act and expect to see more in 2015. I am also positive because we have built the tools and infrastructure to manage in an environment that expects us to achieve higher results in care outcomes and safety or else be penalized financially.

Brent Saunders, Actavis

While economies in regions around the globe will continue to face challenges, overall I am confident in a bright 2015 for the pharmaceutical industry and for Actavis in particular.

Coming off of a period of strategic mergers and acquisitions that culminated in our proposed acquisition of Allergan in November, I see the global pharmaceutical industry and the healthcare industry at large continuing to be reshaped in the coming year. Companies, such as Actavis, that are aggressively redefining their global business model will be defined by key characteristics: a focus on revenue growth that drives sustained earnings performance; strategic investment in innovation; and exceptional customer-focused delivery of products.

Success will require companies to capitalize on:

•Building markets globally.

•Robust, high-quality supply chains that ensure effective delivery of inventory in step with customer demand.

•New product research and development productivity.

I believe that the continued consolidation of pharmaceutical developers and manufacturers will create opportunities for those forward-thinking companies that are reshaping their business paradigm to capitalize on category and marketplace leadership opportunities.

Kasper Rorsted, Henkel AG

“I am positive about our business prospects for 2015 because we have a clear strategy and a very good team in place around the world. We are continuously adapting our processes and structures to the global market environment which I believe will continue to be highly volatile in 2015. But overall, I am confident that next year at Henkel we will make another important step towards reaching our ambitious targets for 2016.”

Steven Collis, AmerisourceBergen Corp.

“Pharmaceutical care is one of the most efficient and effective ways to treat illnesses, and access to care is increasing. Our industry continues to innovate and grow and opportunities continue to evolve for us to add value with the unique role we play.

Eric Elliott, Prime Therapeutics LLC

Positive: “First there was a lot of uncertainty still coming into 2014 around the ACA and its impact on businesses as well as families. Although the costs are still troublesome, some amount of the uncertainty is past and employers will be less reluctant to take action. Second, I think the election results send a strong affirming message that the public believes we have moved too far in one direction and I think there will be some correction of the tax and spend, and added diligence, to how the government is run. Lastly, in terms relative to the world, the US is strong and growing —– momentum, even a little, fuels momentum.

David Pyott, Allergan Inc.

“Strong momentum in our product markets even in economically challenged parts of Europe. N. America remains strong.

Rupert Duchesne, Aimia Inc.

Consumers in the United States and Canada are showing increased confidence and, because of the substantial fall in energy prices, have more money in their pockets which will help drive the recovery of the consumer and retail economy. Furthermore, in Canada, the fall in the relative exchange rate between Canada and the US will boost manufacturing and other export industries. Europe remains a substantial challenge: The key “power” markets of the UK and Germany will do well but the headwinds from those economies that have done little to address structural challenges (France, Italy) will hold the continent as a whole back and lower energy prices will not have the leveraging effect they will elsewhere. Whilst I do foresee slightly slower growth in Asia, it still represents great opportunity with a growing middle class in all developing markets (China, India, Indonesia) and steady demand from traditional markets like Korea and Japan.

Wolfgang Eder, Voestalpine AG

Ongoing strong momentum in the US/Mexico and China plus an accelerating upturn in India should more than offset weakness in EU and South America as well as recession in Russia/Ukraine.

Ralph Izzo, Public Service Enterprise Group

I am positive about business prospects in 2015 as I see a resurgence in consumer confidence largely driven by the energy dividend of lower oil, gasoline, and natural gas prices.

Mark Thierer, Catamaran Corp.

I am positive about the outlook for 2015. The economy is showing strength and the underlying drivers for growth are showing substantial improvement. This will positively impact hiring — we are seeing it in our business.

Healthcare, the market in which we compete, has become a very visible area of economic and social opportunity, where quality and cost containment have never been more important. This sets up very well for healthcare firms focused on innovation and new approaches to manage the new ACA beneficiaries.

Brian Cornell, Target Corp.

I am positive about business prospects in 2015. Lower gas prices, higher employment rates and stronger consumer confidence should boost the consumer marketplace.