Texas officials released on Friday the autopsy report that was taken the day after Sandra Bland was found dead in a Texas jail cell on July 13.

The autopsy, which ruled her death a suicide, stated that the 28-year-old Chicago native used a white trash bag to create a noose and hanged herself. The autopsy also showed that Bland had about 30 horizontal wounds, described as "scarred regions of healing," on her left forearm, reports The New York Times. She also had a "scabbed healing abrasion" on her left wrist and several abrasions on the right side of her back.

On Thursday, a Texas county prosecutor announced that the autopsy results showed injuries consistent with suicide.

"There were no bite marks or other injuries on her face, on her lips, on her tongue, which would be consistent with a violent struggle," said Warren Diepraam of Waller County, dispelling speculation that guards may have been involved in her death, reports CNN.

In addition to the approximately 30 "cut marks" on her left wrist, Diepraam said Bland had lacerations or abrasions on her wrists after being handcuffed. Diepraam also told reporters marijuana was found in Bland's system.

Meanwhile, it was discovered through Bland's jail intake form that she admitted to attempting suicide by using pills in 2014 after having a miscarriage, reports CNN. However, in another section on the form, she wrote "no" to the question: "Attempted suicide?"

According to one of the women in the cell across from her, Bland was "distraught" on the days leading up to her death.

"She was crying and I could barely understand her, and I was like, 'It'll be OK, don't cry, it'll be alright, you can't be in here forever,'" fellow inmate Alexandria Pyle told ABC affiliate station KTRK.

"She seemed really distraught," Pyle said, "but I don't know if I can say that was suicidal."

Pyle added that she was "positive" that Bland's death was a suicide.

"I don't think the guards did anything," Pyle said.

"I just know the guards here. They're good guards. They're strict when they need to be but they're good guards," Pyle added. "She wasn't causing a ruckus or anything, so I don't see why the guards would do anything to her. She was quiet."