HIGHLANDS RANCH — Bob Caton may have retired from teaching, but he’s in his 36th year as a gym rat as a high school basketball coach because of his love of the game.

“I enjoy it,” the 65-year-old grandfather said. “It’s a great experience.”

Dec. 19, against Pine Creek, Caton’s Highlands Ranch Falcons beat Pine Creek 54-45 for Caton’s 500th victory as a Coloradan.

Tuesday night, before the Falcons defeated Aurora Central, they honored their coach with a ceremony that included an interesting historical note. Highlands Ranch is the only school that has boys and girls coaches as members of the 500-victory club in Colorado basketball. Falcons girls coach Caryn Jarocki attained the mark Feb. 13, 2014.

“It’s pretty cool,” she said.

As a youth, Caton spent countless hours watching schoolboy ball at the old Auditorium Arena downtown, which is long gone but still ranks as perhaps Denver’s all-time mecca of hoops.

“That was my entertainment,” he said, “and it was great entertainment.”

Yes, he said, he wanted to grow up to be one of those coaches he admired as a youth. He later played at Denver West and Colorado State. And coaching? Before Highlands Ranch, there were stops at Manual, Denver West, Abraham Lincoln, George Washington and Aurora Central.

There also were state runners-up showings at the previous two stops, but his biggest reward was teaching the game and interacting with high school kids.

And what’s a dinosaur to do with a trophy? Caton admits he may be one of the last of his breed, at least in the Denver area. A lifer. Rudy Carey, Gary Childress, Bruce Dick, Joe Ortiz and Ken Shaw, to name a few, are still active, piling up the years and the wins.

But the odds are stacked against others following in their footsteps. Teaching and coaching jobs don’t pay much.

“We had teaching jobs to go along with the coaching jobs, so in my era, you got out of college, got a teaching job and that would be connected with your coaching job,” he said. “So many young future coaches cannot get into the teaching profession, and that in turn makes it very difficult for them to coach. And we don’t encourage athletes in college to seek the high school teaching job.”

Enjoy these guys while we can.

Neil H. Devlin: ndevlin@denverpost.com or twitter.com/neildevlin