“Before you are a leader, success is all about growing yourself.” — Jack Welch

The only time Phil Martelli ever kicked Jameer Nelson out of practice, he secretly prayed — hard — that the calculated move wouldn’t cost him the best recruit in St. Joseph’s history.

“I told him to go home — home home,” Martelli said. “Not just his dorm but home.”

Then came the longest two hours of Martelli’s coaching life. Nelson, then a freshman, had missed a class. So the coach had to make certain Nelson and the team knew there was still order, and none of that changed just because the player walked in with star status.

Martelli checked his phone immediately after practice.

“He had called me three times,” Martelli said, “apologetic and telling me that it would never, ever happen again.”

It can be argued the Nuggets’ top free-agent priority this offseason was retaining the 33-year old Nelson. It can also be argued he’s the most important player in the locker room though he’s a backup to rookie Emmanuel Mudiay.

As effective as he was on the court late last season, the decision to make a strong push to keep the point guard was made because of his locker room impact.

Things changed for the better almost immediately after the Nuggets traded for him in January. He was a stabilizing force who knew just what buttons to push on a fractured team down on its luck and down on itself. Two weeks after his arrival, he invited players and coaches to his house in Philadelphia for some team healing. He made himself available to teammates for advice on and off the court. He was never comfortable with how quickly media swarmed him after a game, but there was never any doubt Nelson was the voice of reason in the midst of chaos.

The Nuggets wanted all of that back. Because it was clear to them that a team of individuals who lack professionalism and discipline was just as doomed as one short on talent.

Nelson is a safeguard against that.

Martelli has always known it.

“When I was recruiting him I was amazed, if not blown away, by the care and concern for not just the teammates that he had in high school, but those around the program,” Martelli said. “The respect with which he dealt with me, one of the many coaches recruiting him. The mature fashion with which he dealt with the notoriety.”

“Leadership is a posture and a choice, not a role that must be bestowed on you. Step up and be a leader when no one is watching or expecting you to do so.” — John Izzo and Marshall Goldsmith, Stepping Up: How Taking Responsibility Changes Everything

Being on time is about 20-30 minutes too late to Nelson. So each day he strives to get to practice before his teammates.

“To be a leader you have to be uncomfortable,” Nelson said. “You have to get extra shots up, you have to be early to be on time. You gotta hold yourself accountable, so then when you hold somebody else accountable they’re not looking at you with a side eye. (Instead) they’re like, ‘He’s doing it, he’s showing us.’ “

Nelson made an immediate impression on new Nuggets coach Michael Malone.

“I have the utmost confidence in Jameer Nelson as a leader,” Malone said.

When Nelson joined the Dallas Mavericks in 2014, coach Rick Carlisle gushed to reporters that Nelson was a “natural leader.”

Nelson brought back the majority of the Nuggets to his Philadelphia-area house for a summer team bonding camp, and the impact it had did not go unnoticed.

“Everyone got a chance to know each other,” Nuggets forward Darrell Arthur said. “I thought it was a great experience for the team.”

“The task of the leader is to get his people from where they are to where they have not been.” — Henry Kissinger

Leaders orbit Mudiay like planets around the sun. It is by design, and it is also why when asked about Nelson, Mudiay lumps others in the leader bucket.

The effect, however, is the same.

“He has the most years, him and Mike Miller,” Mudiay said. “They’re the face and the leader of the team right now, so their voice matters. I’m just trying to learn from them, from Coach Malone and the staff and it’s been doing me good so far.”

Nelson returned to the Nuggets for the promise of things to come. He insists he’s not close to retirement, but already has an eye on coaching. He’s not going to hold Mudiay’s hand through every day of his professional career, but does take interest in helping mold a player who has the potential to be great.

Nelson is already playing a winning hand.

“I know this,” Martelli said. “If you said to me, I want a leader for my car dealership, I want a leader for my newspaper, I want a leader for my university, I want a leader for my basketball program, it wouldn’t take me a lot of names to get to Jameer. He has the Midas touch. He does. And I will forever be grateful to the man above that I had that young man in my life. Because he made me a better person.”

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or @dempseypost