Cruz rallies Janesville voters in Wisconsin's 'swing town'

Anthony Wahl John Gorski takes video during a rally for Republican presidential candidate U.S. Senator Ted Cruz on Thursday at The Armory in Janesville.

Angela Major Jason and Holly Lebeck start a discussion with protestors Rob Sooter and Christina Hall on Thursday following a rally that Republican presidential candidate U.S. Senator Ted Cruz held at The Armory in Janesville.

JANESVILLE—Republican Presidential Candidate Sen. Ted Cruz hasn't been widely known for his instant ability to warm hearts, at least not among his colleagues on Capitol Hill.

But his game plan at a rally in downtown Janesville on Thursday was to sway the hearts—or at least connect with the gut—of a core of local voters here. It's their blue-collar mentality that could make a big difference as he tries to get a leg up on rival presidential candidate Donald Trump in the political battleground state of Wisconsin.

Cruz appeared Thursday afternoon at the Armory, an event venue in downtown Janesville, speaking for about a half hour at a public rally at the former military armory's training gym-turned theater.

Cruz spoke of his desire to win the Republican nomination for president and then the White House in the November election. He spoke of his overarching presidential goals: to repeal Obamacare, instill a flat tax for all residents, secure U.S. borders and end “sanctuary cities” and “welfare” for illegal immigrants in the U.S.

Cruz sought to funnel those talking points into a message aimed squarely at the heartwood aesthetic of the 300 mostly middle-class, blue-jean jacket and tennis shoe-clad residents who filled the Armory's theater room to capacity Thursday.

He told the rally attendants that his tax, immigration and national defense policies would help to boost the national economy, rally job markets, and lift stagnated middle class worker wages—but he said he needs their faith in him and their votes to make it happen.

“We'll see morning in America,” Cruz said in his rally speech Thursday.

The eyes of national network television cameras were on Cruz Thursday. But more crucial, perhaps, were the eyes of local, middle class voters such as nurse Peggy Kures, a Janesville native.

Kures has been on the fence over whom to vote for in the presidential election. She teeter-tottered her hand in front of her face to illustrate her thoughts.

“I'm back and forth (between Cruz and Donald Trump), but lately I've leaning toward Cruz,” Cures said. “I admire his policies and his ideals. He follows the constitution.”

Janesville resident John Gorski, a Vietnam Veteran, said Thursday he's still undecided whom he'll to vote for.

“I wanted to come here to learn more about what Ted Cruz says he'd do. I don't know a lot, yet, but I know a lot of people would rather see a Republican president than the alternative, Hillary,” Gorski said.

Gorski said he's not a big fan of Trump, who he said has a “devil-may-care attitude,” and “a rude, New York style.” By contrast, Gorski said he thinks Cruz has “good values in a patriotic way” and “credibility.”

Gorski and Kures represent a segment of primary voters both Cruz and Trump hope to pin down in the coming weeks.

The Wisconsin Republican presidential primary is the first in of a wave of primaries in seven states throughout April. That comes at a time when Cruz trails Trump in overall primary wins, although Cruz claimed Thursday that polls show he holds a slim lead over Trump among Wisconsin voters.

“You are going to be a bellwether for the rest of the nation April 5,” Cruz's wife, Heidi Cruz, said during a speech at the rally.

Trump's campaign announced Thursday that Trump will stop in Janesville on Tuesday for a rally at the Holiday Inn Express conference center on the east side.

Political analysts say Wisconsin is a major swing state in the GOP presidential primary, and it's being looked at as a hotbed for key Congressional seats as Republicans and Democrats fight for the balance of control of the White House, Congress, and a politically teetering U.S. Supreme Court.

Even if Cruz has a slight edge over Trump in Wisconsin, a significant portion of Republican voters are undecided whom they'd vote for for president.

Wade Hallett, the Rock County Republican Party's elections board chairman, acknowledged that Thursday, and suggested it may be an even bigger factor in Janesville than the rest of Wisconsin.

“Janesville and Rock County tends to be a little bit more centrist than maybe other places in the state,” he said. “Wisconsin is a political swing state right now for sure, and Janesville is a real swing town.”

For Cruz and Trump both, timing of appearances and singular impressions with local voting bases could be paramount.

Gorski highlighted that point as he shot video of Cruz's rally with a digital camcorder.

“If this guy is the next president, who knows? This could be my only chance to see him.”

Cruz, the son of an expatriate Cuban freedom fighter, fired sharp shots aimed at Islamic terrorism as a global and domestic threat. He told those at the rally that he wants to see U.S. military and defense policies that would strike hard and fast to overwhelm Islamic terrorist groups.

He claimed that would be a more effectual response than Obama's defense policies and what he called historically “slow-to-anger” American defense strategies.

“If you are going to wage jihad against America, we are coming to kill you,” Cruz said to a burst of applause.

Kures said Cruz's tough talk on terrorism Thursday earned her support.

“He's got it. He's go my vote,” she said.

Not so convinced was Rob Sooter of Janesville.

He stood outside the Armory waving a white picket sign as people were leaving the Cruz rally. His sign read: “Less obnoxious doesn't mean less evil. No Trump, No Cruz.”

Sooter said he doesn't trust Cruz, in part because of one of Cruz's emerging ideas: “patrolling and securing” so-called Muslim neighborhoods.

“Ted Cruz, unlike Trump, speaks with some civility. Too bad his message is dangerous. Openly advocating for selective patrolling of neighborhoods to focus on one group, Muslims? That's a bigoted police state,” Sooter said.

Sooter's picketing drew arguments with a few people leaving the rally. One man yelled at Sooter to “go back to Russia.”

Sooter looked at the falling snow Thursday afternoon as it collected on his sign and the lapels of his black trench coat.

“Wait,” he said. “Isn't the Cold War over?”