New York state has tried for years to address the sick state of Brooklyn’s health care delivery system. Symptoms include hospitals that hemorrhage money, disintegrating facilities and a population in poor health. East New York, for example, has the highest diabetes rate, 18%, in the city.

The latest plan to fix health care in Brooklyn was to tap an insider to Gov. Andrew Cuomo: James Introne, a former state deputy secretary of health who retired in June 2013. The state Department of Health hired Introne to help manage “the transformation of the health care system in central and eastern Brooklyn,” said an agency spokesman, adding that Introne will cajole hospitals to undertake “strategies that can assure the availability of sustainable, high-quality health services in Brooklyn.”

That means hospitals must form networks or merge. Last week, Jason Helgerson, the state’s Medicaid director, said consolidation makes sense for a hospital like Brookdale Hospital Medical Center, which gets a $100 million annual state subsidy. Heavily reliant on Medicaid, Brookdale is one place where the free market “doesn’t work very well,” said Helgerson.

Market intervention will be courtesy of Introne. By consolidating, Brooklyn hospitals will be in a better position to use $500 million set aside in the state budget to build a new facility to replace the campuses of three competing institutions—but that’s still only half the construction cost.

Doc fingers Silver as trial begins

Dr. Robert Taub testified that he referred asbestos cases to Sheldon Silver and his law firm in exchange for $500,000 in state funds as the trial of the former Assembly speaker got underway last week.

Jet.com joins the unicorns

Amazon rival Jet.com scored funding that values the startup at $1.5 billion. The year-old online shopping site is close to raising $500 million to $550 million in a round led by Fidelity Investments.

WTC progress, setback

One World Trade Center celebrated its first birthday last week with the announcement that mobile-­advertising tenant xAd had taken more space in the building. But problems persist. Westfield’s luxury mall at the lower Manhattan site will not open early next year as anticipated because of a water leak from construction at adjacent 3 WTC. Meanwhile, Silverstein Properties is using a popular visa program known as EB-5 to raise $500 million from Chinese investors so it can start erecting 2 WTC.

Legalizing pot sooner

Gov. Andrew Cuomo has until Nov. 11 to sign a bill that will expedite access to medical marijuana, which will become legal in January, for patients with terminal illnesses.

Data point East Side Access, a commuter-rail tunnel 14 stories below Grand Central Terminal that will connect the transit Hub to the Long Island Rail Road, is costing $1 million per foot to construct. Its debut is scheduled for 2022.



Penalty on sanction violations

Deutsche Bank agreed to pay $258 million to settle investigations by state and federal banking regulators on its dealings with countries such as Iran and Syria that violate U.S. sanction laws. It is the latest deal in a string of similar cases involving large European-based banks that use their New York operations to do business with blacklisted countries.

NY probes oil companies

The state attorney general is investigating ExxonMobil and Peabody Energy for allegedly deceiving investors by hiding research results on the causes and effects of climate change. The probe may lead to inquiries into other oil companies.

Viceland to air

To capture more advertising dollars, Brooklyn-based Vice Media is launching a cable channel in partnership with A+E Networks. Viceland will focus on gay culture, marijuana and music.

Trump book launch

Crippled America, a campaign manifesto, offers little insight into the presidential hopeful’s policy goals.

A Flintstones-like museum addition

The American Museum of Natural History revealed designs by architect Jeanne Gang for its $325 million Richard Gilder Center for Science, Education and Innovation at West 79th Street. The plan “consumes less park space than expected, while introducing an aesthetic that evokes Frank Gehry’s museum in Bilbao, Spain,” The New York Times wrote. The design is subject to City Council approval as well as a Landmarks Preservation Commission review.

Sign Up for Health Pulse Brought to you by Crain's New York Business, Health Pulse is a subscription-only website focused on the business of health care. The site is updated every day with breaking news, research and unique information. Subscribe today and receive access to the site and the daily emails. Plus, twice a week we release a special report called Extra, featuring data and statistics. Subscribe Today

Comments