The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) commonly called the Affordable Care Act (ACA) or, both colloquially and affectionately called Obamacare, is a United States federal statute that was signed into law by President Barack Obama on March 23, 2010. The stated purpose of the ACA, simply put: To insure the uninsured. The latest Gallup Poll released on Thursday makes that effective argument that the uninsured rate has dropped once again; this time the uninsured rate among all U.S. adults was 11.0 percent, down from 11.9 percent in the fourth quarter of 2015. This marks a record low since Gallup and Healthways began tracking the uninsured rate in 2008. The uninsured rate has declined 6.1 percentage points since the fourth quarter of 2013, which was right before the individual mandate provision of the Affordable Care Act took effect in early 2014 that required Americans to carry health insurance.

Photo by Joe Raedle/Getty Images

The Gallup poll also showed that the uninsured rate is down most significantly among Hispanics and blacks. Across key subgroups, blacks and Hispanics have experienced the largest declines in their uninsured rates since the fourth quarter of 2013. The rate among Hispanics was 28.3% in the first quarter of 2016, still significantly higher than for all U.S. adults, but down 10.4 points from the fourth quarter of 2013. Similarly, the uninsured rate has declined 9.5 points among blacks over this same period to its current 11.4 percent. These larger declines for blacks and Hispanics partly reflect higher uninsured rates among those demographic groups relative to whites before the implementation of the new healthcare law.

U.S. Rep. Robin Kelly (D-IL), Chairwoman of the Congressional Black Caucus Health Braintrust, has been speaking out on the issue of health care disparities among communities of color. Rep. Kelly said, "African Americans, in particular, have benefited tremendously from the ACA."

"Among African American adults, the uninsured rate dropped by 53 percent since 2013, resulting in 3 million people gaining coverage. Nearly 8 million African Americans with private insurance now have access to preventative services like mammograms or flu shots with no co-pay or deductible," said Rep. Kelly. "More than 500,000 African American young adults between the ages of 19 and 26 who would have been uninsured now have coverage under their parents’ plan."

The uninsured rate has dropped considerably since the fourth quarter of 2013 when the key provision of the new healthcare law requiring U.S. adults to obtain health insurance took effect. After declining significantly in earlier quarters, the rate of uninsured U.S. adults leveled off in 2015. Most healthcare policy watchers had anticipated this, as those who remain uninsured are among the most difficult to insure. The drop in the first quarter of 2016 suggests that the rate may continue to decline in future years, although less markedly and maybe only in the first quarter of each year as U.S. adults continue to make use of the exchanges to obtain health insurance.

The open enrollment period concluded on Jan. 31, 2016, meaning slight changes are expected in the second quarter of 2016 when the totality of interviews are conducted after the exchanges have closed, but further significant changes to the uninsured rate are unlikely until the first quarter of 2017.

Results are based on telephone interviews conducted Jan. 2-March 31, 2016, as part of the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index survey, with a random sample of 44,557 adults, aged 18 and older, living in all 50 U.S. states and the District of Columbia.