4438338

Taking a page from free-birth control enthusiast and spectacularly failed politician Sandra Fluke, a Gainesville, Fla. high school student took to the local news this week to sell her student group’s petition for free condoms for all students.

The student, Kira Christmas, is a senior at taxpayer-funded Gainesville High School, reports area ABC affiliate WCJB.

The objective of the petition is to convince school district officials to purchase a large number of condoms so the school nurse can provide them to all comers.

The petition observes that Gainesville, home to the University of Florida, and surrounding Alachua County are home to Florida’s highest rate of sexually-transmitted diseases among 15 to 24-year-olds.

“Condoms are a safety tool,” the free stuff-demanding Christmas told the station. “It’s something that everybody needs in life. It’s 2015 and it shouldn’t be an issue.”

The senior appears to be blissfully unaware that a 36-count pack of Trojan-enz lubricated, latex condoms can be purchased at Amazon.com for just $13.97.

In Florida, the mandatory minimum wage is $8.05 per hour. Thus, a high school student who has a basic fast-food or retail sector job only needs to work one hour and 44 minutes to purchase 36 condoms.

Superintendent Owen Roberts met with Christmas. She said the superintendent’s message was that he is uncertain if the free-condom proposal has broad support in the community.

She is undeterred.

“I would love to see more discussion in schools. It’s something that’s still taboo and it’s not talked about at all,” Christmas said, talking about sex and condoms on the WCJB television newscast reaching hundreds of thousands of people.

“We don’t have a sex-ed class,” the senior also claimed.

“Alachua County teaches abstinence-only sex education without any further instruction,” Gainesville pediatrician Olivia Potter has previously written in The Gainesville Sun, according to EAGnews.org.

The next potential free condom giveaway is never far off in America’s taxpayer-funded public schools.

A couple years ago, for example, the Philadelphia Health Department installed clear plastic dispensers brimming with free condoms at several public high schools. (RELATED: Philadelphia High Schools Welcome Students Back With Free Condoms)

In 2014, a school board in Oregon decided not to give out a bunch of condoms to local 12-year-olds despite previously voting to provide free condoms to all students from sixth grade through 12th grade. Parental notification did not appear to have been part of the ambitious plan. (RELATED: School District Pulls Out On Plan To Give Condoms To SIXTH GRADERS)

Meanwhile, Sandra Fluke, the face of the Obamacare contraception mandate, lost a November 2014 bid for state Senate in California’s 26th Congressional District. The women’s rights activist received 39 percent of the vote while her opponent, also a Democrat, won with 61 percent. (RELATED: Sandra Fluke, Champion For Free Birth Control, Also Lost On Tuesday)

Follow Eric on Twitter. Like Eric on Facebook. Send education-related story tips to [email protected].