Indians back up last week's upset with convincing win to reach final four for the first time since '06

Loveland's Calvin Kelly (11) celebrates his first-quarter touchdown with a teammate during his team's state quarterfinal upset over Duragno. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

For those around the state who may have thought Loveland's upset win at Vista Ridge last week was a fluke, think again.

After a 30-14 drubbing of the 4th-seeded Wolves in Colorado Springs last Friday, the Indians demolished the 5th-seeded Durango Demons 49-21 Saturday in the 4A state quarterfinals at Ray Patterson Stadium.

Going against a team that had finished 9-1 in the regular season, just like Vista Ridge had, the 13th-seeded Indians went on the ground, through the air, and up and down the field in an offensive assault that was too much for the visitors to overcome.

After keeping to the ground attack early with the always-hard-to-tackle 225-pound Charles Dunkelman, leading to a Dunkelman 4-yard touchdown plunge on the game's opening drive, Durango got the ball back and put together an impressive drive of their own. In fact, the Demons got down to the LHS 8-yard line for first-and-goal. The Indians held up and stopped them on fourth down from the 8 to set the tone for a defense that was timely with turnovers and red zone toughness.

But, after a three and out by Loveland gave the ball back to the Demons, Durango put together another drive. This time the Indians turned them over on downs on the LHS 27.

The score was only 7-0 at the end of one. After that, chaos ensued.

Advertisement

First, Loveland senior quarterback Ayden Eberhardt ripped off a 48-yard run to the Durango 32. Then, on fourth-and-11 from the 31, the Indians pulled off a trick play with a lateral from Eberhardt to Aidan McQuade, then to a wide-open Ryan Svendsen for a touchdown with 9:10 left in the first half to give the Indians a 14-0 lead.

Loveland's Kaden Morin (22) eludes a tackle on a punt return during his team's win over Durango on Saturday. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Durango answered back with a 6-yard touchdown catch by Gavin Mestas from quarterback Terrence Trujillo, but Eberhardt turned on the burners for a 46-yard touchdown scamper on the next possession to make it 22-7 with a two-point conversion. Then, after a three-and-out forced by the LHS defense, Calvin Kelley found himself wide open and Eberhardt hit him with a gorgeous 44-yard touchdown pass to push the margin to 28-7, a lead that Loveland took into halftime.

The incredible plays continued in the second half for the Indians as Eberhardt had a 45-yard run, McQuade had a gutsy 25-yard touchdown grab in the back of the end zone and Svendsen a rumbling and tumbling 79-yard touchdown catch.

Before Durango knew what hit them, it was 42-14 Loveland with three minutes to go in the third. In a game in which the Demons found some success offensively, especially through the air, Loveland found much more success in every facet and even tallied four interceptions of Trujillo, two by Svendsen — who played a whale of a game — one by Kaden Morin off a tip from McQuade, and finally one by McQuade himself.

Eberhardt, who threw three touchdowns and ran for another, was quick to credit his offensive line for all the highlight-reel plays.

"With all the highlight plays, honestly the line stepped up," Eberhardt said. "They were working their butts off. They made every play happen. Cohesive offense is what we have right now and that's awesome to see."

Eberhardt finished the game with 169 yards rushing and 199 passing.

"Ayden Eberhardt was unbelievable at quarterback," Loveland coach Wayne McGinn said. "He had some big runs. McQuade had some big plays and so did Dunkelman. All the seniors played their hearts out and they played great."

For a team that was once sitting with a 2-4 record, the Indians have won five of their past six. The lone loss came at the hands of Windsor 6-0, but the Wizards are another semifinalist.

"We had to win two games at the end of the regular season to get in to the playoffs and we treated those like playoff games," said Svendsen, who has been a monster on both sides of the ball several weeks in a row. "Now every game is just getting harder from here on out."

Eberhardt says another playoff win proves his team's worth.

"It can happen once, but happening two times in two weeks, that's something that definitely proves that we're where we should be," the quarterback said.

Now the Indians will host No. 1 Pine Creek, 43-8 winners over Wheat Ridge on Saturday. The Eagles boast a 37-game winning streak and have won the last two state titles.

"All we wanted was a shot at Pine Creek and that's what we got," Eberhardt said. "We're blessed with an opportunity to be able to play them. To host them is even better."

Loveland, after a number of runs to the quarterfinals in recent years, has reached the semifinals for the first time since 2006. The semifinal against Pine Creek is at 1 p.m. at Patterson Stadium.

Brock Laue: at twitter.com/BrockLaue

4A State Playoffs

Indians 49, Demons 21

At Patterson Stadium

0 7 7 7 — 217 21 14 7 — 49

First quarter

LHS — Charles Dunkelman 4 run (Ayden Eberhardt kick), 9:14

Second quarter

LHS — Ryan Svendsen x pass from Aidan McQuade (Eberhardt kick), 9:01 DHS — Gavin Mestas 6 pass from Terrence Trujillo (), 6:47; LHS — Eberhardt 46 run (Eberhardt run), 5:59; LHS — Calvin Kelley 44 pass from Eberhardt (kick failed), 4:52

Third quarter

LHS — McQuade 25 pass from Eberhardt (Eberhardt kick), 5:42; DHS — Trujillo 72 run (), 4:18; LHS — Svendsen 72 pass from Eberhardt (Eberhardt kick), 3:04

Fourth quarter

DHS — Lucas Baken 7 pass from Trujillo (Jernigan kick), 11:56; LHS — Dunkelman 3 run (Eberhardt kick), 3:21.