Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

CALABASAS, Calif. (AP) — Nothing is more important than family.

That’s what the stoic Hollywood fixer played by Liev Schreiber tells his wife in the second season premiere of “Ray Donovan.” While it’s unclear whether his character believes his own words, Schreiber says that principle has shaped his career in recent years.

The actor has made it a priority to spend time with his two sons with longtime partner Naomi Watts — 6-year-old Sasha and 5-year-old Samuel. He set aside plans to direct again after 2005’s “Everything Is Illuminated.” He let others guide him into roles in theatre and on screen.

“It’s amazing how insignificant everything else becomes,” Schreiber said of his fatherhood. “It sounds romantic. But the reality is that you go brain dead for 2 1/2, 3 years and slowly return to the world. … You kind of lose all ambition.”

“That’s part of the thing about acting. It’s so easy to follow the career path that’s defined by the options presented to you,” he said. “Where with directing or producing or writing, there is a lot more self-motivation at play there.”

The 46-year-old actor looked as if he had mostly emerged from that haze during a recent shoot on the set of “Ray Donovan” in a gated neighborhood in Calabasas, the hilly Los Angeles suburb where the Kardashians and many other celebrities live.

Schreiber was directing the episode, his first gig outside of commercials in nine years. Sitting in a high folding chair, he reviewed a script on a MacBook Air, glancing up to watch cameras move into position on a monitor.

“We’re good. We’re good. We’re good,” he announced over a wireless microphone to the production crew. There was a pause. One actor was missing. “Oh right, that’s me,” he said with a tight smile, hopping up swiftly to take his mark for a scene in which Donovan confronts a music mogul and yells at his teenage daughter.

Schreiber says later he underestimated the difficulty of “pulling double duty” on the much-praised series, which weaves together stories of clergy sex abuse, unconventional family ties, violence, celebrity and Hollywood powerbrokers. The second season starts Sunday on Showtime.

“In order to do it correctly, you have to watch playback after every take. I just hated stopping … to see my own performance,” he said. “The hard part is directing without vision, without being able to see.”