NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune asked all 11 of the candidates running for the 6th Congressional District to fill out a standard questionnaire outlining their background and positions on some key issues.

The information below is in the candidates' own words. Some of the profiles may have been edited for space, to fit within a standard word count for all candidates. Any candidates not included did not return the questionnaire by press time.

Name: Peter J. Williams

Party: Democrat

Age: 57

Residence: Lettsworth, Louisiana

Education: Kaplan High School, Kaplan, La. (1975); University of Southwestern Louisiana, (1980); now at University of Louisiana-Lafayette

Profession: Agriculture and forestry tree producer, community advocate and consultant.

Family: Wife of 33 years, Alfreda Rodney Williams, and four adult children, Cornelius, Nathanael, Alanna, and Jasper

What makes you the most qualified candidate in the 6th district?

My overall background in working with diverse groups and governmental agencies, in agriculture, health, housing, education, and other federal and state programs have given me the experience necessary to lead the 6th District in these troubling times across America and our state.

What are the top two issues you want to take on as a congressional representative?

First thing would be to re-establish the overall value of Louisiana to the nation and the world. By doing so, we can regain respect and economic worthiness, which in turn will allow us to be part of the planning process with decisions that affect our daily lives.

Second, I would attempt to introduce a formula through legislation that will prevent any future governor from refusing federal program dollars. This will safeguard the loss of much needed funds that support designated community health care, education, infrastructure, and other social safety net programs.

Given the gridlock in Washington, what would you do to actually get things done?

I am a candidate for the people, not the party, although I'm a Democrat. Party politics is why there is gridlock in Washington. To get things done, I will seek to be recognized as the congressman with ears to hear, a mind that's open, and a heart fixed to make the best possible decision for all citizens of the 6th District and Louisiana.

Would you support Medicaid expansion in Louisiana? Why or why not?

I support Medicaid expansion in Louisiana. It provides a bridge that closes the medical gap for families that need just a little extra help obtaining quality health care, that will improve their overall quality of life. Additionally, it would help hospitals and doctors cover the cost of treating uninsured patients, which has been a financial burden to them in the past.

Would you vote to repeal the Affordable Care Act? Why or why not?

As for the political clubs advocating to repeal the Affordable Care Act, they are just blowing smoke to get votes from confused and uninformed voters. The ACA is law now, and would take a serious combined act of Congress to change it. Lastly, many presidents in the past have signed flawed bills and legislation. Americans simply accepted and adjusted. I suggest with the ACA we do the same, get over it and move on.

How do you think the U.S. government should handle its borders, particularly with regard to the unaccompanied children who are now being housed in Louisiana and other states?

I think the U.S. government should concentrate on increase fencing and border patrol. On the ground, we need to enforce a 30-day pick-up and return home policy, build safe facilities along the border to identify immigrants, conduct health screening and send them back where they came from. Lastly, no civilian family should be able to house unaccompanied children, nor be compensated for doing so.

Click here for links to candidate profiles for those who completed questionnaires.