Buy Photo Iowa Insurance Commissioner Nick Gerhart, right, listens as a Coventry customer complains about a proposed rate hike for next year during an event Saturday in Des Moines. (Photo: Tony Leys/The Register)Buy Photo

Iowans who buy their own health insurance pleaded with the state's top regulator Saturday to reject big premium increases, but several expressed doubt their words would have much effect.

Insurance Commissioner Nick Gerhart held a hearing on rate increases from Wellmark Blue Cross & Blue Shield and Coventry Health Care. Wellmark, the state's largest health insurance carrier, is proposing premium increases averaging 21 percent to 26 percent for 140,000 Iowans. Coventry, the largest Iowa carrier selling policies that qualify for Affordable Care Act subsidies, is proposing average increases of 17 percent for about 30,000 Iowans.

"I can't say the word enough: unsustainable. We've got to put an end to this. I don't know what the answer is, but I'm asking for your help," Mark Seaton of Urbandale told Gerhart.

Seaton, 52, who is a software consultant, said he's paying $16,281 in Wellmark premiums for a family of four this year. Under the company's proposed increase, that would jump 26.5 percent to $20,596, he said. It already climbed 18 percent last year.

Verne Lyon of Johnston said he doesn't understand how Coventry, which covers his wife, has been unable to predict how health care costs would increase.

"Poor planning or gouging? I'm not quite certain which it is," he said.

Executives from the two carriers said the premium increases are fueled by higher-than-expected health care costs, including for people who were uninsured before the Affordable Care Act helped them find coverage.

Wellmark Vice President Laura Jackson said she understood customers' frustrations.

"I'll just be blunt: Rate increases stink. They do. And it is not something that any of us take in a lighthearted fashion," she said.

Jackson said soaring prices and use of prescription drugs are a major factor. So is higher-than-expected use of expensive hospital services, such as those for premature babies or cancer patients, she said.

Jackson said her company's actuaries previously underestimated such trends, including for new customers. She also said that although Wellmark and other players are trying to improve care and health, she doubts cost increases will be reined in soon, especially since so many Americans are in poor health.

"We have chronic conditions that are truly an epidemic in our country," Jackson said.

Dale Mackel, Coventry's top executive in Iowa, said he sympathizes with customers who complain about paying higher premiums even though they take care of their health and rarely go to the doctor.

"Unfortunately, they're part of a larger pool, and the pool in its totality is what drives the rates," he said.

Mackel, whose company took on many Iowans who previously lacked insurance, said they are using even more medical services than experts predicted. He also noted that the federal government is ramping down Affordable Care Act measures to help carriers handle risk.

Besides speaking at the Des Moines hearing, Iowans could chime in via video from sites around the state. They used words like "ridiculous," "unfair" and "unaffordable" to describe the price increases.

"I come before you today to say my belt is so tight I can barely breathe," a woman from Burlington told the commissioner. She said she already spends about 10 percent of her family's $38,000 income on premiums.

Gerhart said he would consider the testimony and customers' written comments. He also will read reports being prepared by statistical experts, which have had great sway in past insurance-rate cases. Gerhart said would have a decision in a few weeks. He expressed sympathy with the complaints about health care costs.

"We do have to get our arms around it," he said.

In the past, Iowa insurance commissioners have generally approved such rate increases if the carriers' statistical arguments were confirmed by other experts.

The event was lightly attended, with only about a dozen customers at the Des Moines site and a smattering at the other sites.

Seaton, the Wellmark customer, said afterward that most people probably decided it wasn't worth attending. He was skeptical the testimony would sway Gerhart.

"I honestly don't think it'll do any good," he said. "But I've gotten to the point where I'm just so frustrated. I felt like I had to speak up."

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1S1uQpu