Cycling as recreation, sport and transport has exploded in recent years, with continued growth likely as more locales install bike lanes and bikeshare programs.

But as you might expect, with that growth has come an increase in bike-related injuries.

Although there is some truth to the adage of “safety in numbers” — that is, risk should decline as more people ride and drivers become used to sharing the road with cyclists — there is also a rather steep learning curve for bikers and drivers. Alas, the United States is still in kindergarten in this regard.

The latest study, published as a research letter Sept. 1 in JAMA, documents a rise in cycling-related injuries and hospitalizations among adults from 1998 to 2013.

Adjusted for age, reported injuries rose 28 percent, and resulting hospitalizations increased 120 percent. There was also an increase, to 56 percent from 40 percent, of accidents that occurred on streets.

Injuries involving the arms and legs declined over the years of the study. But there was a rise in more severe injuries: a 60 percent increase, to 16 percent from 10 percent, in head injuries, and a 20 percent increase in injuries to the torso.

That’s the bad news. The good news, as Dr. Benjamin N. Breyer, the lead author of the study, put it: “The benefits of cycling to the cardiovascular system and to one’s overall sense of wellbeing way override the risks.

Cycling is a fantastic way to get around a city. And it’s great for increasing muscle

strength and balance.”

But, he quickly added, “People need to learn how to ride safely.”

And, as an avid cyclist, I will add, streets and roadways need to be made safer — and more drivers have to learn to pay attention to cyclists and treat them with respect, not as targets.

I have done cycling trips in Vietnam, Spain, South Africa, Germany, Croatia, Poland and New Zealand, and in all those countries, I felt a lot safer than I do in my Brooklyn neighborhood. Drivers approaching from behind did not honk and scare me half to death. They slowed until they could pass me safely, and those planning to turn waited until I had cleared the intersection.

Most amazing was the Croatian bus coming down a steep hill on a narrow road that stopped and waited for me to pass as I struggled up. All I could think was, “That would never happen in the United States.” But it should!

Breyer, a urologic surgeon at the University of California, San Francisco, said one of the most striking findings of the study was the “shift in the age of riders being injured; cycling has become a lot more popular among people over 45,” he said, and older riders now account for a disproportionate number and severity of injuries.

Breyer’s interest in cycling accidents was stimulated in part by the large number of genital and urinary tract injuries he has treated among cyclists, often sustained from landing on handlebars or the crossbar in a fall.

He said that older riders may have more accidents because of diminished strength and balance, and their resulting injuries were likely to be more serious. Even when an older rider is in great shape, Breyer said, “when a 65-year-old falls off a bike, he’s likely to sustain a more serious injury than a 25- year- old.”

Much can be done to enhance the safety and pleasurability of cycling in the United States. Cyclists should always wear a helmet that fits snugly and covers the upper forehead. They can enhance their visibility by wearing bright colors in the daytime and reflective clothing at night and by installing bike lights front and back and a flashing light on their helmets.

Whenever possible, they should make eye contact with drivers and pedestrians. A mirror on the helmet or handlebar can alert cyclists to vehicles approaching from behind. And a bell activated by one finger can alert pedestrians who fail to see a bike coming. Cyclists should always ride in the direction of vehicular traffic and obey traffic signals, including those on segregated bike paths.

Of course, trafficcalming measures that reduce vehicular speeds, especially in residential areas, would go a long way toward minimizing the risk to cyclists. And more bike lanes, especially ones protected from traffic, are needed everywhere. When painted a different color from the roadway, they increase visibility and may help keep vehicles from double-parking in them, forcing cyclists into traffic lanes.

Peter Lyndon Jacobsen, a public health consultant in Sacramento who found that walking and cycling were safest when there were more walkers and cyclists, suggested that motorists adjust their behavior when there are more people to watch out for.

But it’s still up to cyclists to remain vigilant. That means riding without earbuds that reduce the sounds of vehicles, and not texting or talking on phones unless you’ve stopped.