Colorado’s economy has recovered from the Great Recession, ranking high for job creation and enabling state and local government to claim they’ve balanced the books.

But that balancing act has set the stage for the next big debate about Colorado’s future: whether we can afford to shore up public pension funds at the expense of education and infrastructure.

That debate already is well underway. As the editorial page of The Denver Post pointed out on July 3, the problem got worse this past year as returns for the Public Employees’ Retirement Association (PERA) failed to keep pace with its assumed rate of return. And to the jeers of conservative pundits, Secure PERA — a lobbying group on behalf of retirees — is handing out “PERA bucks” to promote the consumer power of public pensions.

A bill signed by Gov. John Hickenlooper last year required detailed annual reporting on PERA’s value to public employees, an assessment of costs and benefits of switching to alternatives, and an evaluation of the assumptions behind PERA’s fiscal projections. The initial evaluation by an outside audit firm was made public on July 13. It concluded that PERA’s operations were cost-competitive with similar plans in other states, but it also confirmed that a wide funding gap remains.

The bottom line is that Colorado taxpayers owe past, current and future public employment retirees at least $27.2 billion in unfunded benefits. PERA has a total of $70.2 billion in liabilities and $43 billion in assets, for a net liability of $27.2 billion. That debt is more than $5,000 for every resident, nearly twice the amount per resident that Colorado’s state and local governments collect in taxes each year.

Put another way, it would take annual “mortgage” payments of $1.5 billion to $2 billion for 40 years to retire this debt. In its summary financial report to members, PERA admitted that full funding was 25 to 48 years away for its five major funding sub-groups.

Overpromising and under-delivering on public pensions may be the greatest legacy of the Great Recession. Part of the reason is accounting. In the private sector, pension liabilities must be discounted based on corporate bond rates, currently about 4 percent. Public-sector pension liabilities, in contrast, can be discounted at an assumed rate of return. PERA’s presumed rate of return is 7.5 percent.

This means PERA’s estimates of its future pension liabilities is much lower at $27.2 billion than it would be if these liabilities were owed by a private pension fund. The difference is about $45 billion in additional pension liabilities — and PERA is not alone.

“All of this is an absurdity,” The Economist editors wrote in a June 27 article on the U.S. public pension mess. “It pretends that it is cheaper for the public sector to fund a pension promise than it is for the private sector.”

There are three broad options for dealing with this massive debt. The first is to continue on our present course. Reforms to PERA in 2010, including a controversial limit to cost of living increases, and subsequent tweaks have put Colorado on a course to potentially fully fund PERA, but that is based on a 7.5 percent annual rate of return achieved over nearly two generations.

Under this approach, employer contributions to PERA from state and local governments and school districts will range from 13.7 percent to an astounding 22.85 percent of their total payroll, depending on the unit of government. These extra payments are going to tie the hands of city councils, school boards and state legislators far into the future in terms of funding roads, education and public spaces. If the pension plans do not reach their expected return, the extra payments could be even more crippling.

In addition, covered employees pay 8 percent to 10 percent of their salary into PERA. Most public employees covered by PERA are excluded from Social Security; neither they nor their employers pay the total 11.3 percent payroll tax that private employers and employees pay.

The second option, which was considered but did not pass in the last legislative session, is to “double down” on PERA’s unfunded liability by issuing up to $12 billion in long term bonds — at approximately 4 percent to 4.5 percent interest — and have PERA reinvest the proceeds, hoping to earn 7.5 percent on average over 30 years. This option, if it worked, would shorten the period of time needed to fully fund PERA’s liabilities by about 10 years, to 2055.

However, this option has considerable risk. If PERA were to earn less than the interest on the bonds, or even lose some of the principal — as happened during the Great Recession — the gains would be diminished or turned into a loss.

“It’s sold as a magic bean,” University of Colorado Denver professor Todd Ely told Washington Post columnist Allan Sloan and ProPublica staffer Cezary Podkul in a recent article that warned about the lucrative sideline that Wall Street has created in selling pension bonds to unsuspecting governments that haven’t truly assessed all the risks.

The third — and very different — option is to convert from a defined benefit model to the defined contribution model that is common in the private sector. This option would move Colorado’s future public employees — but not current employees or retirees — into the Social Security system. The current defined benefit plan would then be replaced with individual 401(k)-type retirement accounts. Note that this option would do nothing to reduce the state’s accumulated pension debt; it would only prevent it from growing larger due to future underfunding.

Public employers would almost certainly offer a match for individual contributions to such accounts, giving employees the opportunity to retire with fully portable retirement accounts that can be spent, turned into annuities, or passed on to heirs.

The interim costs of making such a switch would have to be considered, because public employers would have to fund PERA’s outstanding liabilities even as they make matching contributions to new employees’ defined contribution accounts.

Transition costs are an issue that was raised in the Gabriel, Roeder Smith & Co. report on PERA’s financial condition. But not everyone agrees that pension liabilities have to be paid up front when transitioning to a defined contribution plan. Robert Costrell, professor of Education Reform and Economics at the University of Arkansas, has disputed the need for such payments.

“GRS’ main ‘transition cost’ argument — accelerating payments on the State Division’s unfunded liability by $800 million in the first year — is completely bogus,” Costrell said. “There is no logical financial link between changing benefits for new hires and the pace of payments on liabilities accrued by old members.

“Indeed, GRS itself, in a similar previous case (Utah), recommended against acceleration, since employer payments on the unfunded liability can be calculated on total payroll — old and new alike.”

Beyond the costs for converting, there will be more variability in outcomes for individual employees. Some will save and invest well, and build up a large nest egg. Others will not save as much or invest as well and they will have less for retirement. The risk of a broad divergence in outcomes for individual employees based on their choice of assets is anathema to public sector unions.

But the benefits could be significant. Chief among them is a more competitive workforce that would make it easy for employees to move from the private to the public sector and back again.

In addition, giving each public-sector worker fully portable Social Security benefits and a 401(k)-like account would help them build personal wealth and help end the noxious notion that public employees have a “property right” in their government job. Today, fewer than 7 percent of newly hired private employees are covered by defined benefit pensions.

Elsewhere, change is coming to public pensions. Bankrupt cities from San Bernardino, Calif., to Detroit are rewriting their pension rules because they cannot pay. Other state legislatures are considering major reforms.

Whether Colorado stays the course, doubles down with a big-bucks bond issue or opts for a major overhaul, taxpayers and public employees alike have a lot at stake. Future funding for our schools, highways and other infrastructure will depend on how we deal with Colorado’s massive, looming pension shortfall.

Go to denverpost.com/dubroff for previous installments of Henry Dubroff and John J. Huggins’ occasional series, “What ails America’s economy.”

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.