Ypsilanti's Cross Street Village's historic features drew in 78-year-old Marti Dalley, but there was one other element that made it the perfect place to begin a new chapter of her life: It was affordable housing.

Dalley began searching for a new place to live shortly after she retired from the University of Michigan in 2011.

She previously lived in an Ann Arbor condominium that she could no longer afford. Cross Street Village offers affordable housing to seniors older than 55.

"I had a condo near the old Kroger and Rite Aid (near Georgetown Mall) and it was a two-story with a basement," she said. "It got to be too expensive living on Social Security and the retirement I have from the 'U.' I decided that I wasn't going to be going up and down the stairs to do laundry. I had to accept that I was getting older and I needed to find something that was more accommodating to me as I started to age. I just had a comfortable feeling when I came here."

Dalley isn't alone in seeking out affordable housing.

In the city of Ypsilanti, there are hundreds of affordable housing units that range from subsidized options to apartments that have a lower price point.

Yet, the question of whether Ypsilanti needs additional affordable housing units has resonated through the community since it was announced the city is considering a purchase agreement from a developer seeking to build 90 apartments on the city-owned Water Street site.

Some have said the community already has enough affordable housing units within its 4.5 square miles. Now, the City Council is set to vote on the agreement Tuesday.

Several people -- business owners, former elected leaders and residents -- have spoken out against the project. Ypsilanti Township Clerk Karen Lovejoy Roe wrote a letter to the City Council urging it to think twice before giving the project a green light.

"My only concern ... Each proposal that comes for Water Street, is it going to make developing the plot easier or harder," said Former Mayor Cheryl Farmer at a council meeting a few weeks ago. "At the end of the day, we want Water Street to perform this goal of uplifting the community and making the community stronger."

Some residents went as far as to compare the affordable housing project to a potential "tenement house."

The HKP proposal, unlike Cross Street Village, isn't specifically for seniors, but Dalley said she believes there's a misconception of what affordable housing is and what it looks like. She said every development isn't the same.

"I'm so proud of this place," she said, adding that she has a Steinway piano in her two-bedroom apartment. "I think maybe they confuse it. When they think of affordable housing, they think of that sort of thing when people come in and destroy it. I think they’re confused when they think of that and think that affordable housing means people are going to tear up the space. That’s not senior housing."

Officials say the need for additional units is great throughout the entire Washtenaw County region.

Ypsilanti approved a letter of intent in January for an affordable housing project proposed by Indiana-based developer Herman & Kittle Properties that would occupy 3.14 acres of the 38 acre property.

City Planner Teresa Gillotti said 63 percent of Ypsilanti families would qualify for one of the affordable housing units proposed on the site, based on family size.

"Our incomes are the lowest within the region," Gillotti said. "... This is serving the people we have."

The need for more affordable housing

Data compiled by the city shows at least 886 affordable housing units exist within city limits that have some sort of income restriction. That number does not include the 192 units owned by the Ypsilanti Housing Commission, according to the city.

The most recent Affordable Housing Needs Assessment completed in 2007 by Washtenaw County showed that the city needed as many as 570 additional units of affordable housing.

The Washtenaw County Area Median Income is $59,063. The city of Ypsilanti's median income is $32,996, according to the American Community Survey.

Five units of the HKP proposal, 6 percent, would have income caps of 50 percent of the Washtenaw County Area Median income. A family of six could make no more than $50,700. An individual could make no more than $30,600, annually.

The remaining 85 units would be restricted to an income cap of 60 percent of the Washtenaw County Area Median Income. For a family of six, that equates to $60,840. For a single person, the income limit would be $36,720.

HKP has been working with the Michigan State Housing Development Authority for approval to help finance the project through tax credits worth millions of dollars and other mechanisms that require the apartments to have a varying degree of income restrictions.

The credits could potentially require the property to remain affordable housing for the next 40 or more years.

"Whether Ypsilanti has enough affordable housing or not is really beside the question," said Mayor Paul Schreiber. "If you listen to Ann Arbor ... they’re always setting aside affordable housing units. We’ve got affordable units. A lot of Zingerman's employees live in Ypsilanti."

Gillotti said there are large segments of Washtenaw County where affordable housing options are limited, in particular the Ann Arbor market.

"We are Ann Arbor's affordable housing," Schreiber said. "It just needs to be good, affordable quality housing and I think that’s what this (HKP) project needs."

The county might conduct another assessment this year because officials believe the area's housing stock and incomes were severely impacted by the recession.

"Since the housing study, we had the market totally crash and things have shifted around," Gillotti said. "A lot of people that bought homes don't want to buy another house, they don’t want that debt. Some people want to rent again."

Brett Lenart, interim deputy director of Washtenaw County's Housing & Community Infrastructure, said more affordable units are needed.

"During the great recession and housing crisis, it's likely that we actually lost units during that time frame," Lenart said. "I answer with a yes because I think we lost ground with our affordable housing network."

Zachary Fosler, executive director of the YHC, said there are more than 300 families on waiting lists to be placed at one of its properties.

"The YHC’s current focus is to recapitalize the affordable housing we already own to ensure that we can provide safe, high quality, affordable housing opportunities to the residents of Ypsilanti," Fosler wrote in an email.

A look at who affordable housing serves

Cross Street Village, which opened in 2000 at 210 W Cross St. in the historic Ypsilanti High School, is home to 105 residents, according to site manager Eda Komora. She said several of the residents attended the high school, which was built in 1917.

The property does receive low-income tax credits and the rents are set at four income levels, ranging from 30 to 60 percent of the area median income. All of the utilities are paid for, except electricity. Section 8 vouchers are accepted.

"That enables a larger group to be eligible for housing here," Komora said. "The property, it is very well maintained, inside the building and out."

Lenart said as the need for more affordable, senior housing will continue to rise in the coming years in Ypsilanti and Washtenaw County.

Lenart said communities that have lower income levels are going to have higher levels of affordable housing options because of the needs of residents. According to Census data, 28.8 percent of Ypsilanti residents live below the poverty level.

"There's always going to be more of a need for affordable housing in those communities," he said. "Think about it in the context of the county. There are significant pockets of low income households in Ypsilanti and Ypsilanti Township to a greater extent than the bulk of the county."

Estimates from the 2010 U.S. Census show that 3,809 individuals or families have an income of between $10,000 and $34,999.

But the city also has a sizable number of residents on a higher spectrum of income, with 2,506 having an income between $50,000 and more than $200,000. Census data shows there are 93 individuals or families that fall under the latter income bracket.

The question of why rent prices are traditionally cheaper in Ypsilanti repeatedly come to forefront when the discussion of affordable housing occurs.

"When it comes down to it, the rents are cheaper in Ypsilanti and Ypsilanti Township, rather than Ann Arbor," Gillotti said. "There isn't a lot of affordable housing in Ann Arbor because rental rates are higher."

Gillotti said a lot more people qualify for affordable housing than some may think.

"When you think about those incomes and look at, kind of east of U.S. 23, I think a lot more people qualify," she said. "When you start looking at a lot of people you know, it's a larger number than you realize."

Affordable housing can serve anyone who works in retail to some school teachers, depending on the household size. Gillotti said it could also include the firefighters and police officers who were recently hired by the city.

"I generally think of it as, broadly, people who are pre their full careers or seniors when you start to live on retirement," she said. "... Three of our council members said they would qualify."

Defining affordable housing

The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development states affordable housing can be defined as "housing for which the occupants are paying no more than 30 percent of his or her income for gross housing costs, including utilities."

According to Gillotti, individuals paying more than that are considered to be "cost burdened" and may have difficulty affording necessities such as food, clothing, transportation and medical care.

Lenart said the definition includes a broad range of housing.

"When you say that term, I think it brings to mind different types of housing to mind to different people," Lenart said. "It could be housing that might be developed with little or no public subsidy or it may be constructed in such a way where it is affordable to people. There are lots of different housing that might be affordable from a price point."

Affordable housing also includes forms of subsidized housing or housing that receives some form of low-income tax credits. Lenart said some forms of affordable housing include other supportive services for residents.

"Affordable housing is a pretty big range," Lenart said.

The Section 8 voucher program is another element of affordable housing.

According to the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the housing choice voucher program is the federal government's major program for assisting very low-income families, the elderly, and the disabled to afford decent, safe, and sanitary housing in the private market.

Since housing assistance is provided on behalf of the family or individual, participants are able to find their own housing at places including single-family homes, townhouses and apartments.



If the participant has a tenant-based voucher, it can be used at any housing that meets the requirements of the program and is not limited to units located in subsidized housing projects. HUD provides $16.7 billion annually for its Section 8 programs.

Tenant-based Section 8 vouchers will be accepted at the HKP property. The percentage of tenant-based Section 8 vouchers at eight other Herman and Kittle properties ranges between four and 21 percent.

Although there is a definition of what affordable housing is, officials agree some may have an misconstrued perception about what it is.

"Some people think of the worst possible affordable housing," Lenart said. "Sometimes people think of the sort of textbook cases of public housing investments that were built in the 1960s that suffered from declining HUD resources."

In Ypsilanti, Lenart said there are examples of affordable housing that work for the community. The $16 million redevelopment of Hamilton Crossing greatly improved the former Parkview Apartments, Lenart said.

"It just wasn’t a quality place to live," he said. "That was redeveloped into what you see now. There are resoures on site for residents and it's a high demand place to live now. It’s a great, positive asset for that gateway into Ypsilanti. That’s an example where it does have an important impact."

He said the former Cross Street Senior Village is a model that works, too.

"The redevelopment of the former high school, that’s a great model of affordability and investments," he said. "I think Ypsilanti is a great example of the ways affordable housing is provided."

But, there are examples of housing developments in the city that have been impacted by years of wear and tear. The YHC is planning a $27 million redevelopment project to renovate all of its units and tear down and rebuild the Parkridge Homes development.

The $12.5 million dollar question

Is the HKP proposal right for the city's property? City Council will decide on Tuesday, but several members have already thrown their support behind it.

Some have argued the Water Street Flats rents will be close to market rate and tenants will have higher incomes in comparison to some other affordable housing residents in the city. A two-bedroom unit's rent will range from $765 to $810 each month.

Schreiber said he believes if the property is attractive, conforms with the city's master plan and has a diverse mix of tenants, then it's appropriate for Water Street.

However, he said he is taking residents' opinions into account.

"It’s a matter of figuring out what's best for the city and it’s a judgment call and that's why we have a city council," Schreiber said. "I think it's going to be very attractive. It’s not going to become all Section 8, which is what some people are worried about."

Lenart was one of the city's planners when Water Street property was being assembled.

The city still owes around $24 million on the Water Street debt, a decrease from 2006 when the city owed close to $30 million. The principal amount owed on the property was $15.7 million, but due to interest, the costs ballooned.

In 2014, the city will have to pay $1,340,727.50.

"It's been a really long community conversation and I think the city took an active step to spend a lot of money and realize a vision where that given it's proximity to downtown, was underutilized," Lenart said. "Obviously it was unrealized and the city has had to adjust and take an alternative course."

"One of the things that really strikes me just looking at the discussion and some renderings I've seen, it looks pretty consistent with the original charette.…. Even those physical is … I think the community expectation has changed and that notion of affordable housing means so many different things to people. I personally see a lot of opportunity for affordable, quality housing."

Planning Commissioner and Ypsilanti resident Gary Clark urged council to consider waiting for the new affordable housing needs assessment before deciding on the agreement. Clark said the more than $750,000 in infrastructure the developer would bring to the table is attractive, but there's more to be considered.

"I think this is a very important piece of our community and have to be careful about what we do here," Clark said. "I’d be very much more comfortable if this study were done. Where will the people come from that are going to live there? Ann Arbor has a tradition of sending people they don't desire to Ypsilanti. When we put in Peninsular Place, a lot of people moved from campus areas and it dramatically changed the areas they used to live in."

Ypsilanti business owner Dave Heikkinen said he has no issue with affordable housing itself, but he's against it being built on Water Street, which is in close proximity to the city's downtown.

"Why does Ypsi continue to undersell itself?" Heikkinen said. "We are perfectly located to be a bedroom community to Ann Arbor and to Detroit, if not a technology center. We hate the shadow cast down on us from Ann Arbor, so what can be done? Why do we have to settle for Family Dollars and low-income housing?"



Katrease Stafford covers Ypsilanti for The Ann Arbor News. Reach her at KatreaseStafford@mlive.com or 734-623-2548 and follow her on Twitter.