Theories on ‘Godfather’ question

Staten Island: To answer Voicer Dominick Battaglia’s question regarding “The Godfather”: “Pezzonovante” in Sicilian, literally means $1.90. This term usually is applied to persons of importance. The implication in Al Pacino’s reply is that he doesn’t want or need to be famous or important. M.A. Russo

Fresh Meadows: The reference to Al Pacino’s statement “Another pezzonovanta” in “The Godfather” refers to soneone who weighs 90 kilos or about 200 lbs, thus a “heavyweight” or a big shot. Hope that clears things up. Richard Del Favero

Deer Park. L.I.: “Pezzonovante” originally meant: the biggest firecracker (mortar) fired at a firework show, later on became a mafia word meaning a powerful mafioso, a big shot, a politician who has power and does favors, also a person that is very powerful in his profession or activity. Andrew Belloisi

War and security

Brooklyn: To Voicer Dawn R. LaMadeleine, who has a typically liberal and selective take on recent history: Were you absent the day that Saddam Hussein used chemical weapons to murder thousands of civilians (including children)? While we’re at it, perhaps you can explain, to those of us not so enlightened, how America has benefited from the so-called “wars for oil,” which are so much a part of the liberal mantra? Kenneth Klipp

Not our fight

Garfield, N.J.: The war in Syria is a bad idea, an unjust war, a waste of our resources, and none of our business. Yet we somehow may end up getting involved. Unbelievable! David Reniewich

Their neighborhood

Richmond Hill: Let Iran, Iraq and Egypt deal with Syria’s chemical warfare. Thomas D. & Anna E. Esposito

Their problem

Stockholm, N.J.: If this gassing of innocent people happened in either China or Russia, would we be contemplating bombing those countries? There will never be peace in the Arab world, so can’t the U.S.A. for once just take care of business here at home and let all the civil wars in these Third World countries be just that? Gino Nuzzo

Dance to the music

Brooklyn: To Voicer Judith Durah: What you and the rest of the American public are calling twerking is what we in the West Indian community call “Wining,” a cultural tradition. This is how we dance to our form of music, whether it be Calypso or Reggae, so what you saw the masqueraders doing was not taken from Miley Cyrus or anybody else. They took it from us the way they take everything else and try to make it their own. Pamela O’Connor

Nyuk, nyuk, nyuk

Matawan, N.J.: It surprises me that Gov. Cuomo does not want to endorse a mayoral candidate, but I do understand his decision. He’s probably thinking, “Who do I pick, Moe, Larry or Curly?” Angelo F. Grillo

Real issues ignored

Staten Island: Wouldn’t it be nice to hear the mayoral candidates talk about property taxes that have gone up every year for the past 12 years, ridiculously high water bills and out of control electric rates? And what about the skyrocketing rents people are faced with every month? I haven’t heard a word from any of them about any of these problems that we are up against every month. I wish they would address these important issues that affect all of us. Phyllis O’Callaghan

No more political mail

Brooklyn: I don’t know who Alan Maisel is. I don’t care who he is or what he’s running for. All I wish is that I’d stop receiving mail from him asking for his vote. In a week alone I received six postcards. Utterly ridiculous and a waste of money. Heidi Lystad

Robbery protection

Middle Village: The Cross County Federal Saving Bank policy banning hoodies, hats and sunglasses was in response to several robberies, one of which took place in my branch in Middle Village. Since then, a major renovation has taken place at this branch. The entrance has been moved and so have the teller stations. Upon entering the bank, you cannot see the tellers. A robbery could be in progress and you would walk right into it. I questioned the new design on more then one occasion and was told I would know by the expression on the faces of the officers that something was awry. If Cross County Federal Bank wants to ensure the safety of its employees and customers, an unobstructed view of the premises would be advisable and most appreciated by me. Linda Pettorsson

A sure thing

Astoria: Re your Sept. 4 editorial “Aqueduct finish line”: Having a casino at the track was to raise the purses so more horsemen would come. Aqueduct has not had needed repairs done because the politicians want the property. The idea to build affordable housing is laughable, because once that land is taken, the the seniors and the poor would soon be forgotten. You are right in asking about the Lottery money. But where is the parking meter money? Where is the bridge toll money? It never has gone to education. Look at OTB, when it began it was also for education. You want to free up the property to generate more revenue for the city, which takes enough from us all already. Cynthia Capurso

Back to school

Bayonne: I keep reading about test scores and how schools are letting our children down. Here’s what I see. When there were not enough teachers, they allowed people to teach using the alternative route. There is no longer a shortage of teachers; many are being laid off. My son has had his degree for 10 years and all he can get is a permanent sub job, which took eight years to obtain. Meanwhile, people without a license who have never taught or been in a classroom are being hired. I think the alternative route has served its purpose. It’s time to get people in the classroom who chose teaching as a profession, did student teaching and wanted to make a difference from the beginning. Not someone who took the job since he could not get a job in his own profession. Patricia Cummings

Taking a break

Staten Island: I noticed for a long time that Darby Conley of “Get Fuzzy” is always going on vacation. It must be very exhausting, beyond human endurance, work to draw and write a comic strip. As far as I’m concerned, he can stay on vacation because “Get Fuzzy” is stupid. Please bring back “Curtis.” Pedro Moure

The other side at Walmart

Secaucus: In response to Thursday’s anti-Walmart protest in New York City, I would like readers to know that the claims made by the protesters are far different than what I have experienced in my years with the company. As someone who never had the opportunity to get a college degree, I was concerned that my career would suffer. But I have thrived thanks to the support of Walmart. I joined Walmart more than 10 years ago and realized immediately that I had come to the right place. Starting as a sales associate, I worked my way up on the sales floor to sporting goods and then into store planning. For the past three years, I have been a co-manager, currently at the Secaucus location. By encouraging mobility, Walmart has fostered an environment that pushed me to advance and grow. My story isn’t unique — thousands of others have had the same experience. I hope people will keep this in mind as they read and hear comments by Walmart’s critics. Joshua Robertson

The fracking debate

Ossining, N.Y.: Congratulations on your Sept. 3 editorial, “A tutor for Cuomo,” dealing with one of the most important issues of our time — fracking to gain energy independence — and the wisdom of Energy Secretary Moniz, one of President Obama’s wisest appointments. Moniz, along with Interior Secretary Sally Jewell and EPA Administrator Gina McCarthy, make a terrific team to pursue an energy policy that could well save our country. Now it’s time for you to cover and interview the other side, i.e., five of the nation’s most knowledgeable and prominent anti-frackers: Lady Gaga, Yoko Ono, Mark Ruffalo, the Academy Awards Nominating Committee and Ian Urbina, fracking reporter for The New York Times. Let’s see what they come up with. William Jaenike

Second-class treatment

Fishkill, N.Y.: Congratulations to Voicer Susan Seidenberg on being a three year cancer survivor. The sad part is that Obamacare is just for the general public, not for the members of Congress, the President or their families. They get to keep the plan that they currently have. John Torzilli