Denver is exploring ways to enhance Burns Park, a widely seen but seldom used park known for its four large art pieces at the intersection of Colorado Boulevard and Alameda Avenue.

Denver Parks and Recreation, along with Denver Arts and Venues, is conducting a public survey before beginning a master plan for the park. The hope is to get more people to use the park and make it a destination in the city.

“It’s a nice park, but it’s in a tricky location,” said Jeff Green, spokesman for Denver Parks and Recreation.

The 13-acre park sees a lot of drive-by traffic, but it is difficult to get to as there are only nine parking spaces and the nearby streets can be tough to cross.

Colorado Boulevard, Alameda Avenue and Leetsdale Drive all directly border the park and in a sense, cut it off from regular use.

“The challenge of this park is that it’s very underused because it’s an island with large moats around it,” said Denver City Councilwoman Mary Beth Susman, who represents the area and is promoting the survey.

Residents of the Hilltop and Crestmoor neighborhoods are close by as are Cherry Creek North and Glendale.

Four large art pieces that are placed throughout the park serve as the its signature, and Denver Arts and Venues has particular interest in the park because of the art’s historical significance.

The art pieces were part of an artists symposium in 1968. All of the art was made of plywood and intended to be temporary. Three of the pieces are still plywood and encased in fiberglass. The other was remade out of concrete.

Denver Arts and Venues public art administrator Rudi Cerri sees potential in having artists create more work in the park and doing more with the pieces already in place, such as putting up signs with information about the art. Now, people know that the art is there, but they don’t know why.

“We don’t really have a place for artists to do large-scale temporary work. This could be a place to do that.” Cerri said.

If access is improved, the park has potential to host events. There was a Denver Arts and Venues event Aug .9. Despite being near three busy streets, the road noise doesn’t bleed into the park, Cerri said.

The survey is available through Aug. 29 on the Denver Parks and Recreation website, then park planners will begin working on the master plan.

Said Susman: “I wish us a lot of luck on how we can activate the park and have it be something that people can enjoy up close and personal.”

Joe Vaccarelli: 303-954-2396, jvaccarelli@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joe_vacc