A sexual-assault victim of Keegan Spearchief sits in her home on Thursday January 23, 2014. Spearchief, a violent high-risk sex offender, was released from prison three days ago, and this victim whose incident occurred a decade ago is now fearing for her safety. Lyle Aspinall/Calgary Sun/QMI Agency

In order to give a convicted rapist back his life, they take hers away.

“They re-traumatize me over and over and over again — it’s been years of hell.”

The man who attacked her was released from prison on Jan. 17: Keegan Troy Spearchief is a predator with a long record of sexual assault, violence, break-ins and voyeurism, and yet he’s out, living in Lethbridge and likely to re-offend, according to police.

If every woman in southern Alberta should be nervous about the 28-year-old deviant in their midst, his victim is terrified.

“I’m scared he’ll find me again. I’m freaked out beyond measure. Friday morning they phoned me to tell me they’d let him go — so he’s free and he can hurt people,” she said.

“I can’t change these freaking laws, and I can’t seem to get through to anyone — he had victims before me, and he had victims after me. And they let him out again.”

Just over a decade ago, she was a 40-year-old woman celebrating a break in life, having escaped an abusive partner in Calgary.

She’d landed a solid job, paying $20-an-hour, and had a new home where she felt safe and ready to start over.

“For the first time in my life I had a good job, and I was doing so well,” she said.

That’s when the teenage sexual predator decided to break in, determined to rape someone — he’d failed his first attempt earlier that evening, after attacking another woman in her home and being chased off by a male resident.

If there’s a single bright spot in this horrifying story, it’s that 17-year-old Spearchief failed in his second attempt to rape a stranger, and this time, the male homeowner showed up in time to save the terrified victim, and catch the creep trying to force himself upon her.

It was the justice system’s first opportunity to keep the unrepentant monster behind bars.

Of course, that didn’t happen.

“The justice system? We don’t have one. They help him, and protect him,” says the woman, now 50, and still trying to put her shattered life back together.

Spearchief was charged, but released on bail — while out, he committed a third break-in, this time raping a teenage victim at knifepoint.

Arrested and charged, Spearchief became the first youth in Canada sentenced as an adult under the Youth Criminal Justice Act, and yet he ended up with a soft four-year sentence.

The court ruled the young predator’s rehabilitation could be adversely affected by a harsher punishment, so four years was deemed tough enough.

As the lanky rapist was coddled, his 40-year-old victim saw her life fall apart.

Frightened and in shock, she left her new job and went back to her abusive partner.

Three years later, she moved out again — just in time to be told Spearchief was free from prison, untreated.

Spearchief refused court-recommended therapy while in jail, leading the National Parole Board to rule he was a risk to re-offend.

Yet he was released anyway, because public safety is secondary to a Canadian criminal’s right to a second chance.

Spearchief wanted a second chance alright — to resume his career as a predator. He was soon back, peeping in windows at naked women.

Never the brightest bulb, he dropped his wallet and cellphone as he fled one scene — but despite being arrested, he was again granted bail.

Endless chances for dangerous criminals are a hallmark of Canada’s court system, it seems — but Spearchief blows every break.

Labelled an “uncontrolled sexual deviant” by Calgary police, Spearchief was finally sent back to jail for 3 1/2 years after beating up his common-law wife and mother, before waving a knife at police and demanding that officers shoot him.

The police held their fire, and now, two years and eleven months later, Spearchief is free again.

For his victim, it means reliving the old terror — and waiting for the monster to attack again.

“Now I can’t eat, I can’t sleep — I just keep pacing and I keep having nightmares,” she said.

“They keep letting him out. And I can’t get on with my life.”

michael.platt@sunmedia.ca