Visiting Angels

Visiting Angels is a national, private duty network of home care agencies. We are proud to be the nation’s leading provider of non-medical senior home care services. Our Angels provide in-home care, elder care, respite care, senior personal care, elderly care and companion care services. With our senior home care services, elderly adults can continue to live independently in their own homes. The directors and franchisees of Visiting Angels have always held the philosophy that they are in business to provide the best care possible to seniors as well as others who need in home care while giving total respect to the care giving staff. Our network of franchised Visiting Angels home care agencies provide the very best in training and support so that elderly clients receive top quality care wherever the need exists. That's why Visiting Angels is "America's Choice In Homecare®.”When you choose Visiting Angels as your elder care provider, you will enjoy proactive senior home care services that are focused on the needs of your loved one. Our elder care services are designed to put you in control. We don't dictate your schedule or try to adjust your habits to meet our needs. Instead, our job as caregivers is to adjust to your routine. Our caregivers do everything possible to keep you safe and comfortable in your own home. Your Visiting Angels team is fully committed to ensuring your loved one receives the best senior home care services available. As part of that commitment, we have instituted a system of follow-up checks. The service coordinator from your local franchised office is trained to reach out to your loved one via regularly scheduled phone calls and at home drop-in visits to ensure they are receiving the best care possible. At Visiting Angels, we don’t ever want your loved one to get "lost in the shuffle". At Visiting Angels, we know that choosing an elder care provider is never easy. You have many questions and concerns. You need to make the best choice for your family. We invite you to call your local Visiting Angels franchised office to discuss the senior home care options available in your area. Find out how your local Visiting Angels franchised office can help your family find peace of mind with caring, compassionate elderly care services. Visitng Angels Senior Care and In Home Assisted Living Services can assist elderly people located in Culpeper, Harrisonburg s and surrounding areas in Culpeper County, Virginia. Because we are a non-medical franchised agency and not a nursing agency, Visiting Angels Senior Care and In Home Assisted Living Services does not dictate to you what your schedule is to be. It is our job to assist people in Culpeper, Harrisonburg s and surrounding areas in Virginia by adjusting our schedules to keep your loved one comfortable in their homes.