Sioux Falls, SD

They walk the halls, play on the playground, sit next to you in the classroom, they are homeless students. During the past school year, less than one thousand students were considered homeless by the Sioux Fall School District. Chrissy Dye knows this all too well. Her family hit hard times and last November moved into the transitional living facility - The St. Francis House - in central Sioux Falls. Because the family was in-between permanent homes, the district considered her second grade son "homeless." We have chosen not to identify him. Because he was considered "homeless" he qualified for a program designed to make sure that losing a home didn't also mean losing an education.

"It just helped tremendously, it was huge. I mean I just can't say enough good things about it knowing he was getting there safe," Dye said.

Through the Homeless Education Program, hundreds of children are picked up by a cab or city bus and taken to their original school, regardless of where they are calling home that night.

"Me not having to worry about that took a huge weight off my shoulders and then education is huge and he was able to make it and get there every day on time, never late, he enjoyed the whole process," Dye said.

Dye says even though her family was struggling to get back on their feet throughout the last school year, her son had perfect attendance and was never tardy. Dye credits the stability of the classroom with helping her son during what could have been a very tough time.

"He was excited about it, he became buddies with the cab driver, that was his friend, and he got to sit shotgun in the front seat when he had other kids to pick up and it was awesome to have that for him," Dye said.

The Homeless Education Program was adopted by the Sioux Falls School District years ago, after the McKinney-Vento Act of 2001. Congress passed legislation calling on every state's educational system to make sure homeless children were given equal access to public education. Traci Jensen and eight other social workers with the Sioux Falls School District work with homeless children every day.

"We do everything from getting them connected with resources in the community, making sure they have everything, and they are equipped to attend school. So school supplies, the transportation, making sure they get to and from school," Jensen said.

Staying in their original school helps the child both mentally and academically.

"What we know through research is that it's important for students to have school stability and one of the main ways of proving that stability is allowing them to remain in their school of origin where they first enroll," Jensen said.

Jensen says the program also helps these students achieve a goal that might otherwise be lost, a high school diploma.

"Our students who are identified as homeless, they are at risk for dropping out at a higher rate than the general population so eliminating those factors and barriers are essential," Jensen said.

Whether it is generational homelessness or situational homelessness, Jensen simply says these students are just experiencing homelessness. Dye says when a family is in limbo or faced with a tough situation, this program can be what helps these students succeed.

"They will help you to do that. It's so nice that the answer isn't change schools, even if you're here for a couple of months and that kind of uproots your child and it just adds more pressure on you when you're trying to get everything back in order," said Dye.

Dye and her family are still staying at the St Francis House, but she now has a car to take her son to and from school every day. She says the help of the St. Francis House and the Homeless Education Program means she will be able to purchase her own home this November and the school district her son will no longer be considered "homeless."

So far this year there are more than 200 students in the Homeless Education Program, but that number will grow as the school year continues. The program also connects students and families with other agencies in Sioux Falls that can help them, like The Banquet or The Mission. The district's goal is to break down all the barriers that could keep them from learning in the classroom.