Fort Myers police are conducting a death investigation after the body of an 18-year-old was found Saturday morning.

Police identified the deceased as Jimmie Lee Davis. His body was found around 7:30 a.m. inside the Billy Preserve and Filter Marsh off Marsh Avenue.

Davis' family said they're very familiar with the park, and it was a place Davis would often play with his siblings.

They aren't sure why he was at the park so late, but they believe if he was there, he wasn't alone.

"I just don't understand. He has siblings that he left behind. His mom and dad. It's just senseless," said Tracy Williams, Davis' aunt.

"He's only 18 years old. He hasn't even had a chance at life."

Police said Davis' body was found near a walking trail only minutes from the entrance to Billy's Creek Preserve.

"They went to the house and said they couldn't identify who it was other than fingerprints. So it had to be pretty bad," Williams said.

John Clark walks the park trails almost every other day - and only during daylight hours.

"I was kind of surprised, I wouldn't expect something like that," he said.

"I was surprised, to be honest with you; this is so deserted. You rarely ever see anybody walking through here."

Williams said she and her family are still trying to understand why her nephew would be at the trail late at night.

Although police have not released how Davis died, family say they fear he was killed.

"I can't understand why he would be in the park at night. Somebody had to lure him in here, that he trusted," Williams said.

"The violence needs to stop. Not only does the family suffer, but the other family suffers too because they committed the crime."

Neighbors near the trail said while it's quiet during the day, it does pick up in the late evening. Groups of people can be seen walking from one end of the park to the other. They said it's likely that if something did happen last night, someone saw something.

Police ask anyone with information related to the investigation to call the Fort Myers Police Department or Detective Antonini at (239) 321-7700, Crime Stoppers at 1-800-780-TIPS or text message C-R-I-M-E-S (274637) Keyword FMPD. Tipsters can remain anonymous.