'We need a good 50 more'

IceBusters IceBusters is a program of Boulder County CareConnect, a 42-year-old service organization that promotes security, comfort and independence of seniors and adults with disabilities Volunteers shovel sidewalks for seniors and disabled adults in Boulder and Longmont. The Adopt a Senior's Sidewalk initiative pairs volunteers with specific clients in need. To volunteer, call 303-443-1933. Due to the small number of volunteers, the program is not currently accepting new clients in Boulder. Potential clients in Longmont can request assistance. For more information, go to careconnectbc.org/.

Boulder County CareConnect's IceBusters program cannot accept new requests for help in Boulder because there aren't enough volunteers willing to shovel snow for older people and adults with disabilities.

"They're just worried," said Greg Lim, IceBusters program manager, of the people who call for help and can't get assistance. "A lot of them have a disability that prevents them from shoveling, or they are just very frail. If we get a wet, heavy snow, they just can't shovel that. So I am forced to give them the phone number of snow removal companies, which charge a pretty penny, and I know they can't afford it."

Administrators of the program hope a new Adopt a Senior's Sidewalk initiative will draw in much needed volunteers.

"There in one phrase you have it all,"Lim said.

Volunteers are matched with specific clients in their neighborhood and agree to at least shovel their public sidewalk within 24 hours of snowfall ending. That allows seniors to comply with municipal snow removal ordinances without risking a dangerous fall. Volunteers are encouraged to also shovel the private walk from the sidewalk to the front door and the mailbox.

"The driveway is entirely optional," Lim said. "Some of these driveways are very large, and we don't want someone to not take on a job just because of the size of the driveway."

Lim said he can often find a senior in need of assistance within a few blocks of a potential volunteer.

IceBusters serves clients over the age of 60 or with a disability. Currently, there are 225 clients in Boulder, but just 100 have a match with one of 57 volunteers.

"We need a good 50 more," Lim said.

Because the ratio is so off, Boulder County CareConnect is not accepting new IceBusters clients in Boulder.

In Longmont, where IceBusters also operates, there are five volunteers clearing snow for 30 clients. While more volunteers are needed there as well, Lim said seniors in that city can still sign up for assistance.

Lim said there seems to be a variety of challenges in recruiting volunteers, from people not knowing about the need to people being worried their busy schedules or weekend ski trips will make it hard for them to be consistent.

Lim said that shouldn't deter volunteers. IceBusters can try to find a substitute if they know in advance that a volunteer will be out of town during a storm.

Peter Troller, who lives in Boulder's Orchard Park neighborhood, has been shoveling snow through IceBusters for 12 years now.

"I love shoveling snow," he said. "I love snow. I'm a big skier. It seemed like a natural fit."

Troller said he travels a lot for his job and frequently spends weekends in the mountains, but he's usually able to take care of his shoveling obligations. He gets an email from IceBusters when snow is in the forecast, and he lets them know if he'll be in town or not.

Troller said he likes being outside and getting exercise when it snows. Over the years, he's had two to three clients at a time. Some keep to themselves; he shovels and leaves. Others have formed personal relationships.

"They give you a hug and a thank you," he said. "There was one woman for the first four years when my kids were little. I would bring the kids or the dog, and she would bring out hot chocolate. It was amazing."

Jacqueline Trump, who lives in south Boulder, is just 67 -- "not that old" -- but she has painful shoulder arthritis that makes shoveling snow agony. She first called IceBusters several years ago on behalf of a friend who is in her 90s, and they both were told they would have to wait for a volunteer match.

"That was stressful," Trump said.

A neighbor helped her sometimes, but he had his own busy life to deal with.

Trump said she understands why the city requires snow to be removed within 24 hours. There is a bus stop nearby on Table Mesa Road, and passengers walk from their homes to the stop. If it's a light, dry snow, she can take care of it with a broom. If it's a heavy, wet snow, it's excruciating.

"There are times when it is a lot of snow," Trump said. "That's when I thank God that they help me. It's a blessing."

Erica Meltzer: 303-473-1355, meltzere@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/meltzere