CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Gov. John Kasich put his Republican street cred on the line last year by fighting to extend Medicaid coverage to more low-income Ohioans -- a key concept of President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act.

In doing so, Kasich walked a fine law between the conservative purists who see Obamacare as expensive and expansive government and the centrist sensibilities he's aiming for as he runs for re-election and, possibly, national office in 2016.

So it was surprising Monday to see Kasich quoted in an Associated Press story that characterizes his position as shifting even farther to the left.

"That's not gonna happen," Kasich reportedly told the AP when asked about a repeal of Obamacare, something many GOP candidates for president and Congress favor.

"The opposition to it was really either political or ideological," Kasich added, again, as the AP cast it, presumably talking about Obamacare as a whole. "I don't think that holds water against real flesh and blood, and real improvements in people's lives."

The sentiment is not out of context if you only factor in Kasich's past defense of Medicaid expansion. He's the one-time Tea Party favorite who as his profile rises has been asserting his right to redefine what modern conservatism means.

But when it comes to the Affordable Care Act in its entirety, Kasich has in the past expressed support for "repeal and replace" -- a standard Republican stance.

What's changed? Nothing, said Kasich press secretary Rob Nichols.

"He's for repeal and replace," Nichols said Monday afternoon. "He always has been."

Nichols said Kasich was speaking specifically about Medicaid expansion when interviewed by the AP. A correction was being sought, Nichols added. (Update: AP posted a new version of its story with Kasich clarifying his comments.)

But national writers pounced, sensing a game-changing moment in a game that for Kasich has yet to begin. Most observers think he'll at least test the waters for another presidential run if he wins a second term in landslide fashion next month. (That seems likely, given the polls and the state of his challenger's campaign.)

"John Kasich just broke from his party on Obamacare," read a late afternoon headline on the Washington Post's website. "Big time."

"Ohio Republican governor John Kasich just committed the ultimate taboo," wrote Jonathan Chait at New York magazine's Daily Intelligencer blog.

Did he? As the original AP story noted, Kasich is one of nine Republican governors who accepted the federal dollars for Medicaid expansion. And that's old news.

After several other news outlets chimed in on his AP interview, Kasich took to Twitter late Monday in an effort to clarify his position.

The AP got it wrong. Ohio said NO to the Obamacare exchange for a reason. As always, my position is that we need to repeal and replace. — John Kasich (@JohnKasich) October 20, 2014

This is not the first time Team Kasich has had to walk back a politically sensitive statement. Last year, the governor told a Cleveland TV station that he supports civil unions for same-sex couples. That prompted this follow-up from Nichols:

"The governor's position is unchanged. He opposes gay marriage and opposes changing Ohio's constitution to allow for civil unions."