WASHINGTON, D.C. - A conservative House of Representatives faction led by Champaign County GOP Rep. Jim Jordan announced Thursday its members will vote against any federal spending bill that contains money for Planned Parenthood, dramatically increasing the chance of an Oct. 1 government shutdown.

"Given the appalling revelations surrounding Planned Parenthood, we cannot in good moral conscience vote to send taxpayer money to this organization while still fulfilling our duty to represent our constituents," said the statement issued by the House Freedom Caucus, which Jordan heads.

Jordan and his group are angered by the release of videos that suggest Planned Parenthood profits from selling tissue from aborted fetuses to medical researchers. He and his supporters want to redirect Planned Parenthood's share of federal reproductive health care money to clinics that don't perform abortions.

The stance by the Freedom Caucus' roughly 40 members will make it harder for Republican leaders who control the House and Senate to a pass a bill to keep the federal government open after current government funding expires on Sept. 30.

"No one wants to shut down the government, but I believe that Congress should take the money that is currently going to Planned Parenthood and give it to federally qualified clinics that are providing more comprehensive care to women," said Jordan. "If President Obama and Harry Reid want to shut down the government over an allegiance to that one particular organization, instead of funding our troops and funding women's health care, then that's a sad commentary on their priorities."

The White House has said Obama will veto any bill that doesn't include money for Planned Parenthood, and Democrats in the House and Senate would also be unlikely to support such a bill.

Although several prominent Republicans in the U.S. Senate, such as presidential candidates Rand Paul of Kentucky and Ted Cruz of Texas, have publicly called for Planned Parenthood's defunding, Senate GOP Leader Mitch McConnell has stated Republicans "don't have the votes" to do it.

Planned Parenthood gets more than $500 million each year from federal, state, and local governments, but it isn't allowed to use any of that money for abortions. Funds from foundations, private donors, and client fees pay for its abortions, while public dollars pay for less controversial services, like birth control , cancer screenings and sexually transmitted disease tests.

Planned Parenthood Federation of America President Cecile Richards denies any wrongdoing by her organization. She says it doesn't profit from tissue donation to medical research and argues the group that released the videos wants "to ban abortion completely and cut women off from care at Planned Parenthood and other health centers."

House Republican leaders, including Speaker John Boehner of West Chester, have criticized Planned Parenthood over the videos. Instead of calling for defunding the group, they've said Congress should use all the oversight tools at its disposal to hold the group accountable. During a Thursday news conference, Boehner noted that three House committees are actively investigating the group.

"The goal here is not to shut down the government," said Boehner. "The goal is to stop these horrific practices of organizations selling baby parts."

But members of Jordan's caucus want a vote on defunding Planned Parenthood.

"If it's put up to a vote, we will not give any more money to Planned Parenthood," Kansas GOP Rep. Tim Huelskamp told reporters on Wednesday. "So the question is, will leadership let us have a vote? We will lose if we don't permit a vote."

The stance of Jordan's group puts Boehner in a quandary.

If Boehner lets the GOP-controlled House pass a bill that doesn't contain Planned Parenthood funding, Obama would veto that bill and a government shutdown would be likely.

House Republican leaders can't lose more than 28 votes from their own party if they want to pass a bill without support from any Democrats. So Boehner would likely have to work with Democrats to pass any bill that alienates a big GOP faction like the Freedom Caucus.

Democrats say Boehner should work with them on a spending bill that can gain support from both parties.

"Right now, we're going to need to see leaders in Congress accept the invitations from Democrats in Congress to try and negotiate a bi-partisan agreement on the budget," White House spokesman Josh Earnest said Thursday. "If Republican leaders maintain their insistence on trying to pass a budget along party lines, then we are going to be headed for a shutdown. Because it's clear to anybody that's been paying attention over the last several months, that they don't have the votes to pass a budget."

A 16-day government shutdown resulted in 2013, when many of the same legislators who are in the Freedom Caucus demanded that any funding bill they'd support delay the Affordable Care Act's implementation and repeal a tax that paid for it. That wasn't palatable to Obama, or Democrats in Congress.

Although each side blamed the other for that shutdown, polls conducted afterward showed voters blamed the standoff on Republicans in Congress.

Some conservatives like John Feehery, who served as press spokesman for former House Speaker Dennis Hastert, publicly predict a new shutdown would hurt Republicans.

"And instead of talking about the Planned Parenthood videos depicting Planned Parenthood officials discussing medical researchers' use of fetal tissue obtained after abortions, which sparked all of this controversy in the first place, the media will focus on the National Parks that are closed, the members who refuse to give back their salary and the fact that the military won't get paid as they protect us," said a Wall Street Journal opinion piece authored by Feehery.

Follow @sabrinaeaton