P ETERBOROUGH — Keene High’s Quinn Watson wants to work in theoretical physics, which uses mathematical models and abstractions of physical objects to explain and predict natural occurrences.

Heady stuff, almost as advanced as learning what it takes to become a top high school wrestler.

“It sounds simple, but it’s not: You have to go hard every time out,” Watson said between bouts at Saturday’s 25th Conval Early Bird Tournament. “You have to put in a full effort.

“You have to want it.”

And Watson finally wants it — not just a doctorate and a gig as a theoretical physicist, but becoming a state-title hopeful after three years of primarily being an afterthought as a wrestler.

“I feel like I have the fundamentals,” Watson, 17, said. “I think if I go hard all the time — really hard — I can perform at a higher level.”

The Keene senior, who took the mat for only a handful of varsity matches in his first three seasons, was a tough out but an out in two matches nonetheless in the 138-pound division.

Keene put five of eight wrestlers in the top four. Tristan Stetson took second at 120. Eli August (160) and Jacob Lowe (113) came in third, and Zach Judan (126) and Scott Rathbun (132) came in fourth.

The day included five fall-from-ahead losses for the still-lots-to-learn Blackbirds.

“With being a young team,” Keene assistant Nick Wheelock said, “a lot of our kids lack the composure, discipline and mental awareness to have effective match management in close and intense contests.”

But, they’re getting there.

Watson, a lanky 138-pounder who likes to play music in addition to studying physics, took up wrestling without really knowing why. His older brother, Dan, wrestled at Keene, so he joined too.

“I wasn’t even sure why I was wrestling the first year or two,” Watson said. “I was just doing it.”

Watson finished third at the jayvee state tournament, “but I should have won it,” he said, noting he was older than most. He added a fourth in the Bow tournament, “but it’s not a big tournament.”

The tumblers, though, eventually clicked into place.

“After my sophomore year, I realized I hadn’t improved much since my first year,” Watson said. “I knew I could do better. I wanted more. I started working out, lifting weights, preparing myself.”

Keene assistant Nick Wheelock, who won a state title as a senior at Goffstown, said Watson has the overall technique to compete at the state level.

“Quinn can do it,” Wheelock said. “He’s got the basic abilities. He knows the techniques. He just needs to work on his composure and fitness, and that’ll come with the more he competes.”

Watson took the lead into the final 30 seconds of an early match against Winnacunnet’s Kyle Bolduc, but got in a bind and got pinned.

“That’s what’s so frustrating,” Watson said. “I know I can do it, but I have to keep working.”

Stetson, one of Keene’s co-captains, is certain Watson will figure it out — just like physicists Galileo, Isaac Newton and Albert Einstein figured out astronomy, gravity and relativity.

“He’s wicked smart,” he said. “He’s taking advanced placement classes (in several subjects), and he’s a good wrestler.

“We’re a young team. Quinn’s one of the older guys now and he’s getting his chance.”

In other years, Watson always seemed to be a step behind teammates at the same weight, limiting his varsity mat time. He’s also been sidelined with skin issues like ringworm.

Watson said the wrestling mats and in-close nature of the sport irritate the condition, which he combats with medicine and creams.

This season, though, the future theoretical physicist predicts success. Maybe not a state title, and maybe not even a winning record. But, at the very least, an all-out effort, and that’s a winning formula.

Notes

The tournament featured 13 teams competing on three mats at the Conval gym. ... Keene Coach Bill Gillard spent the day with the jayvee team at a tournament in Concord. ... Best concession item: pulled pork sandwiches, $5. ... Conval athletic director Mark Swasey took on some scoreboard duties, and softball Coach Jim Coppo handled PA duties.