Perry Memorial Hospital in Princeton closed its obstetrics department after 93 years of delivering babies at the hospital.



Perry Memorial can still deliver babies in an emergency. But most new mothers in Princeton will have to drive 25 miles to the nearest hospital obstetrics unit.



Perry Memorial president and CEO Rex Conger said the hospital is facing $1 million in federal cuts to its operating budget this year. He said the hospital can't afford to run the obstetrics department in the face of such significant cuts.



The Affordable Care Act is bringing many changes to the health care industry.



For rural hospitals, cuts in Medicare reimbursements and a new payment system based on quality of care is likely to bring significant changes to how small hospitals serve rural communities across the country.



And for rural hospitals used to small profit margins and low patient volumes, these changes present a challenge. Some are already forming networks with other hospitals and primary care providers to find cost savings and best practices that can help meet the new requirements. Medicaid and the number of people who obtain insurance also will be factors in the economic equation for rural hospitals.



Experts believe some rural hospitals will not be able to make the adjustments and will be forced to close their doors. In other hospitals, there will be program cuts, likely in long-term care units, in-patient mental health units and obstetrics departments, which are expensive to maintain in small towns. As a result, residents will have to seek care in more distant regional health centers.



Medicare changes



Under the Affordable Care Act, small rural hospitals will see significant reductions in traditional Medicare payments, and some will see new payment requirements for patient care. Rural hospitals rely on Medicare payments for almost 45 percent of their annual income.



The changes in how Medicare money reaches rural hospitals — and all hospitals around the country — are an attempt by federal lawmakers to improve health care and reduce costs.



Among the goals is to measure and reward quality of care, and reduce expensive uninsured visits to hospital emergency rooms. By having more people covered by insurance, the theory goes, there will be higher numbers of paying patients and less unpaid debt.



Hospital administrators say they will have to change services and staffing to become more efficient and put more resources into primary care to reduce unnecessary hospital admissions.



Administrators also say the changes will be difficult at a time when rural hospitals already face tough economics. Rural hospitals work on a much smaller scale than their urban counterparts and so have a history of operating on small margins. The recent recession, sequestration cuts in Medicare and drops in patient volume as rural populations shrink have all left rural hospitals financially vulnerable. About 40 percent of rural hospitals operate at a loss, said Maggie Elehwany, government affairs and policy vice president of the National Rural Health Association.



"We are dealing with cuts that already have gone into place that are not part of ACA," said Tim Size, executive director at Rural Wisconsin Health Cooperative. "There is a lot of cacophony and chaos surrounding the ACA. We are dying the death of 1,000 cuts and no one is looking at the big picture."



Under the Affordable Care Act, there will be a $196 billion reduction in annual increases in Medicare payments to hospitals, skilled nursing facilities and ambulatory surgical centers over 10 years.



Rural hospitals' response to the new system likely will change how patients receive care and what services the hospitals provide.



Measuring quality



A major thrust of the Affordable Care Act is to improve the quality of health care and raise the overall health of Americans. So the ACA will tie millions in federal funds to quality of care, basing payments on positive outcomes.



One measure of quality is the number of Medicare patients readmitted to a hospital shortly after receiving care. Readmissions are expensive and the new law aims to reduce them. In 2010, the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare found 19 percent of Medicare patients were readmitted to the hospital within 30 days of discharge, at a cost of $1.7 billion. CMS began penalizing hospitals with reduced payments for excessive numbers of readmissions starting in 2012. Penalties will be a maximum of 3 percent of hospitals' billing in fiscal year 2015. Readmissions are measured among Medicare patients treated for heart failure, heart attack and pneumonia.



To protect their Medicare payments, some hospitals are starting new programs to meet the new requirements and quality benchmarks.



Another goal is to reduce medical errors. Avoidable medical errors added $19.5 billion to the nation's health care bill in 2008, according to a claims-based study conducted by Milliman Inc. on behalf of the Society of Actuaries. The Centers for Medicaid and Medicare will track whether hospitals perform certain best practices to help reduce errors. Hospitals will not be penalized for the errors themselves.



Emphasis on primary care



Rural hospitals facing significant cuts in Medicare payments hope by cooperating more closely with primary care providers they can reduce hospital admissions overall, prevent costly readmission penalties and reduce bad debt losses.



People with little or no insurance still may go to a hospital emergency room instead of a primary care doctor. Rural hospitals often serve communities with higher percentages of poverty and see more uninsured patients. The U.S. Census Bureau reported 16.6 percent of families in rural health services areas were in poverty compared to 13.9 percent from metro areas. As a result, rural hospitals tend to have higher amounts of bad debt written off as charity care for the uninsured.



With or without additional money from Medicaid expansion, rural hospitals will still have to find a number of ways to adjust to the Affordable Care Act's reductions in Medicare payments. In many cases, that will mean changes in services and staffing.



In pursuit of the new law's quality standards, rural hospitals may add some programs and services. To save money, hospitals also may have to reduce other services and cut or reallocate staff.





Cristina Janney is managing editor of the McPherson Sentinel in McPherson, Kan. She spent four weeks researching and writing about the Affordable Care Act's effect on rural hospitals as part of the Pinnacle project reporting program for GateHouse Media Inc.