Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Ark Encounter's Ken Ham discusses the construction progress of Noah's Ark. Marty Pearl/The Courier-Journal

Buy Photo 3.1 million feet of timber was used to build the sailing vessel at the heart of the Ark Encounter in Williamstown, Ky. (Photo: Marty Pearl/Special to The C-J)Buy Photo

Williamstown, Ky. – Less than a month after winning a legal victory in the quest for $18 million worth of state tax incentives, builders of Kentucky’s second major Biblical theme park said Saturday that the giant $92 million Noah’s Ark replica will be largely finished by May and is on track to open in July.

On Saturday, Ken Ham, founder of the Christian group Answers in Genesis, touted progress amid the construction at the Ark Encounter, a 510-foot wooden ship as described in the Old Testament that now rises eight stories above the rolling rural hills of Grant County near Interstate 75.

Surrounding it will be a petting zoo, theater, cafes, gift shop and 4,000-space parking lot – all located 45 miles south of same group’s Creation Museum, which presents a literal interpretation of Genesis and argues the Earth is only 6,000 years old and that dinosaurs and humans co-existed.

As such, the Ark will feature 132 exhibits including wooden cages with sculptures of various animals and “of course there is going to be some dinosaurs,” Ham said.

Ham predicted the new park will draw more than 1 million visitors a year, and he said a main goal is to persuade visitors that story of Noah’s Ark is literal history.

“Today a lot of people just scoff at the idea that Noah could fit the animals onboard. This is going to help them say, ‘Hmmm, this could have been feasible,’” he said, predicting that the well-known story would allow it to outstrip the 300,000 visitors who attend the Creation Museum each year.

Outside the Ark, constructed of more than 3 million board feet of lumber from the western U.S. and New Zealand, the wood siding was nearly complete. The skeleton of the bow and stern were visible near several concrete towers buttressing the ship. Inside, 55-foot lodge polls reached from the concrete pad to the roof. Bays were labeled with signs reading “Noah’s workshop,” and chandeliers made to look like oil lamps hung from the ceiling near wood cages.

Ark officials said the design was based on dimensions in the Bible with an eye toward 4,000-year-old shipbuilding methods. Ham said future phases will include a pre-Flood walled city and rendition of the Tower of Babel, a first-century Middle Eastern village and other elements.

The progress follows a high-profile battle with Kentucky over tourism incentives and religious-based hiring.

Last year, after the Kentucky Tourism, Arts and Heritage Cabinet rejected the group’s application for up to $18 million in state tax incentives based on its “religious purpose and message,” the group filed a federal lawsuit. In January, a U.S. District Judge ruled the state could not exclude the ark attraction based on those reasons, and Kentucky Republican Gov. Matt Bevin declined to appeal.

AiG still must get the incentives approved and no hearing has been set, but Ham said he expects they will be approved. Ark officials said they’ve raised all but $6 million of the initial cost of the Ark structure from bonds, donations and memberships.

Critics continue to object to the group presenting Biblical stories being backed by science, when established science runs counter to those claims.

Although some consider it “an embarrassment to the state,” said Dan Phelps, who heads the Kentucky Paleontological Society, “the tax incentive is what most people object to.”

Others, including Americans United for Separation of Church and State, have objected to Answers in Genesis using religious preferences in hiring. On its website, an Answers in Genesis job opening based in Williamstown requires applicants to submit a “salvation testimony,” a “creation belief statement” and a “confirmation of agreement with the AiG Statement of Faith.”

Ham on Saturday said they haven’t decided what criteria will be used once Ark Encounter hiring begins in earnest, but the group was “not going to give up our right for hiring people with religious preference.”

And he dismissed criticisms.

“Most of the scoffers and those who are criticizing us, they’re from a small group,” he said.

While attendance projections have been disputed, Ham expects the first “40 days and 40 nights” starting in July, when day and nighttime tickets can be purchased, will bring heavy crowds and would be a big economic benefit to the area.

Reporter Chris Kenning can be reached at ckenning@courier-journal.com or 502-582-4697.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1XEyzZ8