Labour Minister Thomas Lukaszuk says the federal government's temporary foreign worker (TFW) program is inhumane and economically unsound.

Lukaszuk made the comments to a packed room at the University of Alberta Saturday during a forum organized by Migrante Alberta.

"We need you here to stay. A revolving door is simply not humane, and economically not sound," he said.

"In most cases what we need in Canada, and particularly in Alberta, is permanent foreign workers."

Lukaszuk blasted federal Employment Minister Jason Kenney for suspending the TFW program in the food sector last month to launch a review, after several Canadian businesses were accused of giving TFWs more hours or priority work status.

Lukaszuk said he learned of the decision unexpectedly through a news broadcast and called the move "simply un-Canadian."

"There was zero consultation with those that are most affected, which is you, or with the provincial government," Lukaszuk said.

"Government has the capacity to fix a program without just stopping it."

Lukaszuk, who serves as co-chair on the Council of Canadian Immigration Ministers, said he is convinced of the need for foreign workers in in Alberta.

He said his family, which emigrated from Poland when he was a kid, would not have been allowed into Canada under current immigration laws.

Lukaszuk has written a letter to Kenney and said he will keep pushing the federal government to develop a foreign worker program that better reflects Alberta's needs.

"Any and all jobs that are available in Canada must be available to Canadians first. But when there are no Canadians ready, willing or able to take those jobs, those jobs nonetheless have to be filled," he said.

NDP Labour Critic Rachel Notley agreed the TFW program needs to go, calling it fundamentally flawed, but called out the PC government for "exploiting" the program over the past 10 years.

During that time, the number of TFWs in Alberta has grown from 7,000 to 85,000.

"The problem is that we do not have a free market when we bring in workers who do not have the right to leave their employer, to go to university, to seek the support of their family, and to stand up for their rights in the workplace. That is not a free market," Notley said.

"As long as that is the case, the temporary foreign worker program proceeds to exploit you and suppress wages for everybody."

Kenney has said an announcement on the TFW program is coming in four to five weeks, but has not specified if that means the moratorium will end.

kevin.maimann@sunmedia.ca

@SunKevinM