Photo

Elizabeth Hensel, 27, is a falconer with Falcon Environmental Services, based in Plattsburgh, N.Y.

Q. What do you do as a falconer?

A. I work with falcons to rid areas of gulls and other birds that pose a danger or environmental threat at places like airports and landfills. Landfills are a food source for them, and their waste is a public health hazard. I’ve worked for the company for almost four years, earlier at a military airfield in Kansas. Now I’m at a landfill in New Jersey.

Did the company train you to work with falcons?

No, I had hunted with falcons and hawks on my own, for sport, and I was already licensed. You really need to know what you’re doing before you can do it as a profession.

How did you become interested in this field?

My aunt’s neighbor was a falconer. When I was about 6, my cousins and I would go to his house to watch them. I was fascinated.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

How did you get this job?

I was working at a nature center while completing an apprenticeship on my own time when a falconer friend told me about this opening and I applied. My degree in geology with a concentration in environmental science from State University of New York at Cortland may have helped.

What is your day like?

In the morning a co-worker and I move our 10 falcons to the outside pen. We release them one by one throughout the day to chase gulls away from the landfill and blow a whistle to signal them to return. When they do, we give them quail.

Do you find your work rewarding?

I love working with the birds; you have to be passionate about animals to do this. In the wild, you can’t be 10 feet from a bird jumping out of a tree to catch a squirrel; it would fly away. But these are trained birds, so they accept us as part of their world.

Do you have a favorite falcon?

That’s like asking a parent if they have a favorite child. Elena, who weighs a pound and a half, is really cute and well-behaved. I also like Isabella, who sits next to Elena and is very dependable. We use her as our closer at the end of the day.