Nancy Carriere

A veteran school bus driver hopes to drive her first campaign for elected office to victory in October.

Nancy Carriere is running for the District 2 seat on the St. Landry Parish Council against longtime incmbent Leon Robinson.

“I feel I have a lot to contribute to the betterment of the parish,” Carriere said.

She has held one appointed position during her 12 years on the Prairie Basse Gravity Drainage District board. “We had to make financial decisions, and we had to be wise about it,” she said.

Roads, utility systems and other structural concerns are important, she added, especially because the parish has the potential to grow in the years ahead.

“I want to try to work with other government entities to develop our infrastructure and bring in new industries,” Carriere said.

The graduate of Leonville High School has driven school buses for the parish public schools since 1992.

“The most fulfilling part of my job is to serve,” she said. “I feel so satisfied knowing that I can do something to help someone else every day.”

Her years behind the wheel and the summer she’s spent campaigning door-to-door have helped her better understand the issues that face District 2, the largest in the parish, she said.

While she said she harbors no hard feelings toward Robinson and his record, she noticed a refrain as she’s asked people to vote for her.

“Some identify more with the city of Opelousas than wth the parish,” Carriere said. “A lot of them didn’t realize they had representation on the parish council,” or had little idea about what it does.

“I hope as a parish that we can continue to grow. We have to stay alert. We have to stay on top of things,” she said. “We have to stay together and we have to keep it moving.

“I feel I’m the better person to continue to make progress.”

Qualifying for the October 24 election takes place Sept. 8-10. If a runoff election is necessary, it will happen Nov. 21.

Read or Share this story: http://www.dailyworld.com/story/news/local/2015/08/16/carriere-runs-parish-council-seat/31822145/