Pat Muldoon pressures Iowa quarterback C.J. Beathard to force an incomplete pass during the Badgers’ 28-9 win. Credit: Rick Wood

SHARE Video Loading... Postgame videos Interviews following Wisconsin's 28-9 win over Iowa. Loading... UW Chat Monday, Nov. 4

UW FOOTBALL

Jeff Potrykus, beat writer

Read Transcript

PLAYER OF THE GAME

James White's first visit to Kinnick Stadium was painful.

A freshman in 2010, White was limited to 10 yards on six carries and was knocked out of the game early in the second quarter with a left knee injury. He watched from the sideline as UW rallied for a 31-30 victory.

Wisconsin's senior tailback talked quietly during the week of how important this meeting was. White did not disappoint in UW's 28-9 victory Saturday.

Running against a defense that crowded the line of scrimmage determined to take away UW's running game, White slugged away until he finished with 132 yards and two touchdowns on 19 carries, an average of 6.9.

He squirted through a hole over the left side for an 11-yard touchdown after an Iowa turnover, and his clinching 2-yard touchdown came six plays after his 59-yard run to the Iowa 17.

"It was great," White said of his return trip to Kinnick Stadium. "I was glad I could be there to help my team when they most needed it. Last time I was watching."

OFFENSIVE PLAY OF THE GAME

UW trailed, 6-0, late in the first half, faced third and 7 from the Iowa 44 and needed some sort of big play.

Quarterback Joel Stave, 3 for 7 for 21 yards to that point, and tight end Jacob Pedersen combined to do just that, with an assist from offensive coordinator Andy Ludwig.

Pedersen lined up just outside left tackle Tyler Marz. UW deployed wide receiver Jared Abbrederis in a slot on the right side of the formation.

When Abbrederis came off the line of scrimmage and ran a short route, Iowa safety Tanner Miller kept his eyes on that side of the field. Pedersen, meanwhile, worked deep down the seam on the backside of the play against freshman cornerback Desmond King.

Stave was given ample time to look for a receiver and he fired a strike to Pedersen inside the Iowa 10. Pedersen bounced off King and into the end zone with 1:49 left in the half.

"We know Abby is going to command attention," Stave said. "I was looking right and I saw the safety continuing to flow that way and the corner starting dropping.

"When that happens you know the backside is going to be open."

DEFENSIVE PLAY OF THE GAME

Who knew defensive end Pat Muldoon could lift his 6-foot-3, 269-pound frame so high into the air?

UW was clinging to a 14-9 lead in the fourth quarter when Iowa backup quarterback C.J. Beathard fired a pass toward the right side. The ball caromed off the helmet of guard Andrew Donnal and high into the air.

Muldoon, who estimated his vertical jump at 30 inches, leaped amid a large group of players from both teams. He corralled the ball with both arms and fell hard at the Iowa 25 after he was undercut.

White scored on an 11-yard run three plays later.

"It seemed to hang in the air longer than most tipped passes," said Muldoon, who last intercepted a pass as a junior in high school. "I had a split-second thought: 'I've got to go for this and it's probably going to hurt.'

"It didn't hurt as much when I made the catch."

SPECIAL TEAMS PLAY OF THE GAME

Wisconsin punter Drew Meyer got the best of a nasty wind when it mattered most.

The redshirt sophomore averaged 33.9 yards on eight punts. He punted twice with the wind for an average of 47.5 yards. His average on the six punts into the wind was 27.7.

However, with UW clinging to a 7-6 lead and facing fourth and 6 from the Hawkeyes' 49, Meyer boomed a beautiful punt into the wind.

The ball was downed at the Hawkeyes' 1; cornerback Darius Hillary intercepted a pass at the 20 on the next play; and Stave hit Abbrederis for a touchdown on the next play.

"I don't know if it was the way the stadium is and the way the wind was coming in," Meyer said of his critical punt. "In Camp Randall in different spots the wind is coming in from different directions."

In short, Meyer wasn't sure what happened.

"It was one of those where we got a lucky bounce, too," he said. "You never know if it is going to go into the end zone. It was one of those where after the few went into the wind and went nowhere it was kind nice to get a bounce going our way."

UW coach Gary Andersen saw it a bit differently. "He crushed it," Andersen said.

INSIDE THE HUDDLE

The third-quarter interception by Hillary was the result, in part, of a successful blitz by linebacker Ethan Armstrong. Armstrong defeated the cut block of tailback Mark Weisman and harried quarterback C.J. Beathard in the end zone. What was interesting, however, is that the call was a run-blitz because the Badgers expected Weisman to get the ball.

QUOTABLE

"The one thing I'm going to remember this team for forever, regardless of what happens the rest of the season, is they are never fazed. The next kid that's got to go in — whether it's on special teams, offense or defense — they seem to be prepared." — Gary Andersen, talking about his team's ability to overcome several injuries

BY THE NUMBERS

4 Games this season UW has not allowed a TD.

9 Tackles by linebacker Marcus Trotter, a team high.

14 Points by UW off two Iowa turnovers.

24.2% The teams' combined third-down conversion rate (8 of 33).

733 UW's winning mark in November road games (11-4) since the start of the '06 season.

UP NEXT

BYU (6-2) at Wisconsin (6-2),

2:30 p.m. Saturday

The Cougars, in their third season as an independent, are coming off a bye. They have won five consecutive games since stumbling to a 1-2 start, with losses to Virginia and Utah. The streak includes victories over Houston, Georgia Tech and Boise State.

Jeff Potrykus