For weeks, no one wanted to listen to Rebecca MoDavis.

She wanted the public to know her special-needs son, Ricky, needlessly swallowed a plastic toy in his classroom on Aug. 27, resulting in hours of surgery and likely a $300,000 bill.

After consulting with her state representative and a calling a broadcast media outlet, she took her case to the Easton Area School Board. She told them the school district is to blame and needs to revise its policies to prevent future accidents.

The resulting story on lehighvalleylive.com gained traction online and more than 100 comments within 24 hours.

Some readers support her. Some were harshly critical of her position. She had no idea her appeal before the board would generate so much public opinion.

"I was surprised people said it was a bold thing to do," the Palmer Township woman said. "That wasn't my intention."

Her 15-year-old son has the mental capacity of a 3-year-old and suffers from severe cerebral palsy, according to the MoDavises. He was in a Colonial Intermediate Unit 20 class at Easton Area High School when he swallowed the inch-high plastic bear and it lodged in his esophagus.

He has attended IU classes for 12 years, but this was his first year at Easton Area High School.

"He's a part of our family," said Colonial Intermediate Unit 20 executive director Charlene Brennan on Wednesday. "We are as concerned for his safety and welfare as we are for all the children we serve."

After the meeting, Easton Area School District solicitor John Freund said the districts sympathized with the MoDavises. He wasn't sure whether the district would contribute to the family's medical bills and said the school board doesn't have the authority to change Ricky's Individualized Education Program.

Rebecca MoDavis said Wednesday that Easton Area School District officials have expressed an interest in discussing Ricky's future.

Brennan said she met with Richard MoDavis III, the boy's father, and will continue to work with the family to address their concerns. She said personnel matters are confidential and couldn't discuss whether the classroom employees were at fault.

Rebecca MoDavis said her son was one of eight children in the class supervised by a teacher and two assistants. One student has a nurse, she said. She had requested an aide for her son, but now isn't sure she wants him to return to the class.

She said he is now being treated for a pressure sore of uncertain origin, which is preventing him from going back to school.

Some have questioned online whether Ricky belongs in school. Anyone who asks that question really doesn't understand special needs children, according to Rebecca MoDavis.

"He's been in school for 12 years, since he was 3," she said. "We've never had any issues before. He's a very social child. We've never had any behavioral issues before. He just has issues that are beyond his control."

The family's insurance for Ricky is capped at $1 million. While the Affordable Care Act guarantees uncapped coverage for everyone, the family doesn't want to drop its current plan.

The MoDavises say their fight is more for accountability than it is for money.

She hopes her decision to address the board will encourage other parents of special needs children to come forward. She didn't anticipate the wave of attention her story would generate, but she said she has no regrets if it will help her achieve the goal of effecting changes in education policy.

"If we want to change it, we have to go all out," she said.

Rudy Miller may be reached at rmiller@express-times.com. Follow him on Twitter @RudyMillerLV. Find Easton area news on Facebook.