Q: Are spring pollen seasons getting worse for allergy sufferers?

A: It depends on where you are. Scientists have documented that in many parts of the world, the allergy season starts earlier and lasts longer each year, potentially because of climate change. Researchers have theorized that the more carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and the warmer the temperatures, the more plants produce flowers or food, which means more pollen.

The spring ragweed allergy season has lengthened by up to 27 days since 1995, depending on where you are in North America, according to research by the Agriculture Department published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences in 2011.

Higher latitudes are warming faster than those closer to the equator and are seeing proportionally longer pollen seasons, according to that study.

For instance, in the Canadian city of Saskatoon, the season was 27 days longer than the usual 44 days, while in Minneapolis, it was 16 days longer than the usual 62 days. By contrast, the effect in places such as Texas was minimal.

Lewis Ziska, a plant physiologist with the Agriculture Department's crop system and global change laboratory and the study's lead author, said the data his team has collected since then is consistent with the previous findings.

He said that this year's long, frigid winter is especially intriguing to scientists because one of two extremes could happen: "It could be everything happening all at one time. In that case, there will be records for pollen count set. Or the damage to plants could be severe enough that you may not get much of a pollen season at all."

Mark Scarupa, an allergist at the Institute for Asthma and Allergy in Maryland, agrees that it's difficult to predict the severity of any allergy season.

"Like the weatherman, we can get it wrong pretty bad," he said.

Still, he said that in more than a decade of private practice, he has never seen an allergy season begin as late as this one.

"If it warms quickly, everything is going to pollinate at once," said Estelle Levetin, a professor of biology at the University of Tulsa who studies airborne allergens.

The danger of a shorter but more intense allergy season, specialists say, is that it could overwhelm immune systems, triggering potentially serious health issues.

"It's more than just a nuisance for some people," said Sally Joo Bailey, assistant professor of allergy and immunology at Georgetown University.

"On some really bad days, if you have pollen allergies, you could have a severe asthma attack. When your nasal area gets inflamed because of allergies, it doesn't just stop there. It can get into your lungs."

–Brady Dennis and Ariana Eunjung Cha, The Washington Post