"People do not know what Obamacare is, how they enroll. They need education."

TEANECK — People ask every day about Obamacare at the Korean Medical Program at Holy Name Medical Center.

“We don’t have to push,” Kyung Hee Choi, vice president of the program, said. “Our phones are ringing off the hook.”

Her challenge is getting more navigators to help enroll the estimated 13,000 Korean-Americans in New Jersey. So Choi worked with Rep. Bill Pascrell to bring 25 navigators to the hospital Tuesday, at an event that drew about 200 people looking to get health insurance before a March 31 deadline.

Many Korean-Americans don’t speak English fluently, Choi said. Many of the people at the event declined interviews for that reason. The language barrier, along with the technical problems that have plagued Healthcare.gov, have kept many from signing up.

“In our case we anticipated that and we’ve been inviting bilingual navigators to Holy Name every single day since October last year,” Choi said.

While enrolling each person can take about an hour, the hospital has signed up about 1,200 people in that time, Choi said.

There is also an education gap, she said. Many Korean-Americans fear they can’t afford healthcare and don’t know about the government subsidies that can help them pay for it.

Jae Chun, a private insurance agent, has held 40 seminars in four months on the Affordable Care Act with Korean-American audiences.

“People do not know what Obamacare is, how they enroll,” he said. “They need education.”

On Tuesday, navigators and translators huddled with enrollees at computers in a conference room at Holy Name. The hospital served sushi.

Pascrell said it was the biggest crowd he’d seen at an enrollment event. He blamed Chris Christie and other governors who failed to spend the federal money they were given to help the uninsured get medical coverage.

“If the governors would have spent the money allowed to them to educate people in their states, it would have been a lot easier,” Pascrell said.

Choi hoped Pascrell would send more navigators to a March 25 event at the hospital, just a week before open enrollment ends.

“I don’t think we can enroll 100 percent,” she said. “But at least for those who are calling us I hope to help them out.”