LOS ANGELES--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Health Net, Inc. is on a mission to bring wellness visits into the spotlight so preventive care takes center stage in the lives of Americans. Wellness visits – otherwise known as “physical exams” – are a crucial component of whole-person care. To help with this initiative, Health Net offers CareAlerts, customized messages that notify members when it’s time to visit their doctor.

“Having an annual wellness visit with your doctor is an important part of maintaining good health,” said Patricia Buss, M.D., medical and health care services operations officer for Health Net, Inc. “Wellness visits are particularly important for those with chronic diseases, such as diabetes or heart disease, and those with a family history of chronic illness or cancer.”

Health Net’s CareAlert Program

Annual wellness visits are just one way to help maximize good health. Screenings, immunizations and other preventive health measures also are important. This is why Health Net created CareAlert, a member and provider alert program that notifies both the doctor and the patient when it’s time for things like medical screenings, medication renewals, provider follow-up visits and immunizations.

These reminders increase the opportunity to influence healthier behaviors and may help to reduce medical risks, such as drug interactions and duplicate therapies. Enrollment in Health Net HMO plans is automatic, and patients may receive CareAlerts related to chronic condition tests, preventive care and medications, among others.

What to Expect at a Wellness Visit

According to the National Institutes of Health (NIH), annual exams are designed to check for diseases, identify future medical concerns, update immunizations and strengthen the patient-doctor relationship. This is a good time to bring up any medical concerns, talk about weight issues and exercise, and ask questions about current medications. An open discussion about general lifestyle habits goes far in getting patients the right kind of care.

The doctor also may check blood pressure and vital signs, and possibly conduct a gender-specific exam. In addition, he or she may review lab tests taken prior to the appointment, and may order additional studies, like a mammogram or a colonoscopy screening.

Covered by Affordable Care Act

Depending on an individual’s coverage, many preventive services, some of which may be part of a standard annual wellness visit, are now provided free of charge as a result of the Affordable Care Act. “Consequently,” said Buss, “cost to the patient may no longer be an obstacle in relation to these yearly exams that can – in some instances – truly be lifesaving.”

How to Prepare

Health Net recommends visiting the doctor with a list of questions about your health. The answers can help patients set health goals and plan ahead. The NIH recommends dressing in easily removable clothing and refraining from wearing excessive jewelry. It’s also important to:

Bring a list of all current medications including prescription drugs, over-the-counter medications and herbal supplements

current medications including prescription drugs, over-the-counter medications and herbal supplements Explain in detail any pain you’re experiencing

Have results in hand from any recent tests or lab work

Chronical hospitalizations, surgeries and serious medical issues

Supply contact information for additional physicians

Medical Advice Disclaimer

The information provided is not intended as medical advice or as a substitute for professional medical care. Always seek the advice of your physician or other health provider for any questions you may have regarding your medical condition and follow your health care provider’s instructions.

About Health Net

Health Net, Inc. (NYSE:HNT) is a publicly traded managed care organization that delivers managed health care services through health plans and government-sponsored managed care plans. Its mission is to help people be healthy, secure and comfortable. Health Net provides and administers health benefits to approximately 6.1 million individuals across the country through group, individual, Medicare (including the Medicare prescription drug benefit commonly referred to as “Part D”), Medicaid and dual eligible programs, as well as programs with the U.S. Department of Defense and U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. Health Net also offers behavioral health, substance abuse and employee assistance programs, and managed health care products related to prescription drugs.

For more information on Health Net, Inc., please visit Health Net’s website at www.healthnet.com.

Follow Health Net

Like Health Net on Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/healthNetInc

Follow Health Net on Twitter: https://twitter.com/healthnet

Visit Health Net on YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/user/HealthNetInc

Connect with Health Net on LinkedIn: http://www.linkedin.com/company/health-net