One Whopper, hold the taxes

Yorktown Heights, N.Y.: Burger King wants to move their headquarters to Canada to escape the high U.S. taxes that have been created by the Obama administration, to help pay for the unpopular Obamacare, also known as the Unaffordable Care Act. This is only the beginning. More and more companies will do this to escape taxes, which means that costs for the average citizen for health care will skyrocket. Thank you, President Obama. I wonder what the tax is on a set of golf clubs. William J. Griggs



Orange, N.J.: With the news that Burger King might be moving its corporate headquarters to Canada, does that mean its burgers will now be Calgary Flame-broiled, the Big King will be renamed the “Big McKenzie King,” and that it’s signature sandwich will now be spelled “W-h-o-p-p-r-e”? Have it your “eh”? Derek Tague



Hallandale Beach, Fla.: Tim Hortons operates over 4,250 restaurants across Canada, several U.S. states and “a few other outposts,” as well as the Cold Stone Creamery icecream shop chain. Once Burger King’s acquisition of Tim Hortons is completed, I think Tim Hortons will expand throughout the rest of the U.S. — which will make it a big competitor to Dunkin’ Donuts, Krispy Kreme and even Starbucks. Paul Bacon

Shot in the heart

Centereach, L.I.: To Arizona child protective services: The parents of the 9-year-old girl who accidentally killed her shooting instructor with an Uzi should be investigated for endangering the life of their daughter. This has nothing to do with the Second Amendment or gun rights. The only question that needs to be answered is why was this child there in the first place. I will pray for the girl as well as the family of the instructor. Unfortunately, this is just another story that speaks to the epic failure of our government to enact better gun laws. Jordan Tarazi

Patience?

Bronx: Voicer Joan Kinneary says justice has to be allowed to take its course regarding the death of Eric Garner. She says the courts, not a protest march, will decide the outcome. Really? Justice took its course at the O.J. Simpson trial almost 20 years ago, yet many white people are still livid at the outcome. I wonder if Kinneary will readily accept the outcome if it isn’t to her liking. Jonathan Solomon

Excess at Succes

Silver Spring, Md.: Juan Gonzalez’s piece on Eva Moskowitz was spot on. It is obscene that this operator of a handful of charter schools is paid more than double what the head of the city’s 1.1-million-student public school system is paid. When will Americans wake up to the fact that charter schools are part of a campaign to privatize education, turn students into widgets and transform teachers into assembly-line robots? Enough already. Edd Doerr

You’re not it

Brooklyn: I noticed the other morning that the F train stop at Ft. Hamilton Pkwy now has a huge red graffiti tag at the entrance to the station. What is wrong with people today? Most of us work hard to support our families and do the right thing. Who raised you, tagger? Whoever you are, you are a total punk in my book. Madeline Paniagua

Solidarity never

Jamaica: Shame on you, police sergeants’ union! You are supposed to protect and serve — and now you’re telling us you can’t protect us. You sound like a bunch of spoiled children. Do you know that having the Democratic National Convention in New York would bring in a lot of revenue for the city? Small businesses would profit. The police in all boroughs could get a lot of overtime. I thought the union was supposed to help people, not hurt them. Charlene Black

It tolls for thee

Manhattan: To recent transplant Zephyr Teachout (“Cuomo enabled Christie’s Tunnelgate,” Op-Ed, Aug. 27), who wrote about “funds that come in large part from revenue collected in New York State”: Last time I crossed the Hudson at a Port Authority crossing, I paid my toll on the Jersey side. Anthony Russomano

Hunger for the past

Forest Hills: I’ve read the many nostalgic letters about A&S custard and other long-gone foods and enjoyed them all. Strangely, as a Brooklyn native, I do not remember the snack counter under the escalator in the store’s basement, and neither do any Brooklyn-born and -raised friends I asked about it. I do remember the wonderful coffee soda at Macy’s called Sparkoffee (I think that’s the right spelling) and the wonderful roasted nuts at Macy’s. My mother and I always got a bag of cashews, which were always long gone before we got to the Utica Ave. station. Elaine Wohl

Fumble

Bardonia, N.Y.: Last Monday night, my wife and I sat for 31/2 hours watching the 2014 Emmy Awards. The show was enjoyable enough, but I walked away with one nagging question: What in the world ever possessed ABC to stop broadcasting Monday Night Football? Dick Mills

Better assimilate than never

Bronx: The fact that somebody can live here for 50 years and not speak the official language supports my position that New York City is practicing the same apartheid, also known as multiculturalism, as Amsterdam, the city I left. This debauching of culture in the civilized Western world is a very sad state of affairs! Lisette Muntslag

A little respect

Hamilton, N.J.: It’s not that the President takes vacations. He is certainly entitled. But to give James Foley the short amount of time that he did and then go off to the golf course showed insensitivity. When Obama “got back” Bo Bergdhal, so much was made of it that there was an announcement with his parents in the Rose Garden. Foley’s parents’ press conference, on the other hand, was stepped on by his announcement. How about standing with them, Mr. President? Jeanette Nichols

Be afraid, very afraid

Brooklyn: I get most of my information from watching Fox News, listening to radio talk shows and reading newspapers, and what I see scares the hell out of me. Yet I’m constantly hearing from many on both sides of the aisle lately that our President has no set plan to protect us from ISIS and other terrorist groups. Many of the terrorists are homegrown with legitimate passports, and the southern border, as we all know, is porous. I fear for all of us. Emma Stellabotte

Are we lost?

Washingtonville, N.Y.: Is it that Americans are inclined towards faith, or are we just so self-absorbed we are able to block out all that is around us and concentrate only on what affects us personally? Honestly, for many, it is probably a mixture of both. America has faced very difficult moments in its history, yet now truly seems worse than ever. “Do unto others what you want done unto you”: If those words still rang true in America, it would still be the beacon of light other countries look to for guidance and help. We must see the suffering not just in this country but throughout the world. Where there is no love, there is no peace. Kim Brady

Booo-ber

Manhattan: How is it that the behemoth car service company Uber is allowed to conduct business in New York City without there being a contact phone number available so that consumers can speak with a live person? They are demanding that sensitive credit card and personal ID information be exchanged only via an app. Sounds like a very unsafe and sketchy practice for such a large and successful company: a ticking time-bomb of Target proportions. Craig Lowther

Worst of West

Philadelphia: So, Cornel West has a problem with “Jewish men who consider themselves very smart.” Pity. I respect anyone who impresses me as intelligent, including black men and women. Unfortunately, West’s statement leaves me with a problem with one man who does no credit to either the black race or the human race. I understand his concerns about President Obama’s policies. However, Obama does not only serve liberals like West — and, for that matter, me — but must maneuver among other powerful people. I wish Prof. West would at least reconsider some of his crude language. Bruce S. Ticker