After rising steadily for decades, U.S. life expectancy has flat-lined for three consecutive years, according to a new report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The study also finds that chronic conditions like heart disease, cancer, stroke and kidney disease remain among the leading causes of death in the United States.

Our country requires a new strategy for improving the health and longevity of Americans. In particular, our leaders need to focus on reforms aimed at combating chronic diseases through prevention, medical innovation and improved access to care. By elevating these three priorities, policymakers can help make 2016 the beginning of the end of America's chronic disease crisis.

Chronic conditions represent the single largest threat to health in America. According to the CDC's latest statistics, roughly half of all adults suffer from at least one chronic disease, with a quarter of all adults suffering from two or more. In 2014, seven chronic conditions were responsible for nearly 65 percent of all deaths.



[READ: 10 Ways to Combat America's Drug Abuse Problem]

Not surprisingly, these diseases also are the main driver of our nation's rising health spending. About 86 percent of all health care spending goes towards treating patients with one or more chronic conditions. The good news is that policy strategies for reducing the death, suffering and cost associated with chronic disease are within reach. What's required is a renewed emphasis on three core principles.

First, policies must incentivize all actors in our health sector – from insurance providers to physicians, employers and individuals – to focus on prevention. For instance, individuals suffering from a chronic illness, or at risk of developing one, could receive tax deductions for healthy behaviors like joining a gym, just as they would for owning a home.

Similarly, employers could receive tax credits for establishing wellness programs for their workers. Such incentives already exist in states like Massachusetts and Kentucky. But, while the Affordable Care Act established a grant program that helps small businesses set up wellness initiatives, a permanent federal tax break doesn't yet exist.



[READ: The Food and Drug Administration Needs to Change After 110 Years]

Policymakers must also work to promote the development of better treatments, like the handful of recently released hepatitis C medications that boast cure rates of 90 percent or more. More innovative treatments like these could be a game changer in the battle against chronic disease. But that depends on a policy environment that fosters innovation by protecting the incentives research scientists need to develop the next series of breakthroughs.

Finally, efforts to expand access to care are essential to any chronic disease policy strategy. Lawmakers can start by addressing the lack of physicians across the country. According to one recent analysis, the nation could face a shortage of 90,000 doctors by 2025.

The scarcity of doctors only will make it more difficult for chronic disease patients to manage their illnesses. Case in point: Some 80 percent of seniors suffer from at least one chronic disease. And yet, the shortage in geriatricians is expected to reach 17,000 as America's population ages.



[READ: Banning Prescription Drug Ads Is the Health Care Remedy No One Talks About]