What do Kentuckians’ really think about the Affordable Care Act? Medicaid expansion? A statewide smoke-free law? Are there more cost-effective ways to deliver health care services to a growing insured population? Are there more effective ways to keep Kentucky healthy?

The Foundation for a Healthy Kentucky is a nonprofit, non-partisan philanthropic organization committed to improving the health of Kentuckians throughout the commonwealth — and to finding answers to questions like these. We do this through targeted research, polling and investment in demonstration projects aimed at testing ways to do health care differently or improve community health. We seek to improve access to care, reduce health risks and disparities, and promote health equity through lasting policy and systems change, and offer those most impacted by these policies and systems a chance to have their voices heard.

Foundation work focuses on two primary areas: promoting responsive health policy and improving the health of children in the state. The promotion of responsive health policy aims to make public policy in Kentucky more responsive to the health and health-care needs of Kentuckians. Investing in Kentucky’s Future is an initiative aimed to improve the health of Kentucky’s children by engaging in communities and testing innovative strategies.

In addition, the foundation is committed to attract and sustain investment in innova-tions in health care and health promotion through supporting communities. Strategies in this area include continued support for the federal Social Innovation Fund multiyear effort, Kentucky Healthy Futures Initiative; matching grants; conference support investments; and communications partnerships designed to increase awareness of health issues.

Investments in and near Lexington reinforce the foundation’s desire to work with local communities on specific health challenges. As former Foundation Community Advisory Committee member Dr. Gil Friedell was fond of reminding us, if the problem is in the community, chances are the solution is in the community. Since the foundation was launched in 2001, more than 100 central Kentucky projects have moved forward with the help of grants from the Foundation for a Healthy Kentucky.

A recent grant from the foundation to the city of Lexington helped make it possible for a local food coordinator to be hired. Ashton Potter Wright was hired to fill a new position created to improve connections between central Kentucky farmers and consumers. The goal is to increase the fresh, locally grown, healthy food choices for residents and new sales markets for farmers.