Peoria resident Jon Ritzheimer said he will give his life 'to fight tyranny in this country.' (Source: YouTube)

Two members of an armed group occupying a federal building at the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge in Oregon have deep ties to Arizona.

The protesters seized and began occupying the refuge’s headquarters on Saturday evening, according to Harney County Sheriff Dave Ward. Demonstrators say they want to restore the rights of ranchers, loggers and miners to use the land free of federal oversight, and some have pledged their lives to the cause if necessary.

[RELATED: Militants seize federal wildlife refuge in OR]

"I am 100-percent willing to lay my life down to fight tyranny in this country," Peoria resident Jon Ritzheimer said in a video posted to YouTube. Ritzheimer drew national attention – and FBI scrutiny – for organizing armed anti-Islam protests last year.

[RELATED: Rally outside Phoenix mosque draws anti-Islam protesters]

[RELATED: Man organizes 'Draw Muhammad' contest in Phoenix]

"We will not fire unless fired upon, but we will stand and defend the constitution. We are within our rights," he said in another video posted from the wildlife refuge Sunday.

Group leader Ammon Bundy told reporters the demonstrators are prepared to stay indefinitely. Property records show Bundy owns a home in Laveen, although neighbors said he sold the home and moved out last year.

"This is not a time to stand down. It is a time to stand up and come to Harney County," Bundy said in a video message.

His father, Cliven Bundy, was involved in his own standoff with the federal government in 2014 over grazing rights.

Ward said the men came to Harney County in remote southeastern Oregon claiming to be there in support of local ranchers, but were really there to spark a movement to overthrow the government.

The sheriff said he is working with local and federal authorities to keep the citizens in his county safe and to quickly and peacefully resolve the situation that began after a peaceful protest in the nearby town of Burns.

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.