ObamaCare is coming. Or, as Elizabeth Hasselbeck quipped in an oh so not scripted totally planned way today on Fox today, “ObamaScare.” Yeah, they didn’t believe Sarah Palin’s lies, so we’ll get Elizabeth Hasselbeck to say them.

As Republicans crow that only 23% of Americans want them to destroy ObamaCare because they don’t understand it or like it, the big benefits are starting to roll in.

The latest benefit is a doozy, with the Department of Health and Human Services releasing a report today showing that nearly six in ten (56%) uninsured Americans can pay less than $100 per month for coverage.

Yep. Nearly six in ten people who don’t have health insurance may be able to get coverage through the Health Insurance Marketplace for less than $100 per month, according to a new report released Tuesday by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).

HHS explains that 23.2 million, which is 56% of the 41.3 million eligible uninsured,

may qualify for Medicaid, CHIP, or tax credits enabling them to get insurance at the exchanges for $100 or less a month.

So Republicans want Americans to reject being able to pay only $100 a month for coverage, so that they and their families can go uncovered in order to help Republicans appease a faction of their party. Seriously? The fail is huge on this.

Of course, Republicans have blocked the Medicaid expansion in some states (and you know they’ll blame Obama for that and their base will buy it), thereby keeping millions from affordable health insurance. In those states, Republicans are causing insurance rates to rise by denying Medicaid expansion. A RAND Health study found that premiums increase by 8 to 10% if states fail to expand Medicaid.

Tuesday’s HHS report shows “if all 50 states took advantage of new options to expand Medicaid coverage, nearly 8 out of every 10 people (78 percent) who currently do not have insurance could be paying less than $100 a month for coverage under the Affordable Care Act.”

Republicans can continue to ObamaScare the public, but only their base wants ObamaCare destroyed. The public is confused about ObamaCare. Not only have Republicans thrown all of their considerable corporate resources at demonizing the healthcare law, but in typical Democratic style, it has been presented long in policy specifics and short on bumper sticker slogans. Democrats are trying, but short and inaccurate is not their forte and every time they try it, then end up cringing in retreat as soon as they’re busted.

Democrats feel compelled to litter up any public notices with long winded statistical analysis, specific and accurate qualifiers and caveats. (e.g., “Republicans voted to end Medicare”– they got dinged for that, had to add “as we know it” when if it was not as we know it, it would no longer be Medicare. See Shakespeare and Plato.) President Obama is guilty of this; one of his biggest weaknesses is his failure to simplify things for the public. He routinely thinks that good policy makes good politics.

Democrats should learn from Bill Clinton.

Former President Bill Clinton cut through the fog of lies recently, “President Clinton said by not cooperating people in Republican states will be paying for the law, but the benefits will be going to people in other states.”

ObamaCare will no doubt have a bumpy roll out, as did Medicare and Social Security. But as people begin to enjoy the benefits, the polls will begin to shift. The only problem will be all of the Tea Partiers and Republicans who are on ObamaCare but don’t know it. When they are polled, no doubt they will bash it just like they demanded the government stay out of their Medicare.

Eventually even the most politically unaware will become dimly aware that Republicans are against millions of them getting access to affordable health insurance that is not a pick pocket sham for a corporate business.

Note: HHS defines Marketplace eligible as the eligible uninsured with incomes above 138% of the Federal Poverty Level in Medicaid expansion states or above 100% of the Federal Poverty Level in non-expansion states.