Odds are that the Game of Thrones season 5 finale will be action packed and full of surprises, but ultimately will it deliver and meet everyone’s expectations? Is doomsday imminent in the finale? The last time anyone saw the White Walkers, they were on a mission and their leader seemed to have his eye on Jon Snow. With the walkers on a path of destruction and determined to make more of their kind, Jon could be in serious danger as could anyone really. The walkers could spell doomsday as they progress forward on their mission. No one is safe at this point and that has always been the case since season one of Game of Thrones.

Fans of Game of Thrones are sure to want all of their questions answered and hopefully at least some of them will be. In the past, the season finale’s have left viewers on the edge of their seat and yearning for more. While this season did start off a bit slow, at least in comparison with previous seasons, the last couple episodes have delivered in more ways than one. In recent weeks, viewers have got to see Daenerys and Tyrion meet, Daenerys ride one of her beloved dragons, Cersei finally being held accountable for some of her actions, and a huge battle scene with the White Walkers. This is just to name a few of the highlights. With the walkers moving in on their targets and Stannis sacrificing his own daughter in his quest for power, it is clear that no one is safe in Westeros or anywhere else that is featured in the series.

DNA stated that David Nutter, who directed the Red Wedding episode of season 3, will be directing tonight’s episode titled Mother’s Mercy as well. Viewers who saw that episode know that it was a devastating blood bath, so if this episode follows suit then no one is safe. Game of Thrones is notorious for killing off characters and this season is no exception with some being killed off that are still alive in the books. Fan favorite Ned Stark was killed in season one and season three saw the deaths of Catelyn and Robb Stark who were also notable characters. The Stark family has suffered multiple tragedies and many wonder what the fates of the remaining family members will be. The creators of the show have proven that any character is dispensable. Even if characters have survived the books so far, that is definitely not a promise that they will survive the series. Doomsday could really be imminent for anyone.

CNet stated that on the wish list of many is to find out whether or not Cersei will finally get what is coming to her. In previous episodes, she was arrested and accused of incest. Viewers and haters alike got to see her confined to a jail cell, her worst nightmare, and wearing rags. She had wished this upon her daughter in-law and anyone who got in her way, so it was nice to see her get some of what she has been dishing out. While an intriguing and excellent villain, she ultimately deserves what she gets.

Fans of Game of Thrones also wish to know whether Stannis will pay for his actions and be killed at the hands of either the Boltons or the White Walkers, according to the article. Also plaguing the curiosity of many is whether the wildlings will stay united with the Night’s Watch or go their separate way, whether Jon will lead everyone to safety or not, whether Jon will survive or meet his death, whether Theon and Sansa will escape the Boltons or not, and what Arya’s path will lead her to. Will Jamie and Bronn make it out of Dorne? Will Brienne save Sansa? Will Sansa seek out Jon at the wall only to find him no longer there? What will Daenerys’s next course of action be? Will Tyrion encourage her to move toward the iron throne?

Tonight’s episode of Game of Thrones has fans guessing and waiting in anticipation. Will the episode deliver? Is Doomsday imminent in the Game of Thrones season five finale? No one is ever safe in this series and any character could meet their ultimate doom by episode’s end. Viewers are sure to be in for an action packed and eventful episode where anything can happen. The White Walkers could bring about doomsday in a show where everyone’s lives are always in danger.

By Heather Granruth

Sources:

DNA: Game of Thrones Season 5 Episode 10 preview: Expect the unexpected

CNet: Our wish list for the ‘Game of Thrones’ Season 5 finale

EW: 5 questions for the Game of Thrones season finale

Photo Courtesy of Gage Skidmore’s Flickr Page- Creative Commons License

Photo Courtesy of Suzi Pratt’s Flickr Page- Creative Commons License

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr