Pascrell Opposes Repeal of Medical Device Tax

Offers medical device amendment to protect patient safety

WASHINGTON, DC – Today, U.S. Rep. Bill Pascrell, Jr. (D-NJ-09), a member of the House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health, voted in opposition to H.R. 160, Protect Medical Innovation Act, legislation that would repeal the medical device excise tax.

“The device industry wants it both ways – they want the new business the Affordable Care Act (ACA) has created for them, but since the law was passed, they have been lobbying for repeal,” stated Rep. Pascrell. “You can’t support the goals of the ACA and then start stripping out the pieces of the law that fund the realization of those goals. Repealing the device tax is not good policy, and it’s not good for our budget.”

Rep. Pascrell became highly involved in medical device issues in 2007 when a number of device manufacturers entered into controversial deferred prosecution agreements for providing doctors with kickbacks for using their knee and hip replacement devices. A number of these products ended up being recalled because they were unsafe and the companies escaped the system with no punishment.

Rep. Pascrell also offered and withdrew an amendment to H.R. 160, the Protect Medical Innovation Act, that would direct the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) to take necessary measures to ensure that the Unique Device Identifier (UDI) for medical devices appears on Medicare claims.

“While patients deserve access to innovative new devices that improve their health, we must ensure they are implemented in a manner that protects their safety,” continued Pascrell. “As is the case with any new medical technology, not all adverse events are detected in the product’s market approval or clearance processes. However, we can mitigate the impact on patients with a robust post-market surveillance program. Patient safety must remain paramount, which is why we owe it to them to be able to quickly identify problems with medical devices when they arise.”

Rep. Pascrell’s amendment would require UDIs to appear on Medicare claims by October 1, 2018 for Class III medical devices, October 1, 2020 for Class II medical devices, and any additional device through regulation, subject to notice and comment rulemaking. When leveraged appropriately, the UDI can help identify safety concerns with devices more quickly or disprove a suspected problem.

In 2013 and 2014 alone, the FDA recalled more than 120 medical devices. However, in many cases, the recall occurs only after the devices have been implanted in or used by hundreds or thousands of patients, resulting in extensive revision surgeries, severe pain or other medical problems, and in some cases, even death.