The aging of the population will increase demand for industry services because people typically require more medical care as they age.

The Speech-Language Pathologists industry has experienced steady conditions and stable growth during the past five years. The industry, which comprises health practitioners that primarily evaluate, diagnose and treat speech, language, cognitive-communication and swallowing disorders, typically services clients in schools, healthcare facilities and hospitals. In recent years, rising student enrollment rates have stimulated demand for the industry's diagnostic and treatment services. Most importantly, increased access to health insurance as a result of healthcare reform has better enabled individuals to afford industry services, as many speech-language pathology services are covered by health insurance. As a result, industry revenue is expected to increase at an annualized rate of 2.6% during the five years to 2015, nearing $3.1 billion in 2015.

The passage of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) of 2010 has been a boon to the industry. According to IBISWorld Industry Analyst Dmitry Diment, “Under the healthcare reform law, subsidized state and federal healthcare exchanges have expanded private health insurance rolls since 2014 by mandating that all individuals obtain coverage or face a penalty. As a result, more individuals have obtained private health insurance coverage, better enabling them to access industry services.” Moreover, the PPACA has increased the number of individuals with government health insurance by expanding access to Medicaid. Consequently, in states that decided to participate in the expanded Medicaid program, the number of people covered rose substantially. In states where Medicaid covers speech-language pathology services, industry operators have benefited substantially.

These trends are expected to continue in the next five years. “Growth of the industry's main markets, students and the elderly, is expected to remain strong,” says Diment. “In particular, the aging of the population will increase demand for industry services because people typically require more medical care as they age.” Although the PPACA will continue to increase access to industry services by expanding health insurance rolls, the industry is expected to face pressure from falling Medicare reimbursement rates, stymying profit growth. Nonetheless, revenue is projected to continue rising during the five years to 2020.

For more information, visit IBISWorld’s Speech-Language Pathologists in the US industry report page.

Follow IBISWorld on Twitter: https://twitter.com/#!/IBISWorld

Friend IBISWorld on Facebook: http://www.facebook.com/pages/IBISWorld/121347533189

IBISWorld industry Report Key Topics

This industry comprises establishments of health practitioners that primarily evaluate, diagnose and treat speech, language, cognitive-communication and swallowing disorders.

Industry Performance

Executive Summary

Key External Drivers

Current Performance

Industry Outlook

Industry Life Cycle

Products & Markets

Supply Chain

Products & Services

Major Markets

Globalization & Trade

Business Locations

Competitive Landscape

Market Share Concentration

Key Success Factors

Cost Structure Benchmarks

Barriers to Entry

Major Companies

Operating Conditions

Capital Intensity

Key Statistics

Industry Data

Annual Change

Key Ratios

About IBISWorld Inc.

Recognized as the nation’s most trusted independent source of industry and market research, IBISWorld offers a comprehensive database of unique information and analysis on every US industry. With an extensive online portfolio, valued for its depth and scope, the company equips clients with the insight necessary to make better business decisions. Headquartered in Los Angeles, IBISWorld serves a range of business, professional service and government organizations through more than 10 locations worldwide. For more information, visit http://www.ibisworld.com or call 1-800-330-3772.