The Planned Parenthood abortion business stands to be one of the biggest beneficiaries financially from the success of Obamacare, which funds abortions and is funding the abortion giant directly.

With millions of Americans losing health insurance under Obamacare and support for its repeal at an all-time high, Planned Parenthood is relying on a campaign including top celebrities and a massive public relations push to “save” Obamacare. Meanwhile, the abortion company is taking to Craig’s List to hire canvassers to go door-to-door to promote Obamacare.

From a report on the hiring of canvassers:

Knock, knock, who’s there? Obamacare! This is no joke. Very soon your dinner may be interrupted by a representative from a new outreach campaign educating the public about the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare as it’s commonly known. “Community Connect, LLC” has been posting ads on Craig’s List seeking Canvassers to work 5 hour shifts for 12 dollars per hour and team leaders for 15 per hour…and they state they’re working with the Planned Parenthood National office. According to the ad, the campaign is set to run from November through March 2014 and is starting in Dallas, FT. Worth, Houston, as well as west palm beach and Miami Florida. However, because they’re doing business in Florida they’ve registered as a foreign LLC. Documents filed with the state of Florida show Community Connect LLC is managed by Planned Parenthood from their principal address in West 33rd Street in New York, NY. These corporate filings show that Community Connect LLC is not merely “working with” Planned Parenthood, as they claim, but rather they’re being entirely managed by Planned Parenthood itself. Where does planned parenthood get it funding to form an LLC and launch a door to door campaign promoting Obamacare? Well, according to FactCheck.org Planned Parenthood receives two federal governments sources, the Title X Family planning program and Medicaid.

Meanwhile, pro-life blogger Jill Stanek reports on the use of top celebrities to push Obamacare. These are well-known entertainers who have a long-standing relationship with the abortion business.