Perhaps the religious right is losing influence as Joel Kotkin suggests [“Religious right being left behind,” Opinion, Feb. 14], but the cause may go beyond the statistics on demographics and church attendance he uses to make the point. Perhaps others like me object to the dogmatic, self-righteous, often fanatical attitude shown those who, in matters of religion, disagree.

More to the point, many object to the insertion of religious dogma into government policy. We object to the imposition on the entire nation of religious views on abortion, assisted suicide, gay marriage, contraception, creationism, evolution (whether individually we agree or not). Were it not for the continued attempts to proclaim by government edict notions they cannot convince people of from the pulpit, such views would be tolerated as free practice of religion.

Fritz Mehrtens

Irvine

• • •

Joel Kotkin pointing to momentum shifting away from organized religion misses one point [“Religious right being left behind,” Opinion, Feb. 14]. Apparently, millennials are now swayed by modern-day myths that they have been taught. The Pied Piper, Hansel and Gretel’s witch offering sweet cakes and gingerbread and Snow White being offered the apple were allegories, meant to warn children against blandishments and the consequences of accepting them. The modern purveyors of these myths are offering Robin Hood and Pied Piper socialistic schemes, which millennials have been taught to grab. They have not been warned that such a government may quickly turn into a wolf.

Elaine Wempen

Irvine

Berned by socialism

There should be no surprise at the clamor of college-age people for Bernie Sanders’ socialism, and it’s not only due to a distaste for Hillary’s history and persona. These young people are products of an academic system that simply doesn’t allow diversion from liberal teachings, and they come out of that system with very little understanding of how true capitalism functions, or why socialism doesn’t.

More’s the pity, because capitalism, if kept vigilantly free from corruption and monopolies, pumps wealth and employment into an economy through the profit incentive, even while driving down those profits, and consequently the costs of goods and services, through competition. In comparison, socialism eats away any chance of the good life for its citizens because government can give away goodies only up to a point, since it never produces anything on its own.

Socialism eventually turns any country that tries it upside down by debt accumulated through weakly funded giveaway programs. Its proponents have never figured out why they aren’t able to fund their programs by simply raising taxes beyond economic break-even levels, or why eliminating incentive and/or driving away its major taxpayers somehow produces lower overall revenue and employment.

Collegians have now been far too indoctrinated to understand any of this. Scarily, they might now form up with the greater masses being propagandized by other institutions that have also been taken over by progressives – most of the media, entertainment and the like – into a gathering storm over American capitalism. If so, by the time they begin experiencing the impoverishing results of their promised life under socialism, they could well also find themselves forbidden to reverse course.

Ted Robinson

Newport Beach

Both sides lie

I have just read Mark Landsbaum’s column “Why we trust those we know are lying to us” [Opinion, Feb. 13]. I naively thought it would be fairly objective and even nonpartisan, especially with the blizzard of accusations of lying on the Republican side.

But I was surprised even at ultraconservative Mr. Landsbaum’s totally one-sided take on the subject. Even if his accusations about Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders are 100 percent true, these pale by comparison with the Republican side. For example, the Register published a Fact Check after a recent Republican debate. It examines Ted Cruz lying about Obamacare and refutes all of his statements. It also refuted Chris Christie’s claims regarding the economy. And this was just from one debate.

Philip Peace

Lake Forest

Women and Selective Service

The issue is not whether the draft will ever be instituted again. The issue is that we have given equal rights, for the most part, to everyone over 18 years of age. Women and the law have demanded equal pay for equal work, and these rights have been extended into every field, including combat.

So for women not to register for the draft would be discriminatory. All it would take is for one male to file suit and take it all the way to the Supreme Court. The court would have no choice but to rule in favor of the man.

Joseph Saraceno

Gardena

Suds along the shore

Sitting on a towel at Doheny State Beach on the Fourth of July, I watched a group of four sheriff’s deputies marching down the beach. They looked inside every cooler, sniffed a few drinking glasses and turned over blankets in their search for alcoholic beverages. I thought it was to prevent some intoxicated swimmer from drowning, or from causing a scene. There is a cafe right on the sand that serves beer and wine, and soon there will be beer and wine served at Bolsa Chica State Park.

It is now clear to me. The alcohol inquisition I witnessed was just a means of ensuring that the vendors have no competition. I hope the Sheriff’s Department gets a cut of the profits.

Wayne Via

Dana Point