Look around the high country these days, and it’s hard to miss the signs: The boom is back.

And this might not be an entirely good thing.

After a five-year economic lull, the mountain resort towns are bouncing back. Vacation bookings are up. Construction is going gangbusters. Ski areas are expanding their offerings. The forgotten sound of cash registers ringing has returned.

The rising tide is apparent in Vail and Aspen and Winter Park and Steamboat Springs, with new projects in the works and mothballed old ones being resurrected.

But perhaps nowhere is it more prevalent than in Summit County, just 75 miles west of Denver along Interstate 70. In Frisco, a new Whole Foods is going in, and the town recently sold for development an empty 2.2-acre lot near Interstate 70 for $2.3 million that will be anchored by another Starbucks.

In my hometown of Silverthorne, Carquest is building a gleaming new shop to replace its dilapidated old modular structure, and Murdoch’s Western store is taking over a vacated hardware store.

And in my neighborhood — well, the upper, luxury portion of my neighborhood, not the family-oriented middle-class part toward the bottom of the hill — three new 5,000-square-foot homes are under construction.

While all of this is good from an economic standpoint, each has its own price to pay.

Those new luxury homes, for instance, are slated as second homes for their out-of-state owners, occupied only a couple of weeks out of the year and otherwise left dark, as a sort of high-dollar ghost town.

Carquest and Murdoch’s continue the mountain town’s march toward homogenization, joining recently added big-box retailers Target and Lowe’s along with the usual assortment of fast-food restaurants. Carquest actually is moving in directly across the street from Auto Zone, creating a competition that inevitably will leave one standing and one abandoned. Same with Whole Foods, which stands only a couple hundred feet from a long-existing Safeway along the same side street.

Meanwhile, Breckenridge Ski Area will open new terrain on Peak 6 this winter after winning a bruising public fight with critics over the need for the project, the unintended “social” consequences such as increased traffic and demands for worker housing, and the permanent damage to the healthy high-elevation forest.

Because it’s surrounded by the White River National Forest with no adjacent private property, the resort can’t build new upscale lodging at the base area as it has in previous expansions, but it can market “exclusives” such as its “First Tracks” program that allows people staying in Vail Resorts properties an hour head start on the lifts.

In Silverthorne, the Catholic Archdiocese is building eight new apartment buildings adjacent to existing low-income worker housing, and the town is renewing efforts to build its own affordable housing on a scenic ranch adjacent to Colorado 9. Congressman Jared Polis even has a bill directing the U.S. Forest Service to sell off a piece of property near Frisco for more housing. This all fulfills a need that the business community has created but fobs off on the social safety net because wages for the thousands of low-skilled laborers needed to run ski areas and big boxes are nowhere near sufficient to cover the elevated cost of housing in the resort areas.

Meanwhile, heavy construction traffic has turned the overburdened roads into mud-spattered, congested messes, creating the frustrating experience on occasion of having to sit through more than one red-light cycle – admittedly a small-town, first-world problem.

This is not to say the boom is entirely bad: Employers are hiring again, there’s new energy and enthusiasm permeating the community, and cash is flowing. It’s just that there are consequences to our communities, to our quality of life and to our environment. And, really, just how many Starbucks do we actually need?

Steve Lipsher (slipsher@comcast. net) of Silverthorne writes a monthly column for The Denver Post.