Complexities of health law open market for benefits administration specialists

Company benefits programs have become more complicated to manage with the Affordable Care Act and Kismet Toksu is among the experts helping employers navigate murky waters.

In January, Toksu became president of EBenefits Solutions, an online benefits administrator. The for-profit company was spun out of UPMC a decade ago and now manages benefits for roughly 200,000 employees and their families at more than 50 organizations across the nation, including health care providers, universities and manufacturers.

The 55-year-old Squirrel Hill resident joined EBenefits in January. She discussed the demands on benefits administrators from federal health reform and growing interest in private exchanges, marketplaces set up by companies for their employees to shop for health insurance. Below is an edited transcript.

Trib: How has the ACA affected demand for benefits administration services?

Toksu: Employers of all different sizes are trying to understand how the law impacts them. How they need to track, what they need to file and so forth. One of the big reporting requirements right now is understanding who is full time, who is part time, measuring that and then filing it. That's a very onerous process.

Trib: Has there been any concern or any reluctance among some of the organizations of the security of (online benefits administration) services?

Toksu: We have a huge focus on compliance and being associated with a health plan, even though we are a for-profit company, we are still associated with UPMC. We follow all of the HIPAA compliance and other regulations protecting people's privacy and security, particularly related to any of their health care decisions. So we are a very secure system.

Trib: How much revenue does it bring into UPMC?

Toksu: We don't talk in terms of revenue. We'll talk more in terms of members and number of customers and so forth. I would see the growth trajectory, depending on how you measure a customer, certainly above a 10-15 percent annual growth in number of customers and members.

Trib: How much of that do you think is driven by compliance concerns with the ACA?

Toksu: Benefits administration in and of itself might not be the biggest growing area, but as you mentioned, ACA is huge. There are changes in rules in ACA, there are updates in rules. Almost hand-in-glove with ACA or perhaps the output of ACA is the whole private exchange piece. Private exchanges are slated to grow significantly.

Trib: Are you managing private exchanges?

Toksu: We are developing a private exchange now.

Trib: What are you growth projections there?

Toksu: Some of that depends on timing. I would say if you were to look at Accenture's research or Kaiser, one in five Americans will purchase health benefits through an exchange by 2017. I would say that might be aggressive. But we have numerous potential partners that we're working with now on implementations and we'll see what customers they put on. We're working on those projections now. We're very young in our development of private exchange.

Trib: What role do you think EBenefits is going to play in supporting the institution, UPMC, financially?

Toksu: I would say that E-Benefits will continue to grow and as we grow, we'll support the institution.At this point, I can't give you a percentage or a how much. What I can say is that we're certainly investing in EBenefits because we are a commercial entity that is growing.

Chris Fleisher is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 412-320-7854 or cfleisher@tribweb.com.