A large and lively crowd gathered Saturday morning at Manual High School to speak their minds on the embattled Denver Sheriff Department.

Opinions ranged from skepticism that true reform will actually happen to suggestions that the sheriff’s department is betraying its deputies by failing to protect those who do their jobs well.

As with any public forum, emotions spread across a wide spectrum, including some who acknowledged the difficult job deputies face.

There were moments of laughter, including when two ladies each claimed to be the oldest person in the room. And there were moments of shock such as the instance an older gentleman yanked dentures from his mouth, saying he had lost his teeth at the hands of violent police officers.

Eventually, though, a theme emerged at the first of four planned meetings for public input on reforming the sheriff’s department.

The deputies who use excessive force against inmates need to be punished, including with criminal charges, people said over and over.

“There is zero tolerance for violence from inmates,” said Mandy Koss, who has worked for more than 20 years in the criminal justice system. “There should be zero tolerance for violence from deputies.”

Under the current system, punishment comes slowly and lightly for those who abuse inmates. As a result, no one takes it seriously, Koss said.

“If they see their fellow deputies get charged criminally, they may think twice about what they do,” Koss said.

Stephanie O’Malley, executive director of the Denver Safety Department, said she knows the use-of-force policy needs to be changed.

“It keeps coming up in all conversations related to the Denver Sheriff Department,” she said. “That’s a big one.”

This year, an excessive-force case cost the city $3.25 million after it settled a lawsuit against former inmate Jamal Hunter. Another lawsuit over excessive force over the death of a homeless street preacher inside the jail is set for trial this month. And a third former inmate has filed a $5 million suit against the city after he was slammed against a metal window frame in a courtroom.

Several people spoke about mental health treatment for inmates, including interim Sheriff Elias Diggins who, when asked what he would do if money and resources were unlimited, mentioned he would do more for the mentally ill.

Robert Giron, a former city employee, suggested deputies be cross-trained in social service skills so they can help rehabilitate the people they guard all day.

“They need to understand they are taking in our sons, our sisters, our uncles, our family,” he said. “Understand they are human.”

But some in the crowd did not appear convinced that their opinions were being heard. They criticized city leaders for being tone deaf after a Denver Police Department bomb squad truck, motorcycle and several police cars were parked outside the building.

“You just don’t get it,” said Darren O’Connor, who removed his Guy Fawkes protest mask to speak.

The equipment was on display as a public-relations effort for Mayor Michael Hancock’s Cabinet in the Community events also being held at the school.

But Rosemary Rodriguez, a member of the reform effort’s executive steering committee, agreed.

“When I saw it, my stomach fell,” she said. “What we try to do as a committee is to be approachable.”

Noelle Phillips: 303-954-1661, nphillips@ denverpost.com or twitter.com/Noelle_Phillips

Upcoming

More community meetings on Denver Sheriff Department:

Sept. 13: 9:30 to 10:30 a.m., Highland Senior Center, 2880 Osceola St.

Sept. 20: 10 to 11 a.m., Eisenhower Recreation Center, 4300 E. Dartmouth Ave.

Sept. 23: 6 to 7 p.m., Eagleton Elementary School, 880 Hooker St.

E-mail: Send suggestions and comments to weighin@denvergov.org