Covered California, the designated Obamacare marketplace for all of California, announced today in an email to insurance agents that its enrollment website will be offline from tomorrow until October 1st. Customer service representatives at the telephone numbers provided confirmed that Covered California California Insurance Agents will not be able to complete the appointment process before the site goes offline. Agents do not have access to the actual enrollment system until they are appointed. This includes modifying the profiles they created in their original registration.

So the website will be going live on the first day of enrollment on October 1st without any agents truly prepared to use it. Agents will not be able to test their system nor get acquainted with the site. Nor will potential enrollees be able to use the public directory, if it is available, with any degree of reliance. All of this assumes that the website works perfectly itself, without having been Beta tested in any manner.

But, Covered California still maintains its preposterous position that it will be ready for enrollment on October 1st. The text of the announcement is:

Notice to All Agents Covered California’s registration website, http://apply.CoveredCA.com will be undergoing system maintenance in preparation for our next system release onOctober 1, 2013. Our registration website will be unavailable beginning Friday, September 20th at 6:00 p.m. until Tuesday, October 1, 2013 at 8:00 a.m. Licensed agents that have already registered with Covered California prior toSeptember 20th at 6 p.m. will not be disrupted by this system maintenance. Registered agents will continue to have access to the Learning Management System (LMS) and will be able to proceed with their Certified Insurance Agent training and certification program. Licensed agents that have not registered with Covered California prior to 6:00 p.m. on September 20th, when our registration website becomes unavailable, will be unable to register until on or after October 1, 2013. No new registration will be processed during the maintenance period. We strongly encourage you to register now. Covered California’s service center will be open and taking calls to assist with any questions.

For questions about Covered California and the Patient Affordability and Affordable Care Act (Obamacare), contact a Certified Insurance Agent.