Your browser does not support inline frames or is currently configured not to display inline frames. Content can be viewed at actual source page: http://youtu.be/iwQXZvbaIX8

Aired 9/9/13 on KPBS Midday Edition. GUESTS Todd Gloria, Interim San Diego Mayor Mark Fabiani, General Counsel for the San Diego Chargers

Transcript

Document New Chargers Stadium Proposal The San Diego Chargers submitted this proposal for a multi-use stadium and convention center in San Diego's East Village to the California Coastal Commission on August 30, 2013. The Coastal Commission will consider proposals in October. Download

The proposal for a downtown Chargers stadium took on new life late last week, as the Chargers introduced plans for a combined stadium, convention center complex.

If that sounds familiar, it's because a similar plan was introduced and rejected by San Diego city leaders two years ago.



As the plan for the $520 million convention center expansion nears a crucial hearing before the California Coastal Commission, the San Diego Chargers are reviving the multi-use stadium plan. They say their plan could actually be completed more quickly, and bring more revenue to San Diego.

Mark Fabiani, general counsel for the San Diego Chargers said in an interview published Thursday on the Chargers web site, "there is a more cost-effective and environmentally-sensitive way to expand the convention center as part of a multi-use stadium in the East Village. And that’s the concept we presented to the Coastal Commission."

On Friday, Interim San Diego Mayor Todd Gloria responded to the Charger's plan. He said he supports the current convention center expansion plan.

"It is a plan that is vital for us to attain and attract other conventions, most of whom have made it perfectly clear they want to hold their events with contiguous space. Few conventions are interested in holding their event in a venue that is spread out over several city blocks," Gloria said.

The Coastal Commission is set to consider the plans next month.