Del City Police say the woman who found a missing 5-year-old boy will face child endangerment charges, after police searched her home and found drugs and syringes inside.

Police also arrested 28-year-old Elizabeth Ayala, who was also inside the house.

Carmen McDonald, 36, was arrested on Wednesday after officer found her walking down the street with the child.

Del City Police say the woman who found a missing 5-year-old boy will face child endangerment charges, after police searched her home and found drugs and syringes inside.

Carmen McDonald, 36, was arrested on Wednesday after officer found her walking down the street with the child. Police searched her home in the 4700 block of Newport Dr. in Del City shortly after the arrest and found the items all over the home.

"It's creepy," said Dustin Walker, who lives two doors down from the house. "I mean, I have a young one myself, so it's good to know what happened."

Walker says the women who lived there kept to themselves, but he says there were usually a lot of cars in the driveway.

"What it appears to be is a shooting gallery type home, where people go to inject drugs," said Capt. Jody Suit with the Del City Police Department.

5/21/2014 Related Story: Missing 5-Year-Old Boy Found Walking With Stranger

Del City police originally arrested McDonald on a complaint of public intoxication. But now she will be facing the much more serious charge of child endangerment because of what police found in her home.

"He could have picked up a needle and stuck himself very easily," said Suit.

Police also arrested 28-year-old Elizabeth Ayala, who was also inside the house.

"It's a felony to have a child in a home where drugs are being used and sold," said Suit. "And it is also a felony to bring them into the homes."

Police say McDonald claimed she found the little boy wandering outside a convenience store and though she didn't know him, brought him home to feed him. Police also say Ayala told them she told McDonald to call police to report the missing kid, but officers say neither of the women did that.

Del City police say there were also two men inside the house when the boy was there. The boy was checked out a local hospital and is doing OK. He is back at home with his family.