The suspect in the attack of an 80-year-old store clerk was arrested Saturday as he drove the victim’s car into a truck stop near Lake City, Winter Haven police said.

Perry L. Chance, 53, of Lake Wales, was taken to the Columbia County Jail and will be brought back to face a Polk County judge in the next few days, authorities said.

Police had been looking for the suspect, since Tuesday, when surveillance cameras recorded a man beating, gagging and robbing Elonka’s Fashions employee Carol Sheeth.

The attacker also stole Sheeth’s 2009 white Chevrolet Impala.

Sheeth was severely injured, but is continuing to recover and improving, police said.

Her son, Doug Sleeth, and daughter, Cindy Grondin, appeared with Winter Haven Police Chief Charles Bird on Saturday to discuss the case with the media.

Chance has family in the St. Petersburg area, and he was last spotted there at 66th Street North and 54th Avenue North early Friday afternoon, police said. Winter Haven police and the Florida Department of Law Enforcement began concentrating on the area.

On Saturday morning, investigators received a tip that Chance was at the Crystal Inn near the intersection. Authorities showed Chance’s photo to motel managers, who confirmed that Chance checked into the motel the night before, police said.

Entry was made into the room, but Chance had already left, police said. A receipt from a nearby McDonald’s and alcohol was found inside the room, police said.

Authorities said they went to the McDonald’s, where surveillance video of the drive-thru from Friday night showed Chance driving Sheeth’s car.

“A close look at the car revealed Chance had placed a Sunoco sticker on the bumper in an obvious attempt to alter the original vehicle description and also placed a stolen tag on the vehicle,” police spokeswoman Jamie Brown said.

The stolen tag was from a vehicle in St. Petersburg, police said.

The Florida Highway Patrol was alerted to look for the vehicle and stolen tag, Brown said. Troopers spotted Chance in the Impala on Interstate 75 just north of Gainesville and began following him, Brown said.

Chance exited at the truck stop, where he was taken into custody by troopers, officials said.

Winter Haven detectives were headed to Columbia County to interview Chance.