Maya Heneghan's "Howling at the Moon" is one of 15 decorated toilet seats on display at The Great Frame Up, 430 Main St., Wednesday. The seats will be auctioned to raise funds for Longmont Theatre Company's "Illuminate the Marquee" campaign. ( Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer )

EDITOR'S NOTE: The Times-Call's Take Two series revisits people and things we have written about in the past year. Take Two stories run on Mondays.

When the Longmont Theatre Company was thinking of a way to combine their fundraising efforts to improve the front of their building and buy new lighting with promotion of their upcoming production of "Urinetown," they decided to get literal. The play is about paying to pee, so why not have people pay for toilet seats -- toilet seat art, that is.

If you go What: Longmont Theatre Company's production of "Urinetown" When: March 13-28 Where: Longmont Performing Arts Center, 513 Main Street Cost: $16-18 More info: Call 303-772, 5200, or visit http://www.longmonttheatre.org/ Toilet seat art: The Longmont Theatre Company is auctioning off toilet seat art as part of its “Illuminate the Marquee” campaign in conjunction with the upcoming run of the play “Urinetown.” The art is currently on display at The Great Frame Up, 430 Main St. You can also visit the online auction site at http://www.32auctions.com/LTCRaiseTheSeat

The theatre contacted a bunch of local artists, urging them to put their paintbrushes to some ceramic and auction off the seats to raise money for a restored marquee, as well as some repairs to the front of the building.

"We've been doing the marquee fundraiser for the past four months," said Tracy Cravens, who serves on the board of directors and runs the Longmont Theatre marketing committee. "We had kicked that off back in the fall. We'd been doing fundraisers as well as our big campaign for it, so this (campaign) plays into it."

Cravens said that the artists that decided to participate "really stepped up and brought us fun ideas."

Some of the designs include a bejeweled seat titled "Bling of Thrones," a comic-book classic-art collaboration lid called "I Must Van Gogh, Gotham Needs Me" and many other creative works of art.

Lynn Daignault, one of the artists who donated a painted toilet seat, said it was an interesting challenge for her, she had certainly never painted a toilet seat before. At first she had no idea where to start, but considering how natural this certain bodily function is, she decided to incorporate nature.

"I decided to use a simple leaf motif and did different colors and designs within each leaf," Daignault said. "I really had no idea, I didn't know what other people were doing either. I think it worked out okay."

Her design, titled "Mother Nature Calls," features a forest-full of colors - yellows, browns, greens and blues and a leaf design throughout. She decided to be a part of the fundraiser due to her love of the arts and Longmont.

"Both my husband and I have always supported the communities we've lived in," she said. "We just love Longmont and just want to support what's going on."

According to the online auction site ( http://www.32auctions.com/LTCRaiseTheSeat), the theatre is trying to raise $5,000 through this campaign. There are currently 15 various art pieces to bid on, with the Doctor Who themed seat, "Space, The Final Frontier" having the most bids, at seven, with the last bid standing at $32.

Cravens said she hopes people bid on the toilet seats, or provide a donation online. But mostly that they come check out "Urinetown" and see what they're supporting.

"We want people to bid on the toilet seats and go see the show," Cravens said. "It's a musical for musical lovers and it's an amazing cast."

Isa Jones: 303-684-5274, jonesi@timescall.com or twitter.com/theisajones