He may be a lightning rod for criticism, but President Obama maintains he won’t be lighting up any time soon.

The commander-in-chief, a former smoker, said in an interview published Tuesday that when it comes to cigarettes, he’s had “zero in the last five years.”

“I made a promise that once health care passed, I would never have a cigarette again. And I have not,” he told GQ magazine for its upcoming “Men of the Year” issue.

Obama signed his signature health care legislation into law in March 2010, but rumors have circulated on several occasions since then that he had taken up smoking again.

The most recent speculation arose in June, when a photo taken during the G7 Summit in Germany appeared to show the President clutching a small rectangular item that closely resembled a box of cigarettes.

The White House denied that the item was a pack of smokes.

In his wide-ranging GQ interview, conducted by HBO’s Bill Simmons, Obama also mused on his favorite characters in “Game of Thrones,” what he may do after he leaves the White House and what running against Donald Trump may have been like.

“I would’ve enjoyed campaigning against Trump. That would’ve been fun,” Obama, whose time in office is capped at two terms, said.

Obama also professed his “love” for the HBO series “Game of Thrones,” but admitted that his “problem” with the show was that he doesn’t “remember the names of any of the characters.”

“My favorite character is probably … the dwarf, what’s his name,” Obama, said referring to Tyrion Lannister, a character in the show played by actor Peter Dinklage.

When Obama was asked to compare Trump to a character from the show, he declined to respond.

“I don’t think…I don’t think any of them rise to that level,” he said.

When it came to the worst day of his presidency, Obama didn’t hesitate to describe his feelings during the December 2012 shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Conn.

“Before the second inauguration has even happened, Sandy Hook happens. Which remains, by the way, the worst few days of my presidency. I went up and visited with those families and — you know, Bill, you’ve still got small kids. These are 6-year-olds, right? And you have 20 of them who’ve been massacred,” Obama said.

“Right away, our focus had to shift to ‘is there a way for us to capture this moment to see if we can get over this incredible hump to try to put in place some common-sense gun-safety rules?’ And we knew it was a stretch, just because of the politics of Congress and the NRA. But we had to try.”

Capping the interview on a lighter note, Simmons asked Obama whether he would be interested in being named a Supreme Court justice after his presidency.

Obama paused while answering, prompting Simmons to jump in and press him for his true feelings.

“No, well, the reason I paused for a second was just to make sure that I let people know that I think good judges are really important, and Supreme Court justices, obviously, are hugely important,” Obama said. “I don’t have the temperament to sit in relative solitude and just opine and write from the bench. I want to be in the action a little bit more.”