ANALYSIS/OPINION:

The Republican and Democratic parties bid the nation a happy July Fourth with statements issued almost simultaneously on Saturday morning. Though each refer to the “American dream,” perspectives diverge and tone differs, even on a holiday.

“Across our great country, families and communities will come together, amid picnics and parades, fireworks and patriotic songs, paying tribute to the land of the free and the home of the brave. And as we do, we remember the brave men and women of our armed forces who keep us free,” the Republican National Committee said.

“Happy Fourth! As we celebrate the red, white, and blue, we thank God for all the blessings we enjoy as Americans. We’re grateful for those visionary leaders who declared all men are created equal those many years ago. Today, it’s up to us to keep freedom alive for the next generation, to expand opportunity, and to put the American dream within reach for all people. As a party, we are committed to that cause each and every day of the year.”

And from the Democratic National Committee comes this observation:

“During times like last week, we are reminded of the extraordinary capacity for good that can come from the constant struggle to fulfill that ideal. On consecutive days, we saw necessary protections put in place to help ensure more Americans are healthy and able to fulfill their constitutional right to marry who they love no matter where they live. These victories help ensure that the rights many of us already enjoy do indeed extend to all Americans.”

The organization concluded: “Our founding fathers had the courage not just to declare their independence, but to challenge future generations to lift our nation to the heights to which they aspired. We continue their struggle by fighting for a living wage for workers, a woman’s right to make her own health care decisions, unfettered access to voting, comprehensive immigration reform, and creating opportunities to pursue the American dream for all.”