Newborn Baby, Photo Credit: March of Dimes Foundation - Cropped Photo: March of Dimes Foundation / MGN

RETURNING THE CAMERA Anyone with information regarding the Barker’s pictures can contact Winfield Police or reach the Barker family at (620) 842-2161. The family does not plan to press charges. They just ask for the return of the memory card, if anything. The camera is described as a Canon PowerShot in gray. You can see the picture in the article.



Stay up-to-date with KAKE News: iOS app

Android app

Follow us on Twitter

Like us on Facebook

COWLEY COUNTY, Kan. -- A Winfield mom is hoping the community can help find a prized possession.

On Tuesday night, Courtney Barker returned home from the park with her husband and their baby.

Courtney said they were in a bit of a rush, focused on getting the baby inside safely.

“My hands were full when my husband tried to hand me our camera and I asked him to just sit it down,” she said. “I went inside and got distracted after putting things away. The baby needed a bath and bed, dinner needed made, etc.”

"I really did panic because of all those things I could lose, that would be it. That'd be the only thing I cared about," Courtney said.

Eventually, the Barkers discovered that their camera went missing. It’s not an unusual event, considering their close proximity to busy restaurants nearby. They’re used to plenty of foot traffic on their block, in the 1800th block of Millington -- not far from 18th and Main.

Yet, Courtney said the loss of their camera is one they cannot replace. It has the only pictures of their baby, Blake. Other than a handful of pictures they’ve already shared on social media, Courtney said it has infinite value.

“Oh my heart just sank. I rushed outside but I was too late. It was gone,” Courtney said. “We just celebrated his first birthday last week. Those and so many more cherished pictures and videos, gone.”

REWARD FOR RETURN OF PICTURES

Courtney said she’s hoping to get the memory card safely returned. Friends and businesses have rallied behind the family, offering a reward for her pictures. The reward includes at least $100 and a brand new in box TV stand—valued at nearly $250.

The family also got an unexpected surprise at their front door this week.

"Somebody stopped by and had bought me a brand new camera," Courtney said. "And they said 'I know I can't replace what was lost, but you should be able to take pictures of your baby.'"

"Of all those things I could lose, that would be it. That'd be the only thing I cared about."A Winfield mom makes a... Posted by Annette Lawless on Saturday, August 15, 2015