The Obama administration has agreed “in principle” to grant an $8 billion Medicaid adjustment for New York State that could help stabilize some hospitals in Brooklyn and would reconfigure the delivery of health care there and throughout the state, state officials said on Thursday.

Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo had lobbied heavily for the money in the last few weeks, complaining at a recent news conference with Mayor Bill de Blasio that the federal Department of Health and Human Services had awarded such so-called waivers to other states but had not acted on New York’s request.

Mr. Cuomo’s office said that his administration and the federal agency had reached an agreement “in principle” on the waiver, which would allow the state to move Medicaid money around. The $8 billion over five years that has been agreed upon is somewhat lower than the state’s $10 billion request.

“While the state will be reviewing the terms and conditions of this agreement, it is clearly the biggest step forward towards a positive conclusion for our communities, particularly in Brooklyn, that have suffered from diminishing health care services,” Mr. Cuomo said in a statement.

Federal officials confirmed the agreement, but said that all the details had not yet been worked out, and that receiving the full amount would be continent on benchmarks along the way.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“We are encouraged that this agreement is entering the final stages of approval, and we look forward to continuing work with the state to achieve meaningful delivery system reform in New York,” Joanne Peters, a federal spokeswoman, said.

Senator Charles E. Schumer, who had elicited a promise from Kathleen Sebelius, the secretary of health and human services, to make a decision on the waiver by the end of the month, said the money would “give the state flexibility in keeping hospitals open.”

Kenneth E. Raske, president of the Greater New York Hospital Association, called it a “shot in the arm” for New York’s health delivery system.

But it was still unclear on Thursday exactly how the money would be used. Hospital unions and community activists have held out hope that it would be used to keep troubled hospitals open, including Interfaith Medical Center and Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn.

During the mayoral campaign, Mr. de Blasio said that the waiver would be one way of saving those hospitals. But he has always been careful not to say they would stay open in their current form, and he has recently showed some signs that he might accept turning Long Island College Hospital into a combination of a free-standing emergency room, clinic services and affordable housing.

Mr. de Blasio treaded carefully again on Thursday.

“With this funding,” he said, “we can finally turn the page on a decade of reckless hospital closures, and confront the immediate crises facing seven hospitals in Brooklyn alone. This is our opportunity to focus on long-term solutions that deepen access to preventative, primary and emergency care.”

Federal officials have discouraged talk of using the waiver money to prop up hospital operations; they have said that it should be used to reduce the need for hospitalization and to provide more outpatient care.

Echoing that thought, Mr. Cuomo has said that the waiver money would be used to “transform” health care. The waiver agreement came hours after he raised the ante on Thursday, saying at a news conference that if the waiver was not approved, not only would hospitals close, but also “it will endanger the operation of our health exchange.”

The state’s health insurance exchange has been almost a model arm of the Affordable Care Act, enrolling more than 400,000 people in insurance plans since it opened in October.