WellCare Health Plans, Inc., a managed care service provider for government-sponsored healthcare programs, is enhancing its Medicaid benefits in Kentucky by offering several new programs aimed at preventative health, the company announced through a statement. The new benefits take effect January 1, 2016.

The programs include a healthy rewards program, meals program, and one free sports physical for kids ages 6 to 18 at no cost to the member or their parents/guardians. The healthy rewards program, which is available to all WellCare of Kentucky Medicaid members, offers incentives to achieve specific milestones geared toward preventative health and wellness. Upon completion of such a milestone, the member receives a debit card in amounts ranging from $10 to $60.

[Also: Matt Bevin elected governor of Kentucky, leaves future of state's Medicaid expansion in jeopardy]

The meals program offers nutritional assistance to members who are enrolled in care management and have been recently discharged from a hospital, rehabilitation or skilled nursing facility. Within 14 days of being sent home, the member receives 10 meals help them recover and stay healthy.

"Studies have shown that nearly half of readmissions are linked to social problems and lack of access to community resources," said Ben Orris, chief operating officer for WellCare of Kentucky. "The transition from a hospital setting to a member's home is usually presented with various challenges, particularly for seniors and individuals with special needs. To address one of the prevalent barriers associated with post-discharge transition, WellCare of Kentucky is facilitating meal delivery to support the nutrition needed to help people remain well and at home."

The company says the free sports physical for kids is a way to encourage healthy physical activity.

"According to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, regular physical activity in childhood and adolescence improves strength and endurance, helps build healthy bones and muscles, reduces anxiety and stress, increases self-esteem, and may improve blood pressure and cholesterol levels," said Dr. Howard Shaps, medical director for WellCare of Kentucky.

As of this September, WellCare serves roughly 436,000 Medicaid members.

WellCare is unrelated to the state's expanded Medicaid program that incoming governor Matt Bevin has vowed to abolish in favor of switching to the federal marketplace.

[Also: Kentucky governor Matt Bevin's plan to close state insurance marketplace won't sting consumers, experts say]

Bevin, a conservative Republican, said he didn't want the state to be on the hook for costs associated with that state-based program called Kynect, should its revenues from premium taxes not keep up with expenses.

Twitter: @BethJSanborn