Across the Chicago area, hospitals are adding glitzy buildings, from Rush University Medical Center's $683 million butterfly-shaped patient tower to the University of Chicago Medicine's $700 million facility that takes up two city blocks. Even a small Catholic facility in Englewood feels compelled to join the building boom.

As Obamacare simultaneously widens the pool of people with health insurance and pushes the industry toward outpatient care, aging urban hospitals have to spruce up or watch even their poor patients leave for other providers.

A fixture in the Englewood community on the South Side for more than a century, St. Bernard Hospital wants to build a $33 million outpatient center and medical office building. Just a few years ago, the 210-bed facility scrapped plans for a new hospital amid the economic downturn.

“When patients can go anywhere, they may not choose the facility that's deteriorating,” says Robert Kaestner, a health care economist and professor at the University of Illinois at Chicago. “They need a more competitive framework to meet the challenge of a better-insured population that has more choices now.”

Other small hospitals in the city are pursuing expansion plans, too. St. Anthony Hospital, a nonprofit on the West Side, is tackling one of the most ambitious projects. This year, it aims to begin a $400 million development that includes not only replacing its 151-bed facility but also adding stores, a school and a community center. The 162-bed Roseland Community Hospital, a nonprofit on the Far South Side, wants to open new clinics within a year.

Investing in outpatient facilities helps aging, urban hospitals remain relevant to their patients, as people travel for complex procedures but tend to stay close to home for routine care, says Steve Jenkins, senior vice president at Skokie-based consultancy Sg2 LLC.

Charles Holland Jr., CEO of St. Bernard since January 2013, declines interview requests. But in a response to emailed questions, he says: “We are at a disadvantage now in terms of the space and functionality of our outpatient services that limits the number of patients that can be seen. We are confident the new building will address the limitations in our present facilities, address community health needs and be a destination for high-quality health care for community residents who have had to go outside the community for certain services.”

MANAGING MEDICAID PATIENTS

Founded in 1904 by the Religious Hospitallers of St. Joseph, St. Bernard treats a predominantly poor population, with more than 60 percent of net patient revenue in 2013 coming from Medicaid, according to a hospital financial statement.

St. Bernard is proposing to build a 70,000-square-foot outpatient facility that would include leased office space for physicians, according to its application to the Illinois Health Facilities and Services Review Board, a regulatory board that must approve the project.

A key part of the rationale for more outpatient space is to accommodate about 40,000 Medicaid patients. St. Bernard, along with three other hospital partners, is managing their care as part of a new money-saving Medicaid program. The effort brings big financial risk but potentially big rewards as well. The goal is to treat patients with a fixed amount of money, and St. Bernard can keep savings it achieves by keeping those patients healthy.

quote|Robert Kaestner,University of Illinois at Chicago When patients can go anywhere, they may not choose the facility that's deteriorating. When patients can go anywhere, they may not choose the facility that's deteriorating.

To provide more preventive care, St. Bernard needs more doctors, the application says. It has about 165 physicians on its medical staff, of whom only about 75 regularly practice, Mr. Holland says. St. Bernard also needs to alleviate a crowded emergency room that has become the de facto primary care site for too many patients. Treating patients in the emergency room is much more expensive than at a doctor's office.

The hospital also is addressing its “deteriorated facility,” it says in its application, after state inspectors working on behalf of the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services found several violations dating to 2013. The necessary improvements include upgrading the fire alarm system and adding sprinklers in portions of the hospital, according to a federal inspection report.

Mr. Holland says the campus is made of several buildings of varying ages. The emergency and operating rooms are among several areas that need upgrades and are priorities after the construction of the outpatient center, he says.

St. Bernard Foundation, a charity that supports the hospital, is paying for a majority of the proposal. The foundation had about $95 million in net assets in 2012, according to its most recent tax return. The remaining amount will be collected through fundraising. The hospital had only $5.1 million in cash in 2013.

“We are not in a position to build for the sake of building,” says hospital board Chairman Gregory Whitehead, a nod both to the importance of the project and to the hospital's modest finances.

For complete coverage of Chicago-area health care news, visit ChicagoHealthCareDaily.com.