Improving health literacy among New Jersey's diverse ethnic populations — and helping the uninsured get health coverage — is the goal of a community outreach collaboration among Rutgers University pharmacy students and Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey.

This effort was spearheaded by Hannah Kim, who received her doctorate in pharmacy last May from the Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy at Rutgers. Now a post-doc resident at Horizon, Kim works under Saira A. Jan, Horizon’s director of clinical pharmacy management and a clinical professor at the Rutgers pharmacy school.

Born and raised in New Jersey, Kim, 24, speaks both English and Korean. Since mid-2013, she’s recruited nearly 40 Rutgers pharmacy student to volunteer at community health events to help New Jerseyans make sense of health care lingo and the complexities of signing up for health insurance. Several of the pharmacy student volunteers are bi-lingual, in Korean or Spanish.

Kim said she was motivated to become a health literacy advocate after closely following the 2010 passage and subsequent rollout of the Affordable Care Act and realizing, “I was confused about the ACA myself” — even though she’s spent six years in pharmacy school and has worked in a retail pharmacy.

Click here to subscribe to NJBIZ's e-newsletters

The Rutgers pharmacy students have participated in several community health fairs around the state, including the annual health fair sponsored by the Korean Medical Program of Holy Name Medical Center in Teaneck, which in September drew about 1,500 members of the state’s Korean-American community. In October the students were at a Halloween event at Great Adventure, introducing health care concepts to young adults. This Saturday, Kim and other Rutgers pharmacy students will be at the Woodbridge Mall for Horizon’s “Insure-A-Thon,” an event aimed at encouraging uninsured New Jerseyans to get covered.

Horizon spokesman Tom Vincz said the community outreach partnership with Rutgers is “one of many examples of how Horizon works with New Jersey organizations, and New Jersey’s best and brightest, to improve health care understanding, access and quality for our state’s diversity-rich population.”

Kim said the program is helping the state’s ethnic communities while also providing on-the-ground education for the pharmacy students, who like other health care professionals “need to be able to understand a person’s culture and traditions, so we can understand where they are coming from to help us better manage their health.”

She said the students aren’t marketing Horizon products, but are “going out into the community to create awareness about the benefits of health insurance. The goal is to empower individuals so they have the information to make the right decision for themselves.”

For many of the uninsured, she said being able to afford coverage is a challenge; the students talk about how to weigh the costs and benefits. Under the ACA, individuals who buy health insurance at HealthCare.gov can get federal subsidies to make the coverage more affordable; the subsidies are on a sliding scale, phasing out entirely at four times the federal poverty level or about $46,000 for an individual.

The students explain how deductibles and co-pays work, and help individuals find a plan that covers any medications they’re taking. They also talk up the importance of regular screenings to identify and manage chronic diseases, like high blood pressure and diabetes.

Kim said the students explain the differences among the various levels of coverage available on HealthCare.gov, “and help people understand, if you have a specific disease and you go more frequently to the doctor, maybe plan A won’t be as great as plan B.”

“I think having students who speak their language talk to them about the importance of health insurance and health in general” is a key value of the program, she said.

“When people are able to speak with someone who understands their culture — that really opens up their hearts to the students. And that gives us the opportunity to really sit down with them and take time to discuss this,” she said.

ALSO ON NJBIZ:

NJBIZ presents the 24 Lists of Christmas, Day 3: Top Engineering Firms

Doctors' offices must be wary of data breaches as use of electronic records grows

Port Authority's $7.8B budget focuses on infrastructure