As difficult as it can be for someone battling a mental health illness, acknowledging a need for help is only the first step to getting treatment in Dane County.

Finding the appropriate and affordable treatment may be the larger obstacle for one to face in Dane County’s complex mental health care system.

The county’s mental health services must work to balance the demands of treatment needs with the limitations federal, state and private health care insurance providers present.

Between the United Way and the National Association for Mental Illness, Dane County has many publicly listed adult mental health services, all of which have very different health insurance policies and treatment models.

Additionally, very few facilities offer psychiatric inpatient services for the chronically and severely mentally ill.

“There’s a lot more need in the community than resources available,” said Tammy Quall, chief strategy director of the Access Community Health Centers in Dane County.

Mental health care is not one size fits all, and some treatment centers are better suited to some patients. This is before factoring in paying for it all. Understanding what steps to take may be a daunting barrier for those who want help.

Dane County residents navigating the available services who have the least amount of resources often face the most racial and economic disparities.

Some 40 percent of the population receiving behavioral treatment services from Access Community Health Center in 2013 did not have health insurance, a percentage higher than the center’s amount of uninsured primary care patients according to Quall.

“The behavioral health team is serving the neediest part of our patient population,” she said.

The Access Clinic, a federally funded community center, uses an integrated primary care behavioral health model. This approach allows patients access mental health services while they seek primary medical care, meaning they can often see obtain both sets of services on the same day.

“The reason why we wanted to start having behavioral [health treatment] was because we had a very hard time finding mental health services for our patients who have Medicaid and Medicare,” Quall said.

The Access Clinic accepts Medicaid, Medicare and BadgerCare. What makes it different from most area clinics is its federal sliding discount program for those without insurance. Under the federally sponsored program, Access Clinic cannot legally deny primary care services due to an inability to pay.

Access has a unique health service model. Dane County residents with government health care plans often have trouble finding treatment for a number of reasons.

A limited number of treatment centers accept Medicare and Medicaid because of low insurance reimbursement rates. The rates often do not cover costs needed to operate a clinic, according to director of the Family Center Betty Rygiewicz.

“Even with the Affordable Care Act, a lot of mental health services are not affordable,” she said. “I say that not because [government] agencies are gouging anyone to make as much money as they can, but with rent, utilities and every other cost that goes along with it, there is a lot of cost to run a clinic.”

The Family Center is primarily funded and staffed by the Marriage and Family Therapy program at Edgewood College. The College funds costs for office space and utilities that enable therapists to collect reduced fees based upon income. Sometimes the payment is whatever little cost the client can afford after the session.

“We don’t want them to come in here and have it be another hardship, but we do want people to pay something towards their sessions,” Rygiewicz said.

The Family Center offers financial flexibility in order to provide individuals, families and couples short-term or long-term treatment weekly.

Although the center treats clients with stable and non-severe illnesses, urgent care appointments on the day of an emergency are available to those struggling to make financial ends meet.

“We don’t turn anyone away for an inability to pay,” she said.

Resources like the Family Center and the Access Clinic are few and far between, according to Rhonda Reinholtz, a licensed psychologist and professor in the University of Wisconsin-Madison psychology department.

Reinholtz sees clients with Medicare at her private practice. At times, she offers sliding fees for clients without insurance or who cannot afford the full fee.

Three years ago, she experienced difficulty when referring clients to Journey Mental Health Center, the mental illness treatment facility primarily funded by Dane County.

Sue Moran, director of outpatient services at JMHC, said Journey struggles to keep with demand for services. About 40 percent of its clients have no medical assistance, according to the JMHC 2013 Annual Report. Eighty-two percent of clients were assessed as unable to pay based upon its sliding fee scale that offers a zero pay fee.

“We know that the population’s needs are far greater than the resources we have,” she said.

Even though JMHC schedules 40 intake appointments for new clients every week, Moran said the clinic still has to prioritize children, family, pregnant mothers using substances and crisis situations when scheduling appointments.

“We try to get people in as quickly as possible,” Moran said.

JMHC provides the largest range of mental health services to the largest population of consumers. The center’s availability increases demand that is further overtaxed by expectations and quotas of health management organizations and health care providers.

“Health care insurance providers have expectations of how their members are going to be served [at JMHC],” she said. “We try to be responsive to individual need while we are managing many different [health care provider] contracts.”

Alternatives to publicly funded, chronic mental health illness treatment like JMHC are non-existent, according to Reinholtz. She says she does not know of any psychiatric private practices that use a sliding fee scale.

As one of the few treatment facilities for the severely mentally ill that accepts any or no form of health insurance, JMHC has a waiting list for appointments sometimes scheduled months from the date of inquiry, according to Rygiewicz.

Moran said that JMHC accepts same-day appointments and usually sees clients one month out from when they first called.

Reinholtz had a different experience when calling to make an appointment at JMHC.

“The last time I checked in with anyone that was trying to get seen [at JMHC] they were so booked up that they weren’t putting people on waiting list anymore,” Reinholtz said.

Moran and her team at JMHC are redesigning the center’s treatment model to better meet the county’s treatment demands. The new, centralized intake process will increase flexibility across JMHC’s treatment programs, getting more clients to the end goal of recovery.

“We had a lot of different programs but we didn’t have a lot of fluidity, she said. “We wanted to be able to easily move people and be more recovery focused.”

Ava Martinez, program coordinator of NAMI in Dane County, found seeking public treatment at JMHC - formally known as the Mental Health Center of Dane County - easily accessible twenty years ago.

Martinez has been a mental health consumer in Dane County since she moved to Madison twenty years ago. She now is an advocate for mental health.

Comprehensive promotion of services like Access Clinic, The Family Center and JMHC, along with others like the University’s WISPIC graduate training program, is where Quall would like to see reform in the county’s mental health system begin.

“From a consumer standpoint, having something much more easily navigated would be a big improvement to the point of ‘I have a problem, where do I start?,” she said.

Serving the largely diverse population of those in need of mental health treatment may advantage the few of those with education and resources.

“It’s hard at any level if you have mental health issues to navigate the system, but boy if you have resources it makes it easier,” Quall said.

Until health care becomes more accessible to all of Dane County’s citizens, Martinez’s advice for someone seeking treatment is to persevere.

“I would encourage them to not give up, and know that they are not alone.”