Seven months after getting married, Danielle and Matthew Davis were dealt a devastating blow that almost ended their life together just as it was starting. Matt was involved in a horrendous motorcycle accident that left him with several broken bones and a traumatic brain injury. Doctors told Danielle the best course of action would be to take Matt of life support, after giving him a 10 percent chance of survival. But Danielle wasn’t so quick to give up on her new husband.

“In July of 2011, my husband Matt Davis, was in a motorcycle accident that left him with several broken bones and a Severe Traumatic Brain Injury,” Danielle said on Matt’s GoFundMe page. “He was 22 and we'd only been married for 7 months. Doctors suggested we remove him from life support and let him go, he would never wake up. I wanted to give him more time to see if he improved. We didn't really have a chance to start our life together, I wasn't going to give up.”

Wife ignores doctor's recommendation to pull husband off life support. GoFundMe

Ignoring the advice of Matt’s doctors, Danielle took her husband home to begin her own rehabilitation therapy. She started off by mirroring some of the therapeutic techniques his doctors had used. She also tended to his every need, including using a “feeding tube, adult ‘briefs,’ sponge baths, over 20 medications, physical therapy, turning him every 2 hrs to prevent bed sores, etc.” Then, three months after leaving the hospital, something miraculous happened: Matt woke up from his coma.

While the joy of having her husband wake up from a coma was indescribable, she had yet another hiccup to deal with: Her husband had no idea who she was. Danielle and Matt started dating two months before they decided to tie the knot. Due to severe long-term memory loss caused by the accident, Matt had no recollection of the past three years.

Following the emotional roller coaster that was the past couple of months, Danielle was more than ready to continue to fight for her husband, but she encountered yet another obstacle.

Wife ignores doctor's recommendation to pull husband off life support. GoFundMe

“Insurance will no longer pay for therapy,” she wrote. “People with Traumatic Brain Injury need a lot of rehab. People continue to make improvements even 10 years after their injury. Insurance doesn't pay for the amount of therapy they need so oftentimes that person doesn't reach their full potential.”

Donate to Matt’s GoFundMe account here.