Some lawmakers are saying that Utah's latest alternative to Medicaid expansion — UtahAccess+ — is complicated and difficult to understand and may lead to its unfolding.

SALT LAKE CITY — One of the architects of Utah's latest alternative to Medicaid expansion said a complicated and difficult to understand funding mechanism may become a "stumbling block" to passage.

Also raised during a discussion on UtahAccess+ at the University of Utah's Hinckley Institute of Politics on Thursday was the possibility that the new plan is a "political tactic" of House leadership to hamper Medicaid expansion in Utah.

"In order to get a bill passed, you have to have the concepts clear and understandable," said Sen. Brian Shiozawa, R-Cottonwood Heights. "If you complicate things too much, it really does invite more pitfalls to a piece of legislation."

Rep. Marie Poulson, D-Cottonwood Heights, a member of the state's Health Reform Task Force who also participated in the LDS Democrats-sponsored panel discussion at the U., said she is concerned that the funding mechanism or other roadblocks being presented "are some sort of strategy to defeat this program altogether."

"I hope that is not the case," Poulson said. "I hope the people of the state of Utah and our Legislature are committed to providing care to these people and that we will continue to work on this until we get something that will aid these people who need it."

Rep. Greg Hughes, R-Draper, who has been credited for the idea to include a provider tax or fee to help fund a portion of the state's liability in covering an additional 95,000 Utahns — one of the facets of UtahAccess+ that has faced some scrutiny among providers — has been relatively quiet upon the plan's rollout and did not respond to requests for comment Thursday.

Shiozawa said some believe the only way to achieve consensus on a plan for Medicaid expansion in Utah was to close it to Democrats, hence the all-Republican, governor-appointed "Gang of Six" that held meetings for the past six months to develop "a politically palatable" plan that would potentially pass in both houses.

But Shiozawa said he "would not have been bothered one bit to have (Democrat) input on this."

He said political response on UtahAccess+ has been "lukewarm" so far.

"It's been a very frustrating experience," Poulson said, adding that "we've forfeited a lot of money as we've deliberated over the years."

Twenty-nine states and the District of Columbia have expanded Medicaid to include uninsured populations, as the Affordable Care Act intended. Utah has avoided the decision, debating to offer a private form of expansion, potentially bringing hundreds of millions in taxes already being paid to the federal government back to Utah's economy.

The first three years following enactment of the federal health care reform law promised a 100 percent federal match of funds used to expand the program, but that dwindles to 90 percent by 2021.

It is estimated that Utah's portion then would be close to $50 million annually. Shiozawa said he's amenable to changes in the proposal, but said opponents shouldn't be too harsh about the idea that providers who would likely benefit from serving more patients should pay a portion of the cost to provide them insurance.

Otherwise, money would have to be taken from education, transportation or other vital programs in Utah to fund the expansion of benefits to Utah's poor.

Shiozawa said, however, that taxing providers could lead to a decline in an already huge demand of primary care providers, who sometimes come out of medical school with a lot of debt.

And Poulson is concerned that many providers might not maintain a costly license beyond retirement, when they can and often do provide charity care or serve humanitarian missions.

Both lawmakers said they support a plan to insure Utahns who haven't had access to health care and are putting off preventive and necessary care.

But Shiozawa, an emergency room physician, said emergent care isn't always what a patient needs.

"When you have health insurance, you have access," he said. "If you don't have health insurance, you don't have access; and if you have diabetes, hypertension, or a cancer, and you can't get a colonoscopy, you have chest pain or don't have adequate care for your diabetes or other health problems, you're going to suffer and you're going to die."

The Utah House of Representatives wouldn't hear any discussion on Gov. Gary Herbert's Healthy Utah plan during the 2015 Legislature, even after it passed favorably out of the Senate, and Poulson said that was disconcerting. She also said she wishes the process over the past several months had been conducted openly and "in the public forum."

The public, however, will have a chance to comment on the latest proposal during the Tuesday meeting of the Health Reform Task Force, held 3-6 p.m. at the Capitol.

"We have a great need in Utah to help these people," Poulson said. "This is a matter of life and death, and you should expect your politicians to come up with a way to do this."

But it would take a supermajority vote to get out of the Utah Legislature, whether in a special session or the upcoming session in January, and it remains unknown whether there is enough support for the proposal, which is still in the process of being drafted as a bill.

Shiozawa, a potential sponsor of the bill, said he has heard that some lawmakers might be taking "a wait-and-see approach," pending the results of the 2016 presidential election and possible changes in the landmark health care reform law.

"We need to keep our eye on the ball," he said. "We can deliver health care and help that benefits people with quality care, save some lives and prevent people from coming to the ER and draw down a huge amount of money from the federal government, or we can sit back and say, 'Hell no. This is Obamacare, and I won't be a participant in that.'"

Paul Gibbs, a filmmaker who has relied on Medicaid himself for a lifesaving kidney transplant in 2009, said he doesn't see many in the Legislature changing their minds.

"I just want others to have the same opportunity at life that I've had," he said, adding that he only qualified for Medicaid because of a disability. "It's long past time for us to have solved this."

Email: wleonard@deseretnews.com

Twitter: wendyleonards