Buy Photo Angie Osborne serves plates to a customer at Henry’s Smokehouse in Greenville. Osborne, who has worked in the restaurant industry for years, says she currently has no health insurance or retirement savings plan. (Photo: MYKAL McELDOWNEY / Staff)Buy Photo

Tiger O'Rourke had no idea his Facebook post would ignite such a firestorm, but today, the co-owner of Henry's Smokehouse stands corrected. As it turned out, O'Rourke opened the floodgates of public opinion when he posed a question to Henry's Facebook followers about adding a minimal surcharge to restaurant orders to help pay for employee benefits.

"Instead of just doing it, I said, How would you feel about it?" O'Rourke said of his decision to post on Facebook. "And that's what everybody was saying, great idea, great idea, great idea. But those who have been negative are definitely negative. They say, I'll never eat with you again.

"That makes me think twice about it."

O'Rourke has decided not to follow through with the idea of the surcharge for now, but he knows the issue of benefits for restaurant workers is not going away.

"In the restaurant industry, this is something that needs to be figured out in some shape or form," O'Rourke said.

“In the restaurant industry, this is something that needs to be figured out in some shape or form.” Henry's Smokehouse co-owner Tiger O'Rourke

This is not just a Greenville issue. Debate has been swirling nationwide about how restaurant owners can provide benefits to employees, or even if they should provide them, particularly as the Affordable Care Act takes effect. The provision governing small businesses with between 50 and 99 full-time employees (those working 30 or more hours a week) takes effect in 2016.

The issue at hand is that health insurance remains an unaffordable luxury for restaurant workers whose salaries hover near minimum wage.

The National Restaurant Association opposes legislation that would make restaurant owners responsible for covering insurance for employees. The national group, which advocates for the rights of restaurant owners, says the health care law burdens restaurant owners who fall into the 50-99 full-time workers category. The law states that businesses that do not comply could have to pay a fine.

MORE FROM GREENVILLEONLINE:

Should we raise the tipped minimum wage?

Greenville restaurant growth puts new focus on service industry

In response, the Restaurant Association has endorsed legislation that would change the full-time status in restaurants from 30 to 40 hours a week. The bill has passed the House but awaits approval by the Senate.

The change means that fewer employees would be eligible for benefits.

"Aligning the ACA's definition of full-time employment with current employment practices would help avoid unnecessary disruptions to employees' wages and hours, and provide significant relief to employers," Katie Niebaum, National Restaurant Association spokeswoman, said in a statement.

At the three Henry's locations, O'Rourke and his partners, Bo Wilder and Darby Smith, have 36 employees, 12 of whom are full-time. Those 12 receive benefits, so the idea of the surcharge is to help provide benefits for the other 24 part-time workers. People like Angie Osborne, who has worked on and off with Henry's for a decade.

Osborne, who is in her late 30s, currently has no health coverage or retirement plan, she said.

When she has medical bills, "I put it on a payment plan, that's all I can do," she said. "I try not to go."

O'Rourke was inspired by an NBC Nightly News story he saw about a restaurant in San Francisco. The restaurant, Zazie, is small, has a small staff, and the owner, Jennifer Piallat, couldn't afford the extra cost to provide benefits to her employees. So, she began adding a $1.35 surcharge to all restaurant orders.

The extra money has since funded health and retirement benefits for Zazie's employees and supported paid vacation time.

"I thought it's a really cool idea," O'Rourke said. "And I thought, you know, for $1.35, most people have that in their sofa cushions."

So O'Rourke immediately took to Facebook:

"Just saw an NBC Nightly news report about a restaurant looking out for its employees," he wrote in his post. "They created a program in which $1.35 was added as a surcharge to every bill to cover full insurance, a 401k with 4% match and sick time/vacation time for all their 35 employees ... How would y'all feel about a surcharge added to your bill to cover something like this?"

The post immediately stirred a conversation. By later that evening, it had received 250 likes and generated mix of positive and negative comments.

One suggestion was to just raise prices, but O'Rourke worried that would muddle the funds. A surcharge, he said, would allow those funds to be tracked carefully and distributed to employees as intended. Plus, he added, "if you put it to the menu, you might price yourself out of everybody else's price range."

Other local restaurant owners admit they are trying to find solutions to benefits as well. Douglas Sheley has been gearing up. The owner of Fresh To Order in Greenville has plans to expand his business with other locations in the coming year or two and is researching health care coverage now.

"I'm not sure how it would work — like, if maybe we paid half or what, I haven't gotten that far yet," said Sheley, who has worked in the restaurant industry four decades. "But that's something we would definitely look at. It's on our radar."

Currently, Sheley's 27 employees don't have benefits, but Sheley said he tries to compensate them in other ways. He pays employees at his fast casual restaurant $11 an hour, well above the mandated $7.50 minimum wage.

"I'm an older franchisee and over the years I've been able to observe and learn and deduct that if you're going to get good people and you're going to get them to stay with you, you need to pay them to keep them," Sheley said. "It's worth it from a business standpoint because people don't take into consideration what it costs to recruit, hire and train a new employee."

“It's worth it from a business standpoint because people don't take into consideration what it costs to recruit, hire and train a new employee.” Fresh To Order owner Douglas Sheley

Josh Beeby feels much the same way, but contends that restaurants still face a struggle because of the nature of the industry. Beeby, who owns Barley's and The Trappe Door, relies on servers who can learn and interpret information about the hundreds of wines and beers for which his restaurants are known, but oftentimes it's a struggle to keep good people, he said.

"It takes so much education to teach them about the food, the beer and the wine and the system," Beeby said. "It's a very expensive and timely service to train your staff. Beyond that, people like to see familiar faces."

Beeby previously examined the issue of providing benefits for his 60 or so employees (less than half are full-time). The restaurant owner had employee health and dental plans in the past, but ultimately they never worked out.

"I think there's a misconception from employees themselves," Beeby said. "A lot of them think they are getting free insurance, and then they realize it's a co-pay. So they realize it's coming out of their paycheck and they say, well, I don't want it anymore."

“I think there's a misconception from employees themselves.” Josh Beeby, owner of Barley's Taproom & Pizzeria and Trappe Door

More recently, Beeby re-examined the issue with multiple insurance companies, but to no avail. As a smaller business, he said, his wasn't eligible for rate discounts that larger companies get and most plans were more expensive because restaurant workers fall into a higher-risk category.

"There are so many females in the industry, so pregnancy becomes an issue," Beeby says. "And typically, the rate of smokers and drinkers in the restaurant business is a lot higher than most industries. So we get lumped into that high-risk rate. It's very expensive."

But O'Rourke said that perception of restaurant workers is not always accurate. That traditional idea of restaurant workers being younger and more transient doesn't necessarily hold true anymore, particularly since the economic downturn pushed older, more established workers into the industry. Since then, O'Rourke said, he's seen many more restaurant employees who are supporting families. It creates a different dynamic, he said.

Osborne said she is supporting only herself. She said she has worked in other fields, but her true passion is restaurants.

She understands the concerns some expressed about a surcharge, she said, particularly when the standard Henry's ticket is $9 or $10. But she can't help but think of the difference it could make in her life.

"I would not be afraid to go to the doctor," Osborne said. "And I would also know that I have something to live off of when I get older and retire. Right now I have nothing."

For now, O'Rourke has tabled his idea. But he said he still hopes to find a solution that will work for everyone.

"I feel strongly that if you take care of your employees, your employees will take care of your customer," O'Rourke said. "If your customer is happy, your customer will come back."

Read or Share this story: http://grnol.co/1BXBzY7