WHIPPANY, N.J., Feb. 23, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals Inc. today announced the expansion of its patient assistance program for intrauterine devices (IUD). The ARCH (Access and Resources for Contraceptive Health) program will provide Skyla® (levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system) 13.5 mg and Mirena® (levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system) 52 mg to low-income women who meet eligibility criteria. The ARCH program expands upon a previous patient assistance program, which was managed through an external foundation. The changes include the addition of Skyla and expanded eligibility guidelines to potentially provide IUDs to a greater number of appropriate patients.

"Bayer has always been dedicated to ensuring that cost is not a barrier for women who want to use our products," said Edio Zampaglione, MD, FACOG, Vice President, US Medical Affairs, Women's Healthcare, Bayer HealthCare. "The introduction of a new patient assistance program, managed by Bayer, will continue to provide access to important options for thousands of women who might not otherwise be able to afford an IUD."

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) supports unhindered and affordable access to all U.S. Food and Drug Administration-approved contraceptives and, along with the World Health Organization (WHO), has determined that long-acting reversible contraception options, including IUDs, are among the most effective contraceptive methods currently available.

More information on the ARCH program, including eligibility requirements and application information, is available at www.ArchPatientAssistance.com.

The ARCH Program is just one example of Bayer's commitment to improving women's healthcare around the world. Each year, Bayer supports patient education efforts on family planning. This includes support of www.CoverHer.org – a free service provided by the National Women's Law Center to help women and caregivers understand and navigate health insurance coverage for birth control and other health care, much of which should now be covered for many at no cost under the Affordable Care Act. In addition, Bayer HealthCare supports family-planning programs in more than 130 countries, giving women access to modern contraceptives through global initiatives. This includes a partnership with the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to provide access to the Population Council-developed contraceptive implant for over 27 million women in more than 50 developing countries.

Indication for Skyla® (levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system) 13.5 mg

Skyla is a hormone-releasing intrauterine device (IUD) indicated for the prevention of pregnancy for up to 3 years.

Indications for Mirena® (levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system) 52 mg

Mirena is a hormone-releasing intrauterine device (IUD) placed in your uterus to prevent pregnancy for as long as you want to for up to 5 years. Mirena also treats heavy periods in women who choose intrauterine contraception. Mirena is recommended for women who have had a child.

IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION ABOUT SKYLA AND MIRENA

If you have a pelvic infection, get infections easily, or have certain cancers, don't use Skyla or Mirena. Less than 1% of users of Skyla or Mirena get a serious pelvic infection called PID.

If you have persistent pelvic or stomach pain or if Skyla or Mirena comes out, tell your doctor. If Skyla or Mirena comes out, use back-up birth control. Skyla or Mirena may attach to or go through the uterus and cause other problems.

Pregnancy while using Skyla or Mirena is uncommon but can be life threatening and may result in loss of pregnancy or fertility. Ovarian cysts may occur with Skyla or Mirena but usually disappear.

Bleeding and spotting may increase in the first 3 to 6 months and remain irregular with Skyla or Mirena. Periods over time usually become shorter, lighter, or may stop.

Skyla and Mirena do not protect against HIV or STDs.

Only you and your healthcare provider can decide if Skyla or Mirena is right for you. Both Skyla and Mirena are available by prescription only.

For important risk and use information about Skyla, please see the full Prescribing Information.

For important risk and use information about Mirena, please see the full Prescribing Information.

About Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals Inc.

Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals Inc. is the U.S.-based pharmaceuticals business of Bayer HealthCare LLC, a subsidiary of Bayer AG. Bayer HealthCare is one of the world's leading, innovative companies in the healthcare and medical products industry, and combines the activities of the Animal Health, Consumer Care, Medical Care, and Pharmaceuticals divisions. As a specialty pharmaceutical company, Bayer HealthCare provides products for General Medicine, Hematology, Neurology, Oncology and Women's Healthcare. The company's aim is to discover and manufacture products that will improve human health worldwide by diagnosing, preventing and treating diseases.

Forward-Looking Statements

This news release may contain forward-looking statements based on current assumptions and forecasts made by Bayer Group or subgroup management. Various known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors could lead to material differences between the actual future results, financial situation, development or performance of the company and the estimates given here. These factors include those discussed in Bayer's public reports which are available on the Bayer Web site at www.bayer.com. The company assumes no liability whatsoever to update these forward-looking statements or to conform them to future events or developments.

The Bayer Cross, Bayer, Skyla® and Mirena® are registered trademarks of Bayer. ARCH is a service mark of Bayer.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20140312/NY79226LOGO

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/bayer-healthcare-expands-patient-assistance-program-to-include-an-additional-intrauterine-device-at-no-cost-to-women-who-qualify-300039000.html

SOURCE Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals Inc.

Related Links

http://www.bayer.com