Over the past couple years, obesity has become more than just a health issue. In the U.K., it is also become a political issue because the number of obese welfare recipients has swelled.

According to the Independent, many obese recipients have been able to claim welfare benefits and supplemental income due to other health issues they have as a result of obesity. However, most recipients’ health issues could probably be resolved with weight loss. Now, Prime Minister David Cameron is proposing that welfare benefits be cut for individuals who refuse to lose weight or undergo weight loss surgery.

“The next Conservative government is determined to make sure that the hardest to help get the support they need to get them back to a fulfilling life. Too many people are stuck on sickness benefits because of issues that could be addressed but instead are not. Some have drug or alcohol problems, but refuse treatment. In other cases people have problems with their weight that could be addressed, but instead a life on benefits rather than work becomes the choice.”

However, the proposal, which was introduced back in February, has been met with opposition. While some would consider Cameron’s proposal to be quite effective, The Lancet Diabetes & Endocrinology argues the proposal is “far from ethical” because no one should be forced to undergo surgery, reports RT.

“Although many people who claim sickness benefits for obesity might welcome the opportunity to take part in an intervention that helps them to lose weight, any mandated program should have a strong evidence base for success… Requiring people to undergo a major surgical procedure as a condition of receiving benefits seems far from ethical.”

Of course, the controversial topic has sparked quite a debate. Most taxpayers have long argued that welfare benefits only make obese recipients lazier. Over the past couple months, there have been many highly-publicized incidents were obese welfare recipients have claimed to be “too fat to work” and are “happy” with the lives they’ve been afforded with the help of government benefits.

With financial support from the government, some argue there is no incentive to lose weight or seek help to resolve their health issues. Many taxpayers definitely agree Cameron’s proposal could be an effective way to save money and combat obesity. Needless to say, some readers definitely had brash responses for to The Lancelot’s arguments.

Here are some of the comments.

“It is not a question of cutting their benefit, but making their benefit dependent on them seeking treatment or therapy for their obesity… and quite right too!… there is no right to be a parasite!” “As it should be, people should not be allowed to be burden on the rest of society. I believe in providing for those who cannot do for themselves, but, I resent the heck out of having to provide for those who simply WILL NOT do for themselves.” “And the ones who make excuses like, ‘I just can’t stop eating.’ But most of them lie and claim they don’t eat that much, ‘it’s my metabolism.’ Sure, tell me another, if anyone ate what you claim they’d be thin as a rail period.”

Do you think obese welfare recipients should be forced to have weight loss surgery or lose benefits? Share your thoughts.

[Photo by Sean Gallup/Getty Images]