By Lisa Jenkins And Miriam Y. Cintron

Three longtime incumbent Congressmen representing this community are facing challengers in the March 15 primary.

1ST DISTRICT (D)

Howard B. Brookins Jr. was elected alderman of the 21st Ward in 2003 and has held that position ever since. In City Council, he currently chairs the Committee on Economic, Capital, and Technology Development and is past chair of the Chicago City Council Black Caucus. Brookins would like to move up to Congress and feels that one of the big challenges the area faces is economic development.

“Unemployment leads to a lot of the social problems and crimes we see happening in the district,” Brookins said. “By bringing jobs and investments into the district, we can help improve the quality of life in these vulnerable communities.” If elected to Congress, Brookins intends to focus on criminal justice reform, education, and infrastructure.

“From my experience as a public defender and criminal defense lawyer, there should be more accountability from the government and police departments,” Brookins said. He noted that, as a married father of two boys, he cares deeply about public education and will seek opportunities to improve community schools.

Also, “Our roads and bridges are crumbling,” Brookins said. “I will champion infrastructure projects that make our neighborhoods stronger.” He graduated from Northern Illinois Law School in 1988 and has served as a public defender and assistant state’s attorney under State’s Attorney Cecil Partee. Brookins also has maintained his private law practice since 1991. He was born and raised in the Auburn Gresham area and now represents it in the City Council. See www.brookinsforcongress.com.

Patrick Brutus has served for the past nine years as Coordinator of Economic Development for the City of Chicago in the Department of Planning and Development. He has held positions in the divisions of Neighborhood Development, Housing Preservation/Neighbor-hood Stabilization, Workforce Development, and Business Development.

Having worked in Will County, the south suburbs, and the South Side of Chicago, Brutus said he understands “the complex challenges residents of the 1st District face from crime and safety; planning for quality affordable housing; and creating smart and reasonable economic development projects that create jobs.” He promises to bring a regional approach to his work in Congress and to represent all areas of the district equally.

“I will also fight for responsible gun control, human rights, and equal protection for all, and sensible regional planning which includes lower property taxes and real healthcare for the uninsured in our district,” Brutus said.

“I will hold hearings to discover how we can set our country on a path to accomplishing the goal of returning America to a kinder, peaceful, and gentler nation,” Brutus said.

Brutus noted he has a particular interest in “livable communities,” which he said he “enjoyed as a youth and ultimately made an integral career focus. He grew up in University Park, IL and graduated from Hickory Elementary/Deer Creek Junior High and Crete-Monee High School. He completed his graduate studies at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. He and his wife have been married 11 years and have three children.

Brutus is “committed to ensuring that all families have fair and equal opportunities for prosperity.” See www.brutusforcongress.com.

Incumbent Congressman Bobby Rush, who has served since 1993, is extremely proud of his work to pass the Affordable Care Act (“Obamacare”). While Rush noted it cost Democrats control of the House of Representatives in 2010, he also said it “resulted in nearly 20 million more Americans having healthcare today.” He also has worked for better healthcare in the district.

“Since the murder of my son Huey in 1999, I have fought to restore trauma level care to the South Side of Chicago and worked with local community activists and healthcare leaders on possible solutions,” he said. Rush has worked with the University of Chicago Medical Center to provide adult trauma services at its Hyde Park campus, which the university agreed to in December.

Rush is the ranking Democrat on the House Subcommittee on Energy and Power. “I plan to intensify my advocacy working with our nation’s energy leaders to create a pipeline of next-generation energy entrepreneurs and employees.”

Infrastructure is another area Rush concentrates on. “I’ve worked with local, State, and Federal officials to improve the quality of our public infrastructure, ranging from the construction of the I-294/I-57 Interchange and the Metra Englewood flyover, the reconstruction of the Chicago Transit Authority’s south Red Line, and the development of flood control plans for the south and southwest suburbs,” he said.

Rush noted in his time in Congress he has gotten passed or assisted with legislation “that has improved our environment, strengthened consumer safety, especially for children, provided affordable and accessible healthcare, created jobs, and sustained businesses.” See www.rush.house.gov.

1ST DISTRICT (R)

Jimmy Lee Tillman II is an urban political strategist and hip hop political talk show host. As an independent Republican, he feels that what he calls “the increasing dissatisfaction among African Americans towards the Democratic Party” will lead to “a much needed change” in Chicago’s political make up.

“Voters in Cook County and Illinois are eager for an alternative to the current all-Democratic leadership that has delivered very little,” Tillman remarked. “It is important that our community is represented in both political parties. African Americans need a voice in the Republican majority that will bring our issues to the floor of Congress.”

As a resident of the largest African American district in the nation, Tillman feels that the time is now for the African American community to send a Republican representative to the Congress and for an advocate in the Republican Party to make certain that issues important to African Americans are addressed, including the 1965 Voting Rights Act, and to have a complete critique and evaluation of the effects the 1994 Clinton Crime Bill.

Locally, Tillman said, he will advocate for Chicago to have a twoparty municipal election “to end the one party rule that has caused disenfranchisement, disengagement, and distrust of the often complex election process.”

Tillman is a father of three and an alumnus of Central State University. He is the son of Dr. Jimmy Lee Tillman I and former Alderman Dorothy Wright Tillman. See www.facebook.com/Jimmy-Lee-Tillman-II-173356966161.

August (O’Neill) Deuser was born and raised on the South Side of Chicago. He noted his grandfather, Hugh O’Neill, and father, August Deuser, were Chicago police officers, and that he was a police officer for three years before going back to school and becoming a teacher. Deuser believes Congress must clean up government spending.

“Our country is in great debt at both the State and Federal levels,” Deuser said. “It is time to change the culture of politics,” he added. “One way to change the culture of politics in our country is to vote many of the current politicians out of office. It is time to vote for people who want to change the way business is conducted.”

Deuser said, “There are many problems in this country that need change. We have police officers being shot, and we have children being shot. The greatest tragedy of all is children being shot in schools throughout the country. Part of it is due to the mental health problems of individuals. Part of it is due to the general lack of respect that permeates our society. People need to show each other respect. Children will learn what they are taught when raised by their families. People need to be responsible for their behavior. The door swings both ways, and we need to treat each other with respect.

“We need to rid our society of gun violence. I believe the way to change this mentality toward violence is through education. Gun violence solves nothing and creates nothing,” Deuser said. See www.deuser.us.

4TH DISTRICT (D)

Longtime Congressman Luis Gutierrez has held his seat since 1993. His more than 20 years of service have been highlighted by his advocacy for immigration reform and helping thousands of immigrants become citizens. He introduced a bill that would create a pathway to citizenship for non-criminal undocumented immigrants and championed the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals Act, which helps eligible youths get a work permit and protection from deportation.

Gutierrez told the Gazette that he has also worked to “defend Planned Parenthood and a woman’s right to choose, marriage equality and the end to discrimination of the LGBTQ community, and the Working Families Agenda that would raise the minimum wage and require equal pay for equal work and paid family, sick, and vacation leave.”

He also introduced various initiatives aimed at holding Wall Street banks accountable by ending tax write-offs and reforming the criminal justice system and investing in violence prevention, rehabilitation, and community safety. If reelected, Gutierrez said he will continue to push for comprehensive immigration reform and gun control legislation. He would also continue efforts “helping to provide the intelligence community the tools it needs to access encrypted communications without resorting to mass surveillance that most Americans reject, helping to reduce the backlog in the testing of rape kits so that rapists are punished and victims have access to justice, and to continue to protect the funding for the clean-up and development of the southern branch of the Chicago river for the environmental and recreational benefit of our community,” Gutierrez said. For more information, go to www.luisgutierrezforcongress.com.

Challenger Javier Salas is a former radio and television host, having worked for Univision, Telefutura, and Telemundo, among other Chicago stations. His political experience includes serving as a senior advisor to former Illinois Governor Pat Quinn. He also has worked with grassroots community organizations on pro-immigrant marches and lobbied for driver’s licenses for undocumented immigrants in Illinois.

An immigrant who arrived from Mexico City in 1988, Salas said he understands the issues immigrants face but added he would “not just be a Congressman for Latinos; everyone has different problems.” He added, “I want to be a Congressman for everybody.” Salas would work to improve the public education system and address unemployment by investing in education, new businesses, and infrastructure. As a national priority, Salas would support legislation that strengthens national security and improves the economy.

“I wanted to run for office because I see a lot of inaction in Washington, DC,” Salas said, adding he feels Congress needs new energy and new voices. He would dedicate his service to the people in the district and not special interests.

“There’s no machine behind me or commitments to any politicians,” he said.

If elected, Salas would prioritize getting young people interested in the political system and even limit his own terms of service to two cycles “to pave the way for meaningful changes.” For more information, go to www.javiersalasforcongress.info.

7TH DISTRICT (D)

In office since 1997, Congressman Danny K. Davis said he is “engaged in a whole plethora of things, championing a number of issues.” He pointed to the Second Chance Act, his bill passed to provide transitional assistance to ex-offenders, which recently won reauthorization and funding for another two years.

“I’ve been very engaged in fending off attacks on the Affordable Care Act,” Davis added, pointing to the many Republican-led efforts to repeal the law known as Obamacare. He noted Obamacare holds particular significance in the 7th district, which has more hospitals than any other in the country. “Health care is a big part of the economy of our district,” Davis explained. Davis often interacts with constituents in the many town hall meetings he holds. “For democracy to work, people must be engaged in it,” he explained. “The seat does not belong to me. It’s the people’s seat.”

He added that, while it is difficult to solve problems in Congress, his aim is to “level the playing field for low- and moderate-income people.” He also plans to continue efforts to reform the criminal justice system, noting the United States has the most people incarcerated in the world, and to reduce recidivism. Education is another priority for Davis, who said investing in education is important to meet the demands of advancing technology.

Davis serves on the Oversight and Government Reform Committee and is a member of the Congressional Black Caucus. For more information, go to www.davis.house.gov.

Thomas Day is an Iraq war veteran and former journalist whose work has been published in national and international publications including the Washington Post. Day, along with two other Iraq war veterans, established The Bunker, a nonprofit business organization that supports veteran entrepreneurs and small-business owners in Chicago and four other

cities.

Day said one of the 7th District’s biggest problems is unemployment, with a rate three times the national average. He explained that, while the city offers many jobs, employers have trouble finding qualified workers. For this reason, he supports manufacturing certification programs and national apprenticeship programs, which also will give ex-offenders the opportunity to participate in job training.

“Way too many ex-offenders are not being given the chance to reenter the workforce,” Day said. If elected, he also would work to reform the criminal justice system, ensuring officials apply laws more evenly across all income brackets. He added the criminal justice system should be about rehabilitating, not just punishing, offenders.

While he admits he lacks political experience, Day said his military and private sector background have taught him a great deal. “I know how to support these organizations to create jobs for this district,” he said, referring to organizations such as The Bunker. Day added that the military instilled in him the “kind of ethics I want to introduce into the political system.” For more information, go to www.thomasday.org.