Made up of one computer science and five medical students, Team Copernicus Health won at the Rutgers Healthcare Delivery Challenge in April

Team Copernicus Health members (from left) Jeet Patel, Jonathan Haskel, Sam Schild, Brian Friel, Joshua David and Tom Nahass were awarded $50,000 at the The Nicholson Foundation and Rutgers Healthcare Delivery Challenge to implement their innovation, a smartphone app to manage diabetes, in a Rutgers-affiliated clinic. (Photo: Courtesy of The Nicholson Foundation and Rutgers Healthcare Delivery Challenge) Story Highlights Two other student and faculty finalist teams presented their innovations during the ceremony.

Team Copernicus Health presented its app at April’s Rutgers Healthcare Delivery Challenge.

Using gamification, the application allows patients to receive points and rewards.

The Copernicus Health app engages patients to meet metrics proven to reduce serious complications.

What do you get when you unite one computer science student with five medical students and there is $50,000 on the line? You get the next generation of healthcare innovators.

Team Copernicus Health took top honors at The Nicholson Foundation and Rutgers Healthcare Delivery Challenge Award Ceremony on April 22 at Rutgers University.

Against two other teams, Copernicus Health presented its smartphone application for the win at the Rutgers Healthcare Delivery Challenge. The smartphone app engages and motivates underserved populations to better manage their type 2 diabetes. In tandem, it also works to reduce costs to the healthcare system.

The winning team members — Rutgers undergraduate computer science student Jeet Patel of the Iselin section of Woodbridge and second-year medical students at Robert Wood Johnson Medical School Tom Nahass of Montgomery, Josh David of Engelwood, Brian Friel of Montgomery, Jonathan Haskel of Morristown and Sam Schild of Millburn — received $50,000 to implement the innovation in a Rutgers-affiliated clinic.

The Rutgers Healthcare Delivery Challenge was funded by The Nicholson Foundation whose mission is to improve the quality and affordability of healthcare for the state’s underserved communities. The April event served as the culmination of the four-month competition that was managed by the Health 2.0 Program.

With more than $7 million awarded in prizes to date, Health 2.0’s Developer Challenge programs foster online competitions aimed at tackling complex challenges in healthcare. The world’s top developers, designers, healthcare professionals and entrepreneurs compete in these challenges, pilot programs and code-a-thons to create and prototype innovative applications and tools.

The Rutgers Healthcare Delivery Challenge encouraged students and faculty to create interdisciplinary teams. They worked together and submitted proposals for ready-to-implement service delivery or technology innovations that can improve the quality and contain the costs of healthcare for underserved populations. More than 50 students and faculty from Rutgers participated in the Rutgers Healthcare Delivery Challenge, and the award ceremony gave the top three teams the opportunity to pitch their ideas to a panel of judges.

Managing type 2 diabetes

The winning team developed Copernicus Health to address type 2 diabetes complications that are largely preventable, team member Nahass said. In an effort to lower hospital costs and reduce the incidence of adverse outcomes, Copernicus Health provides a comprehensive mobile platform to engage and motivate patients to meet evidence-based metrics proven to reduce the serious complications that result from poorly managed diseases.

Using gamification — the concept of applying game-design thinking to nongame applications to make them more fun and engaging — the application allows patients to receive points for taking their medicine, self-educating about their disease through the app’s embedded learning tools and monitoring key clinical metrics obtained at the doctor’s office. Once patients accumulate a predetermined point volume, they become eligible for rewards in the form of direct cash infusions sent to their reloadable Copernicus debit cards or discounts to use at healthy lifestyle businesses, such as fitness centers and farmers markets.

To help ensure accuracy and real health improvements, users are only eligible for cash rewards after having their lab values verified by their physician.

“Chronic disease management is often one of the most difficult processes to change within the vulnerable community because it requires not only an improvement in diet and lifestyle, but also an improvement in health literacy, or one’s understanding of his or her disease,” Nahass said. “Copernicus Health aims to meet this need by providing a product that educates patients and encourages healthy behavior.”

Submissions were judged on creativity, impact as in the ability of the intervention to improve health outcomes of vulnerable populations and reduce costs within a year, feasibility of implementation and sustainability.

Commitment to innovation

The Nicholson Foundation funded the Rutgers Healthcare Delivery Challenge as part of its commitment to stimulate a culture of innovation across the state’s healthcare institutions that serve at-risk populations.

“The students and faculty from the Rutgers community are helping to lead the way for a healthier New Jersey for all residents,” said Joan Randell, chief operating officer of The Nicholson Foundation. “Their innovative ideas, tenacious problem-solving skills and commitment to reaching at-risk populations will help change the future of healthcare and the lives of patients in New Jersey.”

The Nicholson Foundation and Rutgers Healthcare Delivery Challenge also supported the theme of Rutgers University’s strategic plan to “improve the health and wellness of individuals and populations” by addressing health challenges, locally and globally.

“Those of us at Rutgers who participated in the Challenge are quite proud of the creative, multidisciplinary concepts the teams developed, many of which have real potential to benefit our state’s residents,” said Margaret Brennan-Tonetta, associate vice president for economic development at Rutgers. “This exciting learning and public service opportunity came about because of The Nicholson Foundation’s generosity, which we greatly appreciate.”

Two other top teams

In addition to Copernicus Health, two other student and faculty finalist teams also presented their innovations during the ceremony.

Team “Save A Neck” created BreatheNVS, an application that directs patients to educate themselves and share information with their physicians on noninvasive management of their respiratory symptoms to ‘save their necks’ from invasive tubes, which are commonly used for patients with breathing muscle weakness. BreatheNVS educates patients about the benefits of noninvasive ventilation and provides them with the necessary resources in evidence-based medicine to seek and receive optimal care.

Team “MAP Training” presented its new intervention that combines mental and physical (MAP) exercises to help women overcome severe stress and trauma caused by homelessness, sexual or physical abuse and mental illness. The intervention was translated from neuroscientific studies that discuss the pairing of aerobic exercise and learning. MAP Training combines 30 minutes of silent meditation followed by 30 minutes of aerobic exercise patterned after the popular Zumba dance exercise program.

All teams were evaluated by the panel of expert judges that included Mike Wiley, vice president of Foundation Venture Capital Group, Mark Robson, dean of Rutgers Agricultural and Urban Programs, Denise Rodgers, vice chancellor for interprofessional programs for Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences, Wen Dombrowski, aging, healthcare and technology advisor for Resonate Health, Frank Sonnenberg, medical director of clinical information systems for Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Eric Jahn, senior associate dean of community health for Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Sabrina Chase, assistant professor and director for joint urban systems Ph.D. program in urban health, Jasmine Cordero, managing director of center for urban entrepreneurship and economic development at Rutgers Business School and Gary Minkoff, instructor of professional practice for Rutgers Business School, department of management and global business.

Healthcare innovation taking off

The Healthcare Delivery Challenge is the latest in The Nicholson Foundation’s efforts to boost healthcare innovation in New Jersey and bring cutting-edge services to the healthcare safety net. Other Nicholson efforts within this area include a new grants program with the Center for Care Innovations — a California-based nonprofit — to support innovation within the state’s safety-net hospitals and care delivery systems, and a collaboration with New Jersey Health Foundation to implement an Innovations Grants Program that will award $500,000 in grants to healthcare innovators in the state. Since the start of 2015, the Foundation has committed more than $1 million to fund these three efforts.

The Nicholson Foundation works to improve the quality and affordability of healthcare for vulnerable populations in New Jersey by transforming how it is paid for and delivered. The Foundation’s approach emphasizes partnerships and performance-based grant making and its goal is sustainable systems reform.

For more information about the Foundation, visit thenicholsonfoundation.org. For more information about the Office of Research and Economic Development at Rutgers, go to the new website businessportal.rutgers.edu.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1HhSxyK