Richard Rieselbach, David Sundwall, and Kenneth Shine

December 4, 2014

In November, 1985, twenty-nine years ago, members of the first session of the 99th Congress addressed growing concern and controversy regarding Graduate Medical Education (GME). Although Medicare had financed GME for the previous twenty years, Congress began to recognize that our rapidly evolving health care system could require significant changes in the composition of our physician workforce, and that these changes could impact the appropriate governance and funding of GME.

In this setting, the Council on Graduate Medical Education (COGME) was conceived and underwent rapid gestation, with its birth achieved via enactment of authorizing legislation in 1986. Its charter charged the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS), under Title VII of the Public Health Service Act, with responsibility for taking national leadership in the development of policies related to GME, and in the research, development, and analysis of such policies that impact on the health workforce needs of the nation. COGME was instructed to provide advice and make policy recommendations to the Secretary and committees of the House and Senate within their jurisdiction.

Contrary to a sunset provision in the legislation, COGME still survives. While continuing to function on very limited support, it recently issued a noteworthy report entitled “Improving Value in Graduate Medical Education” in 2013. COGME presently is preparing its 22nd Report, which addresses the need for change in GME due to changes in the U.S. health care system and focuses on opportunities to improve training through more effective targeting of public resources.

As described below, a new Institute of Medicine report has suggested creating a new body that would essentially take over the functions of COGME. But we believe COGME should be strengthened rather than consigned to end-of-life care. This post describes the history of COGME, its authority, objectives, duties and accomplishments, as well as options for its future role. The authors of this post have been involved intimately with COGME, either at the time it was conceived or with its activities throughout the past almost quarter-century.

The IOM Report

In response to Congressional requests for an independent evaluation of GME, after nearly two years of deliberation, the Institute of Medicine (IOM) “Committee on The Governance and Financing of Graduate Medical Education” issued its report on July 29, 2014. It presented a strong case for changes in GME, along with several recommendations to achieve meaningful reforms, some of which have generated substantial controversy.

One such recommendation is for the establishment of a new National GME Policy Council in the Office of The HHS Secretary to provide strategic planning and oversight to GME financing, while fostering evidence-based innovation via a transition fund derived from current Medicare GME support. This recommendation has been particularly controversial and has focused attention on the current role of COGME.

The IOM report recommended that Council members be appointed by the HHS Secretary and that they should be provided with sufficient funding, staff, and technical resources to fulfill responsibilities as follows:

Development and oversight of a strategic plan for Medicare GME financing;

Research and policy development regarding the sufficiency, geographic distribution, and specialty configuration of the physician workforce;

Development of future federal policies concerning the distribution and use of Medicare GME funds;

Convening, coordinating, and promoting collaboration between and among federal agencies and private accreditation and certification organizations; and

Provision of annual progress reports to Congress and the Executive Branch on the state of GME.

The Early History of COGME

Congress in 1985 attempted to address the nations’ increasing concern regarding health workforce policy. Location of care was moving rapidly to the ambulatory setting, with future implications for both the location of physician training and its curriculum. Mixed messages about the number and specialty mix of physicians needed and the existence of barriers to accessing health care were often conveyed to legislators and their staff. Thus, policymakers recognized the need for ongoing, objective information about physician workforce issues.

Additionally, there was renewed interest in forecasting health workforce requirements, although forecasters had offered projections of the future need and supply of physicians since 1933. Over the ensuing years there were many such forecasts, and in the 1960’s and 1970’s new health workforce forecasts appeared with greater frequency, often influencing policies included in legislation.

In 1985, Congress needed to deal with the impact of the latest forecast—the Graduate Medical Education National Advisory Committee (GMENAC) Report published in 1980. The controversial recommendations of this report emphasized reducing the size of medical schools’ entering classes to address its projected oversupply of physicians.

The perception of a physician oversupply caught the public’s attention and achieved broad acceptance in the early 1980s, leading to wide-ranging reductions in funding for medical education. Policymakers were concerned that the unchecked growth in the U.S. physician-to-population ratio would undermine other efforts to bring health care costs under control. Another concern was the increasingly skewed profile of our workforce toward specialists and a growing deficit of primary care providers, in spite of what was considered an overall adequate number of physicians.

In an ambitious effort to address these unfavorable trends, Senator Dan Quayle and his staff drafted comprehensive legislation which engendered major controversy among GME stakeholders. When the smoke finally cleared, the only remaining feature of this legislation was the concept of COGME. Two of us (DS and RR), working with Senators Orrin Hatch and Edward Kennedy respectively, were instrumental in the development of COGME by drafting legislation for its authorization, via an amendment to Title VII, under administration of the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA). Development and enactment of this legislation represented the bipartisan effort in Congress at that time to achieve more rational national health workforce policies.

COGME Authority, Objectives and Duties

COGME was originally authorized in 1986 for ten years. The “health profession education partnerships act of 1988” re-authorized its authority, which was further extended as an amendment [Section 5103] to the Affordable Care Act (ACA) signed into law in March, 2010. Since 2002, COGME has been funded by annual appropriations. The objectives of COGME have been to assess physician workforce needs on a long-term basis, recommending appropriate Federal and private sector efforts necessary to address these needs, and to provide a forum to enable appropriate configuration of these needs.

COGME’s duties in pursuing these objectives involve making policy recommendations to the Secretary of HHS, the Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions of the Senate, and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives with respect to:

the supply, and distribution of physicians in the United States,

current and future shortages or excesses of physicians in medical and surgical specialties and subspecialties,

issues relating to foreign medical school graduates, and

appropriate Federal policies with respect to the foregoing.

These include policies concerning changes in the financing of undergraduate and graduate medical education programs and changes in the types of medical education training in GME programs. Also required have been recommendations regarding improvement in existing data bases concerning the supply and distribution of GME.

Another important duty for COGME is to encourage activities designed to voluntarily achieve COGME recommendations. Other duties include developing, publishing, and implementing performance measures for programs and developing and publishing guidelines for longitudinal evaluation of programs, which could serve as an important resource to State workforce commissions committed to expanding Medicaid support for GME.

The Bureau of Health Professions of HRSA is responsible for providing necessary support for COGME. Meetings are held approximately twice per year and are open to the public. However funding is so limited that ordinarily only one of these two meeting is face to face and the second is a Webinar. Two meetings a year are inadequate given COGME’s scope of responsibilities; the staff support is so limited that it is not feasible to have even minimal analysis and independent study.

COGME consists of nineteen members who are appointed for a term of four years and have broad geographic representation. The fourteen non-Federal members represent a balance between urban and rural educational settings, and include an adequate representation of women and minorities. However its membership lacks sophisticated, disinterested policy analytic capabilities. COGME’s location in HRSA significantly circumscribes its influence and impact. HRSA’s very legitimate interest in primary care narrows the scope of the currently constituted perspectives on the overall GME enterprise.

COGME Accomplishments

COGME was established at the time of proposals encouraging the linking of GME with care for the underserved in Teaching Health Centers and an increase in ambulatory training. An IOM workshop and report published in 1989 included many recommendations that, if implemented, would have helped address the current primary care access crisis. However, concerns regarding both access to primary care physicians and their location of training were overshadowed by the dominant public perception of a physician oversupply.

As we entered the 21st Century, it became apparent that reactions to GMENAC’s predictions of a physician oversupply had led to a shortage. Thus, in subsequent years, COGME has responded to current data and rapid change by emphasizing the shortage of primary care physicians, the changing health care environment, and the need for targeted financing, enhanced flexibility, and high-quality training in GME.

Of course, addressing all of these issues requires the participation and coordination of many stakeholders, and many of the Council’s recommendations have seemingly fallen on deaf ears. Recommendations to produce more primary care physicians and encourage training in medically underserved areas, outside of traditional academic settings, have been met with apparent indifference, if not outright resistance. Thus, it might seem that COGME reports and recommendations have had limited impact, but in fact they continue to inform the national GME dialogue.

Options for the Future Role of COGME

As currently constituted and with its present meager level of support, COGME would continue to have limited impact. However, considering the controversy among stakeholders regarding the IOM GME report’s recommendation for the establishment of a new GME Policy Council, it may be more feasible to revitalize the COGME to assume the proposed functions of this new entity.

Undoubtedly, it will be difficult for the Congress to implement the IOM recommendation via new legislation. Since COGME continues to survive with yearly appropriations, which likely will continue in the absence of legislative obstacles, we believe COGME should be considered as an alternative to the IOM proposed Council.

Some potential advantages of maintaining COGME are as follows:

It could be immediately functional if funding were increased.

As currently constituted, COGME is broadly representative.

With a reconfigured membership, adequate staffing and funding, and with establishment of appropriate subcommittees, COGME could be quickly reconstituted to carry out the functions of the proposed GME Policy Committee.

This alternative should be more appealing to a more conservative legislature, in that it could serve the important functions recommended by the IOM committee without creating a new bureaucracy within the Department of HHS.

For this proposal to be viable, we believe COGME should be composed of thoughtful, informed individuals who have backgrounds in health care education, economics, management, statistics, and workforce theory. There should be two or three members who are directly engaged in the operations of GME to inform the debate. The Chair should be someone with national policy stature who has been engaged in evaluation of financing and governance of GME, preferably with previous Academic Medicine experience, yet who would not stand to benefit from COGME recommendations.

Additionally, to meet the broad scope of responsibility required of COGME, adequate staff will be needed to assist in data collection, fact finding, analysis and drafting.

We recommend that, given the broad range of GME activities and therefore government jurisdiction, COGME should be staffed and operated through the Office of the Secretary of HHS, rather than HRSA, where it is currently housed. Such a relocated COGME could work with the ACA-funded Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation (CMMI), which could support workforce and payment innovation demonstrations without an incursion on Medicare GME funding.

Recent discussions with CMMI have raised the possibility of including support of GME innovations as part of the terms and conditions of State Innovation Model (SIM) grants. SIM grantees would greatly benefit from COGME data and recommendations; several States are already evaluating the retargeting of the $4 billion per year of Medicaid support for GME.

Finally, the original intent for COGME to serve as a forum for stakeholders could be exploited, so that its recommendations could represent a reasonable consensus of currently adversarial parties. Such a consensus would be more likely to achieve bipartisan support in Congress than the current diverse input. Hopefully, stakeholder consensus could be achieved via effective COGME leadership, with the recognition that decades of controversy has resulted in GME workforce policy that does not serve the interest of our nation.

Current Concerns and Recommendations

Stakeholders in GME and members of Congress eagerly awaited the long delayed, recently released IOM GME Report on July 29, 2014. While perceptively characterizing the defects in our GME system requiring reform, and providing some excellent recommendations, the Report generated substantial controversy among participants at a recent GME forum hosted by Health Affairs.

One particular target was the new GME Policy Council. Concern was expressed regarding a new Federal Committee which may not be politically feasible and which would require detailed legislation and Medicare GME funding support. We believe that a reconfigured COGME could serve the function of the IOM GME Policy Council. Thus, we have traced the development of COGME, reviewed its characteristics, and suggested features for its reconfiguration.

Regardless of COGME organization and level of support, greater consensus among GME stakeholders will be necessary for Congress to enact any legislative changes in GME governance and financing that may be recommended by COGME. We believe the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME), which is singularly dedicated to preparing physicians for 21st Century practice by insuring the quality of all accredited GME programs, could play a pivotal role in forging such consensus.

The ACGME, an organization of educators with public members and governmental representatives on its board, has high-quality education as its only vested interest. Thus, the ACGME could convene meetings of GME stakeholders and create forums to help develop COGME recommendations and encourage their ultimate implementation.

After twenty-nine years of life dedicated to guiding and refining policy governing GME, the role of COGME and its survival are being questioned. We have proposed that COGME has not reached the end of its life. On the contrary, its history role, accomplishments, and potential future role merit consideration in support of its reconfiguration in preparation for an expanded leadership role in GME reform.

Authors’ note: The authors’ recommendations do not necessarily represent the position of their present or past affiliations.