The news broke Friday that Kaiser Permanente will acquire Seattle-based Group Health Cooperative in a $1.8 billion deal to make it Kaiser's first complete delivery and insurance system acquisition and its eighth regional market.

I read about it first in Modern Healthcare, the Chicago-based sister publication of Crain’s Detroit.

Was I surprised? No. I broke a news story Oct. 26 about talks I was hearing between Kaiser and Henry Ford Health System in Detroit.

On Kaiser's interest in expanding into a truly national health insurance and delivery system, I quoted health care consultant and professor Jeff Goldsmith, who was absolutely prescient with the following comment:

“Kaiser is talking with everybody,” Goldsmith said. “They want to enter Washington, metro Seattle, with Group Health. They want to start a medical school in Southern California. (Kaiser CEO) Bernie (Tyson) wants to be everywhere. He feels he has a good model.”

Aided by the Affordable Care Act, Tyson also has managed a very profitable integrated delivery system and insurance company that employs doctors and owns hospitals.

Kaiser is flush with $3.1 billion in net income generated in 2014, a 15 percent increase from 2013. If the deal is completed, add to that Group Health's $80.1 million in operating income.

But the two questions now are will Kaiser turn its eye fully on Michigan? And does the Kaiser model fit in well with Henry Ford's statewide growth plans?

While I am 99.9 percent sure talks between Henry Ford and Kaiser have taken place (officials won't confirm, but they won't deny either), what I am not sure of is the type of arrangement the two systems will come up with.

It could range from a full acquisition, like the Group Health-Kaiser deal, to some kind of minority investment by Kaiser or a consulting or vendor arrangement with Kaiser to tap into their population health experience.

The truth is I don't know because they don't know. The talks are very fluid and dependent on a number of moving targets, factors, goals and, frankly, personalities.

“We want to demonstrate to everyone in this country that our model is more relevant today than ever before,” Tyson said in a statement Friday.

Modern Healthcare reported that the Kaiser-Group Health deal is among a fast-growing list of huge health care deals made this year by companies moving aggressively to enter new markets and gain scale.

Acquiring Group Health will allow Oakland, Calif.-based Kaiser to expand into an eighth market and absorb Group Health's more than 590,000 members.

The Group Health deal still requires antitrust regulatory approval and the OK of Group Health's members. The $1.8 billion purchase price would go toward the establishment of a Seattle-based foundation focused on improving health in Washington’s communities, the Wall Street Journal reported.

Group Health has 28 primary and urgent care clinics, four ambulatory surgery centers, a 1,000-physician medical group and contracts with at least 41 hospitals in Washington and northern Idaho.

But adding Henry Ford would increase Kaiser's nearly $60 billion operation and market reach even more.

Henry Ford expects to grow into a $5 billion system next year after it acquires Jackson-based Allegiance Health. It already owns two health plans and an insurance company with close to 700,000 covered lives, four acute-care hospitals, a psychiatric hospital and a 1,200-physician employed medical group.

Sources say Henry Ford has been developing a statewide health insurance expansion strategy that could be exponentially hastened with Kaiser's help.

For example, Henry Ford's pending acquisition of Allegiance will enable it to join a new statewide clinically integrated network tentatively called the "Federation." It is composed of Allegiance, Sparrow Health System, Bronson Healthcare, Covenant HealthCare, Lakeland Health and MidMichigan Health.

One purpose of the Federation would be to link together hospitals, physicians and other health facilities for managed care contracting with insurers and direct contracts with employers.

On the possible Henry Ford deal, Kaiser declined an interview request with me back in October. Friday Kaiser spokesman Ted Carr said this in Modern Healthcare:

“As part of our ongoing operational improvement work and our efforts to improve the quality of health care, we regularly evaluate opportunities to engage with other health care organizations. This work can range from informal collaboration around a narrow scope to more broad, structured and cooperative affiliations,” he said.

Carr went on to suggest Kaiser wants to expand into other markets by making its model "available to more people, as part of our mission to improve the health of our communities.”

Historically, Kaiser builds its markets on its own, said Goldsmith, who is president of Health Futures Inc. in Charlottesville, Va.

Kaiser usually enters a new market by purchasing a health plan, staffing it with its own physicians or employing local physicians. Then Kaiser contracts with hospitals for inpatient services.

Besides its home base of California, Kaiser also operates in Colorado, Georgia, Hawaii, Maryland, Oregon, Virginia and Washington, D.C.

In Seattle, Kaiser said Group Health will be managed locally. This is absolutely what Henry Ford would insist, so a precedent has been established.

Now, the question remains, will Kaiser make Michigan its ninth regional market?

Related Links