WHITE HOUSE RELEASES RETIREMENT INVESTMENT RULE: The Obama administration on Wednesday unveiled new rules for retirement investment advisers, turning aside pressure from industry groups to abandon the proposal.

ADVERTISEMENT

The regulations, which were issued by the Labor Department, establish requirements that the White House says will save Americans billions of dollars by combating bad behavior on Wall Street.

Under the new rules, most investment advisers for retirement plans will have to meet a "fiduciary" standard, requiring them to put the interest of their clients ahead of any others. And if they don't, clients would have the ability to file lawsuits against them.

White House analysis found that conflicted advice can cost Americans up to $17 billion a year, and can drive down investment returns for middle and working-class Americans by a full percentage point. The Hill's Peter Schroeder walks us through: http://bit.ly/23ilnw7.

THE REACTION:

PFIZER CALLS OFF TAX MERGER AFTER TREASURY ACTION: Pharmaceutical giant Pfizer announced Wednesday that it has terminated its planned $160 billion merger with Ireland-based Allergan after the Treasury Department took new action to crack down on U.S. companies moving their headquarters overseas to lower their taxes.

"The decision was driven by the actions announced by the U.S. Department of Treasury on April 4, 2016, which the companies concluded qualified as an 'Adverse Tax Law Change' under the merger agreement," Pfizer stated in a statement.

Pfizer and Allergan mutually agreed to terminate the merger agreement, and Pfizer has agreed to pay Allergan $150 million to reimburse transaction-related expenses, the company added.

The Treasury Department on Monday announced new guidance to curb corporate inversions, or transactions in which U.S. companies reincorporate overseas for tax purposes after merging with foreign companies. The Hill's Naomi Jagoda breaks it down: http://bit.ly/1SQAnfY.

ALLERGAN CEO SLAMS TREASURY: Allergan CEO Brent Saunders said Wednesday that the Treasury Department actions that led his pharmaceutical company and Pfizer to terminate their proposed merger are "a bit un-American."

"We built this deal around the law, regulations, all the notices that were put out by the Treasury, and it was a highly legal construct. We followed the rules that Congress had set for companies looking to move to a foreign domicile," Saunders said in an interview on CNBC.

"For the rules to be changed after the game has started to be played is a bit un-American, but that's the situation we're in," he said: http://bit.ly/208q7m5.

CLINTON SAYS SHE'S PSYCHED: The Democratic presidential front-runner tweeted that she's "glad to hear" U.S. drug company Pfizer terminated a planned $160 billion merger that would have moved its residence to Ireland for tax purposes: http://bit.ly/1S2ZWNG.

HAPPY WEDNESDAY and welcome to Overnight Finance, where we're still learning how to spell "fiduciary" correctly on the first try in honor of today's news. I'm Sylvan Lane, and here's your nightly guide to everything affecting your bills, bank account and bottom line.

Tonight's highlights include filing your taxes while picking up a Big Gulp, private sector job growth and a bill to undo undoing Iran sanctions.

See something I missed? Let me know at slane@thehill.com or tweet me @SylvanLane. And if you like your newsletter, you can subscribe to it here: http://www.thehill.com/signup/48.

ON TAP TOMORROW: The Senate Banking Committee will vote on a slate of Obama administration nominees, including two to the Securities and Exchange Commission. Peter Schroeder fills us in here: http://bit.ly/1qqsqVB.

CLINTON PROMISES CRACKDOWN ON TAX LOOPHOLES: Hillary Clinton on Tuesday vowed to shut down legal tax havens used by the ultra-wealthy.

In a speech before the AFL-CIO convention in Philadelphia, Clinton noted the recent leak of a massive trove of financial documents, known as the Panama Papers, that revealed information about the financial holdings of wealthy politicians and public figures around the world.

"Some of you may have just heard about these disclosures about outrageous tax havens and loopholes that super-rich people across the world are exploiting in Panama and elsewhere," Clinton said: http://bit.ly/1PUAbHR.

GOP SENATORS FIGHT IRAN DOLLAR RULES: From the Associated Press: "Two Republican senators opposed to the Iran nuclear deal are trying to block an Obama administration proposal that would ease rules on using U.S. dollars in trade transactions with Iran.

Marco Rubio Marco RubioWhat happens when the GOP base abandons the party platform? Puerto Rico debt relief faces serious challenges in Senate Trump encourages Rubio to reclaim Senate seat MORE of Florida and Mark Kirk Mark KirkFunding boost for TSA sails through committee GOP senators propose sending ISIS fighters to Gitmo VA chief 'deeply' regrets if Disney comment offended vets MORE of Illinois introduced legislation on Wednesday that would bar the Treasury from permitting foreign banks to conduct foreign currency trades in U.S. dollars for transactions involving Iran." http://abcn.ws/1S37RuA.

PRIVATE SECTOR ADDS JOBS IN EVERY REGION:

Private-sector employment increased across all four regions and all nine Census divisions in March, according to a new report.

The South and West reported the strongest growth in their labor markets, the ADP Regional Employment Report showed on Wednesday.

The South added the most jobs -- 75,000 -- of any of the four regions, although it was the smallest gain since October, led by Florida (18,600) and Texas (17,600).

The West's 51,000 jobs represented the best percentage across the four regions, at 0.19 percent, with California leading the way with 19,600 jobs added last month.

The Midwest added 38,000 jobs, while the Northeast tacked on 37,000.

Of the nine Census regions, the South Atlantic reported the strongest hiring by numbers and percentage, adding 47,000.

Overall, private-sector employers added 200,000 jobs last month: http://bit.ly/1UWUn4b.

SEASONAL INDUSTRIES PUSH FOR GUEST WORKER APPROVAL: Business groups are pleading with the Obama administration to speed up the approval process for seasonal guest workers.

Advocates for the hotel, hospitality and landscaping industries are among those urging the Labor, Homeland Security and State departments to address what they say is a severe backlog in H-2B visa applications for temporary workers. The Hill's Vicki Needham explains: http://bit.ly/23ilsQB.

FDIC CUTS REVIEW TIME FOR NEW BANKS: The Federal Deposit Insurance Commission reduced the period of increased supervising for new banks today from seven to three years. The move was applauded by Independent Community Bankers of America president Camden R. Fine, who called the new timeframe "much more appropriate and sensible in the current banking environment."

NIGHTCAP: The Internal Revenue Service on Wednesday announced an option to let people pay their taxes in cash at 7-Eleven stores.

"Taxpayers have many options to pay their tax bills by direct debit, a check or a credit card, but this provides a new way for people who can only pay their taxes in cash without having to travel to an IRS Taxpayer Assistance Center," IRS Commissioner John Koskinen said in a news release.

More than 7,000 7-Eleven stores across 34 states are participating. Here's more form Naomi Jagoda: http://bit.ly/1VxFLGS.

Write us with tips, suggestions and news: slane@thehill.com, vneedham@thehill.com; pschroeder@thehill.com, and njagoda@thehill.com. Follow us on Twitter: @SylvanLane, @VickofTheHill; @PeteSchroeder; and @NJagoda.