Free-agent pitcher Yovani Gallardo did not make a surprise visit to the annual Rockies Fest at Coors Field on Saturday.

Indeed, general manager Jeff Bridich watered down wide-spread reports that the Rockies are in negotiations to sign the veteran right-hander to bolster their shaky starting rotation.

“Fairly overblown,” is how Bridich described the reports.

Gallardo, 29, will likely get a three-, four- or five-year deal at about $14 million a year. The Baltimore Orioles and Houston Astros have also been talking with Gallardo’s representatives.

“A lot of what came out was a product of the agent group (Octagon),” Bridich said. “When you get bombarded by texts and calls and you finally take a call, that does not equate to serious negotiations. They are trying to maneuver and do things with the media.”

Asked if any negotiations are going on, Bridich replied: “Conversations are going on. There’s conversation.”

Gallardo went 13-11 with a 3.42 ERA in 33 starts for the Texas Rangers last season. In eight previous seasons with Milwaukee, he went 89-64 with a 3.69 ERA, including an All-Star Game appearance in 2010.

With pitchers and catchers reporting to spring training in 24 days, there remains a chance the Rockies could add a starting pitcher, but Bridich said the Rockies have confidence in their in-house candidates.

“Every time you think about (adding a pitcher) you have to weigh it against the opportunities of the players that are here,” he said.

Last season, Rockies starters had a cumulative 5.27 ERA, the worst in the National League. The .291 batting average against was the highest in the NL, and the 127 home runs served up by starters was second-most behind Philadelphia (141).

Bridich, however expressed faith that young pitchers such as Jon Gray and Chad Bettis, along with the return of injured right-handers Tyler Chatwood and Jordan Lyles, would provide a significant upgrade.

“I think adding two guys like Chatwood and Lyles, veteran stabilizers to a rotation, is going to be a massive positive,” Bridich said. “In addition to that you have the growth of Jon Gray, the growth of Chad Bettis last year, (and) you have a guy who can be a quality fifth starter in Chris Rusin.”

Chatwood, 26, sat out all last season after undergoing Tommy John surgery in 2014. He flashed promise in 2013, going 8-5 with a 3.15 ERA in 20 starts before elbow problems flared up.

“He just competes. He’s a bulldog and loves to be out on the mound,” all-star second baseman DJ LeMahieu said. “He goes after guys, and he’s not scared out there and he’s not effected by Coors Field. I know last year it killed him not to be able to compete. I’m just excited to see him out there again.”