Topics: Americans for Prosperity, bridge to wellbeing, Koch Brothers, Politics News

Who says the Koch brothers don’t care about the needy?

Lost amid the noise of the presidential election is the news, little reported, that the Kochs have begun offering seminars that teach life skills such as frugality, discipline and self-sufficiency to people who are struggling to survive in tough times.

This is not a joke. The institute is called the Bridge to Wellbeing and is housed in the foundation arm of the Kochs’ political group, Americans for Prosperity. There are seminars being offered with such names as Couponing, Budgeting, Dinner on a Dime, and Grow Your Garden, among others.

But there’s a catch. If you read the course descriptions carefully, you will see that they also cover such topics as “how government and policies impact our lives” and “the importance of a free society.” In the Couponing course, for example, the website says that you will learn not only how to “keep the pantry full” by clipping coupons, but also how “government policies are causing food and grocery prices to rise.” And a page called “policies impacting you” says that food is expensive because of environmental regulations espoused by Nancy Pelosi and Barack Obama.

Another seminar, Flip the Switch, says it will help you conserve energy in your home. How? “Once you understand why energy costs have gotten so high,” the description reads, “you will stop “throwing money out the window to utility companies.” The policy section cites renewable energy subsidies and Obama’s “aggressive pursuit of a green agenda” as the main culprits of high energy prices. A seminar called Passion for Profit promises to teach you how to make a fortune as an e-commerce entrepreneur, but will also leave you with an “awareness of harmful internet regulations.”

See how this works? The Kochs have invented a whole new type of philanthropy, whereby a poor person can achieve “wellbeing” simply by learning how liberal policies have caused his or her plight. Better still, that person might become a foot soldier in the Kochs’ army. One of the courses is titled Inspiring the Dream and promises to “highlight policies that hinder businesses and individuals from succeeding.” Another is called Speak up and Speak Out and explains how to call your legislator. Who knew that wellbeing could be achieved simply by lobbying for Americans for Prosperity?

Meanwhile, the instructors and administrators are top-notch academics, judging by their bios. They include:

Justine Fink, who works for the American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC) and “is passionate about helping people improve their lives and strengthening America’s culture of freedom.”