Martin Shkreli could really use a good PR agent….

As the healthcare industry turns the heat up on Turing Pharmaceuticals from within, with a letter signed by 150 health care industry participants urging the company to live up to its promise to reduce drug prices, the company’s CEO lashed out at a CNBC journalist today, calling her a “moron” on Twitter.

CNBC reports on 150 healthcare organizations uniting to encourage Shkreli to keep his promise

The issue started this morning when CNBC health care reporter Meg Tirrell reported on 150 health care-related firms calling on Turing to take “immediate action” to reverse decisions taken since the firm was acquired by new owners.

“Physicians are reporting that the continued failure of Mr. Shkreli to roll back his unconscionable 5,000 percent increase in the cost of Daraprim has forced them to switch vulnerable people from the medically-preferred medication to potentially less effective treatments,” HRC President Chad Griffin said in a statement. “It is simply shocking that this greedy price gouging is jeopardizing the health of women, children, infants, and people living with HIV.”

The letter, signed by organizations from Emory University and the University of Chicago Infectious Disease to the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society and the AIDS Treatment Activists Coalition (ATAC), asks Turing to:

Lower the $750 per tablet price to a level comparable to the previous price of $13.50;

Provide parity on pricing for inpatient and outpatient settings;

Offer support under the patient assistance program to patients with incomes at the level of at least 500 percent of the federal poverty level;

Provide transparency regarding eligibility and documentation requirements for the patient assistance and co-pay assistance programs;

Cover the maximum out-of-pocket costs ($6,600 for an individual plan and $13,200 for a family plan in 2015) on co-insurance and copayments allowable under the Affordable Care Act, and

Ensure same day and direct access to the drug in the communities where patients live.

CNBC asks for comment on letter, and Turning’s response isn’t suitable for broadcast

When Tirrell asked Turing for comment on the issue, they responded with what Tirrell said on air was not serious or appropriate for re-broadcast. This led to and exchange between Shkreli and CNBC anchors, including @ScottWapner. “This is the same @MartinShkreli who also insulted our star healthcare reporter @megtirrell on Twitter. I guess that tells you more…” Wapner tweeted.

Shkreli responded by saying that CNBC conducted bait and switch in an interview. “You invite me on and then bait-and-switch topics. Great journalism ethics. Meg is not a star, she’s a moron,” he tweeted. Shkreli went on to denigrate the CNBC network. He has an interview with Fox Business News tomorrow morning.

But there is some good news. See the text from the press release of a Shkreli competitor.