Topics: Affordable Care Act, Daniel Strauss, Kansas, Medicaid expansion, Obamacare, R-Kan., Republicans, Sam Brownback, Supply-side economics, Talking Points Memo, Tax cuts, Politics News

Confronted with a $344 million revenue shortfall that must be filled by June 30, Kansas Gov. Sam Brownback has defiantly refused to rethink his massive, budget-busting income tax cuts for businesses and the wealthy. Instead, the Republican is resorting to a spate of other measures: slashing education, raiding the state’s highway fund, diminishing pension contributions, and proposing new sales taxes, which disproportionately hit low-income people. Still, these drastic steps won’t suffice, a harsh reality that has forced Brownback and his Republican allies in the legislature to contemplate the previously unthinkable: turning to a socialist program, Medicaid, to rescue the state from the disastrous consequences of their right-wing economic experiment.

Some background: While President Obama’s signature health care reform law is hardly the socialist monster its critics depict — it compels most adults to purchase private health insurance plans, and doesn’t include a public option, let alone establish a single-payer system — it did provide for the expansion of Medicaid, a public (i.e., socialist) health insurance program for low-income people jointly funded by the states and the federal government. Under the Affordable Care Act, the federal government pays states for expanding Medicaid to those with incomes up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level — about $33,000 per year for a family of four. While “socialism” in the abstract doesn’t typically poll well in the U.S., the expansion of this particular socialist program is one of the more popular aspects of Obamacare; even in the reliably Republican Deep South, 60 percent of Americans support it.

But most Republican governors oppose Medicaid expansion, and under the Supreme Court’s 2012 Obamacare ruling, states have the right to refuse to expand the program. Kansas has exercised that right, to the detriment of its poor residents. But amid the state’s fiscal mess, that may soon change, Talking Points Memo’s Daniel Strauss reports:

Gov. Sam Brownback (R) and the Republican-controlled legislature in Kansas is inching ever so slowly toward expanding Medicaid under Obamacare. If Kansas did expand Medicaid, it would be the latest in a list of deep-red states—including Arkansas, Utah, and Indiana—to actually take federal dollars through Obamacare, despite having conservative legislatures and fire-breathing, anti-ACA Republican governors.