“Tribal Council is like high school prom. You don’t know what you’re going to get out of it, but you’re going to feel something.”

Peter Baggenstos, the owner of that quote, certainly felt something at Tribal Council on this week’s episode of Survivor: Kaôh Rōng, and it was akin to a piranha bite to the backside. Despite a seemingly safe position within the numbers on paper, what with his place on the Gondol tribe alongside two of his former fellow Brains, Aubry Bracco and Joe del Campo, Peter became the sixth person eliminated from Kaôh Rōng, thanks to the combined powers of Brawn baller Scot Pollard and the Beauty bunch of Tai Trang and Julia Sokolowski.

It was Aubry who delivered the fatal blow, originally casting her vote for Julia, then crossing the 18-year-old college student’s name out in favor of Peter, presumably to avoid a tie and subsequent rock draw. But that only happened after Peter himself attempted to blindside Joe and Aubry alongside the other Gondols, only for the plan to unravel hours before Tribal.

Here’s what Peter has to say about his attempts to take out the Brains, how he feels about the way he came off on television, the many medical situations this season (including one of his own), the President Obama comparisons, and even a trip down memory lane to his high school proms — plural. But first, Peter has a question for me…

Peter, what’s going on?



Josh! What’s up, buddy? First, do you have any comic book recommendations?



Oh, wow! Look at you!



I’m looking for space opera. Something like Cowboy Bebop, which is anime, but also like Firefly. What do you have for me?

Space opera? That’s tough off the top of my head, but I have a great sci-fi recommendation. It’s called Y: The Last Man. If you’re into sci-fi…

…I am. I’m typing this out right now.

It takes place in a world where every man on Earth dies except for one man and his male monkey companion. They have to figure out why all the men have suddenly died.



Why would he want to figure it out? Wouldn’t he be like, “YES!”



Well, there’s times where he’s like that! But then there are other times where he’s aggressively hunted down because he’s the only person left with a male chromosome. This is up your alley if you’re looking for good sci-fi.



[Wigler’s Note: Should have recommended Saga, written by the same author as Y: The Last Man. Both comics are decidedly NSFW.]

So, you’ve done your research on me. You know I’m a nerd.

I appreciate that about you, by the way.

Well, since you know so much about me, I feel like I should know more about you. What happened on your prom night?



I took two girls to prom. [Laughs] And nothing — absolutely nothing! – happened. There were [two schools] in my town in Montana. I went to my catholic school prom, and I knew a girl at the public school prom, so… it was back-to-back, not the same night, but there was overlap. But at the end of the day, nothing happened, which was consistent with my high school career.

So you felt something, and that something was… embarrassment?



Anticipation and embarrassment. The best thing I got that night was a Jolly Rancher.

Let’s talk Survivor. As soon as the Brains took out Liz, you started talking mutiny. In this episode, you’re aiming for Aubry and Joe, at least until the interrogation. Was it pure and straightforward revenge, or did you just not see yourself being able to work with them anymore moving down the road?

You know, it’s a difficult question. After Liz left, I felt worse than a second class player. My first response after Liz left was, “Great, she’s gone, not me.” But the way my mind was working, it felt like there was ultimate disrespect, that they were only keeping me around for their own self-preservation, because I’m good in challenges and I can do those things. They weren’t keeping me around and treating me like a human with values and purpose, but as a tool.

During the swap, I wanted to get them out because they really put me on the side. What’s more frustrating was, this wasn’t shown — and we’re not live, so I can be more honest and cuss and all that stuff — when I got voted out, I had to get surgery on my hand and my back. My right hand had a big infection — deep. I was opening coconuts for Joe and I felt like a slave doing crap for him. He wanted me to work with him, but I was like, “You guys are treating me like crap, just because I was in an alliance with Liz.”

When we swapped, right when we got out there, they started this dialogue that I’m an arrogant a—hole. So Anna never talked to me, not once. When we finally talked, she realized I’m so on the outs that [Joe and Aubry] were all I have. It was this crazy Stockholm Syndrome. I told her, “If you work with me, I’ll get them out,” but she had no interest in working with me. Julia came in and I sat in the ocean with her for hours, and she just nodded. I tried to lay out for her my position, where I saw the game, I don’t like Joe for these reasons… and she was like, “Yeah, let’s vote him out.” I talk to Scot, and he’s kind of just nodding. He never confirmed, and Tai never confirmed. I went to everyone, but no one gave me confirmation. No one ever said, “Yes, let’s do that.”

When Joe was calling me out — and I think it was right after I was trying to get Aubry out — he asked, “Are you trying to get me out?” I was like, “No!” But the truth was, I already tried the day prior. Today, I’m trying to get Aubry out, and no one is working with me. So I wanted to say, “Joe, no one is working with me.” Afterwards, off-camera, I pulled Joe aside and I told him: “I tried to get Aubry out, I tried to get you out… let’s just work as Brains, and we’ll get each other out later. Let’s just stick with the numbers.” And I honestly believed that.

I was going to ask, if you wanted to take out Joe or Aubry, why not do it when Anna is still in the game? She strikes me as a self-interested person who would make that type of move to save her own hide — but you would answer that Anna wasn’t entertaining conversations with you.

Not once. Right when we got out there, Anna and Joe went to sit in a fishing hole and they talked about her Russian heritage and his Italian heritage, and they had this weird father-daughter thing. I went in there to try and break up that conversation, but it was just cold. I could not get Anna… every interaction with her did not feel genuine, unfortunately, because God, I wanted to work with her so bad. But she wouldn’t … she understood where I was, that I was on the outs, but she never took the initiative to [work together].

And Scot, Tai and Julia — they just weren’t having it?

When you go back to Joe challenging me, and they didn’t show this, I went to Scot and Tai and we were going to get mangoes or something, and I laid out my plan again. “Guys, we have to get together and get them out.” I went to get water, and when I came back, Joe just nailed me. What happened was, Tai went straight to Joe and told him my plan. So once again, it was like every time I had a plan, they would go to Joe. I was like, “What is going on?” I’m thinking, “We have an out. I’m going to form a mutiny.” And they would go and tell him immediately! So, like, what was I going to do? I was all over the place because I couldn’t work with anyone, and my last resort was going with the Brains and doing the numbers thing, and by that time, I was septic. I had a fever. They didn’t show the scene, but I was dying on the beach, and not once did anyone come up to me and say, “How are you doing?” And I doctored those guys all day long every day, cutting off abscesses, and when I was on the beach, feeling sick, no one said, “You’re sick, let’s help you out.” I’m just like, “You suck! I’m dying here!”

There was a scene last night where you’re talking to Julia in the water, and you’re trembling. I was wondering, “Why is Pete crying right now?” It turns out, you were pretty sick?

I was sick as [expletive] out there. That was right after the reward challenge. We went in because we were hot. It was burning outside. I got in the ocean and I said, “Julia, nice to meet you, my name’s Peter, here’s the plan.” I felt we would lose every challenge with Joe. I wanted to plan ahead because Joe couldn’t help in challenges. If he was 30 years old, he’d be great. But he’s a 72-year-old man. I treat 70-year-olds with hip fractures, and I was worried Joe would break a bone eventually. I could not rely on winning any challenges with Joe in the game.

The conditions this season were famously rough. As the resident doctor out there, what was the nastiest thing you observed?

Just all the abscesses and all the infections. When you talked to Liz, did she tell you how she needed surgery?

That’s public knowledge now, yeah.

Okay, well, I had to get surgery too.

Were you flown home for that?

Yeah, I went back to Minnesota to get surgery done.

How are you now?

I’m fine. I’m back to being… arrogant. [Laughs] And that’s another thing! You and I are talking and I can tell you, “I’m the strongest person, I can read that comic book in ten minutes,” and you could say, “Peter, what the [expletive] are you talking about?” I’m receptive to that. If I’m challenged, I’m good with saying, “I don’t know what I’m talking about.” That arrogance is so self-effacing and transparent that if you challenge me, I’m fine with saying, “Yeah, I have no idea what I’m talking about.” No problem saying that.

I want to know more about Joe’s interrogation. What was it like to sit under Agent del Campo’s heat lamp?

My first feeling was frustration. Joe was yelling at me and in my mind, I’m thinking, “Why would Tai tell him?” I couldn’t fathom it. It happened within two minutes of coming back to camp, and it was like, “Tai couldn’t not talk to Joe for two minutes?” I was just pissed. I was flabbergasted.

At Tribal Council, you likened the people whispering at each other to piranhas. That’s an evocative image. In that moment, did you know your goose was cooked?

No, they didn’t show this at Tribal, but at Tribal, Scot looked at me and said: “Vote for Joe.” I looked forward and acted like I couldn’t hear him. There was a five second pause and Joe and Aubry were staring at me, because they couldn’t hear what Scot said. Then all the sudden Scot says, “Plan B,” to Julia, which they did show. So I said piranhas, because I heard this chatter, and all the sudden Scot’s saying, “Vote for Joe,” but he didn’t say anything for like three days prior! I was totally trying to be a politician in front of Joe. “You’re going to tell me the plan five seconds before we vote?” That’s not going to work in my mind.

Be careful with comparing yourself to a politician, Peter.

Oh, yeah. [Laughs] I forgot.

How annoying has that been?

You know, they keep wanting me to say, “Obama, Obama, Obama.” But as it goes on, did you notice that the Obama references went away, because I started becoming more of an individual? Once they showed me being a jerk or whatever. But I wasn’t that type of guy. I wasn’t mobilizing people, with people coming up to me and telling me stuff because I’m their leader. I’m not a leader. I’m a dude who punches in and punches out of work.

I did find it funny when people pointed out that you were providing Obamacare to your tribe.

Yeah, that was a good one, when it hit Reddit. I think I one-upped that. That was good.

In your day after video, you said you wished you were more vindictive and left your soul at the door. What did you mean by that?

I was referring to that Scot comment, “Vote Joe.” This was after I gave my word to Joe. I told Joe right before Tribal, “Okay, buddy. We’ll go with the numbers. We’ll get each other out later.” I felt in that moment that I should go with Joe. We had our outs, but I believed that I had to go with him and Aubry. I couldn’t just be flippant and switch again and be completely unpredictable. So I was mad at myself for not switching that up.

Rapid-fire, I want to get your quick takes on some of the other people out there, starting with Debbie.

She always had a target on her back. She, like Joe, was someone you wanted to keep around as long as you could, because she was going nowhere fast. They were the ones who stuck out, and the people who stick out have to get hammered down.

How about Neal?

He’s a really smart guy. Smart people need to go fast. I tried to get him out because he’s really good at Survivor.

You told Scot you wanted to vote for Julia instead of Tai, because you wanted to eat Tai’s Vietnamese chicken. What does that mean?

Oh, Tai is a master at cooking. He could make anything taste good. It was crazy. He’s a great cook.

On Twitter, you referred to Survivor as “Apology Wednesday.” What does that entail?

My mom always gets on my back for the way I’m portrayed out there. [Laughs] She gets upset. That’s mom for you, though.

Was it difficult to watch the show, since you were portrayed in a villainous light?

It was. It was, yeah. We’re all conflict people. We all have different personalities, and different components to our personalities, and they took one part of my personality — the far edge of the histogram — and just exploded it. I was like, “Man oh man.” I’m not saying I’m mad, but that’s what you think of me? I’m not cooler than that? There’s more to me.

Josh Wigler is a writer, editor and podcaster who has been published by MTV News, New York Magazine, The Hollywood Reporter, Comic Book Resources and more. He is the co-author of The Evolution of Strategy: 30 Seasons of Survivor, an audiobook chronicling the reality TV show’s transformation, and one of the hosts of Post Show Recaps, a podcast about film and television. Follow Josh on Twitter @roundhoward.