By

A decade ago, Paula Noack Langlois used to own several natural food stores. She then started considering moving to real estate, eventually getting her license and making the change. “I have a degree in business from the University of Wisconsin-Madison and transferring to real estate wasn’t too hard at all. Besides having a business background, my mother and stepfather were in real estate for a long time and I benefit from all their experience and advice,” she said during this edited interview.

Why did you choose to go into real estate?

It’s a business where I use my entire skills set, my analytical skills, creative skills and relationship skills every day to help my clients.

How did running a small business prepare you for selling real estate?

When I owned the natural food stores, it was a small business that taught me a lot about all the different hats that you have to wear. It was an ever-growing and changing industry. It learned that in addition to knowing a lot about the current industry, you have to know about what’s coming and to stay current.

What do you enjoy most about the real estate profession?

I love the relationships and to me that’s what it’s all about – getting to know my clients and what it is that they need. It’s a very intimate practice when I’m helping clients look for their next home and trying to help them come to terms with what’s best for them.

How do you consider yourself to be different than other agents?

In addition to my skills, I have a vision when viewing my clients’ homes. I use a designer to help me stage the home for no additional fees to the client. I have storage lockers full of furniture and accessories to stage with.

How does your vision and staging help sell homes?

Accentuating the best features of the home allows prospective buyers to see themselves in the home rather than the seller’s belongings. I come in and help sellers prepare the home to get top dollar. We put the home in its best light by using color and placement.

How did you fare during the downturn?

My business actually grew. I paid a great deal of attention to the details, both large and small, and helped my clients do what was needed, from the staging to pricing the home correctly.

What are you doing differently today?

I’ve hired a full-time assistant because it’s the only way I can continue providing the high-quality service I like to provide and stay consistent with it.

What role should a realtor play for a client?

You have to play several roles, the first of which is to be a good listener to understand the clients’ needs. Then, it’s important for me to bring my experience and knowledge, empowering them to make the best decision. I also tell them what they may not want to hear, but need to hear – including when they should not buy a certain home because of its bad quality home or it isn’t right for them.

What qualities make for a good realtor?

A good listener, someone who constantly grows in this dynamic market and has a willingness to learn the market and my customers’ needs.



What is your business philosophy?

Do the right thing. It all comes back to the relationship. Show the clients that I really do care about them.

How have you developed as an agent?

On multiple levels. In staging, I used to only use accessories and I also use furniture today. I’ve also developed my technology skills to stay on top of this dynamic market.

Has anyone in your career path been a strong mentor?

My mom and stepfather were my mentors. They assisted me a great deal when I started in this industry and they were so well respected, they had good rapport in the business and broke the ice for me.

What is the greatest challenge facing clients right now?

Transactions have become very complicated, as lending and inspections have become more complicated. My job is to help clients navigate and make it less stressful.

What’s the most important advice you give to clients?

To keep their goals in mind along with what they want in their next home. It’s easy to get off track.

What is your favorite part of the process?

Getting to know the clients.

How do you recharge during down time?

I like to work outside and garden. I also exercise and read. I also like to spend time with my family.

What charitable groups do you work with?

My son and I work with kids at the Milwaukee Rescue Mission’s literacy program which has been a great blessing. The kids have been absolutely wonderful.