Democrat Forrest Dunbar is challenging Republican Rep. Don Young for Alaska’s only U.S. House seat. Young is a 21-term incumbent who has literally been the 30-year-old’s congressman his entire life.

Dunbar stopped by KTOO recently to talk about his campaign, policy and why he thinks he should replace Young.

You can listen to Casey Kelly and Jeremy Hsieh‘s full interview with Forrest Dunbar here. It was recorded Oct. 16. http://www.ktoo.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/Forrest-Dunbar.mp3

Dunbar says there are a lot of nonpartisan, Alaska-specific issues he and Young agree on, like fighting the Interior Department to allow a road through the Izembek National Wildlife Refuge for King Cove residents, trying to increase oil and gas development in Alaska, and working with the State Department to protect Southeast Alaska from upriver Canadian mines.

The big differences, Dunbar says, are on social issues and in their interpersonal styles.

Dunbar says he’s prochoice, disagrees with the U.S. Supreme Court’s decision in the Hobby Lobby case that let some corporations deny its employees contraceptives through their health care plans, and is strongly on board with Democrats on LGBT rights.

“My sister happens to be LGBT, and so that also sort of firmly aligned me with the Democrats, for the time being,” he says. “And I know there are some younger Republicans that are sort of letting go of that as an issue, but I remember very distinctly in 2004 when I lived in D.C. that they were using it as an issue to try and drive people apart. And now that the tides have turned, there’s a lot of people pretending like it never happened.”

Dunbar says he plans to be collaborative and to work across the aisle, while he characterizes Young as aggressive, bombastic and counterproductive. Dunbar says he had met Young several times while he was in college and working in Washington D.C. and has seen those aspects of Young’s personality intensify over time.

“He was always perfectly nice to me, perfectly polite, had no personal animosity towards him when I started to run. But during the course of this campaign, I’ve realized that, sort of the–the legend is true!”

Dunbar says in the last six years especially, Young has become stranger and a little bit angrier.

“He’s just very different than he was back then.”

The Alaska Dispatch News has reported a number of recent instances of Young’s behavior, including with Dunbar backstage before an Oct. 1 debate in Kodiak. Dunbar told the Dispatch that Young gave him a hard time about his roots. When Dunbar touched his arm, he told the Dispatch that Young said the last person to touch him “ended up on the ground dead.”

Campaign Finance

Dunbar says one of his priorities that gets less attention is campaign finance reform. He says the contrast in his finances to Young’s illustrates why reforms are needed.

In recent filings, Dunbar says, “We had 306 individual Alaskan contributors, which is about, I think between 80 and 85 percent of our total campaign contributions. He had 33, right? Which is less than 20 percent of his total contributions. … It’s been coming almost exclusively from individual, small contributions. … I haven’t gotten the huge, sort of piles of corporate lobbyist cash that my opponent has.”

That difference, Dunbar says, is representative of a concentration of power and lobbyists’ influence.

“We can’t seem to stop that revolving door between the lobbying firms that provide campaign donations and the Hill. So my idea was to use term limits to sort of clog that door with a flood of bodies, lower the individual value of each of one of those people, and then, thus reduce the appeal of the lobbying profession.”

This American Life has reported that members of Congress spend several hours a day cold calling potential donors. Dunbar says that’s why it’s so appealing to accept lobbyists’ offers for fundraising relief. He says he won’t self-impose term limits or fundraising prohibitions, though.

“I’m going to play in the rules of the game as established. I want to change those rules, I want to change that structure,” Dunbar says.

Dunbar says he’s also in favor of legislation that would create a system where candidates for federal offices can opt out of traditional campaign finance in order to earn “patriot dollars” – small, publicly financed vouchers that individuals control and can be spent only on campaigns.

Health Care

Dunbar readily acknowledges there are problems with the Affordable Care Act, which created a mandate that all Americans purchase health insurance.

But he says the heart of the act is requiring insurance companies accept customers with pre-existing conditions.

Dunbar said when he finished law school, he sought health insurance on the private market.

“Turns out, I have a pre-existing condition. I didn’t realize it till I started to apply for quote-unquote private health insurance. This was before the Affordable Care Act went into effect. And I was rejected by everyone.”

His pre-existing condition was sports-related, and it forced him into a high-risk insurance pool run by the state.

“It was $250 a month with a $10,000 deductible. And no–basically, catastrophic only, no preventative care. It was not good insurance and it was not sustainable. I basically, as I’ve said before, I had to get hit by a bus in just the right way for it to be useful for me.”

He was 27 at the time, and a nonsmoker.

“I can only imagine how hard it is for someone who’s in their 50s or 60s, but not old enough to for Medicare who had cancer, for example. There’s no way they’re going to get private insurance if we (repeal the Affordable Care Act) that Don Young and Dan Sullivan support.”

National Guard

Dunbar has been in the Alaska Army National Guard for about a year and serves as a judge advocate, which is a military lawyer. He says he’s working some of the cases and may be involved in prosecutions for sexual misconduct in the guard, detailed in a federal investigation report released last month.

He couldn’t talk specifics, “But in general, it does look like, and, um, it does look like there were some very serious issues in the Guard that went undealt with for a very long time.”

He says Gov. Sean Parnell should have taken stronger action sooner.

Casey Kelly contributed to this report.

Related articles

Comments