Boulder artist Gail Folwell poses with an early version of her work "The NFL Draft, 1936," which was commissioned by the Pro Football Hall of Fame and is scheduled to be unveiled Friday in Canton, Ohio. ( Gail Folwell / Courtesy photo )

Bronislaw "Bronko" Nagurski was an early NFL icon of on-field power. A 6-foot-2 fullback for the Chicago Bears in the 1930s, he was a "a bulldozing runner on offense" and "a bone-crushing linebacker on defense," according to the Pro Football Hall of Fame, where Nagurski is enshrined as part of the induction Class of 1963.

Boulder artist Gail Folwell has noticed another of his attributes, one that no doubt contributed to his athletic success.

"He had the most intimidating face I could find in that era," she said.

This was the quality that most interested Folwell, because she was looking for models for a sculpture she was creating.

The sculpture, titled "The NFL Draft, 1936," depicts five offensive linemen, four in a three-point stance and the middle one, the center, poised to snap the ball. The middle figure represents Bert Bell, who was responsible for bringing the draft system to the NFL (the league's first draft was conducted Feb. 8, 1936), and in the sculpture he's wearing a suit and hat. The four others are in uniform, they're larger-than-life, and they look as if they could crush you — an effect that owes much to the resemblance each of them bears to the terrorizing Nagurski.

"I wanted them to be intimidating no matter what," Folwell said.

Starting with the unveiling of the work on Friday, Aug. 7, "The NFL Draft, 1936," will entertain visitors to Canton, Ohio, where the piece will be installed near the Hall of Fame.

The prestigious commission for the piece was awarded by the nonprofit ArtsinStark and the Hall of Fame. Folwell was among more than 80 applicants from 30 states. The work is part of The Eleven, a $2.2 million public art project that, when finished, will feature 11 sculptures that celebrate the 11 greatest moments in pro football history, as designated by the book "Where Greatness Lives." All the artwork will be located within walking distance of each other in Canton and are meant to serve as a new tourist attraction.

Folwell, a native of Guelph, Ontario, was a graphic designer for sports-related clients before devoting herself to fine art in 1995 and studying at the University of Denver. She has two sculptures in the Denver Art Museum — "Tête à Tête" and "In The Peloton." Her sculptures "The Edge," a tribute to local Olympians, and "Winter" are displayed as public art in Vail, and elsewhere around the world her work is in public and private collections.

Gail Folwell, of Boulder, works on her sculpture "The NFL Draft, 1936." (Gail Folwell / Courtesy photo)

Folwell's creative specialty is sports and the human body, particularly as expressed through the motion and energy of athletics. She's an athlete herself and enjoys mountain biking, skiing, tennis and other sports. She even has tried hockey, the full-contact kind, though the experience wasn't exactly pleasant.

"It was my stupidest midlife crisis," said Folwell, now 54 but 43 at the time. "I don't like getting clocked."

She's a fan of the Denver Broncos, but if an opposing player performs some phenomenal physical feat, she can't resist cheering, which can create awkward moments in the company of other Broncos fans, she said.

In preparing to create "The NFL Draft, 1936," she researched the history of pro football and found that in the early days of the league, the line between the athletic and business sides of the sport was often blurred.

"I liked the dialogue that was happening between business men and football players," she said. "It was one team, one group of guys working on a common theme."

It's the many-hat aspect of the NFL's trailblazers that's behind Folwell's decision to include a suit among the uniforms in her sculpture.

She intends the bronze work to bring a pro offensive line to life, to "make it breathe," she said. Visitors will be able to walk up behind the center as if to take the snap like a quarterback — or to face off against the 7-foot tall Nagurski figures, if they dare.

Folwell plans to attend the unveiling in Canton. She noted that of all the pro sport halls of fame, the one for football probably offers the broadest exposure for her work.

"I'm psyched," she said. "Hopefully it will get me a little bit of notoriety."

Quentin Young: 303-684-5319, quentin@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/qpyoungnews