An honest-to-God permanent extenders bill

With help from Elena Chiriboga and Toby Eckert

WELL, LOOK AT THAT: Who among us rolled their eyes at the idea that Congress would come up with a permanent tax extenders deal this year? After the way last year’s deal blew up and given Washington’s predilection, shall we say, toward the path of most resistance.

Story Continued Below

A lot of us. But congressional leaders got there. Now they just have to make sure it passes.

WHAT’S NEXT?: As Jake Sherman, John Bresnahan and Lauren French report, House Speaker Paul Ryan is pitching a two-year delay of Obamacare’s Cadillac tax as a win for the GOP. But while House Republicans aren’t expected to be too keen on the omnibus spending measure, they are expected to largely coalesce behind the tax deal. Votes are expected as soon as Thursday, at least on the tax measure. http://politi.co/1UuEmic Omnibus text: http://1.usa.gov/1m6knun (And Republican summary here, Democratic summary here.)

House Democratic leaders in recent days have been quite open about their distaste for the extenders agreement’s cost and substance. In just the latest sign of that, Rep. Sander Levin, the top Democrat on the Ways and Means Committee, didn’t join the three other most senior tax writers on Capitol Hill in releasing the cleverly titled PATH (Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes) Act.

Some of the tax provisions that Democrats do like — the reprieve on the Cadillac tax and incentives dealing with renewable energy — were tacked on to the spending measure, presumably to make the extenders deal even more palatable to Republicans. The two-year punt on the Affordable Care Act’s medical device tax — which Senate Finance Chairman Orrin Hatch once called “an ungodly, terrible, stupid, dumbass tax” — is on the extenders bill. http://politico.pro/1ZbkWSb

WHAT’S IN THERE?: You know, the contours of a potential permanent tax deal costing in the hundreds of billions of dollars first started leaking out about three weeks ago. And as it turns out, those rumors held up pretty well.

Democrats did get permanent extensions of the Earned Income Tax Credit, the Child Tax Credit and a permanent extension of the American Opportunity Tax Credit for college expenses. They did not get the child credit indexed to inflation.

On the GOP side, the research and development credit and the Section 179 provision for small-business expensing are also slated to get restored without an expiration date. The most expensive extender of all, bonus depreciation, gets a five-year reprieve. One of the two business extenders dealing with offshore corporate income, the subpart F exception, also gets to come back for good. But another one that Republicans wanted extended permanently, the so-called CFC look-through, gets revived for just five years.

HARD AS IT MAY BE TO BELIEVE, IT’S JUST WEDNESDAY. Here’s guessing that the current congressional calendar has forced a lot of you to rely on the Internet as you shop for those holiday gifts. (Read below for an update on the potential taxing of those purchases in the future!)

Send us tips. Email: bbecker@politico.com, teckert@politico.com, bfaler@politico.com and kodonnell@politico.com. Twitter: @berniebecker3, @tobyeckert, @brian_faler, @katyodonnell_ , @POLITICOPro and @Morning_Tax.

DON’T THINK WE’RE DONE YET WITH EXTENDERS: Other incentives that would get locked up for good under this deal include the deduction for state and local sales taxes, a big one for Texas lawmakers like House Ways and Means Chairman Kevin Brady and Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn. The exclusion that gives workers using mass transit the same amount of transportation benefits as those using parking passes would also go permanent — a victory for Chuck Schumer, Senate Democrats’ leader-in-waiting. The charitable sector gets a string of preferences extended permanently as well — including tax-free contributions from Individual Retirement Accounts, and a deduction for food donations.

Five-year extensions: The New Markets Tax Credit, aimed at spurring investment in struggling areas, and the work opportunity tax credit.

Two-year extensions: Most of the provisions that have given extenders the reputation as a grab bag of special interest giveaways. That includes incentives for race horses (supported by Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell), car racing tracks, Puerto Rican rum production and a credit for electric motorcycles championed by Sen. Ron Wyden. Business also gets a write-off for work done in American Samoa, and film, television and live theater producers get a tax break, too.

HOW MUCH INTEGRITY?: A major reason people were skeptical about the permanent extenders deal was that Democrats and Republicans had to agree on provisions to tamp down improper payments in the EITC and child credit at a time when the two sides remained at loggerheads over immigration. (A refresher on all that: http://politico.pro/1PYrkZL)

According to our Brian Faler, Ways and Means Chairman Kevin Brady said Tuesday that the two sides agreed on new safeguards that would produce about $6 billion to $7 billion in savings. And while Brady called the new protections “strong,” they also fall short of what many Republicans had wanted — like requiring first-time applicants for the Individual Taxpayer Identification Number given to undocumented workers to submit their paperwork in person. http://politico.pro/1RR3MHm

The tax extenders deal would prevent retroactive claims for the EITC, child credit and American Opportunity Tax Credit. But all in all, Democrats appeared to think those so-called integrity provisions could have been a lot worse.

NOT BY CHOICE: Pro Health Care’s Nancy Cook goes behind the scenes on how the White House was basically backed into a corner on accepting a delay of the Cadillac tax, a key plank of President Barack Obama’s health care law.

A moratorium on the tax, which was supposed to go into effect in 2018, will raise questions for Democrats seeking to protect the Affordable Care Act. That’s because there are a lot of folks who think that once the tax on expensive employer-sponsored health plans get delayed, it’s just never going to get implemented — especially given that no major presidential candidate has explicitly endorsed the tax. Or as Nancy puts it, there’s a “cold reality that a piece of legislation once delayed can certainly be delayed again. It may never see the light of day.” http://politico.pro/1Qo9Dov

** A message from the American Suntanning Association: A 10% tan tax was included in the ACA; this tax has shuttered 9,600 small businesses (70% women-owned) and eliminated 81,000 jobs from our economy while only generating 30% of its promised revenue. Repeal cannot wait: abolishing the tan tax must be part of the 2015 tax extenders bill. http://bit.ly/1HUIAON **

WHERE HAVE YOU GONE, JOHN HARWOOD AND NEIL CAVUTO?: Not surprisingly, Tuesday’s fifth GOP debate on CNN concentrated heavily on national security issues in the wake of recent shootings across the country and the debate over Syrian refugees. We didn’t hear a single tax reference, or even much talk about jobs and the economy — which, until recently, had been the top concern among the electorate.

GET EXCITED FOR THE FIRST TAX FIGHT OF 2016! Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell certainly didn’t sound like someone worried about when the customs bill that passed the House last week would get action in the Senate. “This is not the end of the Congress. It's only the end of the first session,” McConnell told reporters. “And I don't know whether we'll do the customs bill this year, or whether it'll wait until next year.”

The customs bill also includes a measure to make permanent a moratorium on state and local taxes on Internet access, a measure championed by Sen. Ron Wyden and other lawmakers. Senate Minority Whip Dick Durbin has said he has the votes to strip that provision from the customs bill. Durbin and others don’t want the Internet Tax Freedom Act to move forward without pairing it with a measure to give states more power to charge sales tax on online purchases from out-of-state retailers. But other lawmakers, like Sen. John Thune, a member of GOP leadership, and Senate Finance Chairman Orrin Hatch, were openly skeptical that Durbin had the votes. http://politico.pro/1mmuOug “If it comes to a vote on taxing the Internet, we think we’ll win,” said a Wyden aide.

In any event, it’s looking more likely that the fight will happen next year. And remember this: Online sales tax supporters are fighting just to keep their less controversial vehicle from getting taken away. And even if they’re successful, those supporters still face a slew of obstacles in getting a sales tax measure through Congress anytime soon.

INTERNATIONAL UPDATE —

GREEK CRACKDOWN: It looks like Greece is making good on one of the conditions imposed by its creditors: cracking down on tax cheating. Deutsche Welle reports that Greek authorities raided the Athens office of Swiss bank UBS, “acting on a list of account holders with huge foreign-based deposits that had been given to them by regional authorities in the German state of Northrhine Westphalia.” Greece had received similar information from the IMF in 2010. “Included on that list were account details on 2,000 Greeks, including politicians, but the government did not launch an investigation back then, for reasons that remain murky.” http://bit.ly/1ISPCna

STARBUCKS NO LONGER HOLDING THE TAXES: The coffee giant multiplied its pretax profits in the United Kingdom by about 17 times between fiscal 2014 and 2015 — from around $3 million to $51.4 million, according to The Seattle Times. The profit jump comes after the European Commission ordered Starbucks to pay millions in back taxes, after finding its cozy setup with the Netherlands was basically illegal state aid. More from Seattle: “Starbucks’ tax bill was $12.21 million. That’s less than the $17.14 million it paid the United Kingdom last year, but there’s a significant difference: Most of the money disbursed last year represented deductions that Starbucks decided to forgo after being publicly grilled for not paying enough taxes despite growing sales.” http://bit.ly/225JJcW

STATE NEWS —

GM AGREES TO CAP TAX CREDITS, BUT VALUE REMAINS UNDISCLOSED: Following a deal with Gov. Rick Snyder’s administration to cap the value of General Motors Co.’s business income tax credits, the company says it plans to contribute another $1 billion in Michigan facilities through 2030, The Detroit News reports. But the value of the Detroit motor company’s tax credits, which can be cashed-in over the next 15 years, still remains a secret. The Michigan Economic Development Corp. “last valued long-term GM’s tax credits at $2.1 billion in July 2014. State officials have said the value of the tax credits have increased with the rising pay and bonuses of 32,890 GM employees in Michigan covered by the job-retention tax credits.” The automobile company, according to the CEO of MEDC, agreed to the tax credit cap on condition that the state keep their value secret. http://detne.ws/224y1zd

QUICK LINKS

— Our pal Russell Berman helicopters back to D.C. to examine how lawmakers are now much less concerned about the deficit impact of the tax extenders deal. http://theatln.tc/1NRalbv

— The WSJ editorial page takes on an IRS regulation seeking optional Social Security numbers. http://on.wsj.com/1O7H4er

— And Hillary Clinton’s anti-inversions plan. (Spoiler: They like neither.) http://on.wsj.com/1mmL2DS

DID YOU KNOW? Japan is Starbucks’ second-largest market, after the U.S.

** A message from the American Suntanning Association: Nearly 10,000 small business owners (70% women-owned) in the tanning salon industry have closed their doors since the 10% tan tax was included in the ACA, and the tax eliminated more than 80,000 women-held jobs. Only 30% of forecasted revenues have been raised, yet 2,000 businesses close annually with 15,000 jobs disappearing. The tax is a net loser. To make matters worse, estimates have found the IRS’ cost to administer the tax is 13 % of receipts collected.

Bipartisan legislation, H.R. 2698, has been introduced to repeal this job-killing tax. Small businesses can’t wait any longer. A provision to repeal the 10 % tax on tanning salon services must be included in this year’s tax extenders bill. Doing so will have the immediate result of halting job losses, boosting economic growth in every state and increasing income and payroll tax collections as an industry is allowed to operate freely again. http://bit.ly/1HUIAON **