BROOKLYN, Ohio - Arrangements to move the new American Greetings headquarters to Crocker Park in Westlake are back on, company owners said Friday, lifting the hold on relocating put in place last year after plans to take the company private had been announced.

"We remain committed to building and relocating to Crocker Park in Westlake, Ohio, for the same reasons we shared two years ago-- to have a work environment that more accurately reflects and effectively supports our creative and innovative culture, and to have a headquarters that reflects who we are now and where we want to be in the future," said a company statement.

"Now that we are privately owned, plans to develop a new Creative Studios at Crocker Park in Westlake, Ohio, are back in motion and negotiations with various constituents can recommence," the statement said.

In August, American Greetings ended more than a half-century as a publicly held company when shareholders accepted the offer by the Weiss family to take the company private. The family paid for the $606 million buyout by contributing its shares, taking on more than $400 million in debt and accepting an investment from an affiliate of Koch Industries Inc., the privately held company led by Charles and David Koch.

The Weiss family includes chairman Morry Weiss, Co-Chief Executive Officer Zev Weiss and Co-Chief Executive Officer Jeffrey Weiss.

Company officials said neither a timeline nor a target move-in date have been set. About 1,600 employees would be making the move.



One of the first signs that the Weiss family was ready to resume the project came at Thursday's Westlake City Council meeting, when council authorized Mayor Dennis Clough to re-bid public improvements for the phase of Crocker Park that includes the American Greetings headquarters.

Clough on Friday said American Greetings "never stopped saying they were moving forward" so his city is ready to move ahead with the necessary infrastructure improvements -- such as sewer lines and water lines. Clough said it will probably take at least 60 days to get those bids, so that construction likely wouldn't begin until -- at the soonest -- early 2014.

Company officials are happy to set the project back in motion.

"We are pleased to be able to restart the process and we are eager to move forward on our next step to our Westlake location," said the company's statement. "We appreciate your patience throughout this time, and we will continue to keep you updated. We look forward to an exciting future home for our associates and a bright future for American Greetings."