ALBANY—Colleges in New York State are pushing a bill that would allow them to keep offering special injury insurance policies to student-athletes, after New York’s top insurance industry regulators ruled that those policies didn’t meet the “comprehensive” standards required of policies offered under the Affordable Care Act.

The federal health law mandates that all primary insurance policies include a handful of essential health benefits, including contraceptive and prenatal coverage.

A majority of other states decided that the ACA didn’t rule out the possibility that colleges could still offer secondary insurance policies to their students, such as dental, vision, or accident and injury coverage for student athletes.

But New York is one of a handful of states that has decided the accidental insurance policies colleges previously offered to their athletes can’t be offered anymore under federal law.

Colleges, particularly those with large athletic programs, say the state’s decision could mean major cost increases in student health insurance premiums next year, if colleges decide that the cost of accident and injury coverage must be baked into the premium rates for every student’s general health insurance plan.

Under present law, any athlete who is part of the National College Athletic Association (NCAA) will have their injury coverage paid for by the NCAA after the costs of their healthcare reaches $90,000. So colleges are only liable for the first $90,000 of costs.

But under New York’s interpretation of the health law, colleges are forbidden from “coordinating benefits” with groups like the NCAA, which means the college would be on the hook for the entire cost of a student’s injury.

In response, Senate insurance committee chairman Jim Seward has introduced a bill that would allow colleges to keep writing the policies, which he said have worked well for years in insuring student-athletes.

“If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it,” Seward said, in an interview with Capital.

The bill picked up sponsorship in the Legislature’s lower chamber from Assemblyman Al Stirpe, whose district includes Syracuse University, one of the colleges also hoping for a change in the law.

At least a dozen other colleges are pressing the state to rethink its position on the interpretation of the law, arguing the increased costs will be borne on the backs of students required to pay more for insurance. In a memo sent in support of the legislation, Cornell University said it had been providing accidental injury insurance for its athletes for decades.

“There are approximately 250 athletes on Cornell University’s student insurance plan and currently any injury they sustain is covered by the alternate plan for athletes provided by Cornell. If the injury is catastrophic the NCAA offers coverage that takes over at $90,000. Without this legislation the athletic injury exclusion is removed and these expenses would be borne by all students on the student insurance plan. There would be no way to take advantage of what would become duplicative catastrophic injury coverage from the NCAA because the NCAA plan would be secondary,” the memo said.

Cornell officials said that if the state’s interpretation of the law were to go forward, it could significantly raise insurance rates for students, who will pay $2,560 a year for insurance coverage, averaging out to roughly $215 a month, for the 2015-2016 school year.

“Colleges are already paying for really good catastrophic injury coverage through the NCAA. It doesn’t make sense if students can’t access it in the unfortunate circumstance they need it. And, they shouldn’t have to pay more in premiums for redundant coverage. This bill fixes that,” said Zoe Margaret Nelson, associate director at Cornell’s office of government relations.

Matt Anderson, a spokesman for the Department of Financial Services, said the agency is “continuing to review the legislation.”