Republicans are looking to win back a suburban congressional seat next month in a race that features two experienced politicians from Naperville.

Republican state Rep. Darlene Senger is challenging Democratic U.S. Rep. Bill Foster in the 11th Congressional District race, which has been relatively low-key but has featured disagreements on issues such as taxes, immigration, foreign affairs and the Affordable Care Act.

Foster, 59, won the 11th District seat in 2012 by defeating longtime Rep. Judy Biggert in the newly drawn district, which covers parts of the west and southwest suburbs. He previously represented a similar district for about three years, but was defeated in 2010.

Before getting into politics, Foster earned a doctorate from Harvard University and worked as a physicist and businessman. He said he uses an analytical approach shaped by his science background when facing complex issues in Congress.

Senger, 59, touts her business experience, which includes a Master of Business Administration from DePaul University and a career in the financial industry. She spent six years on the Naperville City Council, followed by six years in the Illinois House, where she has been on committees looking at reforms to pensions, Medicaid and education. In March, she beat three other Republicans for a spot on the Nov. 4 ballot.

Her fundraising hasn't kept pace with Foster's. Foster had about $1.18 million in his war chest as of April 1 and raised another $922,000 from donors over the past six months while spending roughly $383,000. Many of his supporters are fellow scientists from around the country.

Senger had about $41,000 on hand to start April and has since raised $357,000 while spending about $292,000. Her backers are mostly from the Chicago suburbs.

Despite her political experience, Senger struggled to articulate her position in a Tribune editorial board session in September when asked whether she would support a deficit reduction plan that included a tax increase in addition to spending cuts. In a recent interview, she said considering a tax increase would be "irresponsible."

Foster supported the bipartisan Murray-Ryan budget, which cut spending and also increased revenue.

Last month, Senger went on the attack, labeling Foster a hypocrite for sending mailings advocating higher taxes for millionaires like himself, but not paying income taxes in 2011. Foster has explained that he didn't pay income taxes that year because he didn't earn a salary while he was running for office.

During the primary, Republicans said Foster's vote in favor of the Affordable Care Act would make him vulnerable this fall. Foster said he stands by the vote and believes the law has had a "transformative positive effect on the lives of millions of Americans."

However, he also said fixes are needed, including more transparency on prices. He is calling for health care providers and drug companies to list prices online "so there are no secret deals between insurance companies and providers."

When Senger entered the race, she called for repealing the Affordable Care Act, but now says it should be fixed instead, since people are already in the system. First and foremost, she said, changes are needed to the employer mandate.

"I would want the free market to basically determine how an employer goes about providing health care for their employees," Senger said.

Lifting the health care mandate and other government regulations on businesses has been on Senger's priority list. During the primary, she said raising the minimum wage would hurt job growth and government should stay out of the way. However, her stance has since softened. She now says she is willing to explore it as long as it is part of a more comprehensive discussion that includes tort reform, workers compensation reform, regulations and taxes.

"Those are the levers we have in our hands to move the economy," she said.

Foster said he supports raising the minimum wage to at least $10 an hour and that it should keep up with inflation. Doing so, he said, will help, not hurt, job growth.

"As a businessman I know the real job creator is a customer, and you can't have customers if people are not earning a living wage," he said.

His own priorities include immigration reform. He said he would vote in favor of the 2013 immigration overhaul approved by the Senate.

"It does have a pathway to citizenship, which I think is crucial, and strong background checks," he said. "Not everyone who is here should be allowed to stay if they've had serious criminal histories."

However, he would prefer to see less spending on border security than the plan calls for, saying it won't address people who overstay their visas.

Senger said she would be willing to vote in favor of a plan similar to last year's Senate legislation, but for her, border security is paramount.

"We've got to make sure the borders are secured, make sure we get a visa system in place that makes sense … not only for people in this country, but employers," Senger said.

The two also differ in their views on foreign affairs, namely whether the U.S. should put troops on the ground to combat Islamic State militants.

Foster said he doesn't currently see a need to do so.

"I think ground forces should be provided by our allies," he said.

Senger said she's open to sending U.S. soldiers.

"You can't rule out that this is something we may have to do to get this place secure once and for all," she said. "We've seen before by removing troops too early things deteriorate."

The 11th Congressional District spans from Aurora east to Burr Ridge, encompasses a portion of Naperville and heads south into Joliet. The election will be Nov. 4.

mjenco@tribune.com