Quinn proposes $5.2 billion Medicaid overhaul

The proposal, dubbed “The Path to Transformation,” seeks to expand services like mental health and addiction treatment, create and expand home- and community-based care for the disabled and consolidate nine programs that serve different categories of patients.

In a bid to secure up to $5.2 billion in federal money to help bolster the state's cash-strapped Medicaid program, Gov. Pat Quinn on Wednesday released a five-year restructuring plan that aims to position the program for long-term savings.

In order to access the federal funding, regulators must approve a waiver, which the state plans to submit next month after holding two public hearings.

"This plan will help take our healthcare system to the next level – improving the health of people and communities across Illinois while significantly lowering our long-term costs," Quinn said in a statement.

A spokesman for Quinn said the changes hinge on investing more money upfront to move people out of residential treatment centers and into community-based care settings. The hope is that by shifting care, the state and the federal government will ultimately save money.

That's also what the Quinn administration will have to prove to the federal government in order to get approval for the plan.

"By restructuring and streamlining, we can bend the cost curve and spend less in the long run on community care while also provide better treatment for folks across the board," said spokesman Mike Claffey. "Ours is a very ambitious plan, but we think we can do a better job by reforming and restructuring the system."

The proposal builds on program Quinn has already put in place to move patients in state-run institutions for the developmentally disabled into more individualized small home settings. Supporters contend smaller settings offer more personalized care, while opponents contend some people are better served in institutionalized settings with highly trained staff.

Including the federal money and revenue from health care providers, the total investment for the restructuring is expected to be about $6 billion.

While Quinn is pushing the new five-year plan, there are no guarantees he'll be in office to see it through. The Democrat is seeking re-election to a second term in office and is trying to broadcast his priorities as the four Republican hopefuls snipe at each other heading into the March 18 primary.

The federal government typically considers granting the waivers in situations where it believes the state can save taxpayer money over the long-term by implementing experimental, pilot or demonstration projects.

Under the law, such programs must be budget-neutral, meaning that any money the federal government spends under the waiver must not exceed what it would have otherwise.

Illinois last year received a special waiver to expand Medicaid early to residents of Cook County under a program called CountyCare. The expansion allowed certain low-income people access Medicaid services in advance of the Affordable Care Act, which extended coverage across Illinois on Jan. 1.

The administration’s plan has the support of a number of advocacy groups and the powerful Illinois Hospital Association.

pfrost@tribune.com | Twitter: @peterfrost