President Barack Obama (R) meets with Tunisian Prime Minister Mehdi Jomaa (L) in the Oval Office April 4, 2014 in Washington, DC. Obama and Jomaa were expected to discuss a range of bilateral issues during their meeting. (Photo by Win McNamee/Getty Images)

Fresh off his victory lap of 7.1 million people enrolling in health care exchanges under the Affordable Care Act, President Obama is picking up his pen and phone to move two issues forward by executive action: education policy and equal pay.

A Presidential Memorandum due to be signed Tuesday will require federal contractors to submit wage data by sex and race, which the Department of Labor will use “to encourage voluntary compliance with equal pay laws and allowing more targeted enforcement by focusing efforts where there are discrepancies, reducing burdens on other employers.”

On Monday, Obama will travel to Bladensburg High School in Maryland to announce the winners of the Youth CareerConnect Competition, created by executive action last year to prepare high school students for the rigors of college and full-time employment, especially in STEM careers. More than$100 million in grants has been made available by the Departments of Labor and Education to provide awardees with educational opportunities, job training, mentorship, field trips and academic counseling.

“I’m announcing a new challenge to redesign America’s high schools so they better equip graduates for the demands of a high-tech economy,” Obama said during his 2013 State of the Union address. “We’ll reward schools that develop new partnerships with colleges and employers, and create classes that focus on science, technology, engineering, and math – the skills today’s employers are looking for to fill jobs right now and in the future.” While Education Secretary Arne Duncan announced a $300 million grant pool in June 2013, the funding total was later downgraded.

In order to create more pay transparency in the workforce, Obama will sign an Executive Order prohibiting federal contractors from retaliating against workers who share salary data, according to a memo from a White House official.

Click here to read more.