Topics: Books, Editor's Picks, Education, Fiction, Margaret Atwood, The Handmaid's Tale, West Point, Entertainment News

On a frosty morning last week, the author Margaret Atwood, her silver hair framed by a hood lined with violet-colored artificial fur, left her hotel in Midtown Manhattan and got into a hired town car. As the car left the city and wound through the snow-blanketed woods of the Hudson River Valley, she talked about vampire movies, praising Tomas Alfredson’s “Let the Right One In,” and about some of her travels: More recently, to San Diego Comic-Con, where “I had my picture taken with the Klingons,” but also, when she was a young mother, to Afghanistan a few weeks before the 1978 assassination of President Mohammed Daoud Khan and to Iran eight months before the overthrow of the shah. “Don’t invite me to your country,” she recommended.

Atwood’s destination on this trip, although unlikely enough, was probably safe from a coup. The entire first-year class of cadets at West Point had read her 1985 novel, “The Handmaid’s Tale,” for a literature course. The 75-year-old author agreed to speak to the assembled plebes (as first-year students at the military academy are called) after lunching with them on mac-and-cheese under the gothic arches of the campus’ vast, Hogwartsian mess hall.

“The Handmaid’s Tale” is set in a dystopian future not too distant from the current date. A totalitarian theocratic regime has taken over portions of the U.S., where the narrator, a young woman known only as Offred (as in “of Fred,” for the man in whose household she lives) has been consigned to the status of a Handmaid. Her only role, as one of the few women whose fertility has survived decades of environmental contamination, is to provide the Commander with a child via a ritualized and joyless act of copulation. In this future, women must wear color-coded, body-concealing robes and are not allowed to hold jobs outside the home, to own property, to live on their own or even to read.

The novelist’s visit to West Point commenced with a signing in the campus bookstore. Students and faculty in camo and uniforms lined up with a handful of awestruck local high school students, artsy girls in overalls or ballet flats with kitten faces on the toes. West Point’s current student body is only 22 percent female, but that’s an improvement on past years. To walk its halls is to enter a realm of testosterone and old-fashioned manners. A woman of a certain age (say, over 30) can expect to hear more ma’ams there in one afternoon than in a lifetime of visits to dress shops.

“Reading this book was a life-changing experience,” a bright, well-scrubbed plebe enthused as he handed Atwood a worn paperback of “The Handmaid’s Tale” to sign. “That’s a frightening thought,” she quipped in her nasal deadpan. “What were you like before?”

For many years, readers not especially familiar with Atwood’s work assumed — largely on the basis of “The Handmaid’s Tale,” her homage to George Orwell’s “1984” — that she and her work were, as her fellow novelist Karen Joy Fowler once put it, “Canadian, feminist and grim.” The first two adjectives definitely apply, although Atwood’s feminism has never been of the essentialist or idealizing variety; one of her abiding subjects is the ways women undermine each other, as well as the sustaining power of their friendships. She is the daughter of an entomologist (one of her childhood pets was a praying mantis that she trained to drink sugar water out of a spoon), and she often seems to be observing humanity with the dispassionate, unstarry eyes of a scientist.

“Grim” is the word that doesn’t fit here, even if Atwood’s sense of humor is consistently charcoal in hue. The advent of the Internet and social media have acquainted a much wider audience with her puckish side — literally, in the case of the YouTube dissemination of a clip from a Canadian TV series featuring the diminutive Atwood out on the ice in full goalie gear, explaining her approach to hockey’s most strategic position. (“I don’t like to hot dog, but if the puck carrier is really putting lumber on it, mama can get nasty.”) She’s a wisecracker, albeit a dignified one, so that her manner seems equal parts duchess and film-noir dame.

Atwood currently has 640,000 followers on Twitter, where she promotes favored causes, particularly environmentalism, and has bantered flirtatiously with the comedian Rob Delaney, a fan of her work. She has communed and collaborated with young amateur writers on the site Wattpad, which has given her a Wattpad business card with the title “Fairy Godmother.” She even voiced the part of herself in a fitness app called “Zombies, Run!” in which users are motivated to exercise with a zombie-apocalypse scenario. (In the app, she’s holed up in the CN tower in Toronto, sending transmissions relating the undead takeover of NHL Hockey.) During the drive up to West Point, she chatted about recent articles in Fast Company magazine and her own start-up, marketer of the LongPen, a remote signing device she invented.

For the dozen or so plebes seated at Atwood’s table during the institution’s impressively brisk half-hour lunch period, however, she was a venerable figure, with dozens of books to her name and a Booker Prize under her belt, among other honors. She answered some familiar inquiries — about the ambiguity of the ending of “The Handmaid’s Tale” and how long it took her to write the novel (“one and half years, and a lifetime”) — but she also managed to quiz each cadet on the mascot of his or her company. “I thought they’d all be animals, but one is a firehouse,” she exclaimed. One cadet carried a notebook onto which she’d laminated the image of a wolf. Atwood and the student discussed the various lamination devices currently available on the consumer market — Atwood loves technology — although the cadet explained that she’d just used packing tape. “Packing tape works very well, too,” Atwood said approvingly.