A National Health Service logo is seen on a hospital sign in front of the Big Ben clock tower of the Houses of Parliament, in central London. Reuters

BOB WACHTER: I spent much of 2011 in the United Kingdom on a Fulbright Scholarship. I ended up ambivalent about the National Health Service–inspired by its ability to offer universal coverage and good access to health care for all U.K. citizens, and disappointed by its lack of nimbleness and unyielding bureaucracy.

But the practice that impressed me most was the system’s openness to engaging in mature discussions about how to allocate limited health-care resources. The institutional expression of this openness is an organization called the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, or NICE.

NICE, which was founded in 1999, is charged with advising the National Health Service about whether a new drug or device should be covered. To carry out this mission, NICE conducts detailed reviews to determine not only the effectiveness, but also the cost-effectiveness, of proposed new treatments. About two-thirds of the time, NICE finds that the drug or device has an acceptable cost-effectiveness ratio and it recommends approval. In some cases, it will reconsider a treatment if the manufacturer lowers the price (and many do, in the kind of bargaining that the Medicare is forbidden from engaging in). And about 15% of the time, NICE recommends that the NHS not cover the therapy.

NICE employs a rigorous evidence review process, with substantial input from practicing clinicians, industry representatives, patients, and advocates. Its cost-effectiveness criteria are explicit, as is its review process. Although, unsurprisingly, some of its rulings are controversial–particularly when it rejects a new cancer drug–the organization is generally respected and seen as an essential mechanism for making tough choices in a resource-constrained world.

In the U.S., of course, we would call such a thing “rationing,” and its chances for survival on the political battlefield would be zero. And so we ration in other ways: copays, deductibles, formularies, shortages of primary care doctors, and–even after the Affordable Care Act–tens of millions of people who lack health insurance. When a wildly expensive drug comes along, such as the new treatments for hepatitis C, we have no method to weigh costs and benefits, and so the debate is fueled by emotion and informed more by politics than by science.

Ultimately, our society will have to confront the need to make hard health-care choices, and we will come to appreciate the benefits of having a transparent, explicit process to do so. When that day comes, it’s nice to know that there is a model we can emulate.

Dr. Robert M. Wachter (@Bob_Wachter) is professor and associate chairman of the department of medicine at the University of California, San Francisco. He blogs at www.wachtersworld.org. His new book, “The Digital Doctor: Hope, Hype, and Harm at the Dawn of Medicine’s Computer Age,” will be published in 2015.

Read the latest Health Report.