The Republicans sure hold the pre-born in the highest esteem, but that is as far as their malarkey goes. After that child is born, they don't give a moments thought to them. Sometime, to the point of being heartless and cruel. Yet the Republican followers are like sheep-tenders, sending many supporters to the slaughter. I want to give you several examples of their cruelness. On November 18th, Minnesota Congressman Keith Ellison introduced H.R. 4055. That bill would allowed SNAP precipitants to receive an allowance to give young parents money to buy Diapers. It was called the “Hygiene assistance for families of infants and toddlers act of 2015. After several committee meetings, The Republican leadership in the House bundled H.R. 4055 with H.R. 3102. That Republican bill move, led to a bill that cut over $40 billion dollars from the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) over 10 years. That move by the Republicans proves that they don't care about the children. The great pretenders [GOP] of our military stoop so low, they ignore that Military families receive SNAP supplement benefits too. They are not receiving enough money to live life as a family. There are about 900,000 military veterans receiving SNAP assistance, at any given month. The Republican party and its endorsers are anti-kids, to deny military families enough money in their pay check to live on. The reason I say this is, they want to make it harder for your kids to get free or reduced lunches at our schools even if they qualify for the reduced lunch program. Here is an example of Republican love. Back in 2010, the Community Eligibility Provision was passed as part of the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act. Under the provision, if a school district has a certain percentage of students below the poverty line, the district could apply for the program to feed all kids they cover, regardless of income. That program was made at reducing the stigma that there was a connection as “a food stamp family”. Another factor was, it was saving families the hassle and stigma of having to apply themselves. To qualify 40% of the recipients have to be below the income limits to have this program kick in. Indiana Republican Todd Rokita wants to raise the threshold to 60%, making it harder for districts to apply, and in effect, taking food out of a child's mouth. You may think I am joking, but in reality the Republican have tried to get rid of child labor laws. There are some Republicans that have proposed that kids mop floors in schools in exchange for food. I was under the impression that a child should be cared for and nurtured to adulthood.