Centennial-based United Launch Alliance announced Tuesday that its founding president and chief executive will leave the company in December.

Michael Gass has served as ULA’s leader since the company formed in 2006 as a joint venture of Lockheed Martin Corp. and Boeing Co.

Gass, 58, is retiring, a company spokeswoman said. Tory Bruno has been named Gass’ successor.

“I have been honored to serve as the chief executive officer of United Launch Alliance since its formation nearly eight years ago,” Gass said in a statement. “With my intent to retire in the near term and the changing industry landscape over the next several years, the board of directors and I have agreed that the immediate appointment of my successor to begin the leadership transition is in the best interest of the company.”

ULA is the largest provider of rocket launch services in the U.S. and recently has come under intense scrutiny from Capitol Hill.

Gass has spent the past several months navigating media questions and political inquiry about ULA’s cost structure, defending its monopoly position by reiterating its track record for reliability.

Troubles began in April when California-based Space Exploration Technologies Corp., commonly called SpaceX, sued the Air Force and ULA claiming the government’s “block buy” contract awarded to ULA for $11 billion was unfair and not open to competition.

Two weeks ago, a U.S. federal judge refused to dismiss the case, ordering ULA to hand over details of the contract and requiring the parties to enter mediation.

Just an hour before ULA made the announcement Tuesday, industry colleagues acknowledged several forces impacting the sector’s future business model at a media briefing for ULA’s launch of DigitalGlobe’s highly anticipated WorldView-3 satellite, scheduled for Wednesday.

“ULA, our subcontractor on this project, is in the cycle where a lot of its government business is in full swing, but they are adjusting their manufacturing capabilities,” said Steve Skladanek, vice president of business development for Lockheed’s Commercial Launch Services division.

ULA launches the U.S. military’s most sensitive spacecraft, which involves long gaps of time between winning a contract and achieving the mission. The rocket provider’s current rate of launches is expected to drop off based on its existing contracts.

Bruno comes from Lockheed, where he most recently served as vice president and general manager of strategic and missile defense systems.

“We’re grateful for Mike’s leadership and contribution to ULA’s customers and employees, as well as the space industry as a whole,” said Craig Cooning, president of Boeing Network and Space Systems and a ULA board member, in a news release.

“Tory understands the launch business as well as anyone and is well-qualified to ensure ULA keeps pace with changing customer needs and launch industry dynamics.”

About 1,700 of ULA’s 3,600 employees are in Colorado.

Kristen Leigh Painter: 303-954-1638, kpainter@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kristenpainter