Reprinted from THE AIS REPORT ON BLUE CROSS AND BLUE SHIELD PLANS , a hard-hitting independent monthly newsletter on new products, market share, strategies, conversions, financing, profitability and strategic alliances of BC/BS plans. (Not affiliated with the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association or its member companies.) Sign up for a $72 two-month trial subscription today .

Since the implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), employers and consumers have grown increasingly interested in finding ways to supplement traditional medical coverage, says Kevin Stutler, vice president of ancillary products at Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Michigan.

Likewise, insurance companies are looking to offer employers and consumers one-stop shopping for a wide variety of products, adds Brian Lobley, senior vice president of marketing and consumer business at Philadelphia-based Independence Blue Cross.

In January, the Michigan Blues plan, along with its LifeSecure Insurance Co. subsidiary, signed an agreement with Dearborn National Life Insurance Co. to co-brand that firm’s ancillary benefits alongside the Blues plan’s medical, dental and vision products. Dearborn is a non-Blues-licensed firm operated by Health Care Service Corp. The Michigan Blues plan has been promoting Dearborn’s group short- and long-term disability and term life insurance since January, and in mid-2015 will add group critical-illness insurance. LifeSecure’s ancillary products include group personal accident insurance and long-term care coverage. Stutler says the company is now exploring potential partnerships with concierge care companies and firms that focus on wellness.

“Agents and employers — as well as our members and prospective members — are always looking for ways to simplify. Having the opportunity to bundle ancillary benefits with their medical coverage is seen as an advantage,” Stutler tells The AIS Report. Ancillary products are designed to support medical insurance. “They strengthen our ability to sell medical products,” he adds.

To keep coverage costs down, some employers combine high-deductible health plans with personal accident and hospital recovery insurance. But Stutler says few regional health insurers are able to offer all three products under one roof.

In early 2013, Michigan lawmakers approved legislation allowing the state’s Blues plan to convert from a tax-exempt non-profit insurer to a nonprofit mutual insurance company owned by its members (The AIS Report 2/13, p. 1). That conversion, which became effective Jan. 1, 2014, allowed the company to expand into insurance products that went beyond health. As an insurer of last resort, the company previously was restricted to selling only health, dental and vision insurance.

Stutler says that sifting through the field of potential partners was an arduous task that began with about 70 life insurance carriers. The Michigan Blues plan considered building its own life and disability insurance products, but didn’t think it could compete effectively in such a commoditized market. Partnering with an outside company “gives us the ability to come to the market with an extremely competitive product when packaged with our medical insurance,” he says. The combination, Stutler explains, translates to administrative savings for employers.

Moreover, ancillary products also have become an important part of private insurance exchanges where employees can use a defined contribution from the employer to customize their benefits package.

Independence Works to Define ‘Product’

Lobley and his colleagues at Independence spent the last 12 months defining the term “product.” He compares a health insurer’s product arsenal to a bull’s-eye with medical coverage in the center. Circling the bull’s-eye is a ring of ancillary products such as dental and vision coverage, and the outer rings are voluntary benefits such as life, long-term disability and critical illness insurance.

Since 2013, Independence has offered life, short-term disability, long-term disability, accident, critical illness and cancer insurance through Guardian Life Insurance Company of America. But some of those products are now being white-labeled under the Independence brand. During the annual renewal processes, “you want as much of the wallet-share as possible,” Lobley says.

For companies with substantial brand loyalty, such as Blues plans, customers want to know what else they have to offer. “We have to be relevant and excellent in each of those [bull’s-eye] rings so that each offering is compelling, each offering is worthwhile and each offering means something to the member,” he says. “I think we can move into areas that have been non-traditional for health insurers from a product standpoint.”

And white-labeling could extend beyond insurance to consumer products such as wearable fitness monitors like Fitbit and Jawbone. Such products could be marketed under Independence’s label, for example, and linked to the health plan’s mobile app. Members could earn rewards for hitting fitness goals. And wearables could be expanded to include items such as electronic scales and glucose monitors.

2015 Product Pipeline Targets Engagement

Here’s an overview of what several other Blues plans say they have in the pipeline for 2015:

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Louisiana: Beginning this spring, the Louisiana Blues plan’s members will have access to comparison software from WiserTogether, Inc., which lets members select the most appropriate treatment option based on quality and affordability. WiserTogether says it serves more than 3 million people through their employers and health plans. The technology compares treatment options using evidence-based clinical guidance, individual consumer preferences, insurance coverage, cost and popularity of the treatment among patients.

CareFirst, Inc.: As of Jan. 1, the Maryland-based Blues plan operator says its members who take steps to improve their health can qualify for financial incentives through its new Blue Rewards program. The program is available to all members including those covered through a policy purchased via a public insurance exchange. Depending on the plan, members can receive money to put toward eligible health expenses, such as copayments, deductibles and monthly premium payments. The program includes both participation- and results-based rewards, according to spokesperson Sarah Wolf. It is part of CareFirst’s larger efforts to improve health care quality while promoting cost-effective delivery of care.

Independence Blue Cross: Last year, Independence teamed up with DaVita HealthCare Partners, Inc. to launch Tandigm Health to incentivize providers to improve quality while reducing costs and boosting patient satisfaction. Tandigm manages medical cost risk for providers. DaVita operates medical groups and physician networks in several states. Lobley suggests more carriers will look to expand the ACO model beyond those that are hospital-led to ones led by physician practices. “Physicians are at the beginning and the end of the care continuum,” and can play a substantial role in keeping members out of the hospital.

Premera Blue Cross: Since Jan. 1, some Premera members have had around-the-clock access to telehealth benefits available through its virtual care offering. The virtual care benefit offers members access to care “at a time and place that is convenient to them,” according to the company. “It will especially benefit consumers when in-person care is a challenge due to geographic distance, limited access to transportation or need for care outside of regular doctor hours.” As an alternative to emergency room and primary care visits, telemedicine has the potential to save U.S. employers $6 billion a year, according to an analysis from Towers Watson. The telehealth benefits are available on individual and group plans at the time of plan renewal. The service will be available through providers who are equipped with telehealth capabilities and through Teladoc, an outside company that bills itself as the largest and fastest-growing provider of telehealth medical consultations in the U.S.

Cambia Health Solutions/Regence: Employers in Washington and Oregon now have access to ActiveCare, Regence’s accountable health product. “ActiveCare allows us to deliver a higher level of engagement between physicians and members at a reduced price of 10% or more compared to a traditional PPO. Regence plans to expand ActiveCare to Utah and Idaho in 2015,” says Bill Bradley, vice president of product development at Regence.

© 2015 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Get more timely, objective business, financial and regulatory news of the health insurance industry in AIS's weekly newsletter Health Plan Week. Sign up for a $91 two-month trial subscription today!