On Tuesday night, Comedy Central host Larry Wilmore viciously attacked Senator Ted Cruz (R-TX) and deemed his 2016 presidential campaign "'Backlash 2016: The unblackening' begins tonight. It is time for America to say f*** you to the notion that once you go black you never go back."

The Nightly Show host opened his broadcast by shamelessly proclaiming "we ask the question can a foreign-born half-white man be our next president. The answer according to one woman, hell no! Ted Cruz went to Harvard, just like Unabomber Ted Kaczynski. Hey, Harvard, stop admitting dudes named Ted."

Wilmore then claimed that “any time a crazy guy enters an election, you have a late night show job security for a little while longer." The Comedy Central host went one step further and argued that Cruz’s campaign was an attempt to reclaim America from a black president:

[T]hat's why we are so excited to announce the start of our 2016 election coverage. That's right. You got it. That's right. "Backlash 2016: The unblackening" begins tonight. It is time for America to say f*** you to the notion that once you go black you never go back.

As the segment progressed, the Comedy Central host trashed Cruz’s decision to announce his presidential bid at Liberty University because there's “no better place to start the unblackening of the presidency than at a university in Lynchburg, Virginia.”

Later on, Wilmore played a clip of Cruz stressing the need to “reclaim the constitution of the United States” which the comedian took as a racial dog whistle:

Reclaim the constitution? He thinks just because Obama is a brother he stole the constitution from the White House? He's not the black Nicholas Cage.

Wilmore concluded his over-the-top condemnation of by addressing the “biggest takeaway of the speech was Cruz' coded language about how he sees the future of the country” which was Cruz stressing the importance of restoring America’s greatness:

I get it. I get it. In order to go forward, you have to go back, right? Reclaim, restore, reignite. So what you're really saying is somebody stole your country. Black guy did it, right? Blacklash at its finest.

See relevant transcript below.