Angelcare Monitors Inc. is recalling 600,000 of its Angelcare Movement and Sound Baby Monitors after two reports of child death due to strangulation.

Angelcare Monitors Inc. is recalling 600,000 of its Angelcare Movement and Sound Baby Monitors after two reports of child death due to strangulation. U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission

Canada-based Angelcare Monitors Inc. has issued a voluntary recall for 600,000 baby monitors that were sold between Oct. 1999 and Sept. 2013. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CSPC) issued a statement on Thursday announcing the recall after two infants died of strangulation as a result of the device’s faulty wiring.

The product involved in both incidences, the Angelcare Movement and Sound Baby Monitors, features a cord that connects to a sensor pad, which is placed under the crib's mattress to monitor the infant's movement. If the cord is pulled into the child’s crib and becomes entangled around the neck area, he or she runs the risk of strangulation.

The first fatality connected to this device occurred in Aug. 2004 when an 8-month-old girl in Salem, Ore. died when the device became wrapped around her neck. A 13-month-old girl from San Diego, Calif. passed away in Nov. 2011 because of strangulation as well, NBC News reported.

“In both fatalities, the cord from the sensor pads was pulled into the crib by the infant,” the CPSC said in the statement. “In addition, there have been two reports of infants who became entangled in cords of Angelcare baby monitor models, which did not result in fatalities. In these incidents, it could not be determined if the 'sensor pad cord' or the ‘monitor cord’ was involved in the incident.”

Baby monitors were sold at Babies R Us/Toys R Us, Burlington Coat Factory, Meijer, Sears, Walmart, Amazon.com, Target.com, Overstock.com, and nearly 70 small baby specialty stores for around $100 to $300. Model numbers include AC1100, AC201, AC300, AC401 AC601 and 49255. They did not include rigid cord covers.

A CSPC safety alert issued in Feb. 2011 indicated seven industry-wide strangulations due to baby monitors since 2002. Following the statement, the death toll rose to eight including the two fatalities associated with the Angelcare baby monitor.

Any consumer who has purchased an Angelcare Movement and Sound Baby Monitor has been asked to contact Angelcare at (855)-355-2643 or visit their website at www.angelcarebaby.com. The company will provide a repair kit, which will include revised instructions, a replacement cord with a strangulation warning label, and a rigid protective cord cover that the sensor-pad cord can be threaded through.