In 34 games over his first two seasons, including playoffs, Eddie Lacy, taking a handoff from Aaron Rodgers, has carried 611 times, which ranks fourth in the NFL. Credit: Rick Wood

SHARE Poll Which player will have the most success with his new team? Tramon Williams Davon House A.J. Hawk vote View Results Tramon Williams: 37% Davon House: 47% A.J. Hawk: 17% Total Responses: 2842 Off-Season Tracker Follow the comings and goings on the Green Bay Packers roster with our 2015 off-season tracker.

By of the

Phoenix — At the end of Eddie Lacy's rookie season, Green Bay Packers coach Mike McCarthy sat down with him and laid out what he wanted.

Work on your pass-catching and pass-blocking skills because you're not coming off the field on third downs, McCarthy told him.

By most measures, Lacy took the directive to heart. He played on more third downs than either backup James Starks or fullback John Kuhn and caught 42 passes for 427 yards and four touchdowns.

He finished second behind Pittsburgh's Le'Veon Bell in yards per reception (10.1) among backs with at least 20 catches.

After this season, McCarthy didn't have much to tell Lacy except keep doing what you're doing.

"I really felt that last year's conversation was more important than this year's, the ability to make a huge jump from Year One to Two, being a three-down player, that was something we stressed from Day One, and I thought he delivered," McCarthy said at the NFL owners meetings this week.

Lacy played in 60.5% of the regular-season snaps his rookie season and 65.4% last season. Those numbers would have been closer if Lacy hadn't been knocked out of the Washington game after five snaps his rookie season.

As far as actual carries, Lacy's average per game last season didn't even crack the top 10 in the NFL. He ranked 13th with 15.4, which was nine carries fewer per game than league-leader DeMarco Murray (24.5) of the Dallas Cowboys.

McCarthy said the 246 attempts he gave Lacy didn't reach the target he had set, but he liked the way he limited Lacy's snaps and carries early in the season and increased them down the stretch.

"Maybe not run attempts," McCarthy said of hitting the target he set. "But I thought we were really smart the way we used him....I thought his pass protection he made a huge jump, and his ability to play out of the backfield.

"Eddie has excellent hands, and just his understand and his feel with Aaron, he definitely made a step."

In 34 games over his first two seasons, including playoffs, Lacy has carried 611 times, which ranks fourth in the NFL behind Seattle's Marshawn Lynch (709), Murray (653) and Buffalo's LeSean McCoy (647).

His carries in 2013 (305) and 2014 (306) were almost identical, so if anything McCarthy has found some balance.

But he also knows that Lacy takes (and delivers) punishment that some of the other backs don't because of his bulldozer running style. McCarthy said he's not concerned with changing Lacy's willingness to run over people instead of around them, and that the best way to preserve him is to limit his touches.

"I go back to past experience," McCarthy said. "I went through this, really. Ricky Williams was the first running back that I went through the how-many-attempts, how-many-runs (discussion).

"It's a learning experience. I'm conscientious of how many times each guy touches the ball, how much each guy plays, especially the running back. I think you have to be smart there."

To that end, McCarthy probably needs to find another running back for his 53-man roster. Starks and Kuhn handled the load when Lacy wasn't in the game, but McCarthy also had DuJuan Harris if one of the backups got hurt.

Harris was let go this off-season and signed with Minnesota. The Packers like practice squad back Rajion Neal, but it's a given they'll either draft another back or bring in at least one undrafted free agent.

"We need more than one, that's for sure," McCarthy said. "I think you always have to approach it that way."

Seattle memories: There won't be any signs in the Packers locker room this season encouraging the players to avenge their loss in the NFC Championship Game.

"We're not going to run out there and come up with some slogan, 'Remember Seattle,'" McCarthy said. "I'm not going to do that."

Still, he knows the subject is going to come up next season and, it's going to be something the players are going to have to deal with whether they like it or not.

"I don't think you need to coach against it," he said. "I think the only time really we'll deal with it is more on a personal basis whether it's in an interview, whether a player has to answer a question."

No stranger: Even though McCarthy has been the play caller since the day he became head coach, he hasn't called every game.

Traditionally, he allows the offensive coordinator to call the final preseason game so that he can focus on player evaluation before the final roster cuts.

It also gave McCarthy an idea of what it would be like not to call a game.

"It really gave me my ability not only to coach the whole team but really the personnel, the evaluation of it," he said. "The fourth preseason game has been a lot of fun.

"It's a totally different coaching opportunity that is different than any of the other regular-season games that I've been the head coach."

So long, Suh: McCarthy wasn't sorry to see defensive tackle Ndamukong Suh leave the NFC North for the Miami Dolphins.

"I'm trying to teach my 6-year-old to do a cartwheel right now, but not that I'm doing any," McCarthy joked. "I thought it was a win-win. It was good to see him leave the division, and it was great to see (Dolphins coach) Joe Philbin improve his football team."

Asked if he has any hard feelings about some of Suh's behavior or questionable tactics against the Packers, McCarthy said no.

"Hard feelings? No, it's football. It's all football," he said.

McCarthy said there's no question Suh will make the Dolphins defense better immediately.

"Suh is an impact player," he said. "I think when you say that about a defensive lineman he's both an impact player in the running game and the passing game. He'll definitely improve their defense."