Terror threat

As Americans celebrate the country's 239th birthday this weekend, law enforcement officers will be very busy protecting the U.S. from the threat of a terror attack. Sources tell CBS News correspondent Kris Van Cleave special Transportation Security Administration teams are being assigned to large airline hubs, and investigators are watching potential suspects.

Train derailment

About 5,000 residents of Maryville, Tennessee, are waiting to find out when they can go home after being evacuated more than 24 hours ago due to the derailment of a train car that caught fire. It was filled with a toxic chemical, reports CBS News Correspondent Omar Villafranca.

Mall threat?

An Army sergeant was in his company's custody at Fort Bragg in North Carolina this morning after being called a threat to the public. CBSN Correspondent Vladimir Duthiers reports authorities say Bryan Scott Wolfinger, 25, a Maryland native, was armed with an Armalite-15 assault rifle when he was arrested at a mall in Fayetteville yesterday.

Supply rocket

Recovering from an April failure, Russia successfully launched a Progress cargo ship early today loaded with more than three tons of much needed supplies and equipment to replenish stockpiles aboard the International Space Station. The last three cargo shipments failed to reach the space station.

Holiday campaigning

Sixteen months ahead of the 2016 election, the presidential field is already crowded with 19 candidates. They may come close to literally tripping over each other this holiday weekend, as they vie for attention in July 4th parades in a few key early-voting states. Here's a look at what they have planned.

IP address shortage

Behind every laptop or tablet that goes online, behind every web address, behind every stack of servers, there's an IP address. These strings of numbers and dots act as unique identifiers for the devices and domains on the Internet and enable them to communicate with each other and send information back and forth. And we're running out of them.

Doctor shortfall?

The Affordable Care Act has sparked plenty of heavy disagreement and debate, including about what its true cost might be, how the system can deliver better care while reining in costs, and even whether Congress has the right to draft such legislation in the first place. But even with all those questions, one has received little notice: Will we have enough health care professionals to handle a growing and aging population?

Grateful Dead

This weekend, fans of the Grateful Dead are flocking to Chicago to see one of rock 'n' roll's most revered bands unite one last time. CBS News correspondent Dean Reynolds reports the group's "core four" surviving members will play the final three shows in their 50-year history.

More Top News

World

Boko Haram slaughters dozens during prayers in Nigeria

Politics

Obama calls GOP "mean" and touts overtime pay proposal

Rick Perry: Republicans must reach out to black voters

U.S.

Fiat Chrysler to face sanctions over recall failures

Good Karma: 9/11 hero NYC firefighter wins $5 million

MoneyWatch

Whole Foods apologizes for overcharging "mistakes"

Made in the USA: 7 of the best cars made here

Red, white and beer: What Americans eat and drink for July 4th

Selfies: The next big thing for credit card security?

Health

Experts warn about bone risk from "female athlete triad"

#SunburnArt? Experts warn against dangerous social media trend