When it comes to reform efforts in Tallahassee, nothing seems to stir more energy, emotion and letters to the editor than alimony reform. Add in the touchy topic of child custody, and it should come as no surprise that the effort to repeal permanent alimony came up short again this year.

The shame is that needed reform was really close to the finish line.

It's also a shame that as with health care and the state budget, the upstart Florida House is again attacking the more-measured Florida Senate in very personal and childish terms for failing to accept its family law proposals as is, no amendments allowed.

Listen to how Rep. Ritch Workman, R-Melbourne, describes Sen. Tom Lee, R-Brandon, who believes it's good public policy for the children of divorcing parents to spend equal time with both parents, unless there's good reason not to.

"What he cares about is getting back at the judge that didn't give him 50-50 time share 15 years ago or whenever he got divorced," Workman told the News Service of Florida.

"(Lee) is going to kill a bill out of spite because he didn't get his way. Literally picking up his toys and stomping out of the sandbox and running back with tears and snot in his nose because he didn't want to share his toys in the sandbox."

Actually, it was the Florida House that took its ball and went home after failing to get its way in a state budget fight against Obamacare. And because the House quit its job three days early, the Senate was left to address the bills it had sent over, take them or leave them.

The good news was that after five long years, warring factions had finally agreed on a plan to end permanent alimony, which can now be secured by an ex-spouse after 17 years of marriage. This means that if you marry someone at 20 and divorce at 37, you may have to pay that person alimony for the rest of your life.

Stories abound about people who haven't been able to retire because of alimony obligations. On the other side are stories of people, mostly women, who long devoted themselves to raising children and can't realistically be expected to start a career late in life.

The proposed compromise would have provided financial fairness and certainty to both sides. It created a formula that would determine payments based on the length of the marriage and the difference in income between the spouses. It would have addressed the needs of older women, and prevented years of litigation where lawyers wind up the winners.

Because the bill addressed family law, Lee asked its sponsor, Sen. Kelli Stargel, R-Lakeland, to also include a provision about equal child time-sharing, as she had two years ago. She agreed.

The 50-50 time-sharing measure would have judges continue to start with the best interests of the child and be guided by 20 specific considerations, such as distance to school or a history of domestic violence. But by stating it's good public policy to provide equal time-sharing where practicable, the measure would have tempered any longstanding judicial biases that exist in certain courtrooms around the state. Plus, judges would have to explain their rationale in writing.

"Nothing is more subjective, less quantifiable and more emotional than who gets the children, and it is where a bulk of the litigation money is spent," Lee told us. "This was a bill about greater predictability and reducing the amount of things for people to fight about."

And for the record, Lee, who is divorced and remarried, says he has 50-50 custody of his children.

From Lee's standpoint, the House's bill needed some terms defined and some duplicative clauses clarified, but he considered his planned amendments minor and agreeable to a majority of both chambers.

From the standpoint of Stargel, Workman erred by promising members of the Family Law Section of the Florida Bar that his bill would not address child time-sharing, given that the legislative process includes amendments. And as Stargel notes, this provision also was addressed last time out, though Gov. Rick Scott vetoed the bill because it would have made the elimination of lifetime alimony retroactive.

Workman never called us back, but a representative of the Florida Bar's Family Law Section, Abigail Beebe, says it's bad policy to start from a 50-50 time-share because it would make the better parent have to prove the negative.

"Right now, everyone is on even ground, here's what's best for my family," Beebe said. "But this would shift the burden to the party who doesn't agree with it, or doesn't think it would work. I would have to prove why 70-30 is better for my family. To say every case should start with an assumption of 50-50 and move away from that would cause more work and litigation."

Yet Florida divorce law starts with an assumption that assets should be split evenly, so it's hard to see why a similar assumption is not a good starting point for child time-sharing, so long as a judge always has the discretion to make adjustments, as appropriate.

Neither is it unreasonable to expect judges to write an order explaining their reasons, given the stakes. Sure, they might say something about a deadbeat dad that a child might find hurtful down the road, but in writing orders, judges have found ways to write about "the evidence presented" without spelling out specific facts.

Families are changing, Work lives are changing. And divorce can change a parent's priorities.

If moms and dads equally love their kids, it seems appropriate that state policy support shared parenting time, realizing there will always be exceptions.