GRAND RAPIDS, MI — Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder defended his track record Monday evening during an MLive Ballot Bash in Grand Rapids. But, in a rare act of humility from a politician, he also acknowledged a mistake.

Snyder, Attorney General Bill Schuette, Secretary of State Ruth Johnson and U.S. Senate candidate Terri Lynn Land -- all Republicans -- took turns answering questions from MLive Vice President of Content John Hiner while editors from around the state took notes.

Watch full video interviews and highlights of the interviews

The forum was open to the public and live-streamed online, a unique format designed to peel back the curtain on the editorial board process, which will culminate in MLive endorsements ahead of the November 4 general election.

Democratic candidates are scheduled to interview before the MLive editorial board on Thursday and Oct. 14 at similar Ballot Bashes in Lansing and Royal Oak. The events are produced in partnership with The Center for Michigan and Michigan Radio.

SNYDER: I LEARNED FROM 'MISTAKE' ON NERD FUND

Snyder, as he's done during recent campaign stops, unfurled a brochure of his first-term accomplishments, touting a falling unemployment rate, creation of new private sector jobs and increasing home values.

But the governor also admitted fault in at least one instance, calling creation of his non-profit New Energy to Reinvent and Diversify (NERD) Fund "a mistake" based on advice that he received before taking office.

Snyder used the tax-exempt NERD Fund to pay the salary of a top advisor and cover travel expenses for other staff, but he was not legally obligated to disclose donors, prompting questions about the potential impact of dark money on public policy.

The governor closed the fund last year and replaced it with a transparent version, but he did not disclose the original donors, arguing it would be unfair because they had contributed with an expectation of anonymity.

"That was a mistake, in retrospect. So I learned something, because this was my first political office. I don’t know about you, but we’re all human,” he said during Monday's Ballot Bash.

Snyder also defended business-friendly tax code changes he spearheaded in 2011 and the controversial right-to-work law he signed in late 2012.

While right-to-work wasn't always on his agenda and infuriated organized labor, Snyder championed the new law as pro-worker policy that will benefit the state economy, but he acknowledged that it's difficult to see tangible evidence of the impact.

"We're seeing our business development pipeline of companies considering Michigan growing significantly," Snyder said, before offering the caveat that "no one's going to come out and say they're looking at Michigan because of right to work, because they're just asking to get protested."

The governor also continued to fight the claim that he cut $1 billion in education spending, saying that his general election challenger Mark Schauer and the Democratic Governors Association are "lying" in television commercials.

While his first budget did cut overall K-12 spending, Snyder has blamed that reality on a loss of federal funding, which the state made up for in subsequent years.

K-12 spending has actually increased about $1 billion since Snyder took office, but most of the new money is going to cover school district requirements costs, and critics still say not enough is reaching classrooms.

"Those teachers you see in those ads talking about how bad a guy I am? I'm the guy trying to make sure they have a retirement," Snyder said.

True to form, the governor shied away from social issues.

He said he does not believe in discrimination and thinks the state Legislature should discuss updating the Elliott-Larsen Civil Rights Act with anti-discrimination protections for gay residents, but he did not take a position on the issue itself.

TERRI LYNN LAND TALKS AUTO BAILOUT, KNOCKS HARRY REID

Former Secretary of State Terri Lynn Land, now running for U.S. Senate against Democratic Congressman Gary Peters, said she would have supported the so-called auto bailout widely credited with helping save General Motors and Chrysler.

Land, in a 2012 video from the Republican National Convention, told a conservative news outlet that she stood with presidential candidate Mitt Romney, who opposed government funding for the struggling industry but said private financing could facilitate a managed bankruptcy.

In recent weeks, however, the Land campaign has said she "always supported the auto rescue." Critics accused her of trying to rewrite history, and PolitiFact called her campaign's new characterization a "full flop."

Asked about the apparent inconsistency, Land said she long supported the auto industry and suggested that if push came to shove, she would have backed the bailout, which began under Republican President George W. Bush.

"I felt it was important to maybe look at private financing," Land said. "When that was not available, we had to do something rather than nothing."

Land, who has repeatedly spoken out against government regulations, blasted proposed rules from the Environmental Protection Agency designed to curb carbon emissions from aging power plants.

The Byron Center Republican said utilities are already phasing out coal plants and reducing emissions but argued that the EPA rules would "put the pedal to the metal" and increase electricity costs.

"I believe there is climate change, that humans do affect the climate," Land said. "We need to make sure we have clean air and reduce carbon emissions, there's no doubt about that, but we also have to do it in a logical way."

Land thanked retiring Sen. Carl Levin for his service but noted that she disagrees with him on the Affordable Care Act, which she wants to "repeal and replace."

She was less cordial when discussing Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nevada, blasting the Democratic-controlled Senate for sitting on bills approved by the Republican-controlled House, including repeated attempts to repeal Obamacare.

"The Senate is the great deliberative body, and they haven't deliberated much," said Land.

Asked if she could support any new gun regulations, Land simply noted that she has been endorsed by the National Rifle Association and believes there is room for improvement in mental health services.

Asked about the battle against ISIS in Iraq and Syria, Land said "the president needs to have a plan" but did not offer one of her own. "ISIS is a terrorist organization that needs to be stopped," she said. "The president has not led on this."

SCHUETTE: DEFENDING THE CONSTITUTION ON GAY MARRIAGE

Schuette, the incumbent attorney general who is running against Democratic challenger Mark Totten, looked to put a personal touch on his track record, citing the names of specific individuals impacted by his work in office.

There was the Detroit firefighter whose pension he sought to protect in the city's bankruptcy case and the human trafficking victim whose story informed a push for new laws respecting survivors.

The Midland Republican defended his participation in controversial lawsuits challenging implementation of the Affordable Care Act in Michigan, and he stood by his defense of the state's same-sex marriage ban, pointing to a common thread motivated by the Michigan constitution.

"I took an oath to defend the constitution," Schuette said. "It wasn't half an oath. It wasn't discretionary or optional. It's not like a jalepeno in a buffet, where if it's too spicy you stay away from it."

Earlier Monday, the U.S. Supreme Court denied petitions to re-examine lower-court decisions that struck down bans in other states, effectively allowing same-sex marriage to move forward in those parts of the country.

Schuette declined to say whether he was prepared to fight the Michigan case all the way to the nation's highest court but reiterated his call for a final determination.

"The sooner the Supreme Court makes a decision on this, the better off I think everyone else will be," he said.

Asked about the legislative push to update the state's anti-discrimination law by adding protections for gay residents, Schuette echoed previous comments by the governor, declining to share his personal opinion on any specific proposals but encouraging a civil debate.

Religious freedom should be a part of that discussion though, according to Schuette. "This is the 21st century," he said. "Can't we do more than one thing at a time?"

As for a second term, Schuette said he'd like to continue several initiatives already underway and ensure their implementation, including a permanent Human Trafficking Commission and a statewide student safety hotline for schools.

JOHNSON: TECHNOLOGY A BOON, BUT ONLINE VOTING NOT READY

Secretary of State Johnson, who is running against Democratic challenger Godfrey Dillard, highlighted various ways her department has used technology to improve customer service inside and outside of branches.

She pointed to ExpressSOS.com, which allows residents to renew their driver's licenses and vehicle registrations online. She also noted a pilot program in 10 branch locations that lets residents make branch appointments online without having to wait in line.

"You can do everything online now," she said of ExpressSOS. "You don't have to come in, you simply print a receipt and carry it with you."

Some online technology is not ready for primetime though, Johnson argued. She criticized the Michigan Democratic Party for rolling out an online absentee ballot registration program without allowing the state to test it first.

The Bureau of Elections followed up on 197 absentee ballot requests processed through the MDP's online tool, according to Johnson, and found that 43 never made it to the local election clerk as intended.

"That means people could have been disenfranchised because the clerk did not get the request, so that means the voter will not get their absentee ballot," said Johnson, who has instructed anyone who used the tool to contact their local elections clerk. "That is just wrong."

Johnson, asked about the possibility of online voting in the near future, also expressed concern, saying that the technology is not yet secure enough to ensure the integrity of the Democratic process.

In terms of voter access, she noted that she supports a form of no-reason absentee voting, but the state Legislature has not yet moved in that direction.

If elected to a second term, Johnson said she would work to fight insurance fraud, expand successful pilot programs to more branches and continue to clean up the state's qualified voter list to ensure ineligible voters are not listed.

Jonathan Oosting is a Capitol reporter for MLive Media Group. Email him, find him on Facebook or follow him on Twitter.