With an air of authenticity, a replica of Fort Uncompahgre is located in Delta. Each of the rooms has information about the function of that particular space. A modest fee is charged to enter the fort. ( Kenneth Jessen / For the Reporter-Herald )

If you go A replica of what this fort looked like is located in Confluence Park in Delta. The entrance to the park is off of Gunnison River Drive a short distance west of U.S. 50 on the south side of the Gunnison River. There is a visitor's cabin at the entrance, and a modest fee is charged to enter.

The original Fort Uncompahgre was near the confluence of the Gunnison and Uncompahgre Rivers. Although its exact construction date is unknown, it was probably built around 1828. The modern-day town of Delta is located close to the site.

Antoine Robidoux was quite successful prior to building Fort Uncompahgre, the first of his three fur trading forts. He picked the Fort Uncompahgre site due to its proximity to a trail connecting Santa Fe with points north. There was also a good ford across the Gunnison River, and it was a popular Ute camping site. He established a trail from St. Louis over Mosca Pass, across the San Luis Valley and over Cochetopa Pass into the Gunnison River drainage. After his fort was established most of his supplies were hauled 300 miles from Santa Fe.

Robidoux knew that the Utes wanted to trade especially for firearms. There was an arms race going on between the tribes at the time. The Mexican government prohibited trading firearms, but Robidoux knew that he was in such a remote location, that enforcement would be difficult.

Advertisement

Even though he violated restrictions on firearms, Robidoux operated his fort with a permit from the Mexican government. His 15 to 18 employees were all Mexican and would sign a contract to work for a year. Most came from the northern part of Mexico near the border with the United States which, at the time, was the Arkansas River. This area had a surplus of labor and as a result, Robidoux took advantage of paying his employees in trade goods.

Beaver pelts and skins were what a fur-trading fort was all about. Trappers and Indians alike could trade them for items that they needed such as metal pots and pans, knives and guns. (Kenneth Jessen / for the Reporter-Herald)

The men that worked at the fort had specific duties such as negotiating trades, bookkeeping, preparing the hides and skins, bundling them for shipment and general maintenance. Robidoux traded both with trappers and the Utes. The Utes, however, expected that they would enjoy a monopoly, and having competition from non-Indians angered them. A conflict was sparked when a band of Utes was killed, and protesting resulted in the death of one of their chiefs. This led to an attacked on Fort Uncompahgre in 1844. Fortunately for Robidoux, he was away at the time, but the attack resulted in the sudden abandonment of the fort.

In 1902, Francis Cragin documented forts in the Rocky Mountain West and measured what remained of Fort Uncompahgre. The fort was 75 feet by 90 feet with square bastions about dozen feet square located on opposite corners. Rooms with common walls were located along the inside defensive walls a dozen feet high. Typical of other forts of this era, the rooms were used for trading, a blacksmith shop and living quarters. There was also a storage room for the skins as well as a kitchen. After Cragin's visit, a flood washed away what little remained of Fort Uncompahgre. The site, however, had been noted on Cragin's map.

Jumping ahead to 1989, William Bailey and his supporters convinced the town of Delta to construct a replica of Fort Uncompahgre upstream from the original site in the town's Confluence Park. Since the exact details of the fort and type of construction were unknown at the time, a fort similar to the one constructed by Robidoux in 1831 was used as a model. With the help of volunteers and contributed materials, most of the cabins were completed by 1990 and the fort was opened to the public.

Fort Uncompahgre requires maintenance — the wood for the picket fence rots below ground level and the mud chinking on the cabins needs constant attention. During a visit, it is not unusual to see volunteers working on the fort.

Fort Uncompahgre is well worth a visit, and within each room, there are descriptions of how that room would have been used. Signs give visitors a glimpse into what life was like in the fort and the tools necessary for survival.

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years.