It is instinctual for babies to consume their mother's milk. Breastfeeding mothers can't just ignore their baby crying when hungry so they have don't have much of a choice but to breastfeed their baby wherever and whenever they are. However, there are some people who don't feel comfortable when a mother breastfeeds their baby in public because of "decency" issues.



Like Us on Facebook

Advertisement

Know Your Rights



What are the rights of breastfeeding mothers about this issue? According to Huffpost Parents, in the U.S., 49 states have passed a legislation that allows mothers to breastfeed in public places. The legislation HR.2490 permits all the mothers to breastfeed their child in Federal buildings or on Federal property.



Section 7 of Fair Labor Standards Act that was amended by Section 4207 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act also requires the employers to provide an appropriate place and a break time for mothers to express their milk for their babies who are under 1 year of age.



These laws greatly help not just the mothers but also the health professionals and health officials who are promoting healthy breastfeeding for babies. The mother's breast contains colostrum that is very beneficial for babies. The colostrum helps the baby develop antibodies to protect them from several infections and diseases.



According to Telegraph, new moms nowadays are afraid to experience discrimination or shaming because of public breastfeeding. New mothers are thinking that breastfeeding is still not socially acceptable and this is the reason why some mothers would resort to formula-feed their babies instead of healthy breast milk.



What To Do



If you are a lactating mother who has no choice but to feed her baby in public, don't be ashamed because you have rights protected by law. If you experience any discrimination or shaming, don't hesitate to confront them and talk about your rights.



If you are not comfortable in doing so, you can always file a complaint against the offenders. It is the right of a mother to breastfeed her baby. Ignorance of the law is never an excuse.