Posted: May. 3, 2016 8:35 am

QUINCY -- One of the chief goals of the recently created Current Health Solutions, a new venture within Blessing Health System, will be working with employers in an effort to better manage their companies' health care costs.

Blessing Health System CEO Maureen Kahn

Current Health Solutions is also designed to improve the health and well-being of employee populations, said Maureen Kahn, president and chief executive officer of the Blessing Health System.

"Business owners and managers are experts at managing costs," Kahn said. "However, one type of business cost can be much tougher than all others -- employee and dependent health care, because it is not something which a business person has the same type of control over as other costs.

"However, health care is a business expense owners and managers can better understand. A better understanding can result in healthier employees and lower costs in the long run."

Current Health Solutions (CHS) is designed to work closely with an experienced health plan administrator and population health provider to ensure local self-funded employers are utilizing the best practices to improve the quality and effectiveness of coverage offered to their employees.

Tim Moore, vice president of finances for the Blessing Health System, said the organization has repeatedly heard from employers it deals with about the difficulties of properly meeting all of the requirements of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), also known as Obamacare.

"The complexities of the (ACA) continue to be a problem," Moore said. "There was not a lot of scrutiny when it was initially legislated in."

CHS uses sophisticated data analytics to measure different aspects of health-plan use in an effort to improve the value of coverage for the organization, employees and its dependents. This information assists employers with creating plan design benefits and programs to help improve the health of the covered population.

Patrick Gerveler, chief financial officer for Blessing Health System, said the plan for the Current Health Solutions model has been in the works for four years.

"We knew employers' (health care) costs kept rising," he said.

Getting better insight to claims' data was a key, Gerveler said. Gerveler said studies indicated the top 10 percent of employees make up 80 percent of the costs for the average employer.

"That is the industry norm," Gerveler said.

Moore said a concept such as Current Health Solutions is a multi-year investment, especially when considering the wellness plans companies are now undertaking to keep their employees healthier -- and health care costs down.

"Our goal through this initiative is simple," Kahn continued. "We want to help employers keep their staff healthy and productive while doing the same for their bottom line so the economy of this region can thrive."

Another CHS benefit is its understanding of the market.

"CHS is different because it provides members and employers with convenient and local customer services." said Jordan Kiel, executive director of CHS. "This helps health-plan members better understand their benefits and how to access the most efficient and effective level of care for their needs. This also allows CHS to truly develop and design benefit plans and population health programs that specifically meet the needs of the local market."

Businesses offering self-insured health plans to their employees or insurance agents assisting self-insured health plans can learn more about CHS by calling 217-277-8980 between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. Monday through Friday.

The CHS office is located at 1246 Broadway and is open 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday through Friday. The CHS website can be found at currenthealthsolutions.org.