ACA assisters: more work, less time, less money — No smoking at tobacco HQ — Davita to pay $350 million over kickback claims

With help from Joanne Kenen and Natalie Villacorta

THE RETURN OF THE OBAMACARE ASSISTER — Those ACA foot soldiers have less time — three months instead of six — and less funding to do a tougher job this year as they try to reach the remaining uninsured. And they will also be juggling re-enrollment and post-enrollment questions from consumers who signed up last year. But they learned a lot last year. They know where the uninsured like to hang out (public libraries in Tennessee, fire stations in Maryland) and how to hook young people (food trucks) And they’ve developed new consumer resources and undergone additional training. Natalie Villacorta has our story: http://politico.pro/1wuaRTw

Story Continued Below

Welcome to Thursday morning Pulse, where we think Pennsylvania might have happened on a way to deal with physician shortages. National Journal reports that the state’s liquor code allows “hospitals desirous of obtaining confiscated liquor” can apply for it, and right now officials are sitting on a motherlode of 2,447 bottles of wine confiscated from an illegal trader. We wonder if there’s anything about news organizations on Virginia’s booze books. National Journal: http://bit.ly/1nzGIjQ

“Just one thing makes PULSE forget: Red, red wine.”

FIRST IN PULSE: FAMILY MEDICINE COALTION LAUNCHES PRIMARY CARE CAMPAIGN — Today Family Medicine for America’s Health, a new coalition of eight family physician groups, including the American Academy of Family Physicians, is launching an education campaign on the role of primary care in health care delivery reform. Health is Primary will use advertising and other forms of outreach to advocate a primary care-based health system. In this system, doctors have long-term relationships with patients and treat the whole person; technology is used to facilitate those doctor-patient relationships; prevention is as important as treatment. The campaign will offer tools to meet these goals and will travel cross country to engage stakeholders, including policymakers, patients and employees. Learn more: http://fmahealth.org/

— HHS Secretary Sylvia Burwell will address the group about “new Affordable Care Act measures that seek to improve patient care and spend our health care dollars more wisely” at 4 p.m. at the Washington Convention Center. Pro will be there.

REYNOLDS AMERICAN ADDS SMOKING RESTRICTIONS — The nation’s second largest tobacco company told employees Wednesday that starting next year, they will no longer be allowed to smoke cigarettes, cigars or pipes in company offices, conference rooms, hallways and elevators. Smoking is already banned on the factory floors, in the cafeterias and fitness centers. The updated policy will go into effect once designated indoor smoking areas have been constructed. E-cigarettes, dipping tobacco and other smokeless tobacco products will still be permitted indoors. Reynolds American spokesman David Howard says the company feels the new policy better accommodates both nonsmokers and smokers who work in and visit its facilities. More from POLITICO: http://politico.pro/1ymXGmD

— The American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network lauded the move, but noted that millions of Americans are still exposed to unwanted cigarette smoke in work settings and public places. “If Reynolds cared about the American public as much as it does its own workers, the company would support comprehensive smoke-free policies nationwide that protect people from its own products and those of other tobacco companies, including policies that prohibit special smoking areas that have proven to be ineffective in protecting non-tobacco users from tobacco smoke,” said ACS CAN President Chris Hansen.

DAVITA TO PAY $350 MILLION TO RESOLVE KICKBACK CLAIMS — The Justice Department announced late last night that the dialysis provider Davita Healthcare Partners, Inc., will pay $350 million to settle allegations that it violated the False Claims Act by paying for referrals. The Denver-based company is accused of finding physician practices with a lot of renal patients and giving them financial stakes in their dialysis clinics. Davita also pushed the physicians into non-compete agreements to keep them funneling patients into their clinics, which operate in 46 states. More on the alleged scheme from the DOJ: http://1.usa.gov/1FFyZqo

WHEN DOES A MALPRACTICE CAP MATTER? — Payments to plaintiffs in malpractice cases are genuinely decreased when damages are capped at $250,000 a new study finds, but the cap is less relevant when reaches $500,000. This has implications for California’s Prop 46 ballot measure, Pro’s Rachana Pradhan reports, which would raise the limit on damages to $1.1 million. The study’s authors predict that the initiative’s passage “would lead to about a 20 percent increase in average malpractice payouts — and more in obstetrics and gynecology, as well as pediatrics.” The Pro article: http://politico.pro/12eYAXL

POTUS CALLS PRESBY STAFF — President Barack Obama called the staff at Texas Health Presbyterian in Dallas yesterday to “thank them for their courage and perseverance in dealing with the first cases of Ebola to appear in the United States,” according to a White House readout. Obama paid tribute to the two infected nurses and “emphasized the importance of integrating lessons learned from Dallas into response plans going forward, and reviewed the additional steps that have been taken to strengthen the Nation’s ability to respond quickly and effectively.” He also praised the staff for “staying focused on the vital mission of caring for others in times of need regardless of the difficult circumstances.”

REPORTS: VINSON’S FAMILY SAYS SHE’S EBOLA-FREE — The family of Amber Joy Vinson, the second nurse infected with Ebola, is saying that there are no longer signs of the virus in her body, and that she’s slated to be moved to a different unit at Emory University Hospital. No confirmation as of late Wednesday night from the CDC or Emory. http://bit.ly/1zl5WI9

$31 MILLION TO PROMOTE DIVERSITY IN BIOMED RESEARCH — NIH announced $31 million in new grants to develop new ways of drawing in underrepresented groups in the biomedical sciences. The awards are going to 50 geographically diverse institutions over what’s expected to be a five-year project. The announcement: http://1.usa.gov/1tc1Rma

REUTERS: JUDGE SIGNALS ABORTION PILL BAN CAN PROCEED — A judge in Oklahoma said he will let a ban on abortion-inducing drugs to take effect on Nov. 1, Reuters reports. Oklahoma District Court Judge Robert Stuart rejected a request from abortion rights groups to block the measure. The order does not appear to have been formally issued yet. http://reut.rs/1ynbEF8

CALLING ON BUSINESS TO HELP EXPAND SCOPE OF PRACTICE — At a speech to the Chamber of Commerce’s health summit yesterday, the head of the American Association of Nurse Anesthetists called for employers to ask their health plans to use a range of advanced practice registered nurses to their full scope of practice a way of lowering costs. Businesses “have a golden opportunity to change the system for the better by ensuring that their employee benefits fully cover” these advanced nursing services the same as physicians.

LUNG ASSOCIATION NAMES RIZZO TOP DOC — The American Lung Association named Albert Rizzo its Senior Medical Adviser — which also makes him their top spokesman. He’s chief of pulmonary and critical care medicine for Christiana Care Health Systems in Wilmington, Del.

SURVEY: JUST ABOUT ANYTHING BETTER THAN OPEN ENROLLMENT — PlanSource, a benefits administrator, came up with a novel way to market its new OneMarket private exchange: point out how much people hate choosing employer-sponsored plans during open enrollment. In a poll of 2,000 people, compared to enrolling; 23 percent of people said they’d rather see the dentist; 20 percent would rather watch a movie about the life of Lindsay Lohan; 14 percent would rather star on “The Apprentice” with Donald Trump and 13 percent would rather be a telemarketer. We have no idea if their exchange is as clever as their marketing strategy, but here’s their site: http://bit.ly/1xb67Af

WHAT WE’RE READING, by Jennifer Haberkorn

Obamacare is returning as an election "albatross" for Democrats, Karl Rove writes in the Wall Street Journal. http://on.wsj.com/1vQbsPj

Scientists will gather next month to consider how robots could be used to help stem the Ebola epidemic, the New York Times reports. http://nyti.ms/1yZYjFL

A new study says that if there are no exit screenings in place as people leave West Africa, and estimated three people with Ebola would leave the region each month, the AP reports. http://wapo.st/1nzKtpx

Ebola lobbying has begun. A Florida-based company is lobbying the government to use its automated disinfecting system, Bloomberg reports. Bono's ONE campaign is in the Ebola lobbying game, too. http://bit.ly/1vQfabH

Sam's Club is getting into the Obamacare game with its own private insurance exchange, the Post reports. http://wapo.st/1yZZANd

Aetna on Thursday announced a new ACO model in Washington state, where some insurers have faced criticism for narrow networks. The Seattle Times story: http://bit.ly/1ow9z9u

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Many Medicare drug plans effectively require the use of “preferred” pharmacies that are inconvenient for patients. That means a long trip or higher copays to stick with the pharmacies that patients like. In urban areas, these plans often fail to meet the government’s standard for pharmacy access. In rural areas, “preferred” pharmacies are often 20+ miles away! Support H.R. 793 / S. 1190. This bipartisan legislation is supported by leading consumer advocates and would let patients use any pharmacy willing to accept the “preferred” pharmacy terms and conditions. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **