Incoming Rep. Mia Love of Utah, the first black Republican woman elected to Congress, said Sunday that House Majority Whip Steve Scalise (R-La.) should keep his leadership position despite controversy over his 2002 speech to a white supremacist conference.

Scalise, the number three Republican in the House of Representatives, admitted last week that he spoke at a conference hosted by the European-American Unity and Rights Organization, a white supremacist group. Love had previously made few remarks about the issue, saying only that she had not spoken to Scalise yet about it but that he had always been helpful to her.

During an appearance Sunday on ABC's "This Week," Love was a bit more expansive. She said it was "really interesting" that it was coming up now, so many years after the fact, and that she did not want to give the "awful" groups any publicity.

"I can say as far as I'm concerned with Representative Scalise, he has been absolutely wonderful to work with," she said. "He's been very helpful for me and he has had the support of his colleagues."

She added Scalise should keep his leadership spot.

"I believe he should remain in leadership," Love said. "There's one quality that he has that I think is very important in leadership and that's humility, and he's actually shown that in this case and has apologized and I think we need to move on and get the work of the American people done."

Also on HuffPost: 2014 Election Results: Winners & Losers 2014 Election Results: Winners & Losers

1 of 17 Loser: Political Legacies Despite the help they got on the campaign trail, candidates with family political legacies did not fare well Tuesday. Georgia state Sen. Jason Carter (D), the grandson of former President Jimmy Carter, lost in his bid for the state’s governorship. Democrat Michelle Nunn, the daughter of former U.S. Sen. Sam Nunn (D-Ga.), lost in Georgia’s Senate race. Sen. Mark Pryor (D-Ark.) had assistance from his mother and father, former U.S. Sen. David Pryor (D-Ark.), during his re-election campaign. Yet he lost his seat to Rep. Tom Cotton (R). And Sen. Mary Landrieu (D-La.) moved on to a runoff instead of winning re-election outright, despite being the daughter of former New Orleans Mayor Moon Landrieu (D). Perhaps the brightest spot for political offspring on Tuesday was a win for Gwen Graham, the daughter of former U.S. Sen. Bob Graham (D-Fla.). She defeated incumbent Rep. Steve Southerland in Florida’s 2nd Congressional District. Share this slide:

Sean Gardner/Getty Images