Fire department relies on an old SUV to handle low-risk situations

The Longmont Fire Department's Omega Truck, an old SUV designed to let the department save its fire engines and ambulances for the big calls. ( Courtesy photo )

In general, fire engines are for fires, ambulances are for emergencies. Fire department calls are rarely so easily labeled. Longmont's Omega Truck — a 20-year-old SUV with few of the upgrades and tools typically found in the big rigs — is there for the others.

From the time the truck bowed in April through October it has responded to 344 calls. Most were calls in which the bigger and vastly more expensive equipment could be kept home, without the wear and tear of unneeded starts and stops. Some of the bigger cost more than $1 million.

Omega is designed for two firefighters to respond to things like fire alarms with no smoke or fire reported, carbon monoxide alarms when no one reports feeling ill plus the occasional cat in crisis.

The department doesn't use the truck to respond to medical calls, and the firefighters on board are able to break away to go to emergencies when they arise.

"Most of these calls are helping citizens with smoke detector problems or lifting someone up off the floor and putting them back in bed," Vanlandingham said. "The Omega Truck is used so we don't have to send the fire engine with three or four firefighters to handle low-risk situations."

There is the occasional situation when the Omega Truck provides less-than-robust service. "Most of these can be attributed to elderly or nursing care facilities that give us information indicating that the Omega Truck is the appropriate response," Fire Chief Jerrod Vanlandingham said. When they arrive and the situation is more dire than expected, the bigger equipment is called in. Of those 344 calls, department officials said, that happened about 8% of the time.

Advertisement

The department has and will continue to work with local care facilities in an effort to improve in this area, Vanlandingham said. Statistics for the rest of 2015 aren't available but the chief said he suspected they would be on par with the previous months.

Vanlandingham said the current call volume doesn't warrant a second truck. Still, the department said it expects Omega Truck to reduce dispatches of big by about 1,500 to 2,000 times per year.

"As the community continues to grow in density and the population continues to age, there is no sign of call volume going down," Vanlandingham said.

With call volume comes call variety. Firefighter Molly Meehan confirmed at least one cat distress call. It got itself stuck in a storm drain.

"We ended up not having to do anything," she said. "I think the cat left on his own."

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@timescall.com or twitter.com/johnbearwithme