Two people were rescued from two separate mountains in New Hampshire this weekend.

Overnight, conservation officers from New Hampshire Fish and Game worked alongside personnel from Twin Mountain Fire Department and a manager from the Cog Railway to locate a 55-year-old Amesbury man.

Rescuers conducted a search on and around the Jewel Trail, which descends down Mount Washington on its western side after Chris Trottier was reported missing by his wife at 9:30 p.m. Saturday.

Trottier and his sons had been hiking down Mount Washington when Trottier started suffering from a preexisting medical condition.

He and one of his sons got into an argument and they separated for the last part of their descent.

After waiting several hours for their father, they returned to their homes in Massachusetts.

The weather for the Mount Washington area for the overnight was rain with temperatures dropping into the 30s, which was a concern.

Trottier’s car was located in the hiker parking area of the Cog Railway.

Two rescue parties were formed -- one hiking to the tree line on the Jewel Trail -- and the other covering the lower end of the trail.

After completing their assignments and hiking down the trail, voice contact was made off of the trail with Trottier. Rescuers hiked off-trail and located Trottier in a heavily wooded area at 3:30 a.m. Sunday.

Trottier was found to be cold, wet and disorientated, but was able to walk out with assistance from the rescue party.

Upon reaching the trail head shortly after 5 a.m., Trottier was transported to Littleton Regional Hospital by a Twin Mountain ambulance for further evaluation.

Fish and Game officers were also called to Mount Monadnock in Jaffrey to rescue a 14-year-old boy with a lower leg injury Saturday night.

The boy, who was with a group of police cadets from Windsor, Connecticut, injured his leg at about 5 p.m. after slipping on wet rocks while hiking in the rain on the White-Dot Trail. Conservation officers along with Mount Monadnock Park personnel carried the boy off the mountain.

Rescuers reached park headquarters at 11:30 p.m. Saturday and the boy was transported to Monadnock Community Hospital by the Jaffrey/Rindge Memorial ambulance.

The boy’s injuries are considered non-life-threatening.

Conservation officers remind hikers to always take the weather into consideration before setting out on any hike and to always hike in sturdy footwear.