Story Continues Below Advertisement

Ad Statistics Times Displayed: 6474

Times Visited: 28 Looking for locating technology but can't decide on a direction? Whether you want to use existing Wi-Fi to track assets enterprise-wide, automate par-level asset management or leverage your investment for patient & staff workflow...Versus will put you on the path to RTLS success. Visit us at AAMI Booth # 930

Pages: 1 - 2 - 3 >>

Because EDs are often the first, and sometimes only, place people interact with their community’s hospital, they have a huge impact on a hospital’s reputation. They also generate a large percentage of inpatient admissions, a major source of hospital revenue. When run well, with a stable group of providers who deliver high quality care and excellent customer service, an ED can make a hospital’s reputation and boost its revenue. But if an ED is inefficient, with poor customer service, patients will be dissatisfied—regardless of the quality of care they receive. Positive or negative, a patient’s experience in the ED triggers a ripple effect that can be felt hospital-wide.I think everyone in healthcare agrees that physician performance drives the patient experience. But what I think many overlook is the support physicians require to perform well—efficiently, compassionately, and consistently. Education and incentives are a great start. But a high-functioning practice environment, which is to say, one where operations, finances, and the team are stable and not a source of stress, is vital. So too is work-life balance and outstanding clinical leadership. You can’t have happy patients if you have miserable doctors. And you won’t ever have happy doctors unless you create an environment where they feel valued, supported, and can thrive.Because of the growth, one of the biggest challenges new and established urgent care centers face is the ever-increasing competition. A location near a hospital or in a commercial area with 25,000 cars passing by is ideal—but it’s likely a competitor will agree. Many assume increasing volume is the way to survive and thrive. But I’d argue that mastering economies of scale and implementing lean processes must be done first.So, cross-train staff to step into each other’s jobs as needed to maintain flexibility and flow. Keep costs lower by staffing only one shift initially—ideally 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. Utilize advanced practice professionals and other support staff to ensure good customer service and flow without overwhelming your existing physician—or adding another. The goal is to maximize your capacity without compromising patient safety or satisfaction, then marketing to increase volume and adding resources when volume truly permits.