A 20-pound brown and yellow python rests on an engine block July 10 in Santa Fe, N.M. (Photo: SANTA FE POLICE DEPARTMENT/AP)

When a woman's pickup stalled on a street, local chef Jackson Ault stopped to lend a hand.

Ault and the driver both ended up with a surprise July 10 when Ault popped the hood and found a brown and yellow python slithering across the engine block.

A police lieutenant responded to a call for help. He retrieved the 20-pound snake.

The python was taken to the Santa Fe Animal Shelter, where a spokesman says the reptile has minor injuries but otherwise is in good shape.

Police say the snake likely crawled into the pickup at the motorist's home several blocks from where the vehicle stalled. Ault says he thinks the truck stalled because the snake dislodged an electrical wire.

Authorities say the owner hasn't turned up yet.

Man catches 482-pound halibut in Alaska

A California man hooked the catch of a lifetime while on vacation in Alaska.

The Orange County Register reports Friday that Jack McGuire, 76, of Santa Ana caught a 482-pound Pacific halibut. McGuire struggled for 40 minutes before the giant fish was reeled in.

His catch outweighs the 459-pound Pacific halibut caught in Alaska in 1996 that is the world record, but it doesn't meet International Game Fish Association regulations. The halibut was shot, then harpooned before it was brought aboard the boat, disqualifying the catch from being considered for a world record.

McGuire was on a weeklong fishing trip near Glacier Bay with his three children when he caught the 95-inch-long fish.

He says the boat captain shot the giant fish to keep it from flopping around and hurting someone. He applauded the decision, even if it contributed to him not getting the record.

Family maintains hold on pit-spitting contest

Brian Krause of Dimondale, Mich., participates in the 41st International Cherry Pit-Spitting Championship on July 5 at Tree-Mendus Fruit Farm in Eau Claire, Mich. (Photo: Don Campbell, The Herald-Palladium/AP)

When it comes to pit-spitting in southwestern Michigan, it's tough to beat the Krause family, who on July 5 maintained their dominance in the 41st International Cherry Pit-Spitting Championship.

Brian Krause took top honors with a distance of 80 feet, 8 inches, said Monica Teichman, who runs the market at Tree-Mendus Fruit Farm in Eau Claire, just north of the Indiana state line.

Coming in second this year was Brian's father, Rick, with a spitting distance of 77 feet, 7½ inches. Kevin Bartz took third with 64 feet, 8 inches.

Last year's big winner was Matt "BB Gun" Krause with a distance of 41 feet, 6½ inches.

The Krause family has won 26 of 41 of the contests since farm owner Herb Teichman launched the tournament in 1974 as a lark — but also to mark the region's tart cherry harvest.

Brian Krause holds the record spit of 93 feet, 6½ inches, set in 2003.

More than 100 people tried to qualify Saturday for the championship round.

A strong breeze may have accounted for the long distances after organizers changed the direction of the spitting, Monica Teichman said.

"We had some really good spits here," she added. "The breeze felt good, but … it wasn't good for the spitting. We needed to change because we would have been spitting into the wind."

This year's winner received tee time at a nearby golf course, a plaque, a medal, work gloves, a drill bit set and various gift certificates.

Man's draft notice comes 102 years late

A Pennsylvania woman says her late father has received notice to register for the nation's military draft — some 102 years too late.

Martha Weaver, now in her 80s, tells The (Oil City) Derrick that the Selective Service System notice arrived July 5 in Rockland Township, Venango County. That's about 60 miles north of Pittsburgh.

Her father's name was Fred Minnick, though the notice misspelled the last name "Minick" and warns that failure to register is "punishable by a fine and imprisonment."

Her father was born on June 12, 1894, which means he would have turned 18 in 1912.

Weaver suspects the confusion was spawned by the incorrect birth date on the form, which lists the birth year as 1994.

Minnick had died by then, on April 20, 1992.

Pilot buys pizzas for passengers grounded by storm

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share The pilot of a diverted Frontier Airlines flight scored major brownie - or should we say pizza - points with his passengers. Captain Gerhard Brandner ordered 50 pizzas for the entire plane to tide them over while their flight was delayed. KUSA

Faced with potentially hungry — and grumpy — passengers, a Frontier Airlines pilot treated them to pizza July 7 when storms diverted a Denver-bound flight to Cheyenne, where the plane was stuck for a couple of hours.

Cheyenne Domino's Pizza manager Andrew Ritchie said he got a call about 10 p.m. Monday just as he was about to send employees home. Ritchie said the pilot told him he needed to feed 160 people — fast.

"I put my hand over the phone and I said: 'Guys, you're coming back,' " Ritchie said.

In all, Ritchie said his crew made about 35 pizzas and delivered them to the airport, where the driver handed the food off to flight attendants.

That number of pizzas is usually what his store handles in an entire hour, Ritchie said. This time, they needed to make them and deliver them in about 30 minutes, he said.

But that didn't deter his co-workers, Ritchie said.

"Actually, they were super excited. They had a blast. It was a challenge," he said. "It was definitely one of those 'challenge accepted' moments in time," he said.

KUSA-TV reported that the flight to Denver International Airport, which originated in Washington, D.C., left Cheyenne about 10:30 p.m., shortly after the pizzas arrived.

The flight was one of dozens that delayed July 7 because of heavy rain across Colorado.

Rain, mud equal messy good time for hundreds of kids

Runners race through mud July 8 at the Annual Wayne county Parks Mud Day at Hines Park-Nankin Mills Area in Westland, Mich. (Photo: DANIEL MEARS/DETROIT NEWS)

Mud Day was even muddier than usual this year.

A steady rain drenched hundreds of kids and parents July 8 as they ran, jumped and waded into a 75-by-150-foot mud pit during the 26th annual event at a suburban Detroit park.

Todd Mueller, 43, missed 2013's sunny Mud Day because he had to work. But the consultant from Ann Arbor took the day off this year to make it to the Hines Park-Nankin Mills recreation area in Westland with his wife and their two kids.

Not more than 10 minutes in, Mueller was on his back in the middle of the pit covered from head to toe in mud, which he described as "soft and squishy" before his daughter jumped up and slathered on some more.

Jillian Palshan, 9 was rewarded for covering herself in the brown stuff.

The Taylor resident beat out dozens of other contestants for the coveted crown of "Queen of Mud." The judges were impressed by Jillian's "mud helmet," a thick covering that encircled her face and was perched on top of her head.

This was the best Mud Day ever, Jillian said.

Why?

"Because I'm mud queen!" she said, beaming.

The event, hosted by the county park system, included T-shirt giveaways, mud limbo and wheelbarrow races and a cleanup area in which firefighters hosed down participants.

Savanna Mabey, 8, of Massachusetts, who was visiting family, kicked off her Mud Day by doing a belly-flop into the pit.

"It's fun, because you make yourself dirty and stuff," Savanna said.

Especially this year.

Longtime Wayne County Executive Robert Ficano said he could not remember a past Mud Day with so much rain. Add in 200 tons of topsoil and 20,000 gallons of water, he said, and you get one muddy day.

Cat goes wild; owner calls 911

A 4-year-old Russian blue cat named Kush is being quarantined after apparently going berserk inside a central Florida home, prompting its owners to call 911.

Police say the feline scratched owners Teresa and James Gregory on their arms and legs July 5, causing the couple to retreat to a bedroom, where they called 911.

The Daytona Beach News-Journal reports Teresa Gregory told the dispatcher she had mistakenly stepped on the cat's tail earlier in the day and the cat went after her husband. They locked Kush in the bedroom for most of the day. When they finally opened the door, Kush wasn't happy.

Kush was placed in quarantine for 10 days at a pet shelter. Officials say the owners can then take the cat back home, relinquish ownership or have it put down.

Loch Ness monster it ain't: 6-foot croc found in Greece

Greece has its own lake monster — and it's no Nessie.

The Fire Brigade and authorities on the resort island of Crete say a 6-foot crocodile was spotted last week in a man-made lake near the seaside town of Rethymno.

Crocodiles are not native to Greece.

Regional official Vangelis Mamangakis said July 7 it was unclear how long it has been there. He told private Antenna TV that parts of the lake have been fenced off and efforts would be made July 10 to remove it. He said the crocodile was probably a pet that grew too big for its owner, who "thought it would be a good idea to dump it in the lake."

Residents are blaming the crocodile for missing lambs and ducks, and souvenir shops are now selling inflatable crocodiles.

Performer drapes, lights 10,500 firecrackers on body

John Fletcher gets a bang out of firecrackers — especially those he wraps around himself.

The 51-year-old Michigan performer's act includes setting off 10,500 firecrackers attached to his body, The Detroit News reported July 5.

"I guess I'm a little nuts," said Fletcher, who goes by the name Ghengis John the Human Firecracker. "I got a little bit of 'Hey, look at me.' "

He performed last weekend before 300 people and four firefighters at a motorcycle rally in the western Michigan town of Coopersville. It was one in a string of shows that Fletcher said would be his last.

He has yet to keep those promises.

"He's getting too old," Sharon Warner, a friend of Fletcher's, told the newspaper. "I've been telling him that a long time."

Fletcher said that over 16 years, he has set off 600,000 firecrackers attached to his body. His ribs have been fractured 17 times and once Fletcher says he was knocked unconscious. He also has been burned.

The gravel pit scale operator from Pinckney doesn't get paid for his performances and asks audiences to donate to charities.

It costs $140 and takes two weeks to put together his firecracker suit, which are strands of firecrackers are glued to four leather sheets Fletcher hangs over his abdomen, back and arms. He wears safety glasses and a compressed leather vest.

At the motorcycle rally, a volunteer lit the fuse for the firecrackers, and pretty soon, Fletcher began to snap, crackle and pop for about 45 seconds. Emergency medical technicians checked him over for injuries. The most serious appeared to be a bloody nose.

"This is why you never do this at home," Fletcher told the newspaper.

To that, a paramedic replied: "This is why you never do it."

Great fall too much — Humpty Dumpty to be rebuilt

The nursery rhyme proved right: Humpty Dumpty couldn't be put together again.

But the owner of an Oregon tourist attraction vows to build Humpty anew.

During the July 4 holiday weekend, two men planning a photograph jumped on the wall where the statue of rebar, concrete, sand and plaster had sat for 40 years.

And, you know how it goes: Humpty Dumpty had a great fall.

Sculptor Roger Tofte, 84, tells the Salem Statesman Journal Humpty was in too many pieces to fix, but the two men offered to pay for a new one. He says it will take a month to build.

Tofte has been running the Enchanted Forest along Interstate 5 south of Salem since 1971. It's 20 acres of rides and sculptures based on fairy tales and nursery rhymes.

Alaskan city has most expensive haircut in US

If you've seen a lot of long-haired men on Alaska's Kodiak Island, this might be the reason.

A new study finds the City of Kodiak has the priciest men's haircut in the nation, on average at $26.67 a cut. The national average is $13.95 a cut.

The Kodiak Daily Mirror reports the figure is included in a state Labor Department report comparing cost of living data for more than 300 cities.

There is, however, a silver lining for those Kodiak men who are embarrassed by their long locks and want to hide in a dark place.

The report says Kodiak has the most inexpensive movie ticket in Alaska, at $6 on average. That's well below the average ticket price of $10.68 in Anchorage.

Red Bull spills onto I-95 in Florida truck crash

Call it a different kind of energy jolt. Thousands of gallons of Red Bull spilled onto Interstate 95 in central Florida on July 7 after two tractor-trailers collided.

The Florida Highway Patrol says the crash happened in the evening near Rockledge.

Troopers say the truck hauling more than 30,000 pounds of Red Bull was heading north when the driver tried to move over to the center lane because another truck was disabled on the shoulder of the road. When the driver swerved back into the outside lane, his truck sideswiped the parked vehicle. The trailer on the first truck ripped open and the energy drink spilled onto the road.

The driver of the truck was ticketed for failure to maintain a single lane. No injuries were reported.

Pig threatens children walking through woods

Police are looking for a pig that threatened two children walking through the woods.

Capt. Rick Stubbert tells the Morning Sentinel that the children were walking along a trail in the wooded area between the local middle school and the high school at about 1:45 p.m. July 8 when the pig confronted them, "screaming at the kids and chasing them."

The children were so frightened they flagged down a police officer. Police did not disclose the children's age.

Officers, including animal control, responded to the scene, and although they found tracks that confirmed the pig was real, they didn't find the animal.

Stubbert says he doesn't know where the pig came from or why it might have been acting aggressively.

Would-be pirate calls for help on stolen yacht

A Southern California man managed to convince authorities he was a respectable yachtsman long enough to make off with a $3 million luxury boat for a day, police said.

Newport Beach police said Richard Rodriguez, 32, broke into the 78-foot Stimulus last week, found keys inside and headed to sea.

But he became wedged between docks and radioed for help, the Orange County Register reported July 4.

Rodriguez looked like he knew the boat and raised no suspicion when the harbor patrol helped him, a sheriff's spokesman said. The man told deputies the boat was registered to a California corporation, and they didn't have enough information to disprove the claim.

The next day, authorities learned the yacht was stolen, and Rodriguez was spotted near Long Beach Harbor.

Authorities said he later attempted to ram a police boat before he was caught and sent to jail.

The boat had no food on board, only alcohol.

"It was a drunken sea pirate adventure," Long Beach police Detective Joseph Starbird told the newspaper.

Finnish couple win quirky 'wife carrying' race

Champions Ville Parviainen and Janette Oksman of Vantaa, Finland, compete in the Wife Carrying World Championships held July 5 in Sonkajarvi, Finland. (Photo: PEKKA MOLIS/AP)

A Finnish couple has narrowly won the 19th World Wife Carrying Championships — a quirky competition in which men race to be the fastest while carrying a female teammate.

Ville Parviainen and Janette Oksman cleared the grueling 278-yard obstacle course in 63.75 seconds on July 5, less than a second ahead of Britain's Rich Blake Smith and Anna Marguerite Smith.

Thirty-six couples from 12 nations including Australia, Japan, and the U.S. took part in the race, which was held in the central Finnish municipality of Sonkajarvi, north of the capital, Helsinki.

The rules stipulate that the woman must be over 17 years of age and weigh at least 108 pounds. Despite the event's name couples don't have to be married, and organizers say male contestants could "borrow a neighbor's wife" if they didn't have a female companion.

The men can carry their teammate in various ways, though a popular method is for the woman to hang upside-down with her legs around the male contestant's shoulders.

Finland has established itself as a prime venue for unusual events including international air guitar, swamp soccer and mobile phone throwing competitions.

Farmer loses phone, returned 8 months later in Japan

Oklahoma farmer Kevin Whitney thought his iPhone was lost for good when it fell into a grain elevator last year. Eight months later, his phone was returned unscathed after a trip to Japan.

Whitney, the manager of the Apache Farmers Co-Op in Chickasha, Oklahoma, lost his phone in October after it slipped out of his shirt pocket as he was unloading grain from a truck into a silo holding roughly 290,000 bushels of grain.

"I knew it was lost forever and there was no retrieving the thing," said Whitney, 53.

Whitney went out and bought a replacement phone the next day. But the loss of the phone was tough: Pictures of family photos from his daughter's wedding and vacation were stored on there.

What Whitney didn't know was that his phone was just beginning its journey.

The phone traveled to another Oklahoma grain facility before going down the Arkansas and Mississippi rivers to a depot in Convent, Louisiana. From there, the grain was loaded onto ships bound for another grain depot on the island of Hokkaido, Japan.

In late May, Whitney received a phone call from Eric Slater with the Zen-Noh Grain Corporation.

"Lo and behold, I get a call from a guy who works with this grain company in Convent, Louisiana, saying a guy at a feed mill in Japan found the phone," Whitney said.

Slater, manager for Zen-Noh's terminal in Convent, said he charged the phone and scrolled through to find Whitney's pictures and called him.

"I knew if that was my phone, I'd probably want it back," said Slater, who added it's not uncommon for cellphones to accidentally fall into grain shipments. "Frankly, I field about a phone a month."

Whitney was shocked the phone made it through such an ordeal in pristine condition.

"It's crazy because everyone's walking around with a cracked iPhone," he said.

After its global odyssey, the "old" phone came back in June, and is sitting in Whitney's desk drawer, safe at home.

Whitney said he's still shocked he got the phone back.

"It's amazing he didn't just throw it in a Dumpster or something, let alone send it back to somebody," Whitney said.

Police: Men steal $2,000 in soap, hygiene items

Police are trying to figure out why three hygiene-minded thieves walked into a CVS pharmacy in Atlanta's northern suburbs and stole $2,000 in soap and other personal care items.

Authorities say the three men were filmed by surveillance cameras as they carried out the July 1 heist at a store in Sandy Springs, just north of Atlanta.

Sandy Springs police Sgt. Ron Momon tells WSB-TV the suspects walked into the store and casually grabbed the items, then walked out of the store past cashiers.

Police said they wanted to catch up with the men to find out why they took the products.

Whoops! Police say tow truck tried to snag cop car

Whoops!

Authorities said Thursday they arrested the owner of Whoops Towing as he tried to haul off an undercover police car.

Michael Alan Selmer, 35, of Falls City, who has spent much of the past decade in prison over several scams, was taken into custody after police got reports that a towing business was operating without a certificate, posting impound warning signs in parking lots, and using a spotter to generate tows, authorities said.

Police say they parked the unmarked vehicle on Tuesday as part of the investigation, then arrested Selmer when he showed up in the tow truck.

He was booked on suspicion of failure to register as a sex offender and violating parole terms. The towing investigation was being reviewed by Marion County prosecutors.

Selmer was arrested and convicted in 2008 after posing as a firefighter, paramedic and as someone who ran an ambulance company, authorities said.

He was accused of telling people he had his own ambulance service so he could get donations for police and life-saving equipment.

Police said they had arrested Selmer while he was driving a stolen pickup truck rigged with concealed blue and red flashing police lights and with radios equipped to pick up law enforcement frequencies.

He was later convicted of theft, sex abuse and unlawful use of a vehicle, and was in the state prison system from April 2008 until October 2012, said Betty Bernt, a spokeswoman for the Oregon Department of Corrections.

He was also in state prison from February 2004 until November 2006 after working as an apartment manager. Police arrested him after seven families arrived at an apartment complex, ready to move in, then found no vacancies and their deposit money missing.

Police: Buddhist monks ticketed for illegal fireworks

They'll likely be mindful of any future fireworks ban.

Albuquerque authorities say, among the more than a dozen citations for illegal fireworks handed out July 4, one was given to a group of Buddhist monks, KRQE-TV reports.

Albuquerque Fire Department inspector Darrick Pino said the citation was written after authorities stumbled upon an audience watching a fireworks show from the Hoi Phuoc Buddhist Temple.

The monks were setting off a treasure trove of illegal fireworks, including Roman candles and mortars, Pino said. But Albuquerque was under fireworks restrictions due to high fire danger.

A woman with the temple told authorities the monks don't watch TV, listen to the radio or read newspapers. She said the monks didn't know there was a fireworks ban.

"It's still your responsibility to know the laws of the land," Pino said.

The citations can carry a fine of up to $500 or 90 days in jail.

Man dies in holiday hot dog eating contest

A Fourth of July hot dog eating contest in Custer turned tragic when a contestant choked to death.

Custer County Sheriff Rick Wheeler tells the Rapid City Journal that Walter Eagle Tail, 47, of Custer, died July 3 at a hospital after attempts at the scene to save him failed.

The Custer Chamber of Commerce sponsored the contest. The group canceled a pie-eating contest scheduled for July 4.

Chamber Executive Director Dave Ressler says the group is "at a loss for words."

Golf cart plunge kills South Dakota woman

Police are investigating the death of a woman who was killed when the golf cart her husband was driving plunged off a 7.5-foot-high retaining wall and rolled on top of the couple.

Monica Beer, 54, of Deadwood, died July 5 at the scene near the Deadwood Gulch Resort.

Police Chief Kelly Fuller tells the Rapid City Journal that Beer's husband, Greg Vecchi, was taken to a hospital with serious injuries and later released.

Police said later that no charges would be filed. Vecchi told police that the golf cart's accelerator got stuck, the newspaper reported. Tests showed he had no alcohol in his system.

NYPD: Man swiped 7 American flags from homes

New York City police are searching for a man they say stole seven American flags from homes on Independence Day.

The thefts happened at about 5:30 a.m. July 4 in Brooklyn's Windsor Terrace neighborhood.

Police say July 5 that in each incident, the man grabbed the flag from its flagpole before riding away. They describe the man as wearing blue jeans shorts and a bandana.

Surveillance video shows the man enter one home through the front gate, take the flagpole off a stoop, remove the flag and leave the pole behind before riding away.

Compiled by Paul H. Rowe

Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1mxZV3b