WASHINGTON, Dec. 9, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- The EY Tax Educators' Symposium held this fall drew more than 80 professors from top tax accounting programs. The strong attendance and enthusiastic feedback reflected the need for tax accounting professors to understand the sweeping proposals to international tax policies and to address updates to recent changes to domestic tax law and regulations. Each year, the annual symposium shares current developments and their implications with tax professors from universities across the country.

Sponsored by the Ernst & Young Foundation, the event provided tax educators with leading edge resources and a robust learning experience. It also facilitated discussion between the academic community and tax practitioners by combining formal technical sessions with informal gatherings and networking opportunities.

Due to the prevalence of tax policy discussions, the symposium kicked off with two plenary presentations that focused on the big picture. Jefferson VanderWolk, Executive Director with Washington Council Ernst & Young, who recently served as International Tax Counsel to the US Senate Committee on Finance, provided an update to the landscape of international tax policy. Robert Carroll, National Director of Quantitative Economics and Statistics (QUEST) for Ernst & Young LLP, presented recent research on tax reform proposals and expectations.

"Tax professionals are challenged to stay on top of the larger issues, which means that educators must stay on top of the news and its implications and be able to teach how those larger issues affect the technical aspects of tax every day," said host Ian Bradley, EY Americas Director of Quantitative Services. "While we present many updates and information, the symposium allows us to learn more from these leading academics on how to help meet the educational requirements of future tax professionals."

The two-day symposium offered 15 tax technical sessions on some of the most complex tax issues. Topics included: the OECD Base Erosion and Profit Shifting Project, cloud computing, tax provisions resulting from the Affordable Care Act to increase health care coverage, the growing need for technology and analytics skills in tax, proposed regulations affecting partnership taxation, cross-border planning for US citizens and the international matrix of risk and controversy. The symposium also included a session on quality, standards and integrity in tax.

In addition to this faculty-dedicated event, EY hosts many programs to help attract college students to the organization, including its Global Student Experience program, Emerging Leaders Summit and International Intern Leadership Conference, with thousands of participants annually.

About EY

EY is a global leader in assurance, tax, transaction and advisory services. The insights and quality services we deliver help build trust and confidence in the capital markets and in economies the world over. We develop outstanding leaders who team to deliver on our promises to all of our stakeholders. In so doing, we play a critical role in building a better working world for our people, for our clients and for our communities.

EY refers to the global organization, and may refer to one or more, of the member firms of Ernst & Young Global Limited, each of which is a separate legal entity. Ernst & Young Global Limited, a UK company limited by guarantee, does not provide services to clients. For more information about our organization, please visit ey.com.

This news release has been issued by Ernst & Young LLP, member firm of EY serving clients in the US.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130701/NY40565LOGO-b

SOURCE EY