The Louisiana black bear has been removed from the endangered species list. (Photo: Gerald Herbert / AP)

Tucked away in toy boxes across the nation are stuffed animals named for our 26th President and an iconic bear that has been pulled back from the brink of extinction. The story goes that Theodore Roosevelt famously refused to shoot a wounded Louisiana black bear while on a hunting trip, eventually leading to the creation of “Teddy bears.”

The next chapter for the Louisiana black bears is just as compelling and — thanks to the Endangered Species Act (ESA) — has a happy ending.

The bears thrive in bottomland hardwood forests, which occur in southeast U.S. river floodplains, but by 1980, an estimated 80 percent of their habitat had been converted to agricultural use, and the bear’s future looked bleak. The bear was listed as threatened — likely to be at risk of extinction in the foreseeable future — under the ESA in 1992.

Committed to saving the bear and its habitat, a motivated group of stakeholders came together and formed the Black Bear Conservation Coalition. People from the forest industry, conservationists, state personnel, private landowners, researchers, and the public worked for decades to fund research, educate the public, provide landowner assistance, and restore bear habitat.

Thanks to the hard work and partnership of many — today, tomorrow and yesterday — the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has delisted the black bear from the ESA. The tremendous feat was completed in just 24 years — nine years ahead of the schedule laid out in its recovery plan.

Today, the Service estimates that Louisiana black bear habitat has increased by a factor of five thanks to restoration efforts on public and private lands. Importantly, habitat connectivity has also increased; bears can travel more freely between populations, which improve genetic diversity and the overall health of the species.

The rapid recovery of the Louisiana black bear is a testament to the power and importance of effective partnering and shows that states, federal agencies, and private landowners can make a difference for our nation’s imperiled species, preserving our natural heritage for generations to come.

It’s also a testament to the power of the ESA. Since it was enacted by Congress in 1973, the ESA has successfully prevented the extinction of more than 99 percent of the species it protects — the recovery of the Louisiana black bear being its most recent success. It joins other iconic species such as the bald eagle and American alligator in being fully recovered and removed from the Federal List of Endangered and Threatened Wildlife.

Roosevelt, whose legacy as a conservationist endures to this day, would undoubtedly join us in celebrating the bear’s bright future.

Read or Share this story: http://www.shreveporttimes.com/story/opinion/columnists/2016/03/20/saving-teddy-bear-partnerships-lead-louisiana-black-bear-recovery/82058684/