Timothy Jost

May 7, 2015

May 21 Update: ACA contraceptive coverage litigation and Marketplace special enrollment period coverage update. On May 20, 2015, the Seventh Circuit federal court of appeals again refused to grant an injunction to Notre Dame University to block access of its students and employees to contraceptive coverage through its insurer and third party administrator. Notre Dame had sued claiming that it was entitled to this relief under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. The Seventh Circuit had affirmed a district court decision denying Notre Dame an injunction in February of 2014, but the Supreme Court had remanded in March of this year for further consideration in light of its 2014 Hobby Lobby decision, which held that a closely held for-profit corporation was entitled to accommodation of its religious objections to contraception.

In a 2 to 1 opinion written by Judge Richard Posner, the court held again that Notre Dame was not entitled to relief. The court upheld that the current accommodation, which merely requires Notre Dame to notify the government of its objection to providing contraceptive coverage and then requires the government to ensure that the insurer and third party administrator that cover Notre Dame’s employees and students provide contraceptive services without any involvement of Notre Dame; the court said this arrangement does not substantially burden Notre Dame’s free exercise of its religious beliefs, and in any event is the least restrictive reasonable means to serve the compelling governmental interest of ensuring access to contraceptive services.

As it had been instructed to do by the Supreme Court, the Seventh Circuit reviewed the Hobby Lobby decision. It concluded that its resolution of the issue was consistent with the Supreme Court’s discussion of compelling governmental interest and least restrictive alternative considerations.

Judge Posner was joined in his opinion by Judge Hamilton, who examined further Hobby Lobby’s support for the court’s decision on the substantial burden, compelling governmental interest, and least restrictive means grounds. Judge Flaum dissented. He would have found that the religious organization accommodation still substantially burdened Notre Dame’s religious beliefs and that the government had not established that there was no less restrictive means to accomplish its goals.

As of this point, dozens of cases are pending in the courts brought by religious organizations challenging the contraceptive mandate, and the courts have reached different conclusion as to the acceptability of the government’s accommodation of religious organizations. This issue is likely to return again to the Supreme Court for final resolution.

In other news, HHS tweeted on May 19 that 146,000 individuals selected plans through the federally facilitated marketplace during the tax penalty special enrollment period. This special enrollment period was created to allow individuals who had to pay the tax penalty for 2014 to avoid it for 2015 by getting coverage. This number is in addition to a so far undisclosed number who signed up through state-operated exchanges through equivalent state special enrollment periods.

May 15 Update: Rate information filing deadline delay for state-based exchanges and other news. Under uniform rate filing guidelines posted in April, health insurers in the individual and small group market (both in and out of the exchange) must submit a Rate Filing Justification for their 2016 rates to CMS and to state insurance departments by May 15, 2015, unless a state requires earlier posting. States must post on their own website certain information from the Rate Filing Justification, which must be filed by insurers, or link to the CMS website for that information no later than 10 business days thereafter. Final rates must be submitted by August 25.

On May 13, 2015, CMS issued guidance permitting states with effective rate review programs and with state-based marketplaces that do not use the federally facilitated marketplace (FFM) platform to set rate filing deadlines later — as late as June 5, 2015 — to post required information from Rate Filing Justifications on their websites by June 19, and to finalize all rates by October 9, 2015, posting final rates by November 1, 2015. All rates must be released at the same time.

Although there has been talk about modifying rate filing procedures in light of the potential impact on insurance rates of a Supreme Court decision in King v. Burwell invalidating premium tax credits through the FFM, this guidance is aimed at state-operated rather than FFM states, so King v. Burwell would not seem to be relevant. It is more likely that since these states are not using the FFM platform, CMS does not need rate information for loading rates onto the FFM and can allow the states a bit more leeway.

In other news, the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation released a brief report on May 14 noting that 137 million Americans, including 56 million women, 29 million children, and 54 million men, have access to preventive care without cost sharing under the ACA. And another court threw out another ACA case on May 15, 2015. American Freedom Law Center v. Obama had challenged the administration’s transition policy — which allowed individuals to maintain health plans that are not compliant with all ACA requirements — and the hardship exemption that the agencies created for individuals who lost affordable coverage because of the enforcement of the 2014 health insurance reforms; the hardship exemption allowed these people to purchase catastrophic coverage or avoid the individual responsibility penalty.

Judge Reggie Walton dismissed the case, finding that the plaintiffs had not shown that they had been injured by the government’s action. The plaintiffs claimed that their insurance premiums went up because of the transitional policy, but the court held that the premiums went up because insurers increased them, and that the plaintiffs had not proven a causal connection between the insurers’ actions and the transitional policy. The plaintiffs argued that the necessary causal relationship was established by congressional findings that a broad risk pool was necessary to make the insurance reforms work, and a Blue Cross actuarial memorandum that referred to the transitional policy as a driver of increased premiums. However, the court rejected these contentions.

In dismissing the case the judge cited a string of other cases that have dismissed ACA challenges because the plaintiffs failed to establish an injury from the challenged policy. This case is one more sign that the courts are losing patience with hearing political grievances about the ACA.

May 10 Update: Interaction of ACA and HSA-compliant cost-sharing rules: One important Affordable Care Act insurance reform that went into effect in 2010 prohibits insurers from imposing out-of-pocket cost sharing for covered in-network essential health benefit services that exceeds certain limits. These limits were set initially at the out-of-pocket maximum for high deductible, health savings account-compliant health plans and are updated each year according to a statutory inflation adjuster. The amount is set at a fixed dollar amount annually: for 2016, $6,850 for self-only coverage, and twice that amount ($13,700) for other than self-only — or family — coverage.

The 2016 Benefit and Payment Parameter rule clarified that when an individual is enrolled in family coverage, the individual out-of-pocket limit applies to that individual. That is, once out-of-pocket expenditures for that individual reach $6,850 (for 2016), expenses above this limit must be wholly covered by the insurer, even if the family unit has not yet reached the family limit ($13,700 for 2016).

On May 8, 2015 CMS released a frequently asked question document on its REGTAP website clarifying that this rule will be enforced for 2016 and does not preclude insurers from offering health savings account-compliant high deductible health plans that comply with Internal Revenue Service HSA Rules. IRS rules require HSA-compliant health plans to impose deductibles that are not less than specified amounts. The minimum deductible for a family for 2016 is $2,600—far less than the $6,850 maximum cost-sharing limit for individuals under the ACA rule. Thus, ACA compliant plans can also be HSA compliant.

The FAQ also instructs plans as to how to enter out-of-pocket limits on the qualified health plan plans and benefits template.

Original Post: On May 5, 2015, the Senate passed, 51-48, the fiscal year 2016 budget resolution. This legislation had already been passed by the House and does not need to be signed by the President, so it is now the official 2016 budget of Congress.

The budget resolution is a very different document from the President’s budget, submitted in early February. The President’s budget included very detailed recommendations for spending on various Affordable Care Act programs. The congressional budget resolution only includes dollar figures for a few very large functional categories ($433,064,000,000 in new budget authority for “health” for 2016), and even these may be subject to further undesignated cuts, so it is impossible to say how much money Congress intends to spend to fund ACA functions.

This does not mean, however, that the budget resolution has nothing to say about the ACA—far from it.

Reconciliation Instructions

First, as has been widely reported, the budget resolution includes reconciliation instructions intended to facilitate the repeal of the ACA. The House reconciliation instructions direct the relevant House committees to come up with recommendations to the House Budget Committee for reaching specific deficit reduction targets by July 24, 2015. The budget further specifically instructs the House committees to “determine the most effective methods by which the [ACA and amendments] shall be repealed in their entirety.”

The reconciliation instructions direct the committees to consider a policy statement on repeal of the ACA found later in the budget resolution. The policy statement includes a series of criticisms of the ACA, which conclude:

The President’s health care law is unaffordable, intrusive, overreaching, destructive, and unworkable. Its complex structure of subsidies, mandates, and penalties perversely impact individuals, married couples, and families. The law should be fully repealed, allowing for real, patient-centered health care reform: the development of real health care reforms that puts patients first, that make affordable, quality health care available to all Americans, and that build on the innovation and creativity of all the participants in the health care sector.

The policy statement proceeds to identify traditional elements of Republican reform proposals that should be adopted by Congress, including association health plans, sale of insurance across state lines, turning control of Medicaid over to the states in some unspecified way, changing the burden of proof in malpractice cases based on compliance with best practice guidelines, and in general reducing regulation–particularly federal regulation–of health care.

The policy statement is not insensitive to some issues addressed by the ACA. For example, it recognizes the problem of preexisting medical conditions, stating that “individuals should not be priced out of the health insurance market due to pre-existing conditions.” But it rejects the ACA’s approach to this problems, saying “nationalized health care is not only unnecessary to accomplish this, it undermines the goal.”

Advantages And Limitations Of Reconciliation

A budget reconciliation bill carries certain procedural advantages. Debate is limited to 20 hours in the Senate and is usually limited in the House as well. Most importantly, reconciliation legislation cannot be filibustered in the Senate and can be passed by a simple majority.

But reconciliation bills are limited under Senate rules as to what they can achieve. Under the Byrd Rule, any senator can raise a point of order objecting to “extraneous matter” in a reconciliation bill, and if that point of order is upheld by the Senate parliamentarian, the matter must be excised from the reconciliation bill unless the point of order is waived by three fifths vote of the Senate. The Byrd Rule considers to be extraneous any provision of a reconciliation measure that doesn’t change federal spending or revenues, or for which the change in spending or revenues is “merely incidental” to the provision’s non-budgetary effects.

It is conceivable that repeal of the entire ACA, or of specific titles of the ACA, could be considered as affecting revenue and outlays, and thus be ruled non-extraneous. It is difficult to see, however, how expanding the scope of association health plans or sale of insurance across state lines would affect revenues or outlays. It is quite possible that the ACA could be repealed, but not replaced, through reconciliation.

Moreover, provisions of a reconciliation bill may also be struck under the Byrd rule if they increase the deficit under certain circumstances. As the ACA has been generally scored as reducing the deficit, repealing ACA provisions without increasing the deficit may not be possible. Of course, if Republicans intend to repeal the provisions of the ACA that cost money, but not the Medicare cuts or tax increases which pay for those provisions, a reconciliation bill might pass muster. (There is an added complication this year, as a decision for the plaintiffs in King v. Burwell invalidating tax credits in federally facilitated exchange stats would reduce the cost of the ACA and thus increase the impact of a replacement plan on the deficit, a situation that seems to be recognized by special House reconciliation instructions to use the March 2015 Congressional Budget Office baseline for determining the impact of reconciliation).

Finally, the President would have to sign a reconciliation bill before it could become law. President Obama would not sign a repeal bill. At most, therefore, a reconciliation bill would make a political statement and lay down markers for the 2016 presidential and congressional election.

Reserve Funds

The budget resolution includes not only recommended budgetary levels, reconciliation instructions, and policy statements, but also a lengthy list of “reserve funds.” These are essentially issues that have been flagged as having particular importance to the House or Senate and are therefore subject to special instructions that give the jurisdictional committees additional flexibility in addressing these issues as long as their approach do not increase the deficit. Many of the items on this list involve the ACA. Specifically, they involve:

Revising allocations among committees and adjusting pay-as-you go levels to repeal and replace the ACA,

Amending the CHIP program,

Repeal of the individual and employer responsibility provisions,

Repeal of the medical device tax,,

Improving community health centers,

Improving outcomes and reducing costs for caring for medically complex children on Medicaid,

Requiring disclosure of health reform related taxes and fees on monthly insurance premium statements,

Requiring high-level administration employees as well as Congress to obtain health insurance through individual exchanges without non-income related government contributions, and

Changing the definition of full-time employee found in the employer mandate.

The resolution also contains a number of “reserve fund” instructions addressing Medicare and veterans’ health care, as well as others calling for reduction in federal regulation or bureaucracy that probably are aimed in part at the ACA. Some of these provisions could be enacted through reconciliation, but any budget legislation passed through the normal budget processes rather than through reconciliation may face a filibuster and thus require bipartisan support.

The Divided Government Dance: A Pas de Trois This Time

In the end, to keep the government running, Congress will have to adopt appropriations bills to cover non-mandatory federal spending by the beginning of the 2016 fiscal year (October 1, 2015), and the President will have to sign those bills into law. Congress has considerable leverage in the process, but so does the President. The last time Republicans shut down the government over the ACA the gambit did not help them politically. Republicans in Congress will need to decide this time around how far they are willing to go to try to force changes in the ACA, and the President will need to decide what changes, if any, he is willing to accept.

This is, of course, always the dynamic of divided government. But this time around there is a wild card: the Supreme Court could, by deciding in King v. Burwell to invalidate the Internal Revenue Service rule allowing federally facilitated exchanges to grant premium tax credits, cause millions of Americans to lose health insurance and seriously destabilize the insurance markets in two thirds of the states. If this happens, Congress will likely need to take action to repair this breach.

All three branches of our government, therefore, may play a role in determining what survives of the ACA. It should be an interesting summer.