Even though I never voted for Barack Obama, and, as a Republican, I could find a host issues where we would disagree, it’s time to give this incredible man the respect and admiration he deserves.

Buy Photo Paul Bugbee (Photo: Times photo)Buy Photo Story Highlights He embodies the ideals in the Declaration of Independence more than any president since Lincoln

Obama has never lost his enthusiasm nor his confidence for a better America

It was one of those pictures that truly was worth 1,000 words.

On Feb. 4, USA Today published a front-page photograph of President Obama greeting Muslims at the Islamic Society of Baltimore. It was his first visit to an American mosque. He had just finished speaking, encouraging Muslims worldwide to combat extremist ideology and terrorism.

The picture could easily have been a Norman Rockwell print: mothers with ecstatic smiles, young boys in their Cub Scout uniforms, girls seeking a chance to shake the president’s hand, others waving small American flags.

Parents in the crowd clamored for photographs of their own, using cellphones, iPads and cameras. Every age group, race and gender gleamed with fascination, awe and expectation.

This was the president of the United States; their president. Our president!

Even though I never voted for Barack Obama, and, as a Republican, I could find a host issues where we would disagree, it’s time to give this incredible man the respect and admiration he deserves.

It’s not enough to call him out as a great leader just because he is our first black president. Regardless of his ethnicity, he embodies the ideals our forefathers put forth in the Declaration of Independence more than any president since Abraham Lincoln.

Often surrounded by controversy and subjected to frequent racist myths, epithets and partisan absurdities, Obama has never lost his enthusiasm nor his confidence for a better America. He resonates with common people and offers hope and encouragement for the masses, especially those who have been pushed aside, downtrodden or neglected.

He has articulated principles with actions, seeking to end racial and gender prejudices, class disparities and political bias. He stands for integrity, courage and standards of fairness in a world defined by wealth and power.

As president, Obama exemplified a vision for a greater America that goes beyond his list of accomplishments and failures:

• The legalization of same-sex marriages recognizes values of equality and personal choice.

• Global warming and renewable energy initiatives recognize the fragility of our planet and our desire for environmental preservation.

• The Affordable Care Act recognizes the importance of health care access to all Americans.

• The Detroit auto bailout and a hefty economic stimulus package helped avoid a complete meltdown of the world economy in the Great Recession.

Addressing issues of racial profiling, religious differences and the continued plight of minority ethnic groups raises awareness among all Americans and helps us move closer to the guarantees of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness for everyone.

Even his failed efforts for greater gun control measures send important messages of concern for safety and well-being.

In foreign affairs, Obama set new and higher standards for America’s role in conflicts and peace. Instead of flexing American ego and military might, Obama sought compromise and understanding by advocating diplomatic resolve, yet facilitating the war efforts of our allies when necessary through tactical support and training.

Despite the sad reality of America’s involvement in foreign conflicts throughout Obama’s tenure, it is safe to say that because of his policies of combat restraint there are fewer American troop casualties today than in any other presidency since the end of the Vietnam War.

The bottom line is a recognition of Obama’s view of the American presidency, the blessings that we enjoy as a nation, and his perspective of our role in the world.

He brought a different sensibility and aesthetic to the office by attributing our country’s prominence to the sacrifices and challenges Americans have endured and the struggles we have overcome. He has instilled hope and dignity on the home front and established trust and respect abroad.

Honesty, intellect, fairness, integrity, confidence, humility, stamina, vision, empathy, compassion, hope and understanding are a few of the adjectives that define a great leader and an even greater president.

Republican or Democrat, white or black, Christian, Muslim or atheist, man or woman, wealthy or poor, and everyone in between can put aside their differences and their egos in recognition and respect for the presidency of Barack Obama.

I fear it’ll be a long time before a man or woman of this caliber ascends to the highest office in America — and the world —again.

This is the opinion of Paul Bugbee, a Central Minnesota resort owner. His column is published the third Thursday of the month.

Read or Share this story: http://www.sctimes.com/story/opinion/2016/05/18/despite-politics-obama-deserves-praise/84510494/