Nurse practitioners see rising demand, wide range of duties

Photo: iStockphoto Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 NPs assess patients, order and interpret diagnostic tests, make diagnoses, and initiate and manage treatment plans - including prescribing medications. NPs assess patients, order and interpret diagnostic tests, make diagnoses, and initiate and manage treatment plans - including prescribing medications. Photo: iStockphoto Nurse practitioners see rising demand, wide range of duties 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Nurse practitioners (NPs) have been providing primary, acute and specialty health care to patients of all ages and walks of life for nearly half a century.

NPs assess patients, order and interpret diagnostic tests, make diagnoses, and initiate and manage treatment plans - including prescribing medications.

They are the health care providers of choice for millions of patients, and with the Affordable Care Act, they are in more demand than ever before.

"Nurse practitioners are very important and make it possible for many to have access to health care that otherwise they would not, such as in rural areas or communities where more access to health care is needed. NPs help fill the need," said Dr. Kathryn Tart, EdD, RN, dean and professor, University of Houston - Victoria.

However, for nurses to become nurse practitioners, they need additional education.

"Nurses need a four-year degree, BSN, or Bachelor of Science in nursing, and a Master of Science in nursing, from an educational institution that trains nurse practitioners. They also will need to take the nursing licensing exam after they complete their four-year degree or master's degree. NPs also have to sit for the certification licenses to practice. Many nurses continue their education to become a physician's assistant by completing a doctorate of nursing," said Dr. Laura Rooney, director, UT Health Services.

Today's NPs are able to prescribe medications such as antibiotics and anti-depressants. To prescribe controlled substances, such as narcotics and pain medications, the NP would need to apply for a Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) license. Some NPs are able to prescribe some pain medications, though.

If a student went straight through, from a four-year BSN straight through to completing a NP degree, it would probably take six to seven years.

"Nurse practitioners are very educated people," Tart said.

Most NPs specialize in family practice, women's health or acute care in a hospital. Yet, there are other areas of specialization opportunities.

The University of Houston has three master's degree tracks for NPs, which are family practice, education and nurse administrators, and there are critical shortages in all of these areas. UH also has a number of agreements with community colleges, for those with an associate degree to transfer to the university.

"NPs are supervised by a physician, but the physician does not have to be on site full time. NPs also are able to open their own practices, and hire physicians for collaborations," Rooney said.

"Being a nurse is a calling, and is for those who like people, enjoy providing care and who like science. Being a nurse or a nurse practitioner is a very fulfilling position, a lifelong career of service and giving back," Tart said.

In addition, salaries for NPs are very livable and fluctuate depending if they open their own practice, work in a hospital or clinic, or teach.

"Doors open up for nurses with master's degrees," Tart said.

Mobility key

NPs are also able to be mobile, and can find a job wherever they move across states or any country, or from one medical facility to another locally.

"Today, there are so many new people obtaining insurance that a shortage of medical staff is being seen and PAs fill the gap, especially in primary care," Rooney said.