Please enable Javascript to watch this video

HUNTSVILLE, Ala. (WHNT) -- The U.S. Marine Corps' Toys for Tots program is running into a few bumps in the road. They still need to help kids in Madison County have a merry Christmas morning, and they are starting to run low on toys. They still have several hundred children on their list.

These are gifts that are given to children who come from low-income families. If they don't get the number of toys they need to fill the orders, there may be some disappointed faces on Christmas morning.

"We're down to our last county right now and we're short about 600 bags which equals 600 kids," said Staff Sergeant Michael Williams, the Toys for Tots coordinator.

The campaign has always been strong in Madison County, but they are coming up short this year. Madison County is the largest county for Toys for Tots, and the program usually helps 2,800 to 3,000 children every Christmas. Williams said his crew has been working 14 hour days at the warehouse, but they aren't getting the results they need.

"It's just the economy," he said. "The economy is rough right now, a lot of people are having a hard time, and we understand that." However, at the end of the day, Williams wanted to remind the community, it's important to remember our children.

"As adults, as parents, what we need to be teaching children in today's society is that you really need to give back when you can." He hopes that people will find it in their heart to donate this holiday season.

"There's fortunate people out there and there's unfortunate people out there," he said. "The economy is really bad right now and we understand that, it's just pulling the community together on something like this, it's going to make a strong-knit community become even stronger."

Williams said he's sure that the community will come together and make this happen.

"It's our way for the military and the community coming together as one to give back to the kids, and that's the most precious thing in the world anyways is our children."

Williams was hoping to have all donations in by Saturday evening but if that doesn't happen, they will continue to work the rest of the weekend.

You can still help out. It's not too late. You can drop off donations at the warehouse on South Memorial Parkway in the Haysland shopping center next to Goody's. There are drop off boxes at all Publix locations in Madison, at the Walmart on Madison Boulevard, and at the Toys-R-Us at Bridge Street. That box won't be taken up until Monday.