UNTIL last week, it had seemed that the latest and most persnickety challenge to Obamacare was going nowhere fast. But on September 3rd, five federal judges predicted that the complaint—which involves the law’s requirements for employers to provide contraception to their employees—would find a receptive audience at the Supreme Court.

Churches and other religious organisations are exempt from the duty. Last year certain types of “closely held” corporations run by people with religious objections to birth control earned a similar bye. But charitable organisations affiliated with religious groups, from food banks to hospitals—most of which are Catholic but equal-opportunity employers—were not released from the requirement. So in response to their complaints the Obama administration revised the rules to permit religious non-profits to opt out of providing contraceptive coverage by filling out a form or writing a letter to the Department of Health and Human Services. A third party would then provide birth-control coverage directly to the employees without the involvement—financial or otherwise—of the objecting organisation.

This was not enough for dozens of Christian charities and universities, which are resisting the federal government’s attempt to accommodate their religious scruples. A barrage of lawsuits against Sylvia Burwell, the secretary of the health and human services department, contend that the so-called accommodation is anything but. By filling out the form and certifying that “the organisation...has a religious objection to providing coverage for some or all of any contraceptive services that would otherwise be required to be covered”, the groups claim they are still complicit in the sinful practice of destroying life.

One of the highest-profile challenges comes from the Little Sisters of the Poor, a group of nuns providing care to the impoverished elderly in Colorado. To sign the form, the Little Sisters’ petition to the Supreme Court reads, is to be “morally complicit in grave sin”. At stake is nothing less that the Little Sisters’ right “to practice their religion as they understand it.”

The court that rejected that argument in July, the tenth circuit court of appeals, was the sixth appeals court to have done so. It explained that although the Little Sisters’ objection is “sincere”, the accommodation imposes no “substantial burden” on their religious freedom, since it did not require them to provide, pay, or be otherwise involved in the provision of contraception. “Plaintiffs’ only involvement in the scheme,” the panel wrote, “is the act of opting out.”

Following the Little Sisters’ loss, the tenth circuit considered whether to take up the case again before the entire 12-judge bench. By a vote of 7-5, they demurred. But the five dissenters who voted to hear the nuns’ complaint en banc were strident in their dismissal of the original ruling. The plaintiffs "sincerely believe" that they will violate God's law if they fill in the necessary documents, said Judge Harris Hartz. "And the penalty for refusal to execute the documents may be in the millions of dollars. How can it be any clearer that the law substantially burdens the plaintiffs’ free exercise of religion?"

Judge Hartz notes that “it is not the job of the judiciary to tell people what their religious beliefs are” or whether some are “core” while others are “derivative”. On the reasoning of the three-judge panel, he charged, “a Christian could be required to work on December 25” if a court found that Jesus was born in March. A Jewish prisoner “could be provided only non-kosher food” if a court decided that “the real purpose of biblical dietary laws is health.”

If the courts’ failure to uphold the religious non-profits’ claims really led to these results, it would indeed be problematic. But Judge Hartz’s argument is faulty. The courts that have ruled against the organisations are not deigning to redefine Christian tenets or to “correct” widely held beliefs about holidays or the justification for religious commandments. They are not arguing the medically sensible claim that birth-control techniques like the IUD or Plan B (the “morning-after pill”) are not in fact abortifacients. Instead, they have scrutinised the groups’ claims that their beliefs are substantially burdened by the accommodation scheme—and found them wanting.

That seems reasonable. If the government had to bend over backwards for every religious believer asserting that an accommodation permitting them to opt out of a generally applicable law still substantially burdened their beliefs, there would be no end to the exemptions. In its July ruling, the court implied that if the Little Sisters were to prevail, the accommodation available to people with a conscientious objection to military service would suddenly become legally suspect on the grounds that “someone else will take his place” on the front lines. A conscientious objector could therefore argue that he remains "complicit" in sinful military activity even if he himself is exempted from combat.

Religious liberty permits people to practice their faith without molestation by the government. It puts a duty on the government to grant accommodations to believers when warranted, and when doing so does not negatively impact third parties or stymie the very functioning of the state. Attempts to frame such accommodations as an attack on religion are surely mistaken.