A Hutchinson family is mourning the loss of the 8-year-old burned in an apartment fire earlier this week.

Caiden Adams' family started their Saturday night with a prayer in remembrance of their little boy.

"Nobody knows how somebody's world can be turned upside down in minutes and I can honestly say it was in minutes," says Caiden's mother Larisa Beagle.

Beagle was at Walmart getting her son a last minute Christmas present when she heard about the huge fire that destroyed her home.

"All I could hear my fiance say was fire, Caiden, help, and I hung up and ran," says Beagle.

Caiden was taken to the St. Francis hospital burn unit with critical injuries where he fought for his life for a long 3 days.

"I watched my little boy fight the battle that I don't ever wish on anybody to fight.," says Beagle. "I watched my little boy fight the fight when I wished it was me. I wish every moment of every day of the last three days that I was in that bed and not him."

Caiden's organs shut down late Friday night, passing away with family by his side.

"It feels like somebody's ripped my heart out because irregardless if I have two other children that's my baby," says Beagle. "Me and Caiden fought so many battles together because it was me and him for a long time."

He'll be remembered as a little boy with a big heart who was always looking to lend a hand.

"Most of all he was my little body guard," says Beagle.

Caiden's mother and two little sisters are now without a home and belongings, but that's the last thing on their minds.

"I would live on the streets if I had all my children right there by my side," says Beagle. "Mommy loves you baby, with all my heart to the moon and back a trillion times."

Caiden gave gift of sight to two people, including a young boy around his age. The family tells KAKE News everyone is welcome at his funeral. They would like people to bring a Christmas gift to donate to the children's hospital at Saint Francis.

If you'd like to help, Caiden's family has set up a fund to help pay for medical bills. You can donate at any Southwest National Bank in Wichita. Three locations are listed below.

400 E. Douglas Ave

2700 W. 13th Street

2150 Woodrow Street