9:30 AM UPDATE

Let the shoveling commence! Although it's still cold with readings in the teens and wind chills dipping in the single digits during times of higher wind gusts, the trend with temperature will be up and the trend with the wind will be down. By afternoon, mid-30s with partly to mostly sunny skies and light wind will feel dramatically more comfortable. If you save the shoveling until midday, you may break a sweat!

Clouds will increase this evening as a weak disturbance comes through New England, Right now, it looks like this system will come through the area snow-free.

--Mike Cameron

***Previous Discussion***

WINTER STORM ANNA IS DONE

Winter Storm Anna brought snow, wind and coastal flooding Saturday. As we thought, there was a great division on who had and who did not have much snow. Quite literally, Connecticut received 0” to 16”, with Guilford and Greenwich receiving the jackpot and the northwest corner left out. Now, we who got snow have an opportunity to clean up that snow.

MUCH QUIETER SUNDAY AND MONDAY

Sunday will prove to be the bright spot of the weekend. Partly to mostly sunny skies and a brisk northwesterly wind will greet us as we open the door with shovel in hand. High pressure will build into the region during the course of the day; it is this system that will give us a reprieve from the stormy weather. It will also help to bring temperatures up into the 30s. So, once you clear what little or lot of snow you have, the sun will finish the job.

Monday will be nice and mild. Sunshine will rule the sky. After a cold morning with lows in the teens, highs will go into the upper-30s to near 40 degrees. There will be considerable snow melt, making roads glisten in the sun. Be careful in the evening as the sun sets and the air cools to freezing; ice may form where melt water refreezes.

ISOLATED SHOWER LATE TUESDAY

Tuesday will be a changeable day. It will start off sunny as high pressure is retreating. As the system continues to retreat and low pressure moves into the region from the Great Lakes during the afternoon, clouds will thicken up so that, by lunch time, skies will be cloudy. Very late in the day, this system will bring a few rain showers – yes, rain showers! The air ahead of the storm will be milder; by afternoon, highs will peak in the 40s.

The storm will clear Tuesday night so that the sunshine will rule again Wednesday. A westerly wind will help bring morning temperatures in the upper-20s and lower-30s to lower 40s during the afternoon. Very late in the day, a cold front will approach…

COLDER LATE IN THE WEEK

Colder weather will be here Thursday and Friday. By Thursday, the cold front will have passed through the state and brought temperatures low to more normal levels. Instead of lows near 30, they’ll go into the teens and instead of highs in the 40s, they will be in the lower-30s.

CHANCE FOR SNOW SATURDAY

We may have a little snow Saturday, especially in the morning. A quick-moving, moisture-starved system will race from the Great Lakes and into Connecticut. Although it’s far away in time, it does appear that this storm will be far, far weaker than Anna and, therefore, far less impactful on our weather.

WINTER STORM NAMES

The theme this winter is “First Ladies”, since this is a presidential election year. The first name on the list is Anna, after Anna Harrison. The rest of the list goes as follows: Barbara (Bush), Caroline (Harrison), Dolley (Madison), Eleanor (Roosevelt), Florence (Harding), Grace (Coolidge), Helen (Taft), Ida (McKinley), Jacqueline (Kennedy Onassis).

WFSB has been naming winter storms since 1971 and we continue to tradition today independent of the Weather Channel, which names winter storms that affect the entire country. The storms we name are the ones that only impact Connecticut with 6” of snow or more for most of the state and/or ½” or more of ice. Both scenarios would severely impact the state.

Meteorologists Mike Cameron and Scot Haney

“Copyright 2016 WFSB (Meredith Corporation). All rights reserved”