More young, hearty residents enrolled into health plans offered under Covered California this year compared with the last two years, which shows social media campaigns and word of mouth appear to be working, officials said Thursday.

Of the more than 425,000 people who signed up for a plan through the state’s health insurance exchange by Sunday’s deadline, 37 percent were between 18 to 34 years old, said Peter Lee, executive director of Covered California.

That’s slightly higher that last year’s 34 percent and even better when compared with 2014, when 29 percent of that age group signed up.

“Even more important than the strong numbers of those enrolling is the fact that we appear to be continuing to attract a younger and healthy mix of consumers,” Lee said in a statement. “We continue to have a broad and healthy mix of those signing up for coverage — which has already been declared among the healthiest in the country — which means better rates and a more stable system, both for all of our enrollees, and for the entire individual health insurance marketplace in California.”

Nationwide, almost 13 million people enrolled in health plans offered under HealthCare.gov or state exchanges. About 20 percent of those enrolled were 18- to 34-year-olds, according to <URL destination="http://www.hhs.gov/about/news/2016/02/04/fact-sheet-about-127-million-people-nationwide-are-signed-coverage-during-open-enrollment.html">U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

</URL>Enrolling into a health plan is a key provision under the Affordable Care Act, signed by President Barack Obama in 2010. But so are tax penalties for those who choose not to sign-up.

Those who qualified and went without health insurance in 2015 may have to pay penalties at tax time. They can go up to $325 per adult and $162.50 per child or 2 percent of the total household taxable income, whichever is higher. That rate will rise to $695 per single filer and 2.5 percent come next tax season. The penalty may go as high as $10,000 for a family of four.

Lee said that in the last three days before the deadline, nearly 100,000 people signed up.

And 1.15 million who were enrolled in 2015 decided to stick with Covered California and choose plans for 2016, Lee said. That’s higher than in 2014, when 900,000 people who had signed up stuck around for 2015.

A more detailed breakdown of the data will be released later this month, Lee said.

“This continues to he a historic venture where hundreds of thousands of people are realizing they don’t need to cope without insurance,” Lee added. “They’re moving from a culture of coping to a culture of coverage.”

Advertisement

Lee also said those who started an application on deadline Sunday can still complete the process up until Saturday with either a certified insurance agent, enrollment counselor or service center representative at Covered California. Those who experience a life-changing event, such as marriage, a birth or job loss, for example, may still enroll in a health plan under Covered California.