Juana Islas speaks outside federal courthouse in New Haven. She fought to get her brother, Jose Maria Islas, out of ICE detention. The mother of three children, she will likely qualify to stay in the U.S., but not her brother. Mary O’Leary — New Haven Register

NEW HAVEN >> Almost eight years in the country, Jose Luis Piscil is in deportation proceedings, but hopes he can qualify to stay here and raise his two American children.

Juana Islas, who also has American children, feels blessed that her life likely will get easier, but sad that her brother, who has helped her financially over the years, will not benefit from the major immigration reform that President Barack Obama is invoking through executive order,

Obama announced changes Thursday that are estimated to impact almost 5 million undocumented immigrants out of the 11 million in the United States.

His order eliminates fear of deportation for the parents of children born in the U.S. and expands the Deference Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) that Obama approved more than two years ago for young undocumented adults who had been brought here by their parents.

Advertisement

It also gives clear direction as to who Immigration and Custom Enforcement should target for deportation — namely violent offenders, gang members, threats to national security and any immigrants who recently crossed the border illegally.

“We’ll prioritize, just like law enforcement does every day,” Obama said in his speech from the White House.

Immigrants and their advocates gathered at the Latino Cultural Center at Yale University Thursday to watch the president explain his actions, which have drawn extensive praise from Hispanic leaders but criticism from Republicans who say he is exceeding his executive power.

Millions will benefit, while others will have to wait for Congress to fix a system that most people admit is broken.

A coalition of immigrant groups over the past year, when it was clear that Congress was not going to act, switched its pressure to Obama to invoke exective action. Chief among them were the Center for Community Change, the Center for American Progress, United We Dream, the Service Employees International Union and America’s Voice.

“I was overwhelmed,” said Kica Matos, an official with Center for Community Change and a New Haven resident. “I never thought this would happen. The president did the right thing. It is a victory for millions of families who fought so hard. It is a victory for the immigrant rights movement. It is a victory for the civil rights movement.”

Matos and others, however, said they would continue to work for a permanent fix that helps all 11 million undocumented immigrants.

Earlier, in a demonstration in front of the federal courthouse, Alok Bhatt of the Connecticut Immigrant Rights Alliance was proud of the accomplishments of he advocates. He said it goes beyond immigrant rights. “It’s a human rights movement,” he said.

Fatima Rojas and her husband, Luis A. Santiago, and their two daughters, Ambar Santiago Rojas, 7, and Jade Santiago Rojas, 4, likely will be among those who will not be faced with deportation for the next three years, unless the order is revoked by the next president.

“It is a victory for the immigrant community, but it is a bitter one where only a certain portion of our community will be affected,” said Fatima, who came here from Mexico a decade ago.

“I feel that the struggle now more than ever has to be bigger. We really have to send a strong message. It is not about what size of the cake we want. It is not even about the cake. It is about contributing to an economy” that immigrants help run, and getting credit for that, she said.

Topiltzin Gomez, 18, a freshman at Yale, sat on one of the sofas lining the cultural center as he listened to the president. Gomez said he crossed the border with his family when he was five years old; there are no U.S. citizens in his household.

“There is still much work to be done and we have to keep on fighting,” he said, although he praised Obama for this “powerful” action.

To qualify for deferred deportation for the next three years, immigrants will have to pass a criminal background check and pay their fair share of taxes in order to get work authorization. They also must have been here for the past five years and be the parents of U.S. children or lawful permanent residents.

The undocumented parents of the young adults known as Dreamers are not included, but one estimate is that 60 percent of them do have children born in this country.

From 1990 to 2007, the population of undocumented individuals grew from 3.5 million to 11 million, according to the White House, and since has slowed.

The action by Obama comes within days of Connecticut Gov. Dannel P. Malloy signing the TRUST Act that orders the Connecticut Department of Correction to only turn over to ICE immigrants convicted of a violent felony.

Obama was clear as to what the order does not do.

“This deal does not apply to anyone who has come to this country recently. It does not apply to anyone who might come to America illegally in the future. It does not grant citizenship, or the right to stay here permanently, or offer the same benefits that citizens receive — only Congress can do that. All we are saying is, we’re not going to deport you,” the president said.

By letting people come out of the shadows, Obama said they will crack down on companies that hire undocumented workers.

The executive order for the Dreamers is now open to anyone born after 1981 and brought here as children before June 15, 2007, regardless of how old they are today.

For highly skilled immigrants working here, the order will allow immigrants to move or change employment more easily and it gives incentives to foreign entrepreneurs who meet certain rules to create jobs and generate revenue in the U.S.

None of the immigrants qualify for health care subsidies under the Affordable Care Act.

Another change however, will allow them to travel to other countries with advance permission.

Nick Torres of Junta for Progressive Action, which along with Unidad Latina en Accion are the two biggest advocacy groups in the New Haven area, said they always hold elected officials accountable for their actions, but also give thanks to those who help — and he singled out Malloy in the later category.

Maria Praeli, of United We Dream, was one of the young adults who shouted out to Obama and the first lady when they made campaign appearances in Connecticut last month on behalf of Malloy. They were arguing for protection for their parents.

Maria, contacted in Washington, D.C., Thursday, said her mother, Chela Praeli, will now qualify for protection because her sister is a permanent legal resident, having married a citizen.

As a Dreamer, Maria Praeli already has work papers and, under the new rules, she can go visit her grandparents in Peru. Still, she cannot qualify for grants to help with the cost of Quinnipiac University, or get health care subsidies.

“It isn’t the end, by any means, for any of us. But this does stop the bleeding until the problem is solved,” Praeli said.

Obama, answering critics, said his actions are not amnesty. He said amnesty is leaving in place a system where millions live “without paying their taxes or playing by the rules while politicians use the issue to scare people or whip up votes at election time.”

Executive actions have been taken by presidents going back a half-century, he said.

“And to those members of Congress who question my authority to make our immigration system work better, or question the wisdom of me acting where Congress has failed, I have one answer: Pass a bill,” Obama said.

He asked that disagreements over this issue be a “dealbreaker” for other problems that need to be solved.

The president said immigrants have always been a “net plus for our economy and our society.”

“Are we a nation that tolerate the hypocrisy of a system where workers who pick our fruit and made our beds never have a change to get right with the law? Or are we a nation that gives them a chance to make amends, take responsibility, and give their kids a better future,” he said.

The uncertainty of how these changes will play out for individuals was on Jose Luis Piscil’s mind.

He has not been able to convince ICE to allow him to stay by using prosecutorial discretion. His attorney is now appealing on the grounds of proportionality.

He has no criminal record and deporting him for getting caught at the border several times when he was younger, Piscil argues is harsh.

“There is a lot of speculation. We don’t know the details,” he said.