Boulder might be known today as a hotbed of liberalism, but it wasn't always that way.

For more than a century, the former frontier town actually was quite conservative. And, in an ironic twist, the shift that tipped the city's political climate from conservative to liberal came in 1971, when Republican President Richard M. Nixon, during his first term, gave 18- to 21-year-olds the right to vote.

On the University of Colorado campus, nearly 7,000 students quickly registered, many becoming interested in politics for the first time. This was during the Vietnam War, after the U.S. invasion of Cambodia and the Ohio National Guard shootings of unarmed students at Kent State University.

Boulder students rioted in May 1972. In November 1972, Nixon was re-elected by a landslide, even in Boulder County, where Republicans still outnumbered Democrats. But Nixon cut off his own coattails by endorsing the youth vote. When newly enfranchised CU students voted that year, they pulled the lever for Democratic presidential candidate George McGovern.

The majority of the students voted straight Democratic tickets, ushering local Democrats into office. In the county's most heated races, Democrat Wally Toevs was elected commissioner and Democrat Alex Hunter district attorney.

After all of the votes in the 1972 election were tallied, Boulder County Republicans had lost their once-rock-solid foothold. As the Camera stated at the time, "Republican near-domination of local races came to an end," adding that "Democrats stared at their televisions in happy disbelief."

On Aug. 8, 1974, Boulder voters (and others all over the country) cheered when Nixon resigned from office when he faced impeachment after becoming embroiled in the Watergate scandals. Shannon's Restaurant and Lounge, 1025 Pearl St., was one of many Boulder gathering places packed with customers s watching the breaking news on live television.

According to an on-the-scene Camera reporter, as soon as Nixon announced his resignation, the crowd "went bananas," adding "the smell of blood was in the air."

Liberals then quickly controlled local Boulder politics, but the majority of Boulder County voters continued, for three more elections, to choose Republicans in national elections. In 1976, county voters picked Gerald Ford over Jimmy Carter, followed by Ronald Reagan over Carter in 1980. Four years later, they again voted for Reagan when he ran against Walter Mondale.

Boulder County's swing to the Democratic side in national elections began in 1988, when voters selected Michael Dukakis over George H.W. Bush. Both the city and county have been predominantly Democratic ever since. Bob Greenlee was Boulder's last Republican mayor, from 1998 to 1999. And the last Republican to hold office in Boulder County was Sandy Hume, who served as treasurer from 1995 to 2002.

Nixon's rationale for the youth vote was based on the premise that if 18-year-olds were old enough to be drafted and face death in the Vietnam War, they were old enough to vote. Nixon ended the draft in 1973, but his action came too late for Boulder's young and liberal voters, who were glad to see him go.

As the on-site reporter wrote, "Nobody cried at the show's end."

Silvia Pettem and Carol Taylor write about history for the Daily Camera. Email Silvia at pettem@earthlink.net, Carol at boulderhistorylibrarian@gmail.com or write to the Daily Camera, 2500 55th St., Suite 210, Boulder, 80301.