A suspected bat attack in south Phoenix sent a man to the hospital for rabies shots.

"I remember my hand going back and when it came right here I was like, blood. [But] I just kept walking," said Ajamu Bandele, who was walking near 40th Street and Southern when he thinks he was bitten.

Bandele said he likes taking nighttime strolls through his neighborhood and almost always sees bats eating bugs swarmed around street lights. But he's never given a thought to the possibility of one biting him.

"First thought was I was working in the yard [earlier in the day] and that I cut it on the bougainvillea. Because, you know, you can get stuck with those. But when I got to the light I saw these two deep holes," said the 70-year-old.

Sure enough, half an inch apart were two little puncture holes on the outside part of his right wrist.

"It felt like hot water on the back of my hand," said Bandele, describing the pain sensation of the bite.

He said he texted a picture to a friend who works in a Texas emergency room.

"She said 'that's a bat, get to a doctor,'" he said.

Doctors started giving Bandele rabies shots right away and he's got the paperwork to prove it.

"Why would the lord let a rabies bat bite me? But then why would a bat bite you if it's not rabies?" he questioned himself.

Several bat experts contacted for this story all said the same thing -- fly-by bat bites in Arizona are somewhere between impossible and extremely unlikely. This state has 28 species of bats and they all eat bugs or nectar. There are no bloodsucking, movie monster vampire bats in AZ.

But Bandele is positive he is the bat bite man.

"I know snakes don't fly, mosquitos don't go in tandem... what else could it be?"

Bat experts also said bats can carry rabies and transmit the disease to humans in very rare occasions. However, since there is no cure for rabies doctors will generally give a potential bite victim the series of rabies vaccine shots just to be on the safe side.

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.