Supporters of the Affordable Care Act celebrate outside the Supreme Court building on June 25, 2015 after the court upheld President Obama's signature health care law. (AP photo)

(CNSNews.com) -- Rep. Fred Upton (R-Mich.) says that Congress will be prepared to successfully repeal and replace the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), also known as Obamacare, if a Republican president is elected in November.

“If a Republican president is sworn into office in only 11 months, we are going to be ready,” Upton said. “That is the challenge that Speaker [Paul] Ryan put before us.”

He said the Republican alternative to Obamacare would:

Eliminate federal mandates and allow Americans to pick the health care plans they want;

Turn control over the insurance markets back to consumers and states;

Reduce costs and increase choices;

Protect Americans with pre-existing conditions;

Add more transparency and competition;

Target assistance to lower-income Americans;

Modernize Medicare by capping expenditures and giving states improved flexibility; and

Expand Health Savings Accounts (HSAs).

“In the next couple of months, the American people will see a specific policy on paper of our vision for health care,” Upton pledged, adding that there is a consensus among Republicans in Congress on replacing Obamacare after it is repealed in 2017.

Speaker Ryan is “committed not only to getting the big idea right, but also getting the process right,” he said.

Upton reminded attendees at a discussion panel presented by the nonprofit Conservative Reform Network and hosted by the Hoover Institution at the think tank’s Washington suite that Obamacare has not lived up to expectations.

“Sadly, sadly many of the predictions and warnings that we made about the law have come to pass and still, there are tens of millions with no coverage,” Upton remarked.

In laying out the main elements of the Republican replacement proposal, the 15-term congressman also noted that it will remove several key features of the ACA.

“Under our proposal, Obamacare’s labyrinth of federal benefit mandates, rating restrictions and complex tax subsidy structures are gone. Just erased like an Etch-a-Sketch. Individual mandate tax and individual mandates are gone also,” he said.

“Instead of forcing Americans to buy Washington-approved coverage, we empower the American people to make the best health care choices for both themselves and their families.”

In February 2015, Upton, who serves as chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, introduced the Patient Choice, Affordability, Responsibility, and Empowerment (CARE) Act.

The bill seeks to eliminate the federal mandates in President Barack Obama’s signature piece of domestic legislation. Senators Richard Burr (R-N.C.) and Orrin Hatch (R-Utah) are co-sponsors.

The ACA garnered zero Republican votes in Congress when it was passed and signed into law by Obama in 2010. Upton argued the law has federalized the health care industry to its detriment.

“We know that Washington doesn’t always know best. So, we are truly seeing the perils of a one- size-fits-all policy constructed on truly obsolete ideas,” he asserted. “Obamacare’s government-centered premise is not new. The outdated ideas in Obamacare have failed people time and time again.”

After diagnosing the repercussions of Obamacare and prescribing an alternative, Upton declared a call-to-action.



“For the sake of our freedom and our opportunity, for the sake of the economy and the federal budget — something we all care about — the public deserves a fresh-looking approach that embraces 21st century innovation. We are going to make it happen.”