Regan Bayliss rides Reckless Assassin to victory at Flemington on Saturday. Photo: Getty Images

Regan Bayliss' brief career has had quite a few firsts and at Flemington on Saturday, the 17-year-old won at his first ride at Flemington and his first Saturday metropolitan ride, to claim the Rising Stars Series Final (1800 metres) for apprentice riders.

Bayliss won at his first race ride at Donald earlier this season and also at his first metropolitan ride, and the win on Reckless Assassin for John Sadler saw him dead-heat for first in the 25-race, Rising Star Series with Jye McNeil.

"To win at my first ride at Flemington, it's a dream come true," Bayliss said.

Bayliss had Reckless Assassin perfectly placed through the race, sitting just off the good tempo set by Madam Nash and Regaliti.

Advertisement

After easing into the clear shortly after straightening, Reckless Assassin ($10) grabbed the lead at the 200 metres and drew away to score a comprehensive three-length win from Rememba Howe ($9.5), with Madam Nash ($14) a head away in third placing.

Sadler said he had been a little surprised by the win, thinking the mare would need another run before finding form, but he had been impressed by Bayliss' pre-race homework, with the apprentice having watched a tape of all the mare's starts.

"I thought she was the best horse in the race and second up last campaign she was only beaten a length in higher grade. After I went through the horse's replays, I couldn't believe she was a $13 chance," Bayliss said.

While McNeil had to settle for a dead-heat in the series, he bounced back to win the following race, the Bruce Gadsden Handicap (1000 metres) on the promising Enver Jusufovic trained O'Malley.

O'Malley ($4.80 to $3 favourite) enjoyed a nice smother just behind the speed and once McNeil asked him to go, the three-year-old quickly put the race beyond doubt, racing away to beat Cosmic Lights ($4.80) by three lengths.

"Coming to the 400 metres I couldn't believe how well he was travelling," McNeil said.

"I think he's going to be winning better races than this."

Jusufovic said he was unsure whether he would push on to the spring with O'Malley, which has now won three of five starts and has been anointed as his new stable star following the retirement of Briefed.

"Briefed was retired and this horse was going to be the heir apparent, but he had to do it and he had to win today and I certainly think he's a horse on the way up," Jusufovic said

The win kept McNeil in the race for the metropolitan apprentice's title but a winning double to Katelyn Mallyon on Zamorar in the Singapore Turf Club Handicap and Written in the Vintage Crop Handicap, saw her seize a two-win lead coming into the last few meetings of the season.

Peter Moody appears to have found another promising galloper, with two-year-old Tan Tan Diamond ($7.50 to $4.60), making it two wins from as many starts with a narrow win in the Hong Kong Jockey Club Handicap (1200 metres), although he said he had been surprised by good support for the son of Fastnet Rock at both his starts.

"Without lying to you, he's the sort of horse that doesn't do a lot for us at home and the backing at Geelong surprised the hell out of all of us and again today. But he's obviously progressive," Moody said.

Moody said that while there is always the dream of aiming at the Caulfield Guineas, he was more likely to freshen up Tan Tan Diamond before targeting the Carbine Club Stakes and Sandown Guineas in the latter part of the spring.