The three Democrats running for the chance to succeed U.S. Rep. Tammy Duckworth in Congress differ slightly on immigration, health care and a minimum-wage increase, and have clashed on who can best represent middle-class interests.

Primary voters in the 8th Congressional District will get to pick from Schaumburg businessman Raja Krishnamoorthi, Elgin state Sen. Michael Noland and Villa Park Village President Deborah Bullwinkel. The suburban district, drawn to favor a Democrat, includes parts of northwest Cook, northeastern DuPage and northeast Kane counties.

Ahead of the March 15 election, Krishnamoorthi and Noland have split numerous labor union endorsements. Krishnamoorthi has a wide money advantage, raising more than $1.6 million, while Noland has collected nearly $263,000 and Bullwinkel $77,500.

Immigration reform is a hot issue in the diverse district, and all three candidates support a path to citizenship. Noland said he also favors "reforming our visa system in a more permanent manner" and allowing people to travel back and forth to their country of origin.

As Krishnamoorthi knocked on doors in a Schaumburg neighborhood on a recent afternoon, he played up the fact that his parents immigrated to the U.S. from India when he was 3 months old.

A man in a gray sweatshirt and blue jeans who came to the door responded with a smile, "I'm an immigrant. I was born in Poland."

Raising the federal minimum wage also has taken center stage, with each candidate espousing a slightly different plan.

"We can aspire to reach that $15 goal for a working, living wage, but it has to be done gradually," Bullwinkel said.

Noland, who said he favors increasing the federal rate to $15, co-sponsored a bill to raise the Illinois minimum wage but records show he did not vote when it passed the Senate in February 2015. Noland said he was in Chile at the time.

Krishnamoorthi favors raising it to $10.10 an hour, with special consideration for urban areas such as Chicago that already are on track to raise the rate to $13 an hour by mid-2019.

On health care, the candidates agree that the Affordable Care Act needs adjustments.

The biggest proposed change comes from Noland, who called the ACA an "important first step," but said he would like to shift to a single-payer universal approach.

Bullwinkel praised the so-called Obamacare by saying the "bones of it are good" but pointed to the high cost of prescription medication as an area she would like to see restructured. In calling for greater transparency from insurance and pharmaceutical companies, Krishnamoorthi also cited the costs of prescription medication, as well as rising premiums.

Each candidate is fighting for the title of middle-class advocate.

Krishnamoorthi outlined a number of proposals specifically aimed at working families, including a child tax credit, reducing student debt and guaranteed paid sick and maternity leave. Krishnamoorthi, a Harvard Law School graduate, said his success story, the son of immigrants who relied on government assistance at one point, is one he would like to see duplicated throughout the 8th District.

He made more than $200,000 in salary and fees in 2014 from two tech and solar energy companies he is president of, Sivananthan Laboratories and Episensors, according to his financial disclosure statement.

Krishnamoorthi lost to Duckworth in the 2012 congressional primary and lost a primary bid for state comptroller in 2010. In that contest, Krishnamoorthi, a former deputy state treasurer, faced criticism over his management of Bright Start, the state's college savings program that lost $150 million that parents had invested.

"There were several dozen funds within that college savings fund and one of them lost money. We were the first state to notice an aberration in the losses, and we were the first to report it to the Attorney General here in Illinois," Krishnamoorthi said in an interview. "We settled it and much of the money was restored to the families who were invested in those funds."

Krishnamoorthi's opponents have said they are better positioned to relate to the middle class.

"Who's really living the middle-class life?" Noland said.

Noland, also an attorney who has an MBA, pulled in about $76,000 from the state and $10,000 from his law practice in 2014, according to his financial disclosure statement. Noland cited "financial hardship" in 2014 when he modified his mortgage through a federal assistance program that helps homeowners reduce monthly payments and avoid foreclosure.

In an interview, Noland said his family faced a number of financial obligations, including student loans and private school tuition for his daughter. The senator called back the next day to add that his family struggled after then-Democratic Gov. Pat Quinn zeroed out lawmakers' salaries during a 2013 budget fight. Lawmakers went two months without paychecks before a judge ruled the move unconstitutional and the money was paid out.

Also in 2014, Noland got $8,700 from the city of Elgin as part of its energy-efficiency revolving loan program. Noland said the money was used in large part to buy an energy-efficient furnace. City officials said he was one of 19 homeowners who took part in the program, which was open to all qualified applicants.

Bullwinkel, who earns a small salary from Villa Park and has her own marketing business, reported less than $30,000 in earned income, records show.

"Really, truly, I'm a small-town mayor running for Congress," said Bullwinkel, who cited gun control and mental health awareness among her top priorities.

Bullwinkel and her husband bought a condo in Chicago in 2014 and claimed a homestead exemption on the property in addition to the exemption already on their Villa Park home. By law, homeowners are entitled to one exemption on their primary residence.

Bullwinkel said she was unaware of the additional exemption until the Chicago Tribune informed her of it. Bullwinkel said she's "very glad this oversight was brought to my attention" and had contacted the assessor's office and is waiting to see how much she owes.

The primary winner will go on to the November election against DuPage County Board member Peter "Pete" DiCianni, of Elmhurst.

deldeib@tribpub.com

Twitter @deldeib