POLITICO Pro ACA employer mandate: Not as bitter in better economy

Obamacare’s employer mandate looks a whole lot different during a job-growing economic recovery.

The cost of compliance when the mandate takes effect Jan. 1 doesn’t seem quite as onerous when compared to the need to attract and retain workers. Alternative coverage strategies offer businesses a better chance to keep budgets in check without risking the law’s penalties.

Story Continued Below

That doesn’t mean companies are any happier about being required to offer plans to most full-time workers, or that the scaled-back, phased-in version finally kicking in isn’t still in Republicans’ repeal sights when a GOP-controlled Congress convenes next month.

Yet contrary to the once dire predictions of health law critics and the business community, employers are not dropping coverage en masse and steering workers into the federally subsidized plans on the new Obamacare exchanges. In advance of the mandate finally kicking in, many are already increasing the number of employees offered coverage to ensure compliance.

“The economic reality has changed,” said Paul Fronstin, a senior associate at the Employee Benefit Resource Institute. Unemployment’s below 6 percent, down from the double-digit days in which the mandate was first debated. “Employers are remembering why they offered benefits in the first place – to compete for workers.”

The mandate is the Affordable Care Act’s last big piece of coverage expansion to be put into place. The Obama administration twice delayed it in the face of furious lobbying by the business community and repeated votes by the House to kill it. While what survived is a diminished measure, it still stands to pack both a practical and symbolic punch — though not necessarily to the extent that either side anticipated just a few years ago.

“The initial reaction may have been an overreaction,” Fronstin allowed, noting an EBRI survey this month that just 1 percent of employers planned on dropping coverage in 2015. Even some of the low-wage industries that once threatened to stop offering insurance entirely have fallen into line.

“As we’ve gone along, I think there are other factors that have come into play – employee morale, retention of managers,” said Michelle Neblett, director of labor and workforce policy for the National Restaurant Association. “I don’t hear people talking about dropping coverage, I hear about people figuring out how to afford to offer coverage.”

The pending requirement is more gradual than the administration’s original. The first year, it only addresses firms with 100 or more workers. To avoid paying fines, they must offer coverage to 70 percent of employees working 30 or more hours weekly.

In 2016, employers with 50 to 99 employees will finally have to comply after a two-year delay. Smaller employers have always been exempt under the law.

The vast majority of big employers already offer fairly comprehensive coverage to full-time workers. Some are responding to the ACA, particularly its new work week threshold, by making the coverage less generous in order to provide it to more people. Others are charging more.

The companies facing the most change from the mandate are ones that either didn’t offer health benefits before or provided affordable but skimpy coverage falling short of the law’s minimum standards. Prime among those are hotels, restaurants and retail stores, where employee schedules can vary week to week and where workforce needs often change by the season.

“This is really about part-time workers and the lowest-wage full-time workers,” said Larry Levitt, a senior vice president at the Kaiser Family Foundation.

Certain employers have stopped offering benefits to part-time workers, who may then become eligible for the government-subsidized plans. Wal-Mart dropped coverage for about 30,000 part-timers after an unexpected enrollment uptick in its insurance program this year. Home Depot and Target have taken similar steps.

But there have been only anecdotal reports of employers cutting hours to avoid the law’s 30-hour trigger.

The calculus varies company to company. And it turns out that many in the service industry aren’t inclined to pay fines when they can provide a tax-deductible benefit — health coverage — that their workers value.

“Companies are very wary of the public’s reaction to such moves,” said Neil Trautwein, vice president for health policy at the National Retail Federation.

Surveys reveal just how dramatically employers’ attitudes have shifted. Early in 2011, with unemployment still hovering at 9 percent, the consulting firm McKinsey reported that three in 10 employers would “definitely” or “probably” drop coverage after 2014.

Fast forward to this fall, when a Kaiser Family Foundation survey found that more than 90 percent of employers subject to the mandate continued to offer coverage in 2014. And Mercer found that fewer large employers than at any time since the law’s passage in 2010 said they were likely to drop coverage in the next five years.

A majority of Americans favor the mandate, according to a Kaiser Family Foundation poll released Thursday. (Not surprisingly, they like it far more than Obamacare’s individual mandate.) Yet perceptions diverge along party lines and change depending on how the requirement is characterized. Support falls sharply if people are told that employers are cutting full-time workers to part-time status to avoid paying fines, the poll found.

Even after it takes effect next month, Republicans on Capitol Hill still intend to go after the mandate, especially its work week rule. Should there be any deal-making between Congress and the administration later in the year, the requirement could be an element in the bargaining.

Democrats are wary of changing the 30-hour threshold, but it’s unclear what kind of defense they might mount for the mandate overall. They haven’t been its most vocal advocates of late, and earlier this year, some prominent Obamacare supporters even argued that the provision isn’t essential to the law’s coverage goals, particularly given all the political hostility it’s caused.

Yet the mandate is a major source of funding for the law. The Congressional Budget Office projects it will bring in $139 billion in penalties over the next decade, and there’s no easy way to replace that revenue.

For the vast majority of large employers, the biggest changes will be the new tracking and reporting requirements that begin next year, as well as extending coverage to people previously considered part-time based on their 30-40 hours of work weekly.

Most companies have already moved in that direction. More than three-quarters of large employers offered plans to everyone who worked 30 hours or more in 2014, up from 58 percent in 2013, according to Mercer.

The penalties for those that decide otherwise will range from $2,000 to $3,000 per worker, depending on whether the employer offers coverage to enough employees and whether an uncovered employee gets a subsidized Obamacare plan. In either case, the amount is less than what most employers pay to provide health coverage each year. So some will opt to just pay the fines.

One adjustment employers are making is in the benefits they offer. High-deductible plans have become increasingly common, with nearly a quarter of big employers offering such plans in 2014, according to a recent Mercer survey. Senior partner Tracy Watts said Obamacare may accelerate that trend.

Another option gaining traction is to give employees a set amount – a defined contribution – they can use to buy plans through a private exchange that offers different levels of coverage. That’s the approach Ampex Brands is taking.

The Dallas-based company has roughly 4,500 employees at some 200 fast food restaurants in about a dozen states. Next year, about 2,500 are eligible for coverage as full-time workers under Obamacare – a 30 percent increase over this year, said chief financial officer Ken Hignett.

To cover the expansion and avoid raising food prices at its KFC, Long John Silver’s and other franchises, Ampex will have employees with existing coverage pay about 20 percent more for the same level of benefits. The company’s costs are expected to be about 20 percent higher as well, but Hignett said that’s “a little bit of a black box,” because it’s hard to figure now how many of the newly eligible will sign up.

No one knows whether the ACA’s individual mandate and its accompanying fines are enough to push such workers into buying an employer’s coverage, Watts said. The answer will determine the hit to a company’s bottom line.

“That’s the real wild card,” she said.