Welcome to Wonkbook, Wonkblog’s morning policy news primer by Puneet Kollipara (@pkollipara). To subscribe by e-mail, click here. Send comments, criticism or ideas to Wonkbook at Washpost dot com. To read more by the Wonkblog team, click here. Follow us on Twitter and Facebook.



(Photo by Patrick T. Fallon/Bloomberg)

Wonkbook’s Number of the Day: More than 100. That's the number of VA health-care facilities now being investigated amid the scandal over wait times and falsified records.

Wonkbook’s Chart of the Day: These charts offer a guided tour of Americans' financial well-being.

Wonkbook's Top 5 Stories: (1) How well-off are workers and households?; (2) More Obamacare year-two preparations; (3) the wide world of financial regulations; (4) new data on violence against women; and (5) next steps on corporate inversions.

1. Top story: New insights into Americans' finances

Top business execs are more bullish about U.S. corporations than consumers. "The business leaders are more optimistic about the prospects of firms, with 31% expecting them to be better equipped to compete in three years and 26% expecting them to be more poorly positioned. By contrast, 41% anticipate lower wages and benefits for workers, vs. 27% expecting higher pay. The study called the dichotomy between companies and workers 'unsustainable.' The alumni see strengths in factors that affect companies' success, 'such as the quality of management, the vibrancy of capital markets, and firm access to innovation.' They view the building blocks of prosperity for middle and working class Americans as lacking." Paul Davidson in USA Today.

Consumer borrowing surges on more auto loans. "The $26 billion increase in credit...followed an $18.8 billion advance in June that was more than previously estimated, a report from the Federal Reserve in Washington showed today. Non-revolving loans, which include borrowing for autos and college tuition, climbed $20.6 billion, the biggest gain since July 2011. Credit-card lending rose for a fifth straight month. A stronger job market and rising home values are giving households the confidence to take on debt to buy big-ticket items such as motor vehicles. Banks are also becoming more willing to lend, which could encourage more consumers to boost their spending, which makes up the biggest part of the economy." Jeanna Smialek in Bloomberg.

But households didn't spend more. "But oddly, July’s jump in credit-card borrowing wasn’t accompanied by a spike in household spending. Sales at retailers and restaurants were flat from June, and overall consumer spending fell 0.1% in July, according to the Commerce Department." Ben Leubsdorf in The Wall Street Journal.

Charts: A guided tour of American families' financial well-being. Neil Irwin in The New York Times.

Renters fear they lack the credit, not just the cash, to buy a new home. "Those who were reluctant to buy cited traditional reasons, including not enough savings or income. But a sizeable portion (41 percent) also said they were worried that their credit scores would not pass muster....Lenders have shied away from extending mortgages to less-than-stellar borrowers in a bid to shield themselves from financial penalties and lawsuits. They’re demanding higher standards from borrowers seeking government-backed loans than even the government requires. And policy makers fear that the lack of access to credit is hurting the housing market’s recovery. But even if the lenders were to ease their credit standards, it’s unclear whether many renters would bother to apply for a mortgage." Dina ElBoghdady in The Washington Post.

Millennials aren't using credit cards, and it could come back to haunt them. "A new study from Bankrate.com finds that 63 percent of Millennials...have no credit cards. By comparison, only 35 percent of people 30 and over have no cards....There are a few reasons....New rules make it tougher for the youngest borrowers (people under 21) to open cards, meaning it's harder to introduce an 18-year-old to credit card use. In addition, Americans in general have dialed back their credit card use. But it's also that Millennials choose to pay in other ways....It may be a good thing that Millennials have so few cards. Bankrate finds that Millennials are far more likely to miss payments than other age groups, and they're less likely than any other age group to pay off their balance in full each month. The problem is that Millennials who don't get credit cards can't build a credit history." Danielle Kurtzleben in Vox.

Student-loan debt grows, but rate of increase slows. "While a new report from the Federal Reserve Board reinforces the idea that more Americans are taking on more debt to finance their postsecondary education, it also suggests a slowing of that trend in the last three years. The Fed's 2013 Survey of Consumer Finances...also offers an in-depth look at the student loan debt accumulated by young Americans (those families headed by someone under 40), revealing that both the proportion of such families with student debt and the amount they've incurred have nearly doubled since 2001." Doug Lederman in Inside Higher Ed.

Job market's lingering weak spot: pay. "The unemployment rate has sunk to a nearly normal 6.1 percent. Employers have added a robust 2.5 million jobs the past 12 months. Layoffs have tumbled. Yet most people are still waiting for a decent raise. Friday's August jobs report confirmed that average hourly pay has crept up only about 2 percent a year since the recession ended five years ago — barely above inflation and far below the gains in most recoveries. Just why pay has been so weak and when it might strengthen are key issues for the Federal Reserve in deciding when to raise interest rates. The trend has mystified analysts." Christopher S. Rugaber in the Associated Press.

Background reading: See our most recent coverage of pocketbook issues affecting Americans.

Other economic reads:

An energy boom lifts up the heartland. Nelson D. Schwartz in The New York Times.

House GOP eyes extending Ex-Im Bank until December. Jake Sherman and John Bresnahan in Politico.

Top opinion

BERNSTEIN: How and why other countries spend less on health care than we do. "We spend far more than other countries on everything from hospital stays to MRIs to prescriptions to end-of-life care. It’s also the case that private-sector spending makes up a much larger share of health spending here than it does in other advanced economies....The U.S. position in the figure — highest on health spending/GDP; lowest on public share —presents us with the very picture of an outlier. Correlation not being causation, you are within your rights to argue that this doesn’t prove that more private sector means less efficient health care. It could be that people here demand more health care than in those other economies." Jared Bernstein in The Washington Post.

CHEN: A Republican moment on immigration. "Republicans now have a unique opportunity to make both political and policy gains — to benefit their candidates and campaigns, as well as to make lasting fixes in the broken U.S. immigration system. It starts by addressing reform before Obama does. Politically, it’s unlikely that anything Republicans do now will completely change the hearts and minds of large numbers of Hispanic voters. But by acting quickly, Republicans can create an opening for their candidates in border states and start a conversation that could produce electoral benefits in 2016." Lanhee Chen in Bloomberg View.

NOCERA: The inversion delusion. "At first glance, Samuels’s analysis would seem to make sense: the disparity of our uncompetitive corporate tax rate versus their business-friendly rates must be driving the current mania for inversions. Many other corporate executives have made the same argument. Just a few months ago, Heather Bresch, the chief executive of Mylan, a $7 billion generic drug company, announced that her company would be doing an inversion....She complained that the American corporate tax rate needed to become 'more competitive.' But upon closer inspection, this argument turns out to be mainly hogwash." Joe Nocera in The New York Times.

LaCHANCE: What will doom capital punishment? "To opponents of the death penalty, recent accounts of botched executions and DNA-based exonerations of death-row prisoners have revived hope that judges and voters will finally see capital punishment for what it is: an intolerable affront to human dignity. But while such optimism is understandable, it is misplaced....Resources for fighting the death penalty are scarce, and for too long, abolitionists have spent them appealing to the humanistic ideals they wished most Americans shared, instead of one they actually do: distrust of government. Arguing that the death penalty is an affront to human dignity just doesn’t work. But portraying it as another failed government program just might." Daniel LaChance in The New York Times.

PILKINGTON: Efficient-markets hypothesis is wrong, but still taught. "Economists and business schools continue to teach the Efficient Markets Hypothesis, of course. It continues to give off the mystique that markets somehow get the price ‘right’. It does so by being vague to the point of meaninglessness in many cases. But when it does manage to say something concrete and make a claim that can be falsified, it fails. And when it fails its proponents simply ignore the overwhelming evidence to the contrary. This is not science. It is ideology." Philip Pilkington in Naked Capitalism.

FOX: Have economists been captured by business interests? " One of the reasons why economics rocketed past the other social sciences in influence and prestige over the past 75 years was because so many economists involved themselves in the worlds they studied. That has surely led to some amount of capture by outside interests, but it also seems to have counteracted the natural academic tendency toward insularity and obscurity. Lots of economists study things of direct relevance to business leaders and government policy-makers. We wouldn’t really want to take away their incentive to do that, would we?" Justin Fox in Harvard Business Review.

Child prodigy interlude: Watch this child chess phenom take on the competition.

2. Preparing Obamacare for year two

Key priority of Burwell: Improving HealthCare.gov, sans the politics. "Sylvia Mathews Burwell, the secretary of Health and Human Services, said Monday in her first major speech that she wanted to move beyond the politics of health care and work with members of both parties to improve the management and operation of HealthCare.gov, the website used by millions of people to sign up for insurance coverage....Ms. Burwell said she wanted to shift the conversation to areas of potential agreement. Polls consistently show that the public remains more negative than positive on the Affordable Care Act, but that Americans want Congress to improve the law rather than to repeal it." Robert Pear in The New York Times.

Explainer: Challenges ahead for Obamacare in its second year. Elise Viebeck in The Hill.

Background reading: Our previous coverage of Obamacare's second year of enrollment.

HHS spends $60M to help people navigate marketplaces in second enrollment season. "The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) divided the money between 90 organizations that will provide in-person assistance to people shopping for health plans....The awards span community non-profits, universities, tribal groups and charities in 34 states. At least two Planned Parenthood affiliates were included.. Elise Viebeck in The Hill.

Rural enrollment could pose continuing challenge. "Americans living in rural areas will be a key target as states and nonprofit groups strategize how to enroll more people in health law insurance plans this fall. Though millions of people signed up for private insurance or Medicaid in the first year of the Affordable Care Act, millions of others did not. Many live in rural areas where people 'face more barriers,' said Laurie Martin, a RAND Corp. senior policy researcher....Distance is one problem....But the most significant barriers may stem directly from state decisions about whether to expand Medicaid eligibility — more than 20 states chose not to — and whether to operate their own health exchanges." Shefali Luthra in Kaiser Health News.

Tech firms seek redefinition of medical-privacy rules as HealthCare.gov hack raises questions. "Executives of tech companies and health organizations have told the House Energy and Commerce Committee in recent months that what they consider an excessively conservative stance on health data privacy is hindering development of new medical technologies and approaches to treatment, and also adding costs to already burdened state and federal budgets. Much of what health researchers and executives seek involves more clear guidance on what are known as HIPAA privacy regulations....Yet, these calls for a new look at HIPAA are coming at a time of marked concern about the sanctity of consumers’ online accounts." Kerry Young in Roll Call.

Narrow-network ACA plans aren't so bad after all, research suggests. "Health economists actually tend to be quite fond of these products, as they help hold down spending. The potential for savings is big: limited choice plans can reduce patient spending by as much as a third, new research from economists Jon Gruber and Robin McKnight finds. Using a natural experiment from Massachusetts, Gruber and McKnight find that patients who switched to narrow network plans had access to a smaller set of equally good hospitals. They used more primary care but went to the emergency room less. And these patients, along with their employers, ended up saving a whole bunch of money." Sarah Kliff in Vox.

But are we seeing a case of 'access shock' due to narrower plans? "Insurers throughout the country offering coverage through the new health insurance exchanges drove a hard bargain with medical providers, and thus many of those providers chose not to participate. The end result was that Americans who obtained coverage through the healthcare law often found that they didn’t have much choice when it came to doctors or hospitals. Those who averted 'rate shock,' in other words, often found themselves exposed to 'access shock.'" Philip Klein in the Washington Examiner.

Obamacare has let young people stay on parents' plans longer, but studies question overall benefits. "As expected, it increased the rate of health insurance among young adults....But the provision didn't change whether the age group perceived themselves as healthier or whether they thought health care was any more affordable, according to a new study in JAMA Pediatrics....In another study out today, Stanford University researchers...analyzing 2011 data from California, Florida and New York hospitals, the researchers found that the under-26 group had 2.7 fewer ER visits per 1,000 people than the older group." Jason Millman in The Washington Post.

And another study finds Medicaid expansion boosting ER visits overall. "Many people newly insured by Medicaid under the federal health care law are seeking treatment in hospital emergency rooms, one of the most expensive medical settings, a study released Monday concludes....It also found indications that newly insured Medicaid patients admitted to hospitals may be sicker than patients previously covered under the same program, which serves more than 60 million low-income and disabled people. The findings have implications for federal and state policymakers managing the coverage expansion under President Barack Obama's health care law." Ricardo Alonso-Zaldivar in the Associated Press.

McAuliffe retreats on Medicaid expansion in Virginia, puts forth modest expansion. "Gov. Terry McAuliffe of Virginia took only modest steps on Monday to extend health care to the poor and disabled....Mr. McAuliffe, who in June ordered his cabinet to devise a plan for unilateral action by Sept. 1...announced that only 25,000 uninsured Virginians would be receiving coverage, far fewer than the 400,000 he has said are eligible if the state expands Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act. The retreat seemed Mr. McAuliffe’s acceptance that he is politically hemmed in, especially after Republicans took control of both houses of the General Assembly following the surprise resignation of a Democratic senator in June." Trip Gabriel in The New York Times.

Other health care reads:

U.S. homeland security may be vulnerable to disease pandemics, audit says. Josh Hicks in The Washington Post.

What makes the Ebola outbreak so unique: a 'perfect storm' of factors. Karen Weintraub in USA Today.

House GOP to include Ebola aid in spending bill, top Republican says. Kristina Peterson and Michael R. Crittenden in The Wall Street Journal.

Mosquito-borne viruses hit U.S., Japan. Donald G. McNeil Jr. in The New York Times.

Severe respiratory virus afflicting children confirmed in at least six states, as others investigate possible cases. Mark Berman in The Washington Post.

DEA to allow return of unused prescription drugs to pharmacies. Catherine Saint Louis in The New York Times.

VA chief says hiring spree needed to meet patient demand. Richard A. Oppel Jr. in The New York Times.

MULLIGAN: The not-so-affordable Affordable Care Act. "Whether the Affordable Care Act lives up to its name depends on how, or whether, you consider its consequences for the wider economy....The economy cannot expand its health sector without giving up something else of value. A complex law like the ACA has a few provisions that encourage work, such as counting unemployment income against eligibility for health assistance. But the bulk of the law overwhelms them. The ACA as a whole will have the nation working fewer hours, and working those hours less productively." Casey B. Mulligan in The Wall Street Journal.

KLEIN: GOP governors' cave-in on Medicaid expansion is short-sighted. "In reality, under Obamacare, the federal government only fully pays for the Medicaid expansion through 2016. After that point, states will have to start paying for a portion of the expansion, eventually covering 10 percent of its cost. Though that doesn’t seem like a lot, it’s worth keeping in mind that Medicaid is already a major burden on state budgets....Twenty-one states are 'not moving forward at this time' with Medicaid expansion, according to a tally by the Kaiser Family Foundation. If their governors and lawmakers resist the pressure of hospital lobbyists and withstand liberals’ public shaming campaign, they will be doing a service to future generations." Philip Klein in the Washington Examiner.

World record interlude: Watch this man do a bunch of pull-ups using only his pinkie fingers.

3. The Fed signals it may push big banks banks to shrink, and other financial regulatory news

Fed signals intent to force banks to slim down. "When regulators increase capital requirements, it forces banks to borrow less money to finance their lending and trading. The theory is that banks that rely less on borrowing are more stable because they are getting more of their financing from shareholder funds, which do not have to be repaid at short notice when turbulence hits. But as a bank has more equity funding, it in theory becomes harder for it to earn a return on its shares that satisfies investors. The bank might therefore decide that, to reduce its equity funding, it needs to shrink its assets. And if the largest banks fall considerably in size, they would pose less of a threat to the wider economy if they collapsed. But some large banks may not want to reduce their size." Peter Eavis in The New York Times.

CFTC said to alert DOJ of criminal rate rigging. "The U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission, which first sent subpoenas to the world’s largest banks in November 2012 to determine whether ISDAfix was rigged, has flagged its findings to prosecutors....The CFTC’s enforcement powers are confined to bringing civil, not criminal, cases....Benchmarks like ISDAfix...serve as the foundation of global finance, helping pension funds determine their future obligations and lenders decide how much to charge borrowers. Regulators around the world are probing allegations that measures used to set prices in gold, oil, interest rates and currencies were rigged by banks and brokers wanting to pad their profits while cheating their clients and other investors." Matthew Leising and Tom Schoenberg in Bloomberg.

Clearinghouses will get tougher CFTC oversight to ensure the solution doesn't become the problem. "The U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission plans to intensify oversight of swaps clearinghouses to ensure they don’t threaten the financial system they are meant to help secure. CFTC Chairman Timothy Massad said...his agency will bolster examinations of clearinghouses, which process trillions of dollars in transactions and are potentially vulnerable to market shocks or cyber attacks. The agency is working with the Federal Reserve on the effort....Regulators imposed new rules over the $710 trillion global swaps market after largely unregulated trades helped fuel the 2008 credit crisis." Silla Brush and Robert Schmidt in Bloomberg.

Leveraged-loan standards are deteriorating after regulators' warning. "The percentage of the debt that Moody’s considers as having weak or the weakest investor protections known as covenants climbed to 65 percent of the market in the first half of this year from 60 percent in 2013 and 42 percent in 2012, the ratings firm said in the report released today. That’s the highest since at least 2008, according to Moody’s....The Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. issued updated leveraged-lending guidance in March 2013, saying that 'prudent underwriting practices' had deteriorated. Even as regulators continue to warn about froth in the market, loan issuance remains on pace to surpass 2013’s record volume." Kristen Haunss in Bloomberg.

Countrywide penalty could spell doom for S&P, which feds have sued over bond ratings. "Standard & Poor’s (MHFI)’ chances of settling the government’s lawsuit over mortgage-bond ratings for less than $1 billion may have slipped away after Bank of America Corp.’s Countrywide unit was socked with a $1.3 billion fine. The Countrywide ruling was the first to lay out what penalties financial institutions could face under a 1989 bank-fraud law the Obama administration is using against alleged culprits of the subprime mortgage crisis. It has boosted the government’s hand against McGraw Hill Financial Inc.’s S&P, said Peter Henning, a law professor at Wayne State University." Edvard Pettersson in Bloomberg.

Other financial reads:

U.S. prosecutors try for rebound at insider trading trial. Nate Raymond in Reuters.

Bankers join loan guarantors in pushing FHFA pushing to ease insurer capital plan. Zachary Tracer in Bloomberg.

Have markets become more dovish than the Fed? Pedro Nicolaci da Costa in The Wall Street Journal.

Hedge funds reap gains on FHA loans sidelining nonprofits. John Gittelsohn, Heather Perlberg and Clea Benson in Bloomberg.

Marching band interlude: The Ohio State University marching band offers a tribute to a number of TV shows.

4. Dissturbing new data on violence against women

ICYMI: 1 in 5 women have been raped, CDC says. "About 19.3% of women have been raped at least once in their lives, according to survey results released Friday from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. About 2% of men have been raped during their lifetimes, according to the survey of conducted in the USA in 2011. Additionally, an estimated 43.9% of women and 23.4% of men experienced other forms of sexual violence during their lives. And 15.2% of women and 5.7% of men have been a victim of stalking." Jessica Durando in USA Today.

But it's tough to track sexual assaults. "The recent CDC report, based on surveys conducted in 2011, found that almost one in five women (and 1.7 percent of men) have been raped in their lifetimes. In a single year, 1.6 percent of women reported experiences that are considered rape—almost two million cases. But the NCVS report recorded just 243,800 cases of rape or sexual assault in that year, 12 percent of the CDC findings. Meanwhile, a report compiled by the FBI, which only documents cases that were brought to police, shows only 83,425 rapes that year. So why the massive disparities between these numbers? Partly, it’s because the CDC and Justice Department reports have different goals." Claire Groden in The New Republic.

Amid Ray Rice controversy, CDC report also says 1 in 3 women have faced domestic abuse. "The abuse portrayed in the video...shows Rice striking his then-fiancee, Janay Palmer, hitting her against an elevator wall, and dragging her out....It’s also all too common: More than 31 percent of women in the United States have been physically abused by an intimate partner at some point in their lives....That troubling statistic comes from the agency’s National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey, released just last week. Researchers conducted more than 12,000 phone interviews in 2011, and also found that 19.3 percent of women (almost one in five) had been raped." Elahe Izadi in The Washington Post.

Meanwhile, states move where Congress won't on pregnant-worker protections. "The Pregnant Workers Fairness Act, which was sponsored by state Sen. Bethany Hall-Long (D) and co-sponsored by conservative Republicans, sailed through the [Delaware] state legislature in a few months and passed with a rare unanimous vote. The measure had the backing of civil rights and other groups to the left of the political spectrum, and the business community to the right. As a similar bill languishes in Congress, Delaware is the latest in a growing number of states and localities to pass...legislation to keep pregnant women working with certain accommodations, if warranted, as long as they don’t pose undue hardship on businesses." Brigid Schulte in The Washington Post.

Science interlude: How social media is affecting your brain right now.

5. The next steps on tax inversions

Treasury to limit profitability of tax inversions. "The Obama administration will decide 'in the very near future' what actions it can take to make it less profitable for U.S. companies to shift their legal addresses to other countries, Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew said Monday. In a speech Monday, Lew said these companies are eroding the U.S. tax base and shifting the burden of funding the government to other taxpayers. He said the best way to address the issue is for Congress to overhaul the U.S. tax code making it more attractive for companies to stay in the U.S. With tax reform facing an uncertain future in Congress, Lew pressed lawmakers to pass legislation making it harder for U.S. companies to pull off corporate inversions." Stephen Ohlemacher in the Associated Press.

Schumer's draft tax-inversion plan would target 'earnings stripping.' "The proposal by Charles Schumer of New York...would reduce the amount of deductible interest for inverted companies to 25 percent of U.S. taxable income from 50 percent, according to a draft obtained by Bloomberg News....Schumer’s bill addresses the practice known as earnings stripping, the post-inversion steps that companies take to reduce U.S. taxes on U.S. income, often by loading up interest deductions in the U.S. A 2007 Treasury Department study found that inverted companies engage in earnings stripping, even amid a lack of evidence that foreign-owned businesses as a whole engage in the practice." Richard Rubin in Bloomberg.

What conditions would be needed for legislation to occur? "For their part, many Republicans have resisted taking on the corporate inversion issue, generally not because they don’t think the law should be changed, but because they view it as a bargaining chip that will help them get some of the other things they want in a major tax reform package. Regardless, it is now clear that Democrats in D.C. plan to make the inversion issue play to their advantage in the fall. The only question is whether they will be able to gather enough Republican support to pass a bill and give the president his win, or will simply spend the next few months calling the GOP a front for big business." Rob Garver in The Fiscal Times.

Animal acrobatics interlude: Dog with two broken legs learns how to get through a doorway.

Wonkblog roundup

World leaders call for decriminalizing drug use, government regulation of the drug trade. Niraj Chokshi and Christopher Ingraham.

20,000 cases or 100,000? How researchers predict Ebola’s spread. Sarah Larimer.

Civil asset forfeitures more than double under Obama. Christopher Ingraham.

Renters fear they lack the credit, not just the cash, to buy a home. Dina ElBoghdady.

Obamacare lets young adults stay on their parents’ insurance longer. Has that made them better off? Jason Millman.

Children with married parents are better off — but marriage isn’t the reason why. Emily Badger.

Nearly one third of the American labor force works on the weekend. Christopher Ingraham.

Should Treasury act to deter corporate inversions? GE’s tax chief says no. Lori Montgomery.

Airlines have never been better at making certain your flight is full. Chico Harlan.

Et Cetera

Refiners, producers battling over crude-oil exports. Jennifer A. Dlouhy in the Houston Chronicle.

Long read: Urban Shield — after Ferguson, police and suppliers consider fate of military-grade tactical gear. Ed Pilkington in The Guardian.

Coalition urges nations to decriminalize drugs and drug use. Somini Sengupta in The New York Times.

Changes to EPA gasoline rules may shake ethanol industry. Zack Colman in the Washington Examiner.

Charges against climate activists dropped on account of...climate change? Jason Plautz in National Journal.

Congress returns with clear goal: to be "as boring as possible." Ed O'Keefe and Paul Kane in The Washington Post.

World falls behind in efforts to tackle climate change, report says. Ben Garside in Reuters.

Senate Dems in doomed push to limit campaign funds. Alan Fram in the Associated Press.

Got tips, additions, or comments? E-mail us.

Wonkbook is produced with help from Michelle Williams and Ryan McCarthy.