WASHINGTON — The Obama administration said Tuesday that 9.5 million people had signed up to receive health coverage through public marketplaces in 2015, with less than a month to go before the enrollment deadline.

At first glance, the report suggests that the administration has achieved its goal of having 9.1 million people enrolled at the end of this year. But in 2014, more than 15 percent of people who selected health plans in the public marketplaces failed to pay their share of premiums and were therefore not on the rolls at the end of the year. Officials said they thought that similar attrition could occur this year.

Sylvia Mathews Burwell, the secretary of health and human services, said that more than 7.1 million people had selected or been automatically re-enrolled in plans through the federal exchange, HealthCare.gov, and that 2.4 million were signed up in states running their own exchanges.

Florida had the largest number of sign-ups with nearly 1.3 million people enrolled for 2015, followed by California with 1.2 million, federal officials said. Florida uses the federal exchange, and California runs its own.

“We still have a lot of work to do before Feb. 15, but are encouraged by the strong interest we’ve seen so far,” Ms. Burwell said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In federal and state exchanges, about 26 percent of those signing up were 18 to 34 years old. Insurers see younger customers as particularly desirable because they tend to be healthy and their premiums can help cover medical claims for older, less healthy subscribers. Roughly one in five Americans age 18 to 34 still have no health insurance, according to government data.

In September, the administration reported that 7.3 million people had coverage and had paid their premiums in 2014. The current open enrollment period began Nov. 15 and ends Feb. 15.

The White House predicts a surge of enrollments just before the deadline. But federal officials have a long way to go to meet projections by the Congressional Budget Office, which said on Monday that the number of people in the exchanges would rise to 12 million this year, 21 million in 2016 and 25 million for each of the three years after that.

Ms. Burwell said that 87 percent of people with coverage through the federal exchange had qualified for financial assistance in the form of tax credits to help pay their premiums.

Critics of the Affordable Care Act are challenging the subsidies, saying the law does not authorize tax credits for premiums in states using the federal insurance exchange. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the challenge this year.

Health plans are classified in five categories, depending on the share of care costs covered by the insurance. The administration said that 70 percent of people in the federal marketplace had selected the midlevel silver plan, while 19 percent had chosen bronze plans, which typically have lower premiums but higher deductibles and more out-of-pocket costs.

Of the people obtaining coverage for 2015 through the federal marketplace, 4.1 million selected or were assigned to the same plans they had in 2014, and three million were customers choosing plans for the first time.

Under the Affordable Care Act, the federal government sets detailed standards for insurers offering coverage in the exchanges. The administration is proposing changes in Medicare, Medicaid and private insurance that would compensate doctors and hospitals according to their performances, cutting payments to those who provide inferior care while rewarding those who keep their patients healthy.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Ms. Burwell said the government would move Medicare away from traditional fee-for-service medicine to “alternative payment models” in which doctors and hospitals would be held accountable for the quality and cost of care.

“We want to reward value and care coordination, rather than value and care duplication,” she said.

In 2014, officials said, about 20 percent of spending in the fee-for-service Medicare program — $72.4 billion of $362 billion — was linked to doctors’ abilities to coordinate care. Ms. Burwell said the government wanted to increase this proportion to 30 percent by the end of 2016 and to 50 percent by the end of 2018.

“You can’t overstate the importance of this,” said Dr. Andrew D. Racine, senior vice president and chief medical officer at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx. “The secretary is pushing on an open door. The country is moving in this direction, regardless of what the government does, but she can add to the momentum. Fee-for-service is dying as a way to pay for medical care.”