Congress Examines Healthcare Competition, Consolidation

Before a panel of lawmakers, lobbyists for hospitals, doctors, and insurance companies justified consolidation in their markets while blaming others for stifling competition.

A U.S. House subcommittee heard payers and providers offer their views on competition and consolidation of the healthcare marketplace under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act Thursday.

For the most part, lobbyists for hospitals, doctors, and insurance companies spent their morning before the Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial and Antitrust Law defending their turf, trumpeting cost-savings innovations by their members, and justifying consolidations in their markets while blaming others for stifling competition.





Barbara L. McAneny, MD

American Medical Association board member Barbara L. McAneny, MD, told the subcommittee that the federal government should more closely examine consolidations in the health insurance and hospital sectors.

Health Plan Mega-Mergers' Fate Shrouded in Uncertainty

"Given the present structure of the health insurance market, health insurers have the ability unilaterally or through coordinated interaction to exercise market power by raising premiums, reducing service, or stifling innovation," McAneny said. "Accordingly, health insurer markets require more, not less, competition and mergers must be carefully scrutinized."

McAneny said that many hospital markets already are highly concentrated and non-competitive and that further acquisition could "undermine the ability of physicians on behalf of patients to shop for hospitals based upon quality factors."

Mega-Mergers Among Health Insurers Bode Ill for Hospitals

"Too much consolidation reduces the incentive of hospitals to compete on these factors, allowing the merged hospital in a concentrated market to provide potentially sub-optimal care for patients," she told the committee.

"A hospital acquiring market power through merger may also substantially lessen the practice options open to physicians such that the hospital obtains market power as an acquirer of physician services."

Rick Pollack, president and CEO of the American Hospital Association, told the subcommittee that hospitals are adapting to a rapidly changing landscape that is moving toward value-based care and reimbursement models.

"To better serve their communities, hospitals and health systems are integrating with other providers in a variety of ways to ensure more coordinated and patient-centered care and improve efficiency and reduce costs," Pollack said.