SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

With Christmas approaching, Santa is makin’ a list and checkin’ it twice.

With today’s 24-hour news networks, Americans know who’s naughty and nice. Number one on many folks’ naughty list is President Barrack Obama.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Unfortunately, with today’s environmental regulations, St. Nick might get fined by the EPA were he to try and deliver the President a lump of coal. Nevertheless, with the Christmas season in mind, here are the 12 failings of Obama:

One Unscrupulous IRS Commissioner

John Koskinen ignored a congressional subpoena, destroyed key evidence, and erased 422 backup tapes containing as many as 24,000 emails about politically targeting conservative groups. He’s violated the public trust and shown no accountability whatsoever. The best he can hope for this Christmas are some backup tapes.

Two Secretaries of State

Hillary Clinton and John Kerry have left the U.S. with better relations with Iran and Cuba and worse relations with allies like Israel. Hillary Clinton’s gift ought to be “Cyber Security for Dummies” and John Kerry needs a Geiger counter to detect a nuclear Iran.

Three Armed Conflicts

Running on the pledge to end two wars, President Obama has the country entangled in three: Syria, Afghanistan and Iraq, and that doesn’t include the American’s foray into Libya. Perhaps President Obama’s gift should be a quad copter so he’d have a less expensive and less dangerous drone.

Fourth Amendment in trouble

Under President Obama, federal agencies have ramped up efforts to weaken our Fourth Amendment rights For the NSA, perhaps a can and a string so they can figure out how to snoop on playground conversations, too.

Five Supreme Court Justices Who Upheld Obamacare

In 2012, the Supreme Court upheld President Obama’s overreaching mandate that forces every American to purchase health insurance or face a fine. It makes no sense how the President thinks those who can’t afford insurance can afford a tax for not having it and how he doesn’t understand how the mandates have cost the middle class and small business owners. The Supreme Court needs HR 2905 the SCOTUScare act passed that puts them under Obamacare.

Six Countries Hell-Bent on Giving Iran a Nuclear Weapon

The President led a team of six countries in its nuclear deal with Iran. America’s allies like Israel agree, Iran must never have nuclear weapons. No deal is better than a bad deal, and this is a horrible deal. A copy of Donald Trump’s book “Art of the Deal” should also be under the White House Christmas tree.

Seven Years of Stalling on Energy Independence, Job Creation

A few weeks ago, President Obama killed the Keystone Pipeline after seven years of indecision on the issue. As I said at the time, it’s ironic that President Obama demands greater investment in our national infrastructure but kills an $8 billion project that would create 42,000 jobs in the United States. This should earn the President an unemployment check for Christmas like all the Americans without a job.

$8 Trillion More Debt

When President Bush left office, the national debt was $10 trillion ­­– shocking at the time, but now it’s almost doubled to $18 trillion under Pres. Obama. Even a calculator for Christmas wouldn’t help him understand how bad that is.

9mm Ammo Shortage

Why is it every time there is a tragedy in the U.S., President Obama blames the gun rather than the criminal? President Obama then says he is going to force strict gun control on law-abiding Americans regardless of the Second Amendment, leading to a mad dash to buy up ammo while it’s still available. A squirt gun and NRA membership should appear in the Obama stocking this year.

Ten Years Teaching Constitutional Law

“I taught constitutional law for ten years. I take the Constitution very seriously. The biggest problems that we’re facing right now have to do with [the President] trying to bring more and more power into the executive branch and not go through Congress at all, and that’s what I intend to reverse when I’m President of the United States of America.”

Of course that was Senator Obama talking about President Bush. There are various organizations that publish free copies of the Constitution. Perhaps Michelle Obama can pick one up for her husband.

11 Million Illegal Aliens

One of the President’s greatest failures is his unwillingness to secure the border. Instead, President Obama wielded his mighty pen to stop deportations and essentially created an executive amnesty program. A trip for the President to Texas to see what’s really going on probably wouldn’t even help.

12 Months Until a New President

Executive power grabs need to stop – that’s not just true at Christmas, but all year round. The American people’s gift in 12 months will be a Republican President.