MOUNT PLEASANT — Presidential candidate Carly Fiorina lambasted the federal bureaucracy, Obamacare and the response to terror attacks during a speech Monday to Lowcountry Republicans at the outset of a campaign swing through South Carolina.

“I think we have reached a pivotal moment. I think it is time to take our country back,” she said, adding that the federal bureaucracy has become an obstacle to the nation realizing its potential.

The IRS has more personnel than the FBI and CIA combined at a time when national security is in peril, she said.

The IRS enforces a 73,000-page tax code that Fiorina, a former CEO of computer giant Hewlett-Packard, said should be simplified to three pages. She called the Affordable Care Act an 80,000-page “monstrosity” that has led to crony capitalism in the health care system and should be repealed.

“We are crushing people with this complexity,” she said.

She called for “zero-based budgeting” of the federal government so that spending of every tax dollar would be justified.

The National Labor Relations Board, Federal Communications Commission and Environmental Protection Agency are examples of a federal bureaucracy that is unaccountable to the people, she said.

“We are no longer a nation of laws,” Fiorina said. “We are a nation of rules.”

Fiorina pledged to restore America as a land of opportunity, citing her own rise from secretary to the head of Hewlett-Packard.

“This nation was founded on an amazing idea. You had a right to see possibilities and pursue them. You had a right to fulfill you own potential,” she said.

Border security is an ever-present issue that was a hot topic of the presidential races in 2008 and 2012. But nothing has been done about it, she said.

She pledged a cooperative effort to defeat ISIS.

“Our allies are not counting on us anymore,” she said.

She criticized the Obama administration for its response to the attacks in Benghazi, Paris and San Bernardino, Calif. She said she would retaliate if the country is attacked.

She called for more collaboration between the tech sector and the government to thwart terrorism hatched in cyberspace.

When asked about U.S. Sen. Lindsey Graham’s decision to drop out of the presidential race, she said that he is a great patriot and a great American.

“I have great admiration for him,” she said. “I hope he will continue to speak out.”

Fiorina addressed the East Cooper Republican Club at the Holiday Inn on Johnnie Dodds Boulevard. Before speaking, she posed for photos with students from Wando High School, Porter-Gaud and Ashley Hall.

She is scheduled to speak in Florence on Tuesday.