The TXU Monticello Steam Electric Station power plant near Mt. Pleasant, Texas, in February 2007. Reuters

Lazard and FTI Consulting will be advising the committee of unsecured creditors in Energy Future Holdings Corp.’s bankruptcy, one of the largest Chapter 11 proceedings on record.

The Texas power company arrived in bankruptcy April 29 after months of restructuring talks aimed at trying to build support for a strategy to offload some of the debt piled on in a 2007 leveraged buyout. Lazard advised the board of directors and the strategic-transactions committee of what was then called TXU Corp. in connection with the LBO, which didn’t work out so well.

Natural gas prices went down, fracking boomed and Energy Future couldn’t pay the freight on its debt load. Next stop, Chapter 11.

Lazard’s new job requires it to advise Energy Future’s official creditors’ committee, which will turn over every stone looking for money for folks that otherwise won’t get paid. Could Lazard’s past work on the Energy Future LBO complicate its new assignment as adviser to the creditor’s committee? Probably not. Lazard advised the board of the former TXU, directors whose job it was to get the best possible price for public shareholders that owned the company. How much debt was involved in the LBO was not the board’s concern.

Morrison & Foerster’s Brett Miller, lead lawyer for the committee, declined to discuss how the issue will be addressed in advance of the formal filing of Lazard’s application to be hired. Lazard spokeswoman Judi Frost Mackey declined comment.

Under the company’s current scenario, upward of $6 billion worth of debt will be erased by way of a restructuring that will be outlined by June 13. The committee will be heard from for the first time Thursday when Energy Future goes to court with a full agenda of matters that need to be dealt with as the company pushes to get out of bankruptcy by early next year. Thursday, the company will have to contend with calls from unhappy creditors to move the big bankruptcy case from Delaware to Dallas and to answer questions.

The questions are coming from all sides, Energy Future said in court papers Tuesday. Among other things, creditors are asking about “essentially all” of the negotiations on bankruptcy financing, the company’s current business plan, and what happened in the talks that brought some key creditors on board with Energy Future’s restructuring strategy.

Wilmington Savings Fund Society, trustee for $1.6 billion worth of endangered debt, was the first to fire off questions at Energy Future, with a formal “Rule 2004” motion filed the day Energy Future filed for bankruptcy protection. Rule 2004 is a powerful bankruptcy investigative tool that allows creditors to get answers from companies that have sought court protection.

In a detailed, 34-page motion, the bond trustee said it needs answers now about what sent Energy Future spiraling into insolvency. Though it took place more than half a decade ago, the deal on which Lazard advised was not spared when it came to the barrage of queries Wilmington Savings Fund Society aimed at the company.

“Compounding the extraordinary risks inherent in the debt burden assumed to effect the sponsor group’s speculative investment, management has failed to deal with key operational imperatives, which explains in large measure the debtors’ immediate financial predicament,” wrote Brown Rudnick’s Ed Weisfelner, lawyer for the bond trustee.

By “sponsor group,” the bond trustee meant the investment firms that own energy future: Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co., TPG Capital, LP and Goldman Sachs & Co.

The private equity firms pleaded with the court for help against the Rule 2004 probe. “While it is sometimes said that Rule 2004 permits ‘fishing expeditions,’ what is proposed here is to scour the Pacific Ocean, in a matter of days, in search of any and all fish regardless of the size, shape or species,” wrote the trio of law firms representing the trio of Energy Future leading owners.

Write to Peg Brickley at peg.brickley@wsj.com.