SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Liberal Hollywood mogul and Hillary Clinton supporter Harvey Weinstein cited The Who in slamming Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-VT) and his policy proposals on Friday: “We won’t get fooled again,” he told CBS This Morning.

Weinstein was referring to Sanders’ promises to make health care and college free for all. Instead, Weinstein argued, the government should focus on those in need. “I can afford to send my kids to school. Let’s concentrate on the kids that can’t afford to go to school. … Let’s get the ones who can’t afford health care. Easier solution than saying, ‘Let’s give it away,’ and bankrupt the country … I know a lot of guys saying that doesn’t add up, plain and simple.”

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

It’s not clear when Weinstein himself was “fooled” the first time: he supported Clinton over Barack Obama in 2008. He did, however, defend Obamacare — a policy that changed health insurance for nearly everyone in the country, rather than focusing on the small minority who lacked insurance or were unhappy with their insurance policies.

In November 2015, Weinstein defended Obama’s struggling Obamacare system, telling Piers Morgan in an interview on CNN: “… this is the only the country in the world where we don’t have health care. Countries embarrass us around the world. And this is the only country in the world, we don’t have a gun law. I watched you, you know, talk about that. You know, quite frankly it’s embarrassing. Obama is not embarrassing. The country is embarrassing.”

It is not clear whether Weinstein regrets that statement, but he has clearly revised his view on universal health care.

He is not alone: a new survey conducted by Vox.com found that two-thirds of Bernie Sanders supporters do not want to pay the additional amount in taxes required to provide free health care or free college tuition for all Americans.

Weinstein also told CBS that Clinton is a “strong, proven leader … the world is crazy and we need that smart hand.”

In 2005, the National Review called The Who’s “Wont Get Fooled Again” the #1 conservative rock song of all time.