SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Let me set the scene with some science…

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

The national Republican Party has lost the popular vote in five of six presidential elections. The only one they were able to win was a lay-up, the re-election of a sitting president, George W. Bush, during a time of war. And while the national Republican Party has been able to win majorities in Congress, other than better congressional offices for the winners, what exactly was the point?

The first thing Marco Rubio did after the Tea Party elected him in 2010 was to join the Senate’s Gang of Eight and roll over for Chuck Schumer on amnesty. After winning huge majorities in both Houses in 2014 on a message based primarily on President Obama grabbing too much executive power, one of the first things Republicans did was to give Obama more executive power (and a major political victory) by passing a trade deal Democrats wanted no part of. Republicans couldn’t even leverage something like passage of the Keystone Pipeline in return.

The GOP voting base has been repeatedly betrayed, is furious, and has every right to be. The incompetent Establishment is either losing national elections, getting rolled by Democrats, simpering to the media, or serially-stabbing their own voters in the back — and doing so on nothing less than illegal immigration, an issue the base correctly sees as an existential one that will determine the future of our Party and our country.

Meanwhile, Establishment icon Jeb Bush sees illegal immigration as an “act of love.”

To anyone not blinded by their own snobbery, Trump’s appeal to this group, even if it is on the single issue of locking America’s back border door at night, is painfully obvious.

But what is the response from the Republican Establishment to these voters? We saw a perfect example of it Friday night on CNN.

Like an embittered Gollum-In-Glasses protecting “My Precious” Jeb, Rick Wilson, a top Republican media consultant, appeared on CNN last night to hurl criticism mixed with a lot of faux-macho ad-hominem at Republican front-runner Donald Trump.

Which is fine. Wilson is even correct on a couple points.

Then he dropped his pants.

One thing to keep in mind when you read Wilson’s quote from last night below is that Republican candidates actually hire this guy to help them win elections — which I think explains a lot. [emphasis added]:

You do not benefit by trying to draft behind Donald Trump and hope that he collapses and his low-information supporters run into your arms. This is a guy who is increasingly leading a fraction of the conservative base into a very dangerous cul-de-sac. He is promising things that he can never deliver. And it is time for Jeb Bush and other folks to start posting up and really comparing and contrasting Donald Trump’s rhetoric with the reality.

Revealed: The Consultant Class Plan To Defeat Hillary Clinton

1. Go on CNN to insult Donald Trump’s supporters, who make up 23% of the GOP base.

2. Recommend that no one tries to win the votes of these knuckle-dragging Neanderthals.

Rick Wilson and his ilk despise the Republican base (voters!) so much that they are appearing on national television to insult them and advise candidates not to win them over.

On behalf of his Precious Jeb, Gollum’s response to the legitimate anger and concern being expressed by the very voters we desperately need to turn out if we are going to have any chance of winning back the White House, is to attack, demean, insult, and smear them.

Wilson claims he’s not working for Jeb, but when he follows that statement with insults obviously meant to marginalize 23% of the base, you have to wonder what the Consultant Class game plan is.

If there is an example of anyone winning an election by attacking their own voters, I’m all ears.

Again, Wilson isn’t just some talking head. He’s a top consultant hired by Republicans to help them win elections. He is a member in very good standing among the powerful Republican Establishment.

And I don’t mean to single out Wilson. He’s just one of many among the snobby serial-losers who make up the Consultant Class, and he is part of a group that locks arms with the likes of Salon’s Joan Walsh to attack Republican voters as racists and as “clowns” on the pages of the left-wing Politico; and, as we saw last night, as “low information voters” on CNN.

Does anyone have any other questions about why we lose?

Follow John Nolte on Twitter @NolteNC