Adam Goodes has been named Australian of the Year

Eddie McGuire on Goodes racial slur Collingwood president Eddie McGuire cautions against hysteria in the matter of a racial slur directed at Swans champ Adam Goodes, allegedly from a teenage Pies fan.

AFL player and Aboriginal leader Adam Goodes has been named Australian of the Year for 2014.

Goodes was honoured for his leadership and advocacy in the fight against racism both on the sporting field and within society more broadly.

An indigenous Andyamathanha man, Goodes is a champion AFL player with the Sydney Swans.

He holds an elite place in AFL history, with two Brownlow Medals and two premierships.

``Thank you Australia for this award. This is a huge honour,'' Goodes told the crowd at the ceremony in Canberra.

Goodes said growing up as an indigenous Australian he had seen his fair share of racism.

``I believe racism is a community issue which we all need to address and that's why racism stops with me,'' he said.

Last year, the focus shifted momentarily from Goodes' outstanding playing ability to a racial slur on the field.

In a Swans match against Collingwood last May, a teenage girl called Goodes an ``ape'' from the grandstand.

Goodes said he turned the incident into an educational tool to teach indigenous Australians and minority groups to say no to racism.

Congratulations to Australian of the Year, Goodesy @adamroy37 for his tremendous work fighting racism both on and off the field — Bill Shorten (@billshortenmp) January 25, 2014

The 34-year-old is a four-time All-Australian, member of the Indigenous Team of the Century, and has represented Australia in the International Rules Series.

He is actively involved with several indigenous sport and community programs, and has spent time working with troubled youngsters, including in youth detention centres.

RELATED: Hey, true-blue Aussies - let's take an Australia Day stand

Together with his cousin and former teammate Michael O'Loughlin, he established the GO Foundation which seeks to empower the next generation of indigenous role models.

Memo to any fool that wants to criticise Adam Goodes as AOTY. Just don't. Let's unite around a great Australian role model. Good choice. — Darren Chester MP (@DarrenChesterMP) January 25, 2014

Goodes made it clear he would have racism in his sights over the coming year.

``My hope is that we as a nation can break down the silos between races, break down those stereotypes of minority populations,'' he said.

``I hope we can be proud of our heritage, regardless of the colour of our skin and be proud to be Australian.

``The ultimate reward is when all Australians see each other as equals, and treat each other as equals.''

Goodes' mother Lisa, a member of the Stolen Generation, was among those in the crowd for the announcement.

Congratulations to all the @ausoftheyear awards winners! You are truly remarkable people. pic.twitter.com/07LAAmAuC3 — Tony Abbott (@TonyAbbottMHR) January 25, 2014

Australian of the Year 2014 - Adam Goodes (NSW)

- Joined Sydney Swans in 1997

- Dual Brownlow medallist

- Two AFL premiership victories

- Mentor to indigenous kids, establishing Go Foundation with his cousin and former teammate Michael O'Loughlin

Jacqueline Freney is no stranger to a podium but usually it's right beside a swimming pool.

On Saturday it wasn't another gold medal for the the Paralympic swimmer but instead a national honour, as the 21-year-old was named Young Australian of the Year for 2014.

``This is a significant day not only for me but for also for the Paralympic movement as it reflects the unique role Paralympians play in society,'' the Brisbane-born athlete said as she accepted her award.

Cerebral palsy has not stopped Freney achieving sporting success, and at the London 2012 Games she won eight gold medals - the greatest haul by any athlete in the Australian team.

In fact, she won a gold medal for every event in which she competed and set two world records.

The performance earned her the crown as Australia's 2012 Paralympian of the Year.

Congratulations also to Fred Chaney AO, Jacqueline Freney & Tim Conolan - three truly remarkable Australians — Bill Shorten (@billshortenmp) January 25, 2014

``Please understand that I'm just a country girl who was born with extra life challenges,'' Freney told the Canberra crowd.

``I'm an example of how a child with special needs can develop and achieve with support, guidance, encouragement and opportunity.

``I ask that all Australians respect each other's diversity and acknowledge their ability to contribute to this great country.''

Freney's efforts have continued out of the pool, working with Swimming Australia as a motivational speaker to inspire other athletes with disabilities.

Freney's current focus is training for the 2016 Rio Paralympics.

Young Australian of the Year 2014 - Jacqueline Freney (NSW)

- Aged 21

- Paralympic gold medal winning swimmer

- Most successful Australian of the London 2012 Paralympic Games

* * *

Former federal politician Fred Chaney's contribution to Australian society remains resolute, as does his championing of indigenous rights since his departure from parliament in 1993.

The one-time Liberal senator and lower house MP for Western Australia, 72, has been named Senior Australian of the Year in recognition of his commitment to reconciliation and human rights.

Stepping up to accept his award in Canberra on Saturday, Mr Chaney voiced his hope that Australia will soon achieve constitutional recognition for indigenous people.

``I have one learning I've taken from the past 50 years and that is for the prime minister to meet his ambition, for all of us to meet our ambitions to close the gap and to do the right thing by Aboriginal people,'' Mr Chaney said after stepping forward to accept his award on Saturday.

``We have to work in partnership with Aboriginal people ... and if we do that then the political firepower that's being directed, the bureaucratic firepower and the community firepower will enable the Aboriginal people of Australia to have their rightful place in this country.''

Mr Chaney served as minister for Aboriginal affairs in the Fraser government but his commitment to indigenous rights began earlier.

He was an early advocate for Aboriginal voting rights in the 1960s and he later helped establish the Aboriginal Legal Service of WA.

Earlier on Saturday he recalled the ``brilliant campaign'' leading up to the 1967 referendum which allowed indigenous people to be counted in the census and for parliament to make laws concerning them.

He hopes a similarly strong momentum will build ahead of a planned referendum on recognising Aboriginal people in the constitution.

``In all his leadership roles, Mr Chaney inspires others to work collaboratively, respectfully and ambitiously to overcome the barriers that inhibit people's full economic and social participation in Australian society,'' a statement from the National Australia Day Council said.

Mr Chaney has served in a senior role with the National Native Title Tribunal and other advocacy groups, including the Graham (Polly) Farmer Foundation, which supports young indigenous people to reach their full potential.

The father of three, who trained as a lawyer, was appointed an Officer of the Order of Australia (AO) in 1997 for his service to parliament and the Aboriginal community.

Senior Australian of the Year 2014 - Fred Chaney (WA)

- Federal Minister for Aboriginal Affairs in Fraser Government

- Early advocate for Aboriginal voting rights

- Founding co-chair of Reconciliation Australia

* * *

Tim Conolan has been a hero for millions of sick children over the past 15 years and now the title is official.

The Victorian founder and boss of children's charity TLC For Kids has been named Australia's Local Hero for 2014 by the National Australia Day Council.

``To say that I'm overwhelmed is a complete understatement,'' the 44-year-old said as he accepted the honour in Canberra.

He says he set up TLC for Kids because of a lack of services for sick children.

``I believe that any sick child, regardless of their illness, has a right to support,'' he said.

And all sick children should have the opportunity to smile, he said.

``I believe that we are living in the best country in the world and with enough support and everyone getting behind us we can all make a difference. So let's make 2014 the year of the smile,'' he said.

He said the real heroes were the sick children, their families and the hospital staff that help them everyday.

Started in 1998, Mr Conolan's charity offers practical and emotional support to ill youngsters and their families at hundreds of hospitals across the country.

One of TLC's programs includes supplying therapeutic toys and items used by health-care professionals to guide children through frightening and painful procedures.

As a young man Mr Conolan was asked to address a cancer support group as a motivational speaker, where he was inspired to help some of the seriously-ill children he met.

Since then the entrepreneur has made it his mission to ensure all children in hospital have the support they need.

Australia's Local Hero 2014 - Tim Conolan (VIC)

- Set up charity TLC for kids in 1998

- Has helped more than four million sick children and their families

- Former DJ

* * *

"The ultimate reward is when all Australians see each other as equal." @adamroy37 @ausoftheyear 2014 — AusoftheYearAwards (@ausoftheyear) January 25, 2014

THE FULL LIST OF AUSTRALIANS OF THE YEAR

2014 - Adam Goodes

2013 - Ita Buttrose

2012 - Geoffrey Rush

2011 - Simon McKeon

2010 - Prof Patrick McGorry

2009 - Prof Mick Dodson

2008 - Lee Kernaghan

2007 - Prof Tim Flannery

2006 - Prof Ian Frazer

2005 - Dr Fiona Wood

2004 - Steve Waugh

2003 - Prof Fiona Stanley

2002 - Pat Rafter

2001 - Lt Gen Peter Cosgrove

2000 - Sir Gustav Nossal

1999 - Mark Taylor

1998 - Cathy Freeman

1997 - Prof Peter Doherty

1996 - Dr John Yu

1995 - Arthur Boyd

1994 - Ian Kiernan

1992 - Mandawuy Yunupingu

1991 - Archbishop Peter Hollingworth

1990 - Dr Fred Hollows

1989 - Allan Border

1988 - Kay Cottee

1987 - John Farnham

1986 - Dick Smith

1985 - Paul Hogan

1984 - Lowitja O'Donoghue

1983 - Robert de Castella

1982 - Sir Edward Williams

1981 - Sir John Crawford

1980 - Manning Clark

1979 - Harry Butler, Senator Neville Bonner

1978 - Alan Bond, Galarrwuy Yunupingu

1977 - Sir Murray Tyrrell, Dame Raigh Roe

1976 - Sir Edward 'Weary' Dunlop

1975 - Major General Alan Stretton

1975 - Sir John Cornforth

1974 - Sir Bernard Heinze

1973 - Patrick White

1972 - Shane Gould

1971 - Evonne Goolagong

1970 - Cardinal Sir Norman Gilroy

1969 - Richard Gardiner Casey

1968 - Lionel Rose

1967 - The Seekers

1966 - Sir Jack Brabham

1965 - Sir Robert Helpmann

1964 - Dawn Fraser

1963 - Sir John Eccles

1962 - Alexander 'Jock' Sturrock

1961 - Dame Joan Sutherland

1960 - Sir Macfarlane Burnet

Source: National Australia Day Council. No award given in 1993

###