In one of the best games of the NBA season, Golden State overcame a double-digit second half deficit to beat the Thunder 121-118 in overtime in front of a sold out Chesapeake Energy Arena crowd.

2/27/16 Related Story: Thunder Social Scene

With the score tied, Russell Westbrook missed a jumper that would’ve given OKC the lead with under 10 seconds remaining, but the bank shot bounced off the front of the rim and the Warriors immediately leaked out into transition and found reigning MVP Steph Curry, who knocked down a 38-foot 3-pointer with .6 left on the clock to win the game.

The dagger from Curry also tied an NBA record for most 3-pointers made in a game with 12.

Curry’s shot was simply the icing on the cake for OKC, who experienced a night littered with highs and lows.

OKC led by as many as 12 points in the second half and were in control most of the game. Nearly everyone in the arena believed the game was in the bag with 14.5 seconds left in regulation after Kevin Durant drained one of his signature 3-pointers to put the Thunder up four points.

But instead of sealing the game on defense, the Thunder allowed Klay Thompson to score an uncontested layup to get within two points, and then Durant committed a costly turnover after the Thunder inbounds play which gave the Warriors the ball back with the clock ticking down. The ball then got in the hands of Andre Iguodala, who pulled up for a jumper just inside the 3-point line and was fouled on the shot by Durant with .7 left on the game clock.

Iguodala knocked down a pair of clutch free throws to tie the game, and Durant’s game-winning attempt at the buzzer drew front iron to send the game to overtime.

With nearly all the energy sucked out of the Peake, OKC surprisingly got up five points in less than a minute due to stellar ball movement, but Durant fouled out of the game with 4:13 left in overtime after referee Scott Foster whistled a questionable call on a Curry drive to the basket.

Despite all of the misfortune, the Thunder held their composure for a majority of overtime and held a 118-115 lead with 33.9 second left after Andre Roberson finished a tough layup at the rim.

But once again, defense cost the Thunder late, and Thompson converted an and-1 layup to tie the game with 29 seconds left, and Curry took over from there to make the Warriors the fastest team in history to clinch a playoff berth.

Curry finished with 46 points in the win, while his Splash Brother (Thompson) added 32 of his own. Curry did go back to the locker room for a bit in the third quarter to check out an ankle injury, but clearly it didn’t bother him too much the rest of the way.

Durant totaled 37 points and 12 rebounds, while Westbrook contributed 26 points, 13 assists and seven rebounds. Serge Ibaka also had a solid game with 15 points and 20 rebounds.

OKC out rebounded the Warriors 62-to-32, but were plagued by 22 turnovers compared to the Warriors’ 11.

The road doesn’t get much easier for the Thunder, as they hit the road for a four-game road trip that begins in Sacramento on Monday night.