Planned Parenthood abortion business officials in Ohio are looking for volunteers to pray at a prayer event.

No, Planned Parenthood is not asking people to pray for an end to abortion in the way pro-life advocates pray at prayer events like 40 Days for Life. Instead the abortion giant is hoping Buckeye State residents will pray for more abortions.

As this Planned Parenthood announcement indicates, the abortion corporation wants people to join an abortion activist who is calling for prayer in response to the state’s refusal to expand Obamacare, which funds abortion and sends taxapayer dollars to the abortion giant. Planned Parenthood seeks people who think their religion calls on them to pray for “reproductive health,” which is a euphemism for abortion.

From the announcement:

Ohio faith leaders will culminate a week of prayer on issues that affect all Ohioans on Thursday. Join Planned Parenthood supporters and faith leaders from across Ohio at a Statehouse prayer rally. August 28 from 4:30 to 5:30 p.m.

Ohio Statehouse — 3rd Street Steps Moral Mondays was started in North Carolina by Rev. William Barber, head of the state NAACP, to protest that state’s failure to enact the ACA’s Medicaid expansion and other policies that were “morally indefensible,” including attacks on women’s rights. Recently, Rev. Barber put out a call to spread the movement to other states with a week of actions at the end of August. This week of action provided an opportunity to focus on issues relating to civil rights and social and economic justice.

Katie McCann, Director of Communications for Ohio Right to Life, talked with LifeNews about the event.

Click here to sign up for daily pro-life news alerts from LifeNews.com

“We are greatly concerned if anyone prays against protections for unborn children in our state. We hope that the spirit of prayer will move them to join us in protecting the innocent, and we ask Ohio and the country to pray with us for Planned Parenthood and their change of hearts regarding the value of human life,” she said.