The Tuition Equality Act of 2013 was supposed to help young people convert their noblest aspirations into practical realities. Particularly the so-called DREAMers: At last, higher education would be within the reach of these undocumented immigrants, thanks to a prudent government decision which allowed them to pay in-state tuition rates.

But it has turned out to be a false promise and phony premise.

Gov. Christie vetoed the part of the law that would have granted these unauthorized students the same financial aid received by other New Jersey students, so most of them are out of luck - and in a state that has as many as 550,000 unauthorized immigrants, that is absurdly shortsighted.

New Jersey already pays $250,000 for every kid from K through 12, including the undocumented kids. It also gives out another 82,000 TAG grants to some of them when they head off to college.

But the fact that none of those TAG awards go to DREAMers makes the message clear: "We've invested a quarter-million on each one of them - then we basically ask the undocumented students to drop off a cliff," says Assemblyman Gary Schaer (D-Passaic).

As a new study from New Jersey Policy Perspective points out, very few of these unauthorized kids (335) found their way to our 11 colleges and universities last fall. Put it this way: Rutgers accepted 310 undocumented students for the Fall 2014 semester, but only 121 actually made it to class. The majority couldn't afford it.

That's because paying the $13,000 cost of in-state tuition in New Jersey is often impossible without that $10,318 TAG grant.

Especially if you come from an undocumented family household, where the average annual income is $39,100.

Does it matter that we're leaving a sizable portion of the college-eligible population behind? Yes, because there will be jobs to fill: NJPP cites a Georgetown projection that says New Jersey will have the second largest share of jobs in the nation requiring a bachelor's degree in 2018. That means it will become increasingly important for working class families to send their kids to college.

So Schaer is getting ready to propose a bill that will expand financial aid to DREAMers, and if you don't think the state can afford it, consider the alternative.

To deny affordable education is preparing for the future with one arm tied behind our backs, a painful lesson we too often ignore from our history -a glorious history, yes, but one made much harder by our myopia.

We've become the most powerful nation on earth in 239 years without fully recognizing the potential of women, who two generations ago had a choice of only three careers -- teacher, secretary, nurse. We've come this far by treating a large segment of our population like a property for three hundred years, before realizing that opportunity must be universal to sanctify a democracy. We've come this far without considering the contributions of the handicapped - some by a higher power, perhaps, but most by the limits of our moral imagination.

Education can be the holy grail, but it is also about pragmatism: Even in a state as strapped as this one, New Jersey must invest in future assets like infrastructure, medical research, and the development of young minds. It's about using all our human resources, and to neglect them now is asking for failure later.



Follow The Star-Ledger on Twitter @StarLedger and find us on Facebook.