Want people to understand how to handle money? The best results come from videos and interactive tools.

Static brochures and other old-fashioned educational tools aren’t the most effective if you want to raise people’s financial awareness and help them make better financial decisions, according to research published by the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Associated Press

The paper by Annamaria Lusardi, Anya Savikhin Samek, Arie Kapteyn, Lewis Glinert, Angela Hung, and Aileen Heinberg brought together the expertise of financial-literacy economists, behavioral economists, visual analytics experts, psychologists and linguists. It concluded that the most effective educational tools to deconstruct complex subjects such as financial issues “engage the user emotionally or physically.”

Financial literacy is a growing necessity as people struggle in a sluggish economy to not only make ends meet but also to lay aside enough for retirement, children’s college or any other emergency expenses. It is even more important as more people are abandoning state or employer-managed pension plans for Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) or defined-contribution plans, both of which require a thorough decision making process and a certain level of financial literacy.

“Studies show that few individuals plan for retirement and fewer develop and follow through on a financial plan for retirement,” the authors write.

The takeaway from the report is that financial education needs to keep up with the fast-changing digital era. If you want to get your message across to people who spend most of their time either glued to their computers’ screens or staring at their smartphones, you have to upgrade your mode of delivery.

The researchers came up with four online educational programs ; an informational brochure, an interactive visual tool, a written narrative, and a video narrative. All four programs had the same educational objective, which is to explain the notion of risk diversification, identified by experts as a key factor to successful retirement planning. Video was the most effective and almost always beat out the written narrative. Visual tools performed well but not as well as video.