Analysis: State lawmakers go after the federal government but also intervene to block local officials. What's the proper role of government?

Tennessee state Capitol building in Nashville (Photo: Getty Images / iStockphoto) Story Highlights Citizens are getting a lesson in the role of government in this legislative session.

Lawmakers are looking to intrude upon what they consider intrusive federal and local laws.

"It is about policies the state lawmakers like and dislike," says Vanderbilt professor John Geer.

Tennessee lawmakers this year have taken up a resolution to sue the federal government over refugee resettlement.

The House has passed a measure to reaffirm the state’s sovereignty under the 10th Amendment.

And lawmakers have taken up bills criticizing the U.S. Supreme Court’s decision last year legalizing same-sex marriage.

Meanwhile, the Tennessee General Assembly passed legislation to nullify a local-hire amendment approved by Nashville voters last year.

And they’re debating a measure to allow residents to de-annex themselves from cities. It’s a controversial proposal, and officials in Memphis, Knoxville and Chattanooga oppose it.

We’re certainly getting a lesson in the role of government in this legislative session — in particular the relationship between federal, state and local officials.

Republicans regularly chafe at what they view as overreach by the federal government.

At the same time, they've come under some criticism this year, particularly in Nashville, for their position on the local-hire amendment. The measure, approved by voters 58 percent to 42 percent, would have required at least 40 percent of work hours on city construction projects that cost $100,000 or more go to Davidson County residents.

"I think it’s foolish for anyone to try to hinder what Nashville is doing," said Rep. Bo Mitchell, D-Nashville. "I think it’s indicative of people’s mindset where they live, and I think people from outside a community trying to force their views upon another city is bad policy."

Mitchell said he finds it amazing that lawmakers regularly portray the federal government in a bad light, especially given the help from Washington after the 2010 flood.

Rep. Glen Casada, R-Franklin, is the House Republican caucus chairman. He sees it differently. He said the line is intrusive government.

"So when the feds intrude, take liberties, rights, economic freedoms away, we fight against that," Casada said. "When local government does the same thing, we fight against that."

The local-hire measure, he said, affects other municipalities where workers might live.

To be sure, the relationship between state and federal government is far different than between the state and a city or county. For one, counties and cities are an extension of the state.

In fact, counties and cities often need the legislature's approval to accomplish their goals. Just look at the bills coming up before lawmakers this year and you'll find dozens that are filed at the request of county and city leaders.

Duane Gang (Photo: File)

"The federal government is only supposed to meddle in what we’ve given up to them to do," said state Sen. Mark Norris, R-Collierville. "We reserve all the rest of the powers to us as the states. Local governments are component governments of state government unlike states with the feds."

But Norris said it can be a fine line state lawmakers walk when dealing with their local counterparts.

"It can be and it's one that we have to be conscious of because it can be too easy to act too quickly in keeping these relationships distinct," he said.

"Today I find that it’s hard for many people to relate to the difference between state and federal government because they don’t know their civics," Norris said. "They don’t read their constitution and they don’t understand completely the extent to which we are bound to uphold our oaths to our state constitution as well as the federal.”

The tension probably won't end and neither will the regular debate about the proper role of government. After all, it's been around since our founding.

"It is not about a consistent ideological position," said John Geer, a Vanderbilt University political science professor. "It is about policies the state lawmakers like and dislike. That is the unifying theme."

Joel Ebert contributed to this report.

Content Strategist Duane W. Gang oversees The Tennessean's team of local news reporters, including politics and statehouse coverage. Reach him at 615-726-5982 and on Twitter @duanegang.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1Ru2qze