Ben Jenkins stocks a fishing tackle box full of bone, rubber, shell and porcelain buttons — some of them American Civil War-era originals — and knows that buttonholes in both Union and Confederate uniforms were hand-stitched in the absence of a mechanized buttonholer then.

"But when people ask me about clothes and fashion today, I'm like, 'Dude, I don't know anything outside of about 1750 to 1880,' " said Jenkins, 25.

Jenkins, a Louisiana native now living in Erie, most enjoys researching clothing worn by the Army of the Trans-Mississippi during that time frame — Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee's third army that fought in Louisiana, Missouri, Arkansas, Texas and the Indian Territory that is now Oklahoma.

Ben Jenkins models period clothing he has made for Civil War battle reenactments. (Lewis Geyer / Times-Call)

Seems like a bad business plan for Jenkins, a tailor who learned how to sew at 14 from his late maternal grandmother and hopes to continue making a living at it.

But in an anniversary year — this is the 150th anniversary of many decisive Civil War battles that led to the south's surrender in 1865 — priority mail boxes litter Jenkins' couch and kitchen counter awaiting order filling and shipping.

Jenkins works feverishly, sometimes from 8 a.m. to almost midnight, trying to finish making clothing in time for his clients to head off to battle reenactment events.

Jenkins admits kits — outfits of period clothing — can be purchased online for half the price he typically charges. Period trousers commercially produced might cost $75, while his fully researched and handmade pants go for $150.

But serious "reenactors" are more than happy to pay those prices, and consider the hobbyists who buy the mass-produced items as "mainstreamers" — people who wear off-the-rack clothing that, to Jenkins, looks more as if it's from the "Gone with the Wind" era during Reconstruction.

Such costumes might represent a generic Union or Confederate uniform, he said.

Hardcore reenactors or authentic reenactors appreciate how nonstandard Jenkins' uniforms can be.

Jenkins notes that blockades caused the Confederacy to struggle outfitting soldiers and how signs posted in Texas during the war read: "Women, We Need Your Help."

"So they sewed haversacks (tote bags) out of anything they could spare. They made them out of carpet, drapes and table clothes," Jenkins said. "And they were not even the same size or strap length."

Fussing over clothing and accessory details first became an issue during the 1961 Civil War centennial, according to Michael Mumaugh, an interpretive ranger at the Mansfield State Historic Site in Louisiana near the village of Shongaloo where Jenkins grew up.

A sack coat made by Ben Jenkins, who crafts period clothing for Civil War battle reenactments. (Lewis Geyer / Times-Call)

"That was the first surge of reenactments, and photos from that time show guys wearing Sears and Roebuck overalls," he said. "The desire to reenact was there then. The desire to do it in proper costume was not. Or, maybe the desire was there, but nobody was making those clothes."

Battle kits come of age

That began to change in 1990, during the second surge of reenactment interest, when filmmaker Ken Burns aired "The Civil War" series on PBS and in 1993, when "Gettysburg" debuted in theaters, Mumaugh explained.

Today, hardcore reenactors store kits with clothing and accessories specific to various battles — a phenomenon that prompted war correspondent and Pulitzer Prize-winning author Tony Horowitz to write, "Confederates in the Attic: Dispatches from the Unfinished Civil War" (Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group).

One of the tools Ben Jenkins uses for making his old-style clothes is a pair of scissors made in the 1820s. (Lewis Geyer / TIMES-CALL)

From the book came a term — "period rush" — that Mumaugh said captures why so-called authentic reenactors go to great lengths to wear hyper-realistic uniforms and civilian clothing.

"In that, in a fleeting moment, you feel like you might be there, and for two or three seconds, you can let go of reality," he said.

Some planners even bring in pyrotechnic companies for surprise 4 a.m. raids to simulate artillery attacks on the authentic reenactors sleeping as soldiers in tents with no pillows, sleeping bags or air mattresses, Jenkins said.

So Jenkins — himself an authentic reenactor — sweats the details in the costume department.

Ben Jenkins models period clothing he has made for Civil War battle reenactments. (Lewis Geyer / Times-Call)

He has gotten orders midway through a restoration process that send him into the back rooms of museums to take notes on the construction of shirts, trousers, jackets and kepis. He rereads a diary written by a Union soldier living as a prisoner among troops of the Army of the Trans-Mississippi because so many clothing details turn up in the copy. Jenkins also studies books — a favorite is "Echoes of Glory" (Time Life) — with photographs of period garments worn by different people in different places throughout the war.

"If I have to start from scratch to construct something, I use a cheap fabric like muslin for the mock-up. Then, I move the pattern to a standard fabric. But I'm usually three garments in before I get it right," he said.

Ninety percent of the sewing is by hand with at least five stitches per inch, he said. The fabric mostly comes from Colorado Mills shopping center in Lakewood, where he has found an excellent selection of replica fabrics.

But sometimes he needs to dye fabrics with iron, tea or nut extracts to get the color right.

On a really good day, he will answer a call like the one he got in 2008 from a dentist in Baltimore.

The dentist had stumbled across 10 yards of vintage, naturally gray jean cotton at an estate sale, the kind commonly used in Confederate uniforms.

He bartered with Jenkins: If the tailor would make him a jacket, Jenkins could keep the rest.

Why play war games?

They made a deal, and Jenkins since has made a jacket for himself with the salvage to wear this weekend while marching among about 3,000 reenactors — of that number, only 110 Confederate and 180 Union reenactors will march in "authentic" units — at Pilot Knob, Mo., to commemorate the 150th anniversary of the Civil War battle there Sept. 26 -27, 1864.

As he worked to finish and mail orders last week, Jenkins got his kit ready — one he tailored to replicate perfectly what a civilian would wear, from hat to boots.

"I have pretty much everything but my rifle because I am flying," he said.

Jenkins said his future mother-in-law once told him she "doesn't get it" — a sentiment others outside the hobby share.

But the Civil War Trust — a Washington, D.C.-based, nonprofit land trust for Civil War battlefields — has attracted 55,000 members and raised $26.9 million in 2013 alone to save and preserve 110 battlegrounds on 34,000 acres, according to the website.

"These places are precious. They are outdoor classrooms and monuments to the men and women who fought there," CWT spokeswoman Mary Koik said. "Reenactments are a homage to them, a respect and recognition that many of these soldiers had never been much more than 20 miles from where they were born, and suddenly, they were marching great distances and fighting a war for huge, principled ideas ... These places and the events held there make the links to the past more tangible than a book or documentary film."

Standing beside his ironing board, Jenkins smoothed his hair back and explained that he loves to learn and he does that best by doing.

"Some guys do this to go out there and play war," he said. "... But for me, to reenact it, I understand how stuff was used. Photos show soldiers wearing their canteens under their armpits on super short straps. I know now that they did that so that it wouldn't slap their butt as they walked ... I also better understand how easy it was to lose stuff and why some guys needed to make shirts out of jacket liners and pants out of blankets."

The only problem with his role in producing the costumes for people who connect with history in the same way comes down to wear and tear.

Like other reenactors, Jenkins tries to "dirty up" the clothes in his kit — make them look as if they've been in the field instead of freshly constructed.

He succeeded in doing that in every part of his kit except his new black riding boots with the squared-off toes.

"I'm just hoping when I get down there that they'll be some mud," he said.

Pam Mellskog can be reached at p.mellskog@gmail.com or 303-746-0942.