By Logan Albright | Watchdog Opinion

According to a new report from Gallup polling, 60 percent of Americans think the federal government has too much power. This is the highest number recorded since Gallup began asking the question in 2002, and is tied with only one other year, 2013.

This finding shouldn’t be surprising; the federal government fails at most things it attempts, and invariably makes situations worse rather than better. Examples are legion. Federal education spending has been on the rise for decades, with nothing but measurable failures to show for it. Even the apparently benign attempt to get schoolchildren to eat vegetables has backfired comically.

The area of health care is even worse. The Affordable Care Act that was supposed to improve health care while simultaneously making it cheaper has done the opposite, with premiums and deductibles both spiraling out of control. More doctors are retiring and medical students are loath to enter the profession, and the incentives to practice medicine have never been lower.

Despite the popularity of Bernie Sanders and his vision of a socialist utopia, government incompetence remains intuitive to Americans. Whenever a rhetorical symbol of frustrating ineptitude is called for, references to the DMV or the Post Office are rarely far behind.

On the rare occasions when the Feds are not bungling simple tasks, they overcompensate by being Orwellian and oppressive. NSA workers, doing their best to emulate the creepiest of stalkers, have been caught abusing their positions to spy on romantic interests. The IRS flexes its muscles to lean on organizations with ideological differences to the current administration. It takes a 13-hour standing filibuster to get the attorney general to admit that the president doesn’t have the authority to unilaterally murder American citizens without a trial. The Department of Education wistfully imagines a future where they can use facial expression analysis to declare schoolchildren mentally unbalanced if they squirm or twitch too much. The EPA claims you don’t really own all those little streams and gulleys that crisscross your allegedly private property.

So no, it’s not surprising that more people than ever think the federal government has too much power. What is surprising is that no one seems to be willing to do much to stop it. Year after year, federal spending continues to expand. Whenever a politician boasts that he has managed to cut spending, what he is actually talking about is an illusory reduction in the growth rate of spending. In other words, we’re still spending more, just slower.

Why is it so hard to limit power most people agree is excessive? Because every chunk of federal spending, every morsel of federal authority has a dedicated and passionate interest group hungrily lobbying for its continued existence. The average person has a family, a job, and other things to worry about than whether a farmer in Iowa or a bureaucrat in Washington, DC is receiving a fraction of a penny out of his tax bill. To that farmer and that bureaucrat, however, the issue is literally a question of their livelihood, and you can bet they will fight to preserve it.

A concrete example of this can found in the U.S. Export-Import Bank, a corporate welfare program that many in the liberty movement have targeted as a symbol of corruption and cronyism between business and government. The Bank’s cost to taxpayers is relatively small, just $2 billion over ten years. On the other hand, the Bank hands out huge taxpayer-backed loans to companies like Boeing and General Electric, whose lobbying shops are not inconsiderable, to say the least. It’s hard to get people to care about such a small expenditure that doesn’t directly affect them, but in a rare victory for limited government, funding for the bank was actually allowed to expire for the first time in 80 years this July. Alas, this is increasingly looking to be a temporary condition.

All this is rather depressing, and it is easy to wonder whether there is anything we can do to actually limit government power. In fact, there is. As with so many things in life, admitting you have a problem is the first step to recovery. The fact that Americans are waking up to the dangers of too much federal power is not only a good start, but crucial if any meaningful change is ever to occur. Politics follows public opinion, not the other way around, and recent shakeups in the House of Representatives indicate the growing energy behind reform. The odds may be stacked in favor of more government, but all centralized power ultimately depends upon the consent of the governed. If the people withdraw their consent, such seemingly insurmountable power quickly evaporates.

In the words of Étienne de La Boétie, a 16th century Frenchman who penned a scathing diatribe chastising citizens for submitting to the will of their monarch, “Obviously, there is no need of fighting to overcome [a] single tyrant, for he is automatically defeated if the country refuses consent to its own enslavement.” If the trend observed by Gallup continues, Boétie’s vision of a wholesale rejection government overreach may one day become a reality.