Only about 40 percent of eligible voters actually go to the polls during midterm elections in the United States. To put it into perspective; in countries like Australia, Belgium, and Chile, voter turnout nears the 90 percent mark. In Austria, Sweden, and Italy, it nears 80 percent.

A large percentage of those who don’t show up for the midterms are us: young people and college students. Only 24 percent of all eligible young people ages 18-29 voted in the 2010 midterms. Elections usually come with a candidate who appeals more to the youth than the other does. This was the trend when Bill Clinton and Barack Obama were elected; their campaigns were characterized by young cries for progress and optimism for a better world.

However, because of a lower turnout from their supporters in midterm elections, both presidents had to lead a government that struggled with bipartisanship, and it could even be argued to be working against them. Clinton’s congress tried to impeach him, and we’re all pretty used to hearing about our current government’s inability to make decisions. (Speaker of the House, John Boehner has actually even tried to get congress to sue Obama.)

Midterm elections are not popular amongst our demographic. The Harvard Institute of Politics recently conducted a study indicating that only 23 percent of youth voters will “definitely be voting” this November. Young voters, Latinos, and African Americans are all demographics that provide liberal votes. They also don’t usually turn out for midterms.

Young conservative voters are proven to be more enthusiastic about midterms and overall more involved in politics than their liberal counterparts. The same Harvard study found that self-identified young conservatives are 10 percent more likely to vote than self-identified liberals. A smaller demographic, the elderly, tend to be conservative and to always show up on election day, which in the past has resulted in governments that borrow heavily and spend excessively on benefit programs for retirees.

When those with political power don’t care much for the interests of the major demographics, problems are sure to ensue.

The conflict in Ferguson, MO, is a great example of the consequences of liberal minorities sitting out elections. the failure of the African-American majority to vote has kept a mostly white city government in a mostly African American town. Whites make up just 29 percent of the population but account for five of six city council members, six of seven school board members, and nearly all of the 53 police officers.

Lack of knowledge and/or interest for local and state issues are in part to blame for the usually poor turnout, but the truth is that the issues that depend on these elections go way beyond local politics. It could even be argued that midterm elections are more important than the presidential elections. The United States is a country ruled by Congress and the Senate, but when its members are elected every two years in November, few care.

But we should care what happens this November.

The next congress will be voting on issues that affect us all, such as immigration and the future of the Affordable Care Act and tax reform; how we deal with problems that most of us are familiar with such as Russia’s involvement in Ukraine, ISIS massacring people in Iraq and Syria, and Iran’s nuclear weapons program are also to be decided by the government officials elected this November. These people will be voting on issues that affect our everyday life–from what we can smoke to how much we should earn for our workplace. Oregon and Alaska, for example, will consider legalizing recreational marijuana and Alaska, Illinois, and Nebraska will be voting on raising the minimum wage.

Midterm elections are a way for us to speak up for the values that we support and to stand against what we don’t want for our future. We don’t often get this chance.

You can find more information on how to vote and get involved by visiting www.rockthevote.com.

[image via]