A few weeks ago I wrote about the evidence that boomer retirement will not look like anything we've seen before: Many retirees are expected to leave the workplace, take a short sabbatical — and then get restless, looking around for their next career.

They won't necessarily want to work for free, like previous generations who have moved to Florida and plunged into volunteering. But they won't be in it solely for the money, either, and many will be happy with part-time or contract gigs.

According to Timothy Hearon, managing partner of a new outfit called Boomerswork.us, that's already been happening in Sarasota.

He found this out by accident when he moved his technology recruiting business here a year and a half ago.

"All of a sudden I was getting resumes from these very qualified local people who were looking to get back into the workforce," he says. "I couldn't help them."

But this hidden talent pool was on his mind when he traveled on business to Halifax, Nova Scotia, and met the founder of boomerswork.ca, a Canadian website that matches experienced executives with corporate assignments. A partnership was formed, and Hearon now heads up the U.S. site of what has become a global company.

Boomerswork held an open house this week in its offices on Palm Avenue. Already the U.S. company has signed up about 20 employers and has a roster of 300 boomers. The potential, Hearon says, lies in those 45,000 workers who are retiring from management positions every week in this country.

Lots of companies, seeing the same opportunity, have set up boomer recruitment websites. But the twist with Boomerswork is that it's not just another site where you browse openings and post your resume. It's more of a matching service, where employers upload specific assignments, and an algorithm sifts through boomers' profiles to find suitable candidates.

"If there's a match, it comes to the boomer and says, 'Here's the opportunity; indicate your interest, yes or no,'" Hearon explains. "We're like eHarmony for baby boomers in the workplace. We're not guaranteeing marriage, but you're going to get a date."

Boomers pay nothing to have their profiles in the system. Employers pay $200 to $300 a month to join Boomerswork and post their openings for a possible match.

The bargain for them, Hearon says, lies in hiring high-level executives for temporary or part-time assignments. It's not that employers don't appreciate the expertise and maturity boomers can offer; it's that they may not be able to justify paying for it on a full-time basis.

"Employers don't think it's possible to bring in a vice president of HR with 30 years' experience for a 100-200 person company; they can't afford $250,000 a year," he says. "But they can afford $50,000 for two days a week for six months for someone to come in and write the book on HR, and hand it over to an $80,000-a-year manager."

While educating employers about this option, Boomerswork also spends time with job-seeking clients who may need help creating an online profile, complete with video.

"Our mission is to enable this demographic to remarket themselves and re-engage in the workforce," Hearon says. "A lot of these people have never had to write a resume; if they have, it's been years."

Before going live, Hearon worked with Sarasota's Institute for the Ages, a nonprofit think tank founded to generate economic development based on local demographics. In interviews with hundreds of boomers, he says, financial considerations came in third on the list of reasons to return to work. The No. 1 reason was a desire for meaningful involvement.

"We heard, 'I've got to get back in the game; my spouse wants me out of the house,'" Hearon says.