By Brian Hamman, The New York Times

You have probably read about how meditation may help you manage anxiety, stress and blood pressure, and help you sleep better, be more creative and improve your relationships. While researchers are still debating these claims, a number of apps offer guided meditation.

Getting started

Start with an app that will teach you the basic techniques through a free, guided program. Calm and Headspace seem to be the best for this, with sessions that introduce you to concepts of mindful awareness and techniques such as focusing on your breath and body.

Calm has a free seven-day introduction. The meditation for each day takes seven to 15 minutes and includes a few minutes of background on technique and then a practice session. Headspace has a 10-day introduction that consists of 10-minute segments that teach the concepts of meditation through short cartoons and videos.

Keeping motivated

One of the more challenging problems in learning to meditate is remembering to do it. Most apps allow you to set reminders. Headspace will send your phone up to five daily doses of inspiration. An example: “A closed mind thinks only of itself and dwells on its own worries. An open mind lets go of its own worries to focus on others.”

Mindfulness Daily offers the most innovative alerts of the apps I tried. Swipe the alert to open a soothing 15-second video overlaid with a sequence of instructions to “Breathe in” and “Breathe out.” It’s a potent reminder of how even a few seconds of focused breathing can change your mood.

The 10% Happier app takes a different approach to keep you coming back, by introducing the user to meditation with a personal coach. You put in your phone number and then immediately get texted by your coach asking if you have questions — which might feel helpful or intrusive.

Changing your life

Once you have made it through the introductory programs, there are apps designed to bring meditation to your daily activities. Buddhify 2 begins with a wheel of more than a dozen activities such as walking in the city, being online, and eating, and offers guided meditations for each activity. Unlike the seated-with-eyes-closed routine of most other apps, Buddhify 2 cleverly weaves lessons of mindfulness into your activities in a way that broadens your experience. But it doesn’t include a guided introductory program or daily reminders.

Stop, Breathe & Think, which seems largely directed at children and teenagers, focuses on the user’s mood — and suggests one of 15 free meditations and others that you pay to download.

The app you choose may ultimately come down to something incredibly basic — do you like the voice and tone of the individual meditations? Look for an app that allows you to test the voice at no cost before you commit.