Only about 5 percent of the general population donates blood, but good planning and Goodwill want to change that.

On Saturday, Goodwill stores collaborated with One Blood to bring the blood donation buses to Goodwill stores throughout the panhandle.

"Oh I started, oh gosh probably in my twenties when I was in nursing school," Barabara David, longtime blood donor, said. "I'd been looking for an ad for a donation bus and there you were."

David made her way to the Goodwill Industries center on Thomas drive in Panama City Beach to spread a little goodwill herself.

"It's just a very small way that I can do something to benefit other people,” David said. “It doesn't seem like a very lot that I do but if I can save three lives every time I do it then I guess that's a very good thing."

She was just one of the people who, despite Saturday’s rain, hopped onto one of the blood donation buses outside Goodwill.

Anyone who donated got $10 off a $20 purchase at their Goodwill store.

Goodwill Acquisition Specialist, Win Vickers, came up with the idea for the partnership. He said he wanted to create an opportunity to do good and hoped to be able to do something even bigger in the future.

"When somebody gets a transfusion, they need that blood and it saves their life,” Vickers said. “Well when you donate to Goodwill or you purchase in our stores, you're changing someone's life. So the idea came to me that you could save a life and change a life, all in the same operation."

Each person who donated also got a wellness check on their blood pressure, iron level and cholesterol. All of the blood collected on Saturday will go to local hospitals.

“I mean I wouldn't expect everybody to jump at the chance to be stuck with a needle,” Eric Lewis, blood donation specialist on the bus, said. “But the benefits outweigh the risks."

“It’s very painless, easy and relaxing,” David said. “And it makes you feel really good.”

According to one of the donor specialists, all of the blood collected on Saturday is so valuable it will most likely be in a new patient by Tuesday or Wednesday of the following week.

Anyone who would like more information on where to find a blood donation bus can visit: http://www.oneblood.org/