Math has never been my friend.

I was a straight-A student through elementary school, when math consisted of multiplication tables and long division. But when algebra and geometry books hit my desk, my student life took a dramatic turn.

It was so bad that I literally narrowed my college major choice to those that required the least amount of math. Because while it is never OK to be scared of your limitations, it is usually beneficial to know them.

Luckily, it doesn’t take a mathematical genius to figure out one thing: The states that have refused Medicaid expansion under Obamacare are hurting us all, and they’re literally killing their own citizens.

Alabama, of course, is one of those states to refuse expansion. We have more than a million people that somehow qualify for one of the tiniest Medicaid thresholds in the country, and then we have another 300,000 people who would be covered by expansion.

But we won’t expand it. And to add insult to stupidity, we’re now talking about refusing to fund the Medicaid program fully, and instead plan to cut services like adult eyeglasses and outpatient dialysis care. (Because, you know, dialysis, is that really necessary?)

We are roughly in the same boat that Louisiana was in a year ago.

Both Alabama and Louisiana had some of the highest rates of uninsured citizens in the country. Both had around 300,000 people who stood to gain coverage through expansion. Both had low thresholds for coverage. Both have state governments that rely on regressive tax structures that have left their budgets perpetually under-funded.

Both states have one more thing in common: Until last year, they were led by Republican governors and their state legislatures were dominated by Republicans, all of whom wanted no part of Medicaid expansion.

MORE MOON: Check out Josh Moon's 'Moon over Montgomery' blog

In fact, the leaders in both states – despite clear evidence to the contrary all around them – spoke of the perils of expansion. The extra costs. The doomed health-care system. The burden placed on doctors and hospitals. The unfairness of it all to hard-working people.

And then, Louisiana did something remarkable. Mostly due to his campaign promise to expand Medicaid (and his Republican opponent’s sex scandal), Louisiana voters put a Democratic governor, John Bel Edwards, in office.

Edwards carried through on his promise to expand Medicaid and to set up a state insurance exchange.

On Monday, Edwards’ office released its first cost analysis of the expansion: It’s going to save Louisiana more than $677 million over the next five years.

Almost all of the savings come from enhanced federal rates available under the expansion and do not include any monies gained by the state through economic expansion, job growth and a healthier work force – all near certainties from the expanded coverage.

You see, it has never taken a math wiz to figure out that Medicaid expansion under Obamacare was beneficial to all states and a necessity for lowering health care costs nationwide. A system which steadily increases costs to customers in order to pay for those who receive the most expensive products for free is a system doomed to fail.

What it did take was a con-man and liar to spread misinformation about Obamacare and Medicaid expansion. Someone willing to inflate the costs, downplay the savings, present every worst-case scenario as an almost certainty and present expected outcomes as pie-in-the-sky dreams.

In Louisiana, that person was former Gov. Bobby Jindal, who, Edwards’ office found, had dramatically misrepresented the costs and potential savings from Medicaid expansion.

In Alabama, that person is … well, pick a Republican leader.

As doctors and hospitals warned state lawmakers last week of the disastrous outcomes of underfunding Medicaid by the $85 million proposed in the general fund budget, those lawmakers continued to look the other way and deflect.

The idea of expanding Medicaid is talked about as if it’s a dream, a faraway option that might only be achieved if the stars align, Saint Reagan smiles upon us and the eagle soars just right.

In truth, we are no different than Louisiana. Expansion’s only obstacle in Alabama are the stubborn men and women who refuse to admit that their ideas for health care budgeting are possibly worse than their ideas for budgeting in general.

It has never taken a math genius to understand the benefits of Medicaid expansion, especially in a cash-strapped state like Alabama. We just needed someone with common sense and decency to lead the way.

We’re still waiting.

Read or Share this story: http://on.mgmadv.com/1Sycl7a