Now that he's out of rehab, Rob Ford plans on running for mayor again; however, reports of his misconduct in rehab have recently been surfacing.

Despite his claims that rehab was “amazing” and thoroughly effective and enjoyable, the infamous alcoholic Toronto mayor — who is also allegedly a crack addict — is now being accused of being somewhat of a troublemaker during his time in recovery.

According to patients and the staff at GreeneStone Residential Addiction Treatment Facility in Canada, Ford was “disruptive” during his stay, and he may have been continuing to abuse both alcohol and drugs, the Toronto Star reported. “Ford broke things, got into fights with other residents,” one source told the Toronto Star. Another source reported that “Ford stopped people from sharing their stories, which is key to a successful rehab experience. Other residents felt intimidated. They felt he was a bully. He was always saying he did not belong there.”

Upon returning to office last month, Ford vowed to make himself the “best person I can be,” he said at a press conference. “For my family, for the people of Toronto, and with your support, I am also resolved to work harder than ever for the taxpayers of this great city.”

At the beginning of his rehab stay, Ford claimed it was like being at a childhood camp: “I feel great, he told the Toronto Sun. “Rehab is amazing. It reminds me of football camp. Kind of like the Washington Redskins camp I went to as a kid.” And at the end of it, he claimed rehab helped him solve his problems: “I went and got professional, professional help at GreeneStone,” Ford told Newstalk 1010. “I believe it’s the best one in the world. And they taught me exactly the problem it was with me.”

But the staff at GreeneStone disagree. In group settings, where patients were encouraged to share their stories and support one another, Ford would reportedly abuse other patients, shout at them, refuse to listen, and swear profusely. After two months, he was removed from the therapy group and scheduled to have one-one-one therapy with a private counselor. In addition, a fellow patient in rehab, LeeAnne McRobb, was kicked out for misbehavior and was later arrested for drunk driving in Ford’s Cadillac Escalade — which the mayor had let her borrow.

However, Shawn Leon, president of GreeneStone Healthcare, did not answer any questions about Ford. “With regards to Mayor Ford’s conduct and how it affected other residents at GreeneStone we simply cannot comment,” he told The Star. “We take patient care and confidentiality very seriously, and as such, cannot comment on our patients or their treatment.” He did mention, however, that “some individuals are not necessarily group ready.” Though Ford is running for re-election, it has yet to be seen if he'll be voted back into office.