MADISONVILLE-The start time for the Monroe County School System may be changing soon.

At the Thursday meeting of the Monroe County Board of Education, 2nd District School Board member Janie Harrill proposed that the board discuss changing the school start time from 8 a.m. to 8:15 a.m.

“In my research, adolescents and teen students require more sleep and they’re not getting it,” she explained. “Starting at a later time makes sense because research shows that it lessens teen driving accidents, it improved scores. Plus, when sleep cycle is disrupted, you deal with obesity, depression and other things.”

“I also hate the idea of these little kids standing out in the dark waiting on buses,” she continued.

Currently, Sequoyah High School, Vonore Elementary and Vonore Middle schools are already on the 8:15 a.m. start time schedule.

“I think it’s a good idea,” said Director of Schools Tim Blankenship. “It would help on the buses too.”

Harrill said a lot of school systems have looked at moving their start times.

Blankenship asked the School Board if they wanted him to put up a survey on the school system’s website to get community feedback, but he was quickly greeted with the answer “no.”

“That’s why they elected this board,” said 3rd District member Steve Rogers.

Other board members felt like the community should be involved.

“I do think we need feedback,” said 2nd District’s member Bob Lovingood.

“I don’t think we need to make that decision without it,” added 2nd District’s Marsha Boring Standridge.

Rogers explained that he was for it right now, but if the majority of the community is against it, he will not be able to vote for it.

The School Board tabled further discussion on changing the start time until the April meeting. Chairman Dr. Larry Stein gave the board instructions to talk with parents and community members in their district to get feedback. Blankenship said he would get feedback from teachers and principals.

Sticking with the topic of changing times, Rogers recommended changing the start time for School Board meetings from 7 p.m. to 6 p.m.

“Let’s try it for three months,” he said. “If we don’t like it, we can go back to the way it is.”

A few board members had concerns, however.

“We do need to give people who attend the board meetings time to get here after getting off work,” said Bob Lovingood.

“If people work and want to have time to stop at home and change, they’re not going to have time to do that,” added Sonya Lynn.

Rogers said he believed that while it may hurt a few, it would “help the vast majority.”

In a roll call vote, only Lynn and Dewitt Upton voted against the three-month trial, which will begin at the April meeting.

Also at the meeting:

• Rural Vale Elementary School student Vince Weigel was honored for his second-place win at the state Beta Convention recently.

• Rural Vale Elementary School Principal Missy Carter and Monroe Academy Principal Maurice Moser gave state-of-the-school presentations.

Carter recognized fifth-grader James Holt for winning the 4H Poultry Show, calling him the “chicken king,” and seventh-grade student Autumn Ritsko for winning first place in website design at the National History Day competition for the Southeastern Division. Ritsko’s project on Sacajawea’s leadership throughout history will advance her to the state contest in Nashville.

Moser announced that Monroe Academy had graduated 57 students so far this school year and that all students at the academy had enrolled in Tennessee Promise.

•The School Board approved several budget amendments, overnight field trip requests and the consent agenda.

• Second District’s Standridge, 3rd District’s Lynn and 1st District’s Dr. Stein were appointed to the Policy Committee. The Policy Committee will meet in its first meeting on March 24 at 4 p.m.

• The calendar for the 2016-2017 school year was approved. The calendar follows the current schedule after the previous year-round school proposal was decided against.

• Transportation and Maintenance Director Terry Harris asked permission to open bids for a mowing services contract for the school system.

Harris said after looking into Affordable Care Act regulations, also known as Obamacare, they realized they were going to have to pay insurance for two additional full-time employees, as two people are hired to work 40 hours weekly from April to October for mowing season.

“Because that makes them full-time employees, we’d have to offer health care,” said Harris.

That with the overall upkeep to continue mowing (approximately $46,000 last school year on labor, parts, gas, etc.), Harris said it may be beneficial to bid out for a contract instead of having maintenance employees do the mowing. This year is also the year that the school system had set aside to buy mowing machines.

At the motion of Lovingood, the School Board moved to bid five-year contractor mowing services out for two mowers.

Harris also updated the School Board on bus route changes.

“The weather got us a little bit behind,” he said.

Currently, Harris said he is working with the Madisonville and Vonore bus contractors to improve those routes and the Tellico routes are being developed and studied now. He said he is looking at implementing the new routes after TCAP testing.

In addition, Harris said the bids for the three extracurricular activities buses for the high schools were opened this week and will be awarded next Thursday, March 19.

• In his director of schools report, Blankenship announced that the school system had been granted a waiver for three missed snow days, leaving the system with one inclement weather day to use this year.

The Five-Year Plan Committee met last week and will present to the board in May.

In addition, Blankenship said a new legal and corrections services class would be piloted at Sequoyah High School next school year by the Sheriff’s Office. Blankenship hopes the class, which will be at no cost to the school system, can be expanded to all the area high schools in the future.

• The School Board will meet in a budget workshop on Thursday, April 9, at 5 p.m. just before the new time for the regular monthly meeting at 6 p.m.