Artur Davis is in the Montgomery mayors race, even if it is not official. Sources close to Davis tell me he has hired a campaign team that includes both Democrats and Republicans, has leased downtown office space and will make the official announcement within weeks.

Alabamians from both ends of the political spectrum are willing to take pot shots at Davis. Democrats rejected his gubernatorial bid because he was not liberal enough for their base, and many Republicans are skeptical of a candidate who used to be a Democratic gubernatorial candidate. And then there is the matter of his leaving for Virginia once that race was done.

But unlike many politicians, Davis is more interested in answering his critics than avoiding them.

At the end of 2014, I had the opportunity to chat with Artur about his mayoral aspirations. The former Democratic congressman from Birmingham who called Montgomery home for the first 31 years of his life is hoping that his hometown will give him the opportunity to again engage in public service.

"I have a vision for what Montgomery can be. I'm going to invite [voters] to judge me based on that vision."

But politicians with "visions" are a dime a dozen. I asked Artur for specifics, a point in most conversations where politicians start to squirm.

Davis said Montgomery needs to recruit industry that needs the skills the city's workforce can deliver right now. He suggested that biomedical manufacturing is a good fit because it can build on Alabama's manufacturing workforce.

Longer term, Davis specified information technology companies as the type of industry that Montgomery should build towards. "I want more businesses that are new and innovative," said Davis, "because they're the ones that have to go out and satisfy customers."

It is not just an economic plan Davis is pitching for Montgomery; Davis wants to create a new identity for the city. When I asked Davis about his approach to a transportation technology innovator like Uber, his response was revealing. "[The presence of companies like Uber] is symptomatic of a community that is interested in new things and new ways of delivering services," he said. "If a community is resistant to an Uber, it is probably going to be resistant to other things."

Ultimately, Davis's vision for Montgomery hinges on the difference between a city that is "a good place to raise a family if you have resources" and a city that creates "a climate of upward mobility." While the first is acceptable, Davis advocates the latter as far superior. By fostering a more dynamic environment, Davis believes that Montgomery can develop into a vibrant city with arts, cultural opportunities, and even a creative culinary scene.

At a minimum, Artur Davis has grand, remarkably specific, plans for Montgomery. Even so, questions about his past will undoubtedly be on the minds of potential voters as they decide his future.

Many Democrats have not forgotten Davis's vote against the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA). Rather than pandering to Republican opposition to the PPACA in Alabama, Davis candidly noted that he wished the PPACA had addressed "the core problem of low-income people not having health insurance" by paying 100 percent of the Medicaid expansion without the other "bells and whistles."

Other voters will undoubtedly ask whether he simply ran from Alabama after being rejected for governor. Davis did not attempt to avoid the question.

"I do believe that public service is honorable," said Davis, "I made a decision that I wanted to do something other than politics." Davis noted that his time serving on a corporate board taught him more about business in four years than he knew in the preceding 43. He sees his time in the private sector as an asset to Montgomery, but he repeatedly expressed his calling to public service.

Davis is a political enigma in Alabama, the kind of moderate pragmatist that drives the partisan purists wild, a market-minded politician who sees a helpful role for government to play. Davis embraces it noting, "There is no obvious Democratic or Republican path to deal with [the challenges facing Montgomery]." Montgomery may not ultimately be willing to give Davis a second chance, but they should at least hear him out.

(Cameron Smith writes a regular column for Alabama Media Group. He may be reached at cameron@smithstrategies.org or on Twitter @DCameronSmith.)