We are not the type of people to normally ask for help. But I thought this might be the only way.

Do you know someone in Alabama who is raising money through a crowdfunding site to help pay medical bills or related expenses? We’re compiling a list and would love to include them. Email a link to avollers@al.com.

HUNTSVILLE, Alabama -- Mike Diduch of Huntsville had everything going for him.



He had a job he loved and was just offered a promotion as a chef in a Huntsville restaurant. His wife Lucia is expecting their first child, a girl, in July.



An experienced motorcyclist, he was out with some coworkers on Feb. 18, enjoying the freedom of an afternoon ride, when the unthinkable happened.

He swerved to avoid a chunk of concrete lying in the middle of Memorial Parkway near the Mastin Lake Road intersection, hit the curb and was thrown 20 feet from the bike.

Diduch suffered a concussion – his helmet was cracked – as well as shattered ankle bones and a severely broken tibia and fibula bones in his leg that required emergency reconstructive surgery.

He can’t put any pressure on his injured leg for three months, and is facing up to a nine-month recovery, after which the doctors have said he may not be able to move his ankle or may walk with a limp.

To make matters worse for the Diduch family, they had no insurance.

“Along with the promotion was going to come health insurance,” said Mike’s sister Katie Diduch, “and they were very much looking forward to that. Unfortunately it didn’t go into effect before the accident and none of it can be instated retroactively.”

The Diduchs are looking into state and federal programs and local organizations that might be able to help them, but it’s been a long road with no quick or easy answers.

They finally were able to sign up for insurance through the Affordable Care Act by accessing it via the Medicaid website, but are currently waiting to receive paperwork to pass along before they can get a final determination on what exactly the insurance will cover. Lucia Diduch, who is pregnant, is not eligible for food assistance to help the family because she works at least 20 hours a week, and they won't be eligible for housing assistance until the baby is born.

"The family is getting together to try to help with rent and other expenses," said Mike Diduch's mother, Dawn Breault. "We're going to do the best we can to help them out."

Katie Diduch, who lives in upstate New York, wanted to find a more immediate way to help her brother and his wife with the medical bills and related expenses they’re facing now, so she turned to an option that has steadily gained in popularity over the past few years: crowdfunding.

She said her brother is not the kind to ask for help, so Katie decided she would create a fundraising page on Fundly.com, an online fundraising site that allows anyone to donate money toward a cause. She said the families of both Mike and Lucia have been helping out in any way they can, but the bills still pile up. And they had friends and extended family asking how they could help.

“We are not the type of people to normally ask for help,” said Katie. “But I thought this might be the only way.

“I’m a freelance web and graphic designer, so in my line of business, social media plays a large role and I am very aware of crowdfunding. I’ve seen examples of very successful crowdfunding efforts.”

Crowdfunding – asking for donations from a group of people to raise money for a specific goal – gained popularity when the website Kickstarter launched in 2009. Since then, hundreds of sites have launched, allowing anyone to solicit donations to support a project or cause. But what was once mostly used by entrepreneurs, independent artists like musicians and filmmakers, and nonprofit groups has been increasingly adopted by regular people looking for the most efficient way to reach out for help when a crisis strikes.

In 2013, Kelly Cain of Athens – whose daughter is battling cancer – started a fundraising page on GoFundMe.com for another Athens family who wanted to take a family trip to Disney World. That family had received a grim prognosis for one of their children who is fighting cancer, and wanted to be able to create as many good memories with him as possible in whatever time he has left.

The family asked Cain to set the goal for just $3,000 but, thanks to Facebook and other social media, the page raised $17,000 for the family of six to help fulfill the boy’s “bucket list” wishes and to pay travel expenses related to his experimental cancer treatments.

According to a USA Today story in January 2013, an estimated $2.8 billion was raised in 2012 alone on all crowdfunding websites. For anyone trying to crowdfund a cause or a project, the ability to get the word out – particularly through social media like Facebook – is everything. A 2012 NPR.com article states that people with small social networks have more trouble meeting fundraising goals; people with at least 200 Facebook friends were much more likely to meet their goals.

Crowdfunding sites like Fundly, GoFundMe, GiveForward, YouCaring, IndieGogo and others offer their services and site design in return for a certain percentage of money raised. Some sites charge a higher percentage if the goal is not met.

Katie Diduch chose Fundly because its cost – 5 percent of funds raised – was lower than other sites she looked into, some of which charged upwards of 7 percent.

“I also liked their interface; it was easy to use and easy to understand, and their sharing capabilities (on social media) were solid,” said Katie.

Crowdfunding sites typically let a user include photos, stories and even videos to help explain the cause, and offer a secure online payment method for donors. Many also offer mobile apps, blog-style comment features, donation alerts and integration with social networks.

Katie had never created a crowdfunding page before, she said, “so I don’t know what to expect and I don’t know how quickly it will take off. But I’ve been overwhelmingly surprised to see who has donated – people from my past, people I haven’t seen in years. That’s why I’m reaching out to as many people as I can.”

Diduch points out one of the biggest pros of a crowdfunding website is the ease of use. Many people may not have the time or ability to volunteer to help, but they can take a few seconds to click through the website and donate whatever amount they can.

“Medical bills, x-rays, CAT scans, all of that adds up really fast,” said Katie. “Then there will be checkups, check-ins, medication. It’s amazing, if you can just touch the right people who are willing to help. It looks like the only way for us to raise the type of money we’ll need to help my brother and his family survive the next few months.”

For anyone donating to a cause online, there may be a concern over whether the money is going to an honest cause. Most major crowdfunding sites employ monitors who constantly comb through the site’s fundraising pages, looking for evidence of fraud.

“We’re really good at making a little bit go a long way,” said Katie of her family. “Mike and Lucia have a long, tough road ahead of them. Any funds will be put to a good and honest use.”

Check back later this week for more articles on medical crowdfunding, including a comparison guide to the top crowdfunding sites for personal health causes, and a best practices guide for how to start a crowdfunding campaign for someone going through a medical or health crisis. Have tips, advice or questions? Share in the comments or email avollers@al.com.