Gov. Rick Scott: Florida Will Do Everything Possible to Protect Military Personnel

By Space Coast Daily // July 18, 2015

ISSUES EXECUTIVE ORDER

TALLAHASSEE, FlLORIDA – Governor Rick Scott today released an executive order instructing the Florida Adjunct General to take immediate actions to secure Florida Guardsmen that work in recruiting centers in the wake of the Tennessee shooting where five military members were murdered.

The Governor’s executive order directs Florida Adjunct General Michael Calhoun to take three immediate actions:

• Relocate all Florida National Guard personnel at the state’s six storefront recruitment centers to the nearest Florida National Guard Armory until there are recommendations made to improve the security of store-front recruitment centers.

• Begin discussions with local law enforcement agencies to arrange regular security checks for Florida National Guard Armories.

• Ensure that all qualified fulltime guardsmen are adequately armed for their personal protection.

STATE OF FLORIDA – OFFICE OF THE GOVERNOR EXECUTIVE ORDER NUMBER 15-137

WHEREAS, on Thursday, July 16th in Chattanooga, Tennessee, four United States Marines were targeted and murdered, along with at leastthree others who were injured, in what some U.S. officials are calling an act of domestic terrorism at a United States Armed Services recruiting centerand a Naval Reserve Facility; and

WHEREAS, according to news reports, there have been multiple other attacks planned by ISIS against United States military members onforeign and domestic soil; and

WHEREAS, the United States Military and the Florida National Guard serve our country with bravery and honor, and protect the freedom. ofour nation; and

WHEREAS, the state will take any and every measure available to secure military personnel against the planned attacks of ISIS, inducing but not limited to securing the work areas and recruiting stations for the Florida National Guard, which the state directs; and

WHEREAS, the state can begin to streamline the application process for military men and women to apply for a Florida concealed weaponslicense to ensure Florida Guardsmen and other United States military personnel who have signed up to serve their country in battle abroad can alsoadequately defend themselves at home.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RICK SCOTT, Governor of Florida, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the Florida Constitution, and all otherapplicable laws, hereby promulgate the following Executive Order, effective immediately:

Section 1 . In the interest of immediately securing Florida National Guardsmen who are being targeted by ISIS along with other USmilitary personnel, I hereby direct Florida Adjutant

General Michael Calhoun to direct all Florida National Guard personnel at the state’s six store-front recruitment facilities to relocate to theirnearest Florida National Guard armory. These Guardsmen will be relocated to armories until General Michael Calhoun can fully evaluate andmake recommendations for improving the security of store-front recruitment centers. Such possible infrastructure improvements shall include,but not be limited to, installing bullet-proof glass and enhancing video surveillance equipment.

S ection 2. I hereby direct Florida Adjutant General Michael Calhoun to begin discussions with local law enforcement agencies to arrange regular security checks for Florida National Guard armories. Such scheduled security checks can then be increased or decreased basedon the acuity of the national security threat to the area.

Section 3 . Thereby direct Florida Adjutant General Michael Calhoun to ensure that all qualified full-time guardsmen areadequately armed for their personal protection. This shall include, but not be limited to, the provision of arms for those fulltime FloridaGuardsmen who do not currently have their own weapon issued to them. For those Florida Guardsmen who need a new state concealedweapons permit, the state will support the expedited processing of licenses for those soldiers.

The Governor’s full executive order is available HERE .

Click here to contribute your news or announcements Free