Politics: Voters gave Republicans both chambers of Congress in the last election, but the Republicans haven’t given the voters what they wanted in return. They’d better wake up.

A> Pew Research Center poll taken this month found that only 23% of the public and 37% of Republicans say the GOP leaders are keeping their campaign promises.

These numbers are down from 2011, when a third of the public felt that way and 54% of Republicans said the same. In the midterm elections of that previous fall, the GOP was handed the majority in the House for the first time since losing it in 2006. Democrats kept the Senate for four more years.

Both years are well below the approval numbers of 1995. That year, after taking majority control of Congress for the first time in four decades, 59% of voters and fully 89% of Republicans said GOP leaders were keeping their promises.

The ongoing frustration with congressional Republicans goes beyond broken promises, though. More than half of their constituents (55%) disapprove of the GOP leaders’ job performance, up from 44% in February.

That mark, coming only weeks after the new Congress began work, should have been taken by the leadership as a two-by-four upside the head. But clearly they did nothing to change course.

The Pew numbers are not a surprise. November’s election results had hardly been counted when Republicans started backing off their promise to repeal ObamaCare, a GOP promise and priority. By April, Senate leaders had moved “to protect the law for the next two years.”

The GOP also has upset supporters by refusing to stop President Obama’s habit of exercising monarchlike authority through executive orders. Other failures include an eagerness to compromise with Democrats the voters had just rejected at the polls; a refusal to defund the FCC’s “net neutrality” rule; a concession to Loretta Lynch’s attorney general appointment; and ceding treaty power to the president on Iran and climate issues.

The GOP has been so ineffective at times that it has seemed that the Democrats won the midterms.

The Pew poll found that Republicans and Republican leaners are also disappointed in the way the GOP has handled government spending, with 59% saying the party is “not doing a good job” there.

The same percentage say Republicans are not doing a good job on illegal immigration, while 57% feel the same about the GOP’s handling of same-sex marriage.

Meanwhile, Republicans are unhappy with the way their representatives have gone easy on Obama: 75% say they should challenge the president more often. Even 37% of independents say Republicans should be more confrontational.

Yes, with Republicans in charge, the Senate is once again a working chamber after so many years as an obstructionist tool under the “leadership” of Democrat Harry Reid. But that doesn’t excuse the fact that they are failing miserably in doing what voters hired them to do last fall.