Members of the Jeffersonville Fire Department view the 9-11 Memorial at the Vintage Fire Museum in Jeffersonville on Saturday. (By Jenna Esarey, special to The Courier-Journal) September 12, 2015

The sounds of bagpipes playing “Amazing Grace” accompanied by the mournful sound of a fire truck siren winding down filled the air as part of the 9-11 Memorial at The Vintage Fire Museum on Saturday.

The Jeffersonville museum played host to the memorial featuring a piece of debris salvaged from ‘The Pile’, as the debris of New York City’s World Trade Center came to be known in the days following the collapse of the twin towers.

A ceremony held at 11 a.m. opened the day’s activity with the presentation of colors by the Lafayette Township Fire Department, prayer and reflection on the tragedy of the devastating terrorist attack on September 11, 2001.

Firefighters from a number of local fire companies, including Jeffersonville, New Albany, and Pee Wee Valley in Kentucky, wearing black bands across their badges, stood at attention or bowed their heads in prayer during the ceremony.

“It is so important that we not forget,” said Dick Bowyer, a former volunteer firefighter in a speech during the memorial. He encouraged those gathered to always honor the “343 firefighters who answered their last bell on 9-11.”

The piece of trade center debris is owned by the New Albany Fire Department and is usually displayed in their headquarters’ lobby. On Friday it featured in the city of New Albany’s 9-11 remembrance before making the trip to Jeffersonville for Saturday’s event.

Admission fees to the Vintage Fire Museum were waived for the day. Inside, the museum screened a compilation of video captured on 9-11, along with photos of the firefighters lost that day and newspaper and magazine stories from that day.

Jeffersonville fire chief Eric Hedrick said he was moved by the memorial. “I think of the constant sacrifice of these firefighters’ families – of the graduations, weddings that they did not get to be part of,” he said. “This day was 14 years ago but we have people that are still greatly affected by it.”

Battalion Chief Matt Bowyer with the New Albany Fire Department served as master of ceremonies for the memorial. He, along with other New Albany firefighters travelled to New York City three weeks after the attack, staying a week at a firehouse in Brooklyn.

“9-11 is very important to me,” he said. “We spent a couple of days working on The Pile. It was still burning.”

Vintage Fire Museum chair Curt Peters said they plan to make the memorial an annual event. “It is important to remember what happened – to honor those who sacrificed their lives,” he said.

“I wasn’t alive for Pearl Harbor,” he said. “For me, 9-11 is like a Pearl Harbor. You can never forget it and it evokes in people a patriotism of the best kind.”

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1F5DFJ1