Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Hawthorne Elementary School Principal Jessica Rosenthal and Watch D.O.G.S. volunteer Greg Whittington talk about an initiative to get more male role models into the schools.

Buy Photo Greg Whittington, right, works with Hawthorne Elementary second-grader Christopher "Jeremiah" Hall. Whittington is part of the Watch D.O.G.S (Dads of Great Students). December 10, 2014 (Photo: Michael Clevenger/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo Story Highlights In the past few years, JCPS has pushed to get fathers and other male role models into schools.

On Dec. 15, the district nearly doubled its number of Watch D.O.G.S. school.

Watch D.O.G.S. is an initiative encouraging fathers to be involved in their child's education.

The program also encourages grandfathers and other men to volunteer in the schools.

When Hawthorne Elementary parent Greg Whittington pulled the white Watch D.O.G.S. T-shirt over his checkered button-down, he became the school's Watch Dog — the day's designated male volunteer — with duties like aiding students, patrolling the lunchroom and administering high fives in the hallway.

In the past few years, Jefferson County Public Schools has pushed to get fathers, grandfathers and other men into the classroom. During the Dec. 15 Board of Education meeting, the district nearly doubled the number of schools participating in the national Watch D.O.G.S. (Dads of Great Students) program, an initiative through the National Center for Fathering that encourages fathers' involvement in education and exposes kids to positive male role models.

Hawthorne Elementary is one of 26 schools now using the program, and the district estimates a total of 60 schools have implemented some sort of "male engagement" program.

"We have a lot of fractured homes, where there's a lot of students ... that do not have fathers as male role models," said John Marshall, the district's chief equity officer.

The program is helping the district reach that group of kids, he said, as well as students who may struggle in the classroom. Marshall said schools are seeing a decline in misbehavior, although the district has not kept hard data of how the program is affecting students.

Whittington's day at Hawthorne Elementary began with greeting kids as they got off the bus and visiting classes with students "who could really use an extra person who cares about them," as principal Jessica Rosenthal put it.

First-grade teacher Kelly McNerney briefed Whittington on 7-year-old student Robert Stewart, who she said had fallen below reading level and could benefit from additional one-on-one practice.

Robert struggled to identify letters of the alphabet on a sheet of paper until Whittington turned their chairs toward the wall to minimize distractions. After that, Robert did so well that Whittington had to make it more difficult.

"I'm gonna make it really hard and flip it upside down," Whittington explained as he spun the paper around. Robert giggled.

Whittington asked Robert to point to the letter "E," and after a few moments, Robert did.

"Good job, man," Whittington celebrated. "I can't fool you."

Whittington, 64, a medical researcher with the University of Louisville, said the importance of male role models became apparent to him early in his career, when he served as director of a residential treatment center for emotionally disturbed delinquents and observed a pattern among clients — most lacked positive male guidance.

"It's important that all children have a positive role model," he said in an interview. "A male that's doing something good for them, something they can relate to, to give them the idea that they are worthwhile and education is worthwhile."

During the course of the school day, Whittington visited four classrooms, including that of his fifth-grade daughter, Riley. He said the children were generally receptive, offering hugs when they noticed he was a Watch Dog.

"I think that the kids I work with individually, they seem to be very appreciative, and when we're finished, don't want to stop our interaction," he said. "They seem to enjoy the one-on-one time."

The Watch D.O.G.S. program costs each school $365 the first year, with $195 for each year after that. In most cases, the individual schools cover the costs, although the district allocates funds to schools with large percentages of low-income students for parent-engagement programs such as Watch D.O.G.S, said JCPS Parent Relation Specialist Sharon Whitworth.

Dr. Bryan Carter, a pediatric psychologist at Kosair Children's Hospital, said programs like Watch D.O.G.S. could be especially helpful for the behavioral development of young boys because boys seem to respond differently to men than women.

Many boys are "wired" to rebel against mothers and other female authority figures, which he said could be problematic in a school setting, where the majority of teachers and administrators tend to be females. It's an issue frequently seen in Carter's field, he said, although experts don't completely understand why.

Bringing in male figures often curbs disruptive behavior, he said, but the value of programs like Watch D.O.G.S. goes beyond that since many kids have "minimal exposure" to positive male role models as divorce rates and single-mother households increase.

"Repeated exposure to those positive male role models is really going to help with (children's) character development, (and) with their ... perception of the world of adult males," Carter said.

But Carter cautioned schools to ensure the male volunteers continue to be a consistent presence throughout the academic year. He has seen children who form relationships with mentors who end up falling out of the child's life, and "that can represent a real loss."

Rosenthal said providing that consistency is vital to the program's goal — to allow kids to form relationships with the volunteers. Some Watch Dogs, who are required to undergo a background check like any other volunteer, are a regular presence in the school, she said.

Hawthorne Elementary's Watch D.O.G.S. program began last year after Rosenthal learned about the program at Kenwood Elementary, which in 2012 became one of the first JCPS schools to implement the program.

Rosenthal said Watch D.O.G.S. also has encouraged students' father figures to become involved in their children's education outside the program. She said it also communicates a valuable message to students.

"When they see father figures at school, it is a good reminder to all of our kids that the value of education extends beyond their ... moms valuing it," she said. "Dads value it as well."

MORE ONLINE

Watch a video about Hawthorne Elementary's Watch D.O.G.S. program at courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/16Ci4b9