Topics: Editor's Picks, Ferguson, michael brown, Police, News

Are the police departments of Ferguson and St. Louis County, Missouri, involved in a conspiracy to obstruct justice in the case of Michael Brown’s murder? It seems disturbingly possible, given their actions over the past month, hiding basic evidentiary information from the public in direct violation of the state’s sunshine laws—and perhaps not even gathering it in the first place. This raises the further possibly that evidence is being hidden from criminal investigators as well, particularly since the investigators have shown no great interest, much less zeal, in getting to the truth of the matter.

On Aug. 15, the world saw Ferguson Police Chief Thomas Jackson belatedly release Darren Wilson’s name—and no other information at all about the killing of Michael Brown—while at the same time releasing a report (followed by a video) on an unrelated robbery that Brown was apparently involved in. On Aug. 20 and 21, first St. Louis County, then Ferguson released incident reports on the shootings—reports virtually devoid of any information. These highly questionable revelations stirred a fair amount of public outrage, but few people seemed to realize how truly sinister they were, or how they connected to much broader patterns of official lawlessness that have long bedeviled St. Louis County, and Missouri more generally, as well as many other jurisdictions across the land.

On Sept. 5, TheBlot magazine reported that Chief Jackson had lied on Aug. 15, when he claimed that he released the robbery report and video because of numerous media requests. Public records released to TheBlot showed that no one had specifically asked for either of them, while many people had asked for information about the killing of Michael Brown, which Jackson refused to release at that time.

Chief Jackson’s press statement at the time thus contained at least two big misstatements—first that information about the robbery was released because of media requests, and second that he was releasing all the information requested relative to the shooting of Michael Brown:

“So, we’ve had this tape for a while, and we had to diligently review the information that was in the tape, determine if there was any other reason to keep it, anybody else that would be charged with a crime, and we had determined that that was not going to be the case. We got a lot of Freedom of Information requests for this tape, and at some point it was just determined we had to release it. We didn’t have good cause, absent any other reason to not release it under FOI. So we decided, the same time, wouldn’t be prudent to release that information, which could be a little bit…i don’t know… well, we needed to release that at the same time we would release the name of the officer who was involved in the shooting, so that we could just keep open, give you all the information that we have. We’ve pretty much given you every bit of information that we have now, I don’t think there’s anything else that we have to give out.”

But while Jackson’s high-profile statement may have been outrageously false and misleading, it’s the underlying actions of his department in the shadows that are downright criminal, part of a seemingly routine pattern of actual lawbreaking by the police themselves, both in Ferguson and St. Louis County—a persistent pattern that hasn’t stopped, according to emails provided to Salon even though the Department of Justice has announced it’s going to investigate both organizations.

In fact, police are now using the DOJ investigation itself as an excuse for further violations of the sunshine law, relating to arrests of protesters who continue demonstrating in Ferguson, according to emails provided to Salon (details below). The emails come from Charles Grapski, a legal and political theorist and political scientist, as well as an active citizen with decades of experience filing public records requests, including work with local activists and lawyers in different states across the nation.

“It’s made me public enemy number one in the state of Florida,” Grapski said. It was Florida that first enacted sunshine laws, giving them their name. But that doesn’t mean public officials love them any more there than they do elsewhere.

It was Grapski, who now blogs for Photography Is Not a Crime (PINAC), who aggressively pressed for the release of police documents after the ACLU and others had been stonewalled, and the ACLU had filed suit—a suit that is still pending.

Anthony Rothert, of the Missouri ACLU, explained that the lawsuit only reflected one aspect of the ACLU’s concerns. “When this incident happened in Ferguson, the ACLU had several concerns,” he said, “among them being the First Amendment rights of protesters, and the militarized police response, but one of the pieces of it was transparency in the investigation.”

This was not an unusual situation, he explained:

I don’t think it’s unique to this story that police departments often operate with lack of transparency, and that really deteriorates the trust that the community has in the police departments. So you have a pretty good law in Missouri, on paper, the Sunshine Law requires incident reports to be made public, and arrest records to be made public, right away, and requires investigative reports to be made public at conclusion of investigations. But time and again police departments do not release those records unless it is favorable to them.

The ACLU, though a thorn in the side, is part of the legal system. Working through the courts is the lifeblood of what they do. But Grapski’s approach is more of an outsider’s one—and thus, more blunt. Thus, he unabashedly points out that both Ferguson and St. Louis County police have clearly broken the state’s open records law by holding back incident reports about the shooting, which should have begun with a report by the officer involved, Darren Wilson, while Ferguson is also withholding a use-of-force report, which should have been generated by Wilson’s commanding officer and gone up the chain of command all the way to the chief. Grapski has posted highly detailed accounts of both failures in two blog posts at PINAC (incident reports, Aug. 25/use of force reports, Aug. 29), with extensive documentation, including pdfs of relevant rules and regulations, as well as the correspondence involved. (More on these below.)

“Ferguson is deliberately violating both the laws and its own policies to prevent any information from being produced and made public that could be used to hold Officer Wilson to account for his actions,” Grapski wrote in the Aug. 29 post, and he repeated this in interviews with Salon.

“They are committing criminal offenses themselves,” Grapski said of both police departments’ public records violations. “It’s not a high crime, but it is class A misdemeanor, punishable by up to year in prison, and a pretty significant fine, by withholding, by knowingly not complying with the public records law. The records law has teeth, and that is it has criminal sanctions.”

Rothert told Salon something similar, but slightly different. “From what we can tell right now it looks like the Ferguson Police Department never did an incident report,” he said, “which would be contrary to their policy, it would be contrary to the law, and quite, quite suspicious, not to take even an initial statement from someone who’s killed another person.”

Grapski believes the report was created, but then buried. Originally the ACLU was told that the report existed, but that it could not be released due to the bogus claim that it was an investigatory document (which it is not, under Missouri law). However, it may take a trial, with full discovery, to finally settle the matter of what was created when. Either way, however, the police have not followed procedure, violating both their own internal policies and Missouri state law. Is there a sinister conspiracy involved as well? Or is this just business as usual? Or does business as usual include and promote sinister conspiracies as a matter of course? These are the questions raised by the ongoing cover-up of public records surrounding the killing of Michael Brown, and the ongoing protests as well.

Two distracting lies have been floated with particular damage to public understanding of the ongoing cover-up, both of which Grapski has meticulously refuted. First is the claim that such reports were not public records—a claim that depends on confusing standard police reports identified as public records under law with investigative reports undertaken in special circumstances, which rely on standard reports as their starting point. Second is the claim that no report had to be filed, because of Wilson’s Fifth Amendment protection against self-incrimination. This neglects the existence of the use-of-force document, which should have been created by another officer by direction of his watch commander, and it misconstrues Wilson’s obligations as an officer, which require him to file an incident report, even if it implicates him in a crime. He can, of course, refuse to file that report. But that refusal is itself a policy violation, and grounds for immediate firing—none of which consequences Wilson has faced.

Although such details have remained obscured from public view, they are well understood by insiders. For example, the ACLU’s initial Aug. 12 request for the incident report on Michael Brown’s shooting clearly distinguished the report they were asking for from the any investigative report which properly could be withheld until the investigation was complete. In a footnote, the ACLU specifically noted that “Unlike ‘investigative reports,’ which may be closed until the investigation becomes inactive, ‘[a]ll incident reports and arrest reports shall be open records.’ Mo.Rev.Stat.§ 610.100.2.”

Yet, despite this clear presentation of the law—with a specific citation—police officials not only ignored what was legally required, they pretended to the broader public that there was not even a question to be raised.

But it’s the work of Grapski, who speacializes in the use of sunshine laws to empower citizens and hold government officials accountable, that illuminates the big picture of what’s going on in this case.

“We cannot wait for ‘leaders’ to do the job for us. In fact that notion of leadership–or authority–is part of the problem that got us here in the first place,” Grapski told Salon. “We all must ‘lead’ as citizens–which is the highest office in a democratic society.”

Grapski’s Aug. 25 blog post documents a detailed investigation, first aimed at trying to get public information about the shooting, then at documenting the lawbreaking involved in thwarting that effort. At the beginning of his post, Grapski explains:

Let me explain how these reports were released in response to citizens filing legal demands under Missouri’s Sunshine Law – and then show how further public records requests have revealed that the Police officials are “knowingly” refusing to comply with the law and the rules on what these reports MUST contain and that the public is ENTITLED BY RIGHT to have that information. The unlawful denial of the records is a civil violation of the law – but the “knowing” violation constitutes a Class A Misdemeanor in Missouri.

Grapski begins by laying out how others initiated the process. (He explained to Salon that he had been heavily involved in ongoing activities in Albuquerque, New Mexico, since May—the site of almost 30 police killings since 2010, and the subject of a scathing DOJ report—but was keeping on eye on things in Ferguson, until he saw the system failing.)

The story begins on Aug. 12, when the Missouri ACLU made a public records request under Missouri’s sunshine law–asking the St. Louis County Police Department for its incident report of the shooting. In its request, the ACLU specifically asked, “If any part of this request is denied, please send a letter listing the specific exemptions upon which you rely for each denial and provide the contact information for the official to whom I may appeal. Mo. Re. Stat. § 610.023.4,” and—as noted above—in a footnote it stated that “Unlike ‘investigative reports,’ which may be closed until the investigation becomes inactive, ‘[a]ll incident reports and arrest reports shall be open records.’ Mo.Rev.Stat. § 610.100.2.”

Nonetheless, the next day, the request was denied with a handwritten note signed “St. Louis County PD — Record Room” which simply said: “in ref to your request for incident report involving Michael Brown. This is an on-going investigation and we are unable to release a copy at this time.”

The next day, the ACLU filed a lawsuit to compel the county to produce the record — and for other relief. The National Bar Association also filed suit on Aug. 18.

In his post, Grapski comments, “At that point in time – the Police Department DID NOT produce the record because of the lawsuit – but was ready and willing to use that process of DELAY to keep denying production. This was soon to change.” It changed because Grapski became involved. On Sunday, Aug. 17, he submitted his own public records request, adopting a much more no-nonsense tone:

THIS IS NOT a request for records of the INVESTIGATION into this matter. Thus if you respond to this that these records are not available at this time because of an ongoing investigation — you will be VIOLATING THE LAW and as this is notice to you that there is no such exemption pertaining to INCIDENT REPORTS in Missouri law — if you make such a claim — your violation will be KNOWING and WILLFUL — and will constitute not only an offense under Missouri Law but will constitute a knowing and willful violation of your OATH OF OFFICE.

At the same time, Grapski told Salon, “I took a weekend to try something I’d never done before, but I’ve been planning on doing.” He reached out “to get a lot of people making the request, because it proves people are watching, and people are interested. It proves that this is an issue of great public importance, and it adds potentiality for multiple litigants, which puts them on guard.” First via PINAC, and then other channels, he spread the word, “and by Monday morning we had about 160 people making the request.”