Speaker John Boehner outlined his plan to “help” the middle class during the Republican weekly address today, and his plan involved taking away health insurance from 1 million people and raising gas prices.

Video:

During the weekly Republican address Boehner said,

Republicans are humbled by the trust the American people have placed in us. We’ll honor that trust by listening to you, by making your priorities our priorities. That means focusing first on helping middle-class families still struggling to pay the bills and find good-paying jobs. We’ll start by debating and voting on the many jobs bills the House has acted on with bipartisan support. We’ll work to approve the Keystone XL pipeline, which will mean lower energy costs for families and more jobs for American workers. We’ll advance the Hire More Heroes Act, which will encourage employers to hire more of our nation’s veterans. And we’ll take on ObamaCare regulations that threaten the 40-hour workweek and the pay and peace of mind of so many Americans. These types of common-sense solutions, so long ignored by the outgoing Senate majority, offer a good starting point.

Here is what Boehner’s agenda really means.

Speaker Boehner’s jobs bills aren’t really jobs bills. The 40+ pieces of legislation that the House calls jobs bills are a collection of regulatory rollbacks, tax breaks, and benefits for corporations. These isn’t a single job creation plan in their list of jobs bills. What the Republican jobs bills are missing is jobs.

Rep. Boehner was lying about the impact of the Keystone XL pipeline. The project would do the exact opposite of what Boehner suggested. Keystone XL will only create 2,000 temporary jobs, and it will raise the cost of gas by ten to twenty cents a gallon in the Midwest.

A return to the 40-hour work week is a stealth attack on the Affordable Care Act. The impact of what the Republicans are proposing is that 1 million working Americans would lose their employer provided health insurance. So far, Republicans have offered the American people tax breaks for corporations, a loss of health insurance and higher gas prices.

The American people are about to get what the Koch brothers paid for when they bought the Senate for the GOP. The Republican agenda is focused solely on benefitting their donors, and Boehner’s efforts “for the middle class” will almost certainly make millions of lives worse.