The year's biggest cancer research conference kicks off May 29 in Chicago, and physicians will learn about the latest advances in treatment. The gathering of the American Society of Clinical Oncology also will address another big issue in cancer care: affordability.

"One of things we are seeing is clear price inflation for new cancer drugs that are the backbone of treatment for many patients with selected cancers," said Rena Conti, a health economist at the University of Chicago.

Conti planned a two-day seminar at the conference, called ASCO for short, on the economics of cancer care. Economists, health insurance executives, drug companies and politicians often do the most talking about the expense of treatment, but Conti says doctors also have a responsibility to control costs.

The United States is famous for break-the-bank cancer drugs, but health insurance companies, cancer doctors and others are sounding alarms about the unsustainability of increasing costs. The U.S. spent 20.7 percent more on cancer medications in 2014 than it did the year before, according to Express Scripts, a pharmacy benefits manager. This is on top of a 24 percent increase in 2013.

Spending on oncology drugs is being fueled by several factors. Early diagnosis and better drugs have increased survival rates. In addition, some cancers are being treated as chronic illnesses that can be controlled with ongoing medication.

Increased spending also is being driven by the staggering costs of some drugs. Some of the new drugs use the immune system to fight cancer. For example, Bristol-Meyers Squibb's Ipilimumab, approved to treat a type of skin cancer, costs $120,000 for four doses.

Conti estimates that drug prices increased by about 12 percent to 14 percent a year between 1996 and 2013.

The soaring costs of cancer treatments has led to worrisome trends. Express Scripts said the population of patients estimated to be taking at least $100,000 worth of medication annually nearly tripled last year, to 139,000 Americans. About one-third of patients in the highest-cost tier were taking cancer medications.

Escalating drug costs also make it difficult for insurers to accurately price policy premiums. Conti said she has noticed that cancer-drug costs are increasingly being shifted to patients and some can't afford their co-pay, or out-of-pocket costs.

The trends underscore the need for reform, Conti said.

ASCO, for its part, has proposed restructuring the way oncologists are paid, which the organization says would improve the quality and affordability of care. Under the model, physicians would be reimbursed a fixed price to support diagnostic, treatment planning and monitoring for patients. In return, doctors would commit to the use of lower-cost drugs, tests and imaging studies where evidence shows they are equivalent to higher-cost treatments.

ASCO President Dr. Peter Yu said in a statement: "ASCO has developed a payment reform proposal that addresses the serious financial challenges facing today's oncology practices, addresses the problems of affordability facing both payers and patients, and ensures that patients with cancer will be able to receive the full range of services that are critical to high-quality, evidence-based care."

asachdev@tribpub.com

Twitter @ameetsachdev