US Senator Robert Menendez speaks with interviewer Paul Gigot at The Wall Street Journal CEO Council on December 2, 2014. Paul Morse for The Wall Street Journal

With negotiations on Iran’s nuclear program set to resume later in December, the outgoing chairman of the Senate Foreign relations committee called for additional sanctions should Iran fail to agree on a framework agreement with the U.S. and its partners by a March 2015 deadline.

Sen. Robert Menendez (D., N.J.), who will become the committee’s ranking member when Republicans take over the Senate in January, said at Tuesday’s annual Wall Street Journal CEO Council meeting that sanctions brought Iran to the negotiating table in the first place, and additional sanctions would induce Iran to reach an agreement. He said he would consider attaching sanctions to a pending defense authorization bill.

Sen. Rand Paul (R., Ky.) and White House National Security Advisor Susan Rice, also speaking at Tuesday’s meeting, said introducing additional sanctions at this stage could push Iran away from the negotiating table.

“That would not be constructive at this point,” Ms. Rice said, adding the U.S. “is in a much better place today,” having reached interim agreements with Iran on enrichment levels, the Arak plutonium facility as well as “unprecedented” transparency into the group’s nuclear program.

Iranian officials have said they will pull out of the diplomacy if new financial penalties are put in place. Ms. Rice said it would be “foolish” to jettison progress in the talks by introducing sanctions, which would fracture the P5+1 group and prompt the international community to blame the U.S., rather than Iran for the collapse of negotiations.

Mr. Paul noted that Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said he thought the extension was a good thing, and that his suggestion might change some of the debate. He said he thought the U.S. should do all it can to prevent Iran from possessing a nuclear weapon, and that instituting sanctions at this stage could hinder the progress so far.

Following over a year of negotiations, Mr. Menendez said he judged progress in the talks had come from the U.S. and its partners moving closer to Iran’s positions rather than Iran agreeing to significant compromises. By late November the two sides were unable to bridge gaps on two key issues: the future size of Iran’s nuclear-fuel production capacity and the pace at which sanctions will be lifted.

They agreed to extend the talks seven months, including four months to reach a framework agreement and an additional three to complete technical details.

The two sides were unable to bridge gaps on two key issues: the future size of Iran’s nuclear-fuel production capacity and the pace at which sanctions will be lifted, according to U.S. and Iranian officials.

Ms. Rice said significant gaps remain, but they have been “substantially narrowed.”