Plaintiffs say appeal is coming, city holding meeting on issue

Kimberly Gibbs, plaintiff in the Gibbs v. Mile-Hi Skydiving, pauses for a moment holding a stack of letters of support during an interview at the Longmont Civic Center on Friday. ( Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer )

A central question has been dividing the Longmont and surrounding community for the last five or six years — who can control noise in the sky?

Boulder District Judge Judith LaBuda answered that question Thursday afternoon, telling a group of Longmont and Boulder County residents in a ruling that they should take their problem with Mile-Hi Skydiving planes flying over their homes up with the Federal Aviation Administration and not with the local authorities.

A long and contentious history

While Mile-Hi has been at the Vance Brand Municipal Airport since 1995 and using its now-signature purple and white Twin Otter airplane since 1999, noise complaints to the airport increased in 2009 to more than 400 complaints in both 2009 and 2010, according to Times-Call archives.

Homeowners both around the airport and under Mile-Hi's flight box — an area over unincorporated Boulder County that the company's planes generally must keep to in order to avoid other air traffic — complained that Mile-Hi's planes were louder than others and flew more frequently.

Compounding the problems, the complaints alleged, were Mile-Hi's hours of operation on fair-weather summer days and especially on weekends.

As the lawyer for a group of plaintiffs who sued Mile-Hi over the noise would later describe in the week-long trial this year, the noise "occurs precisely when the plaintiffs deserve to enjoy the respite and refuge of their homes the most."

Advertisement

Mile-Hi supporters, meanwhile, accused the residents of being a small group of rabble-rousers who bought homes near an airport or its flight path and yet complain when the airport's operations aren't silent.

The homeowners, who formed the group Citizens for Quiet Skies led by Gunbarrel resident Kimberly Gibbs, contended that the airport historically was not a problem until Mile-Hi starting flying louder and more often sometime around 2009.

Similar to the homeowners' description of the Twin Otter, the argument over the years spiraled, getting louder and louder as it went. The argument spilled out onto public forums in City Council and Airport Advisory Board meetings and residents started forwarding their emailed noise complaints not just to then-airport manager Tim Barth, but also the City Council as a whole.

Former Airport Manager Tim Barth and the City Council maintained that they couldn't do anything that could be construed as discriminatory towards Mile-Hi without jeopardizing federal funds the airport relies on. Rules for those funds stipulate that every airport operator be treated the same, Barth would say.

While the airport has noise abatement procedures for pilots to follow, those procedures are voluntary. Citizens for Quiet Skies argued in the lawsuit that Mile-Hi should be mandated somehow to abide by them while Casares has said they follow them in most cases. The judge did not require the company to adhere to the them, referring to the federal regulations instead.

When Mile-Hi stopped announcing night jumps ahead of time, Citizens for Quiet Skies and seven individual plaintiffs, Gibbs included, sued company owner Frank Casares for negligence and nuisance.

In February, Airport Advisory Board Chairman Don Dolce's unofficial analysis of the 2014 airport complaint log sparked furor because he'd labeled a group of frequent anti-Mile-Hi callers' complaints, some of them plaintiffs in the suit, as "invalid." Dolce's analysis noted that 52 percent of the 1,646 complaints made in the 2014 log came from one person, who board members accused of using an automated system hooked up to some kind of noise monitor. Another 28 percent of the complaints originated from nine other people.

Lawsuit Conclusion

The noise issue is so contentious, with such hard-drawn lines on either side that LaBuda included a request in her ruling asking the community at large to "move forward in a manner that demonstrates courtesy, respect and consideration for one another."

Casares said Friday that he would like to do just that and alluded that there may be a yet-unnamed solutions to "strike a balance" between the skydiving business and the residents' concerns.

"We're committed to being a good neighbor and we always have been," Casares said. "The lawsuit hasn't changed that at all."

Gibbs and the plaintiffs have said they are disappointed and are probably filing an appeal.

"The judge punted to the FAA and essentially accepted the defense's argument and didn't read the case law that we provided," Gibbs said.

The plaintiffs had relied heavily on a 2005 case from Naples, Florida. There, the FAA rescinded a grant because the Naples airport banned a certain type of jet airplane. The U.S. Court of Appeals overturned that ruling, and forced the FAA to give back the grant money, allowing the Naples ban to stay in place.

The Longmont-area plaintiffs argued that this allowed LaBuda to place injunctions on Mile-Hi, an argument she did not buy.

The Naples case also has implication for how the city might move forward after the lawsuit, because in December they hired the airport's legal team on as special counsel to the city.

Two hours before the ruling in the Mile-Hi case was handed down, the city announced that it would host a meeting with an attorney from that special counsel team on June 3 addressing the topic of "What cities can do about airport noise."

One option available to Longmont city officials would be petition the FAA for a detailed noise study, which would produce a noise exposure map of the area. Only then could the city, under FAA rules, attempt to restrict Mile-Hi's flights in any way.

But that kind of study is expensive, at a cost of roughly $300,000, City Attorney Eugene Mei noted in an email to the City Council and other staff in February.

Former airport manager Barth commissioned a preliminary study from local firm Terracon in September at a cost of $2,797. The Terracon study found that noise from two of Mile-Hi's four planes were not "significantly higher than the background noise sources except in very specific, short duration instances."

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci