Artist and former Green Beret Magnus Johnson, left, founded Elder Heart. He stands with artist James Connor in front of the 18-foot sculpture “Soaring” in Nashville, Ind. (Photo: Barb Berggoetz/The Indianapolis Star )

When Green Beret Magnus Johnson learned that fellow service members were dying by their own hands, he couldn't stand idle.

Every day, at least 22 veterans commit suicide nationally. He knows four who did.

"Why isn't this a national priority?" the eight-year Army veteran kept asking himself after finishing one tour in Iraq and two tours in Afghanistan.

But he soon realized the government can't do it all. It can't provide all the healing necessary to stem the 8,030 veteran suicides a year.e

"I looked in the mirror and thought, 'What am I doing?' The answer was nothing. I wasn't very comfortable with that," said Johnson, 33, a self-taught metal artist living in Nashville.

The healing, he says, has to emanate from communities, towns, families and veterans. And he's learned from his metalwork that it can come from art, too.

His deep feelings for veterans and his love of art led him to form a nonprofit group, Elder Heart. Its aim is to use art to bring attention to veterans' suicides and their service.

Beauty with a message

The group's first major project, a striking 18-foot leaf sculpture called "Soaring," now stands in the heart of Nashville, a popular fall tourist spot. Its 22 brightly colored leaves represent the daily toll of veteran suicides as reported by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs.

With help from some fellow Special Forces members and other friends, the nonprofit was created in May 2013. It's not just a veterans group, though. Johnson brings together local communities — volunteers, artists, businesses and officials — to create works of public, private and corporate art and other projects in Indiana and anywhere in the U.S.

It's called social impact art — beauty with a message.

"We wanted to think of a way where we can impact where we live, we could tell the story without it being way, super-nationalistic, without it being really dark and really heavy," said Johnson, president and CEO of Elder Heart.

Johnson hopes word will spread from this initial project so other communities will commission work or use Elder Heart's model for their own projects.

Already, Elder Heart is making and helping to fund a 6-foot granite memorial for the family of a Navy SEAL in Rhode Island who committed suicide on Veterans Day 2012.

The leaf sculpture took a major investment of time and money.

For about three months, about 25 volunteers, including five veterans, worked with Nashville artist James Connor and painter Larry Webb, both hired by Elder Heart. After the leaves' curves were rolled in the steel by Midwest Metal Fabrication in Whitestown, local workers cut them out using templates, ground and welded them, added the stems and veining, then finally painted the leaves. It was finished July 4.

"A lot of my family is in the military," said Zion Piatt, 17, who volunteered many weeks on the project. "It was a great opportunity to learn, but I also heard about the problem of veteran suicides. I was honored to do this."

That's just what Johnson wants these projects to do: Open the eyes of people in the community to veterans' issues and create projects people can work on, learn from and financially support.

The project, with a cost estimated between $100,000 and $150,000, was supported by corporate sponsors, the town of Nashville, the Brown County Convention and Visitors Bureau and individual donors.

At the sculpture's base is a plaque and a QR code that links mobile devices to the Elder Heart website, where people can make donations and learn how to get involved in veterans' issues.

Elder Heart supporters said Nashville is the perfect spot for the leaf sculpture. The town has 3 million visitors per year who come to see the fall foliage and shop at local stores.

"The main focus is to raise awareness and pull people in with the beauty of the piece, and then they can see what it means," said Connor, who designed the work based on a leaf sculpture concept proposed by Indianapolis marketing firm Three Sixty Group in 2013.

The town's Arts and Entertainment Commission asked Three Sixty Group to create a sculpture as a "signature" piece to promote the arts district. Conner approached town officials about involving Elder Heart. Their efforts merged and the leaves came to represent military suicides.

Work spurs emotional response

Already, the sculpture, which is on Main Street in front of the tourism bureau, has attracted attention.

"We saw a number of people in tears during the construction of it," said Jane Ellis, bureau executive director. "It's been emotional."

Johnson's view is that veterans are committing suicide at a high rate largely because they don't talk to people in their communities — and communities don't understand how to honor them, other than with events like parades.

"There's a lot of isolation," said Johnson, a Bronze Star recipient for his work defusing explosive devices in Afghanistan. "There's a lot of indifference. There's a lot of guilt, shame and remorse."

Johnson's hope is that Elder Heart's public art will start conversations, allowing veterans to share their pain and help the community open up to them.

"You can't fix your problems unless you address them," Johnson said. "If we don't care about our warriors, who do we care about? That's a scary thought."

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1niT9d7