Supreme Court Justice Anthony Kennedy's questions Wednesday invoked the court's 2012 Obamacare decision. (AP Photo/Matt Slocum, File)

Whether Obamacare survives its latest trip to the Supreme Court surprisingly could come down to a question of the federal government's power over the states.

After nearly 90 minutes of oral arguments Wednesday, there's generally agreement the expected ruling in the case -- questioning the legality of subsidies for millions buying health insurance through 34 federal-run exchanges -- is too close to call. Chief Justice John Roberts, the pivotal swing vote upholding the Affordable Care Act three years ago, gave away nothing that would show which way he's leaning. Justice Anthony Kennedy, who voted to strike down the entire law last time, asked tough enough questions of both the plaintiffs and the federal government that indicated his vote could be in play.

The plaintiffs in the case, King v. Burwell, charge that the Affordable Care Act only provides insurance subsidies in states that set up their own exchanges -- something that just 16 states the District of Columbia did. This, they claim, was done to encourage states to set up their own online insurance marketplaces.

If the plaintiffs' argument is correct, Kennedy asked, wouldn't that amount to an unconstitutional use of coercion? Without the subsidies, Kennedy said, the state's insurance markets could be sent into a "death spiral" since the coverage would be unaffordable and just the sickest patients would be left in the insurance market.

Coercion is the same principle that sunk the mandatory Medicaid expansion in the Supreme Court's 2012 Obamacare case. Seven justices, including two from the court's liberal wing, ruled that the federal government couldn't force states to join the Medicaid expansion at risk of losing federal funding for their existing Medicaid program if they didn't participate. Though the federal government routinely provides funding with strings attached, the mandatory Medicaid expansion was too coercive, the court ruled -- that is, a state's refusal to participate would have exacted too great of a toll on it. The mandatory expansion amounted to a "gun to the head" of states, Robert wrote in the 2012 decision.

Justice Kennedy here posits that interpreting the text like the plaintiffs are arguing could create a constitutional problem. If it's a choice between setting up an exchange or destroying your insurance markets, that's not really a choice for states, Kennedy said.

If those are the circumstances, Kennedy cited the principal of "constitutional avoidance," in which the court reads a law to avoid potential problems with constitutionality. So that would seem to boost the federal government's case.

The questioning on coercion comes as a bit of a surprise, too. The plaintiffs' lawyer, Michael Carvin, said during oral arguments that the federal government never made the coercion argument (though some lawyers supporting the administration's side have).

"Sometimes, we think of things the government doesn't," Kennedy said.

Even the government's lawyer, Solicitor General Donald Verrilli, didn't want to concede that the plaintiffs' reading of the ACA raised constitutional questions. But if the court believes there is a constitutional issue, then it should follow "constitutional avoidance" to interpret the ACA as the government says it should -- that all exchanges, state or federal, can provide subsidies.

Kennedy's questions about coercion "may well prove to be the turning point of the argument," writes Washington and Lee University law professor Timothy Jost, an ACA supporter. The Manhattan Institute's Avik Roy, however, contends that state insurance markets could still function without the subsidies, eliminating the coercion argument.

All along, King was thought of as a textual case, not a constitutional one. Does the law, as it's written, say what the federal government says it does?

That's all to say, of course, we can't reasonably predict how the justices will decide this case when they issue a ruling in late June, or how much federalism concerns play into Kennedy's thinking in the case. But his questioning gives something interesting to debate in the nearly four months we'll have to wait to find out if the ACA survives.