AUSTIN — Gov.-elect Greg Abbott on Thursday morning offered a lengthy account of perhaps his most unlikely meeting since being elected in November: coming face-to-face with his favorite litigant in Washington, D.C.

Abbott, who as attorney general has sued the Obama administration more than 30 times, was invited to the White House last month to discuss job creation with the president and several other incoming governors. The visit came just days after Abbott had filed his latest lawsuit against the administration, arguing the president’s executive action on immigration was an unconstitutional bypass of Congress.

After the meeting, Abbott told reporters it was neither the time nor place to bring up the legal challenge. But that doesn’t mean Abbott didn’t return to Austin with a few stories about holding court with his longtime political foil.

Speaking at a three-day conference for the Texas Public Policy Foundation on Thursday in Austin, Abbott took his audience inside the West Wing. Here’s how it went, according to the incoming governor:

After a day of meeting with administration officials and Cabinet members, the governor headed to the Oval Office, where Obama was waiting to shake their hands in the doorway. Abbott was last in line to greet the president, and “you have to know,” Abbott told his audience, “he was not wanting to shake my hand.”

Still, they shook hands and Abbott took note of how Obama’s grip was “a little stiff and a little cold.” A family member had suggested a zinger for Abbott to use on Obama, but the incoming governor instead went with this line: “Mr. President, you need to understand you’re giving me trouble back.”

“He tightened up and you can tell, ‘Well, you know, we’ve got another smart-alec governor from Texas down here,” Abbott recalled. ”

But Abbott didn’t want his first face-to-face encounter with the president to end on that note, so he switched gears to a more personal topic.

“I said, you know, ‘I have a teenage daughter one year older than your teenage daughter, and she thinks you are a whole lot funnier than I am,'” Abbott recalled. “You can tell he loosened up all of a sudden. He patted me on the back and said, ‘Oh, Greg, you know those teenage girls. They’ll break your heart, but once they turn 25, they’ll come right back to you.'”

With things loosening up, Abbott finally headed into the Oval Office, where the six other newly elected governors were sitting on couches. Abbott settled into a position across from Obama, who suddenly made a special request.

“As I go to lock down my wheels, the president pulls out the chair next to him and says, ‘Greg’ — he’s loosening up now, we’re kind of on a first-name basis — ‘Greg, why don’t you come sit right here by me?'” Abbott recalled.

Respecting the president’s request, Abbott rolled over to the president and positioned himself a short distance from Obama. It was at that moment that dozens of journalists rushed in and started taking pictures of the formation — a “pool spray” in White House parlance.

“I’m thinking, ‘Man, my political career is over,'” Abbott recalled.

Once the cameras left, Obama asked each guest to say a few words about how things are going in their state. First up was Rhode Island Gov.-elect Gina Raimondo, whom Abbott recalled breaking out in “almost incomprehensible language” as she excitedly thanked Obama for campaigning for her.

“And without skipping a beat, I immediately injected myself, spreading my arms so that my left arm was extending into the lap of the president himself, saying, ‘What? You didn’t come to Texas to campaign?'” Abbott said. “He reached over and touched my arm and said, ‘Greg, I don’t think it would’ve helped.’ I bit my tongue because I was thinking, ‘Oh, Mr. President, it would’ve helped.'”

With the small talk out of the way, the president turned to a more serious topic: regulations that the governors and governors-elect believed were stifling economic growth in their states. Abbott recalled having to bite his tongue again, feeling the urge to list three easy targets: the Dodd-Frank financial reforms, the Environmental Protection Agency and the Affordable Care Act.

However, mindful of the outgoing Texas governor’s favorite talking points, Abbott kept the suggestions to himself. After all, Abbott recalled, “I didn’t want him to think I was the second coming of Rick Perry.”

As he finished his account of the meeting at the TPPF conference, he told the audience his office plans to submit a more extensive answer to Obama’s question. He tasked members of the conservative think-tank with coming up with three federal regulations that could be repealed or reform to create jobs. He made sure he emphasized the word “federal.”