Doctors: A woman's right to choose an abortion doesn't deserve taxpayer cash.

Senate Bill 1318, introduced by committee chair Sen. Nancy Barto, R-Phoenix, would prohibit abortion coverage for women insured through the federal health-care exchange. It would also require physicians who perform abortions to show proof of admitting privileges at a local hospital. (Photo: Jack Kurtz/The Republic) Story Highlights A woman's legal right to choose an abortion does not demand that taxpayers pay for the abortion

Doctors: We've used protocol to reverse a medication abortion

Legislation has helped reduce abortion rate in Arizona

In his Monday My Turn column, former Planned Parenthood board member Dr. Eric Reuss wrote that "the role of our state government cannot be to interfere in women's access to health care."

We couldn't agree more.

The problem is that contrary to what Planned Parenthood may think and what would help their bottom line, abortion is not health care. Abortion harms women and ends the life of a preborn child.

What pro-abortion doctors fail to mention time after time is that a woman's legal right to choose an abortion does not demand that taxpayers subsidize or pay for the abortion.

As is explicitly permitted by the Affordable Care Act, SB 1318 prohibits elective abortion coverage to be purchased on Arizona's Obamacare health care exchange. Individuals will still be able to purchase private abortion coverage outside of the exchange, but to do anything less than prohibit abortion coverage on the exchange itself guarantees tax dollars will be funding elective abortions.

FACT CHECK: Barto's abortion-funding claim unsupported

BARTO: Actually, taxpayers do fund abortions

Nearly 90 percent of individuals purchasing health insurance on the exchange receive a subsidy, averaging $264 a month. Under Obamacare, only $1 is being charged to add abortion coverage.

Giving someone $264 per month of taxpayer money and then asking for $1 back to pay for abortion coverage is no safeguard at all.

By passing SB 1318, Arizona will join 17 other states that have also seen through this accounting gimmick and have prohibited elective abortion coverage on their state exchanges.

Dr. Clint Leonard (Photo: handout)

In regard to the informed consent provision in SB 1318, women deserve to be fully informed and know all the facts before choosing to have an abortion. Most would agree that a woman would want to know that if she changes her mind after taking the first pill of a medication abortion, she may be able to reverse its effects and save her child's life. That's all SB 1318 requires.

RELATED: Anti-abortion bill passes Senate

Both of us have administered the abortion pill reversal regimen to women who took the first pill, then immediately regretted their decision. Now they have healthy pregnancies. To date, over 80 live births have been recorded of women who underwent the abortion pill reversal, and there are more than 60 healthy pregnancies because of the abortion pill reversal.

Dr. Allan Sawyer (Photo: handout)

Again, women have a right to know and be told by abortion providers like Planned Parenthood that it may be possible to reverse the abortion pill's effect. To say that women should be left in the dark on this crucial information suggests that women are better off not knowing all the facts about their abortion.

Finally, abortion doctors have been required to have admitting privileges for most of the last year. This is critical to ensure continuity of care for patients who may have complications and need further treatment at a hospital. Ensuring the Arizona Department of Health Services can verify abortion doctors do in fact have admitting privileges is hardly a "punitive measure."

Of the bills introduced in the past six years, 28 common-sense, pro-life provisions are in effect today. In that time period we have seen the abortion rate in Arizona drop.

For those who desire to have "safe, legal abortions," giving a woman the ability to make an informed choice should be a no-brainer. The bills passed are saving lives — both of the mother and her preborn child.

Dr. Allan Sawyer is an obstetrician/gynecologist in private practice in Glendale. Dr. Clint Leonard is an obstetrician/gynecologist in private practice in Gilbert.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1MOvrER