Dear GOP: I've Decided To Start Seeing Other Parties

Look, this shouldn't come as a shock to either of us -- we've been growing apart for years. I've got to be brutally honest and say I mostly blame you.

Hey, you used to be fun. A lot of fun. There was quite a bit of both "G" and "P" in the "GOP" when we started. Now you just seem all about the "O" and it's not even the good kind of "O." It's not just a chronological thing, either. Even some of your younger candidates sometimes seem soooo serious and cranky, like America is one big lawn they want everyone to get off of. Reagan liked to joke. Jack Kemp still had that bubbly college jock enthusiasm, even when his health was failing. And Bob Dole was a solid go-to for witty one-liners as he rearranged deck chairs on the 1996 General Election Titanic.

Now there's Mitch McConnell, always looking like someone just fed him tainted beef.

Sure, Paul Ryan is more charming, but he had to whine and complain about not wanting the job forever before he became speaker, taking most of the fun out of that.

DOES ANYONE REMEMBER LAUGHTER?

We had dreams then, too. Big ones! We were going to abolish the IRS, reduce the size of government, keep the military strong, and give kids stuck in awful public schools choices for their education. Those were things we were for! These days I sort of know what we're against (Obama, Hillary, winning the White House), but if forced at gunpoint to describe a positive Republican vision in 2016, I'm getting a bullet.

I know that I am a little heavier and grayer than when we first met, but I do still try to be presentable. I'm not sure if you own a mirror, but you've really let yourself go, GOP. The orange hair isn't working for me at all, and you haven't lost any of that Department of Homeland Security weight you gained the one time in recent memory you managed to (barely) not screw up a presidential election. Come on, have some pride. There's only so long you can get away with "I'm less hideous than the other party's choice." And that brings us to why we are really having this discussion.

The first time you used that line with me was in 1992, after President George H.W. Bush had screwed us on taxes. It was an easy sell, as we were still flush with the Reagan glow and thought that this mini-betrayal was probably a one-off thing. Still, I hesitated forever in the voting booth that year, unable to enthusiastically vote for the Republican at the top of the ticket. Eventually, I acquiesced, hoping that I'd never have to feel that way again.

My bad.