Tyler Matzek flew through nine innings of work Friday night at Coors Field and only paused early on when San Diego’s Rymer Liriano hit a routine line-drive single to right field in the third inning. It gave the batter enough time to round first base and look at his work.

Hopefully he enjoyed it. Liriano’s hit was one of only three allowed by Matzek. And by the time Liriano lined a comebacker to the mound in the eighth — one that Matzek nonchalantly caught with a shrug — the Rockies’ rookie left-hander was well on his way to Colorado’s best pitching performance of the season.

Matzek (5-9) needed just 103 pitches, 75 of them strikes, to toss the Rockies’ first complete game of the season — a 3-0 victory over the Padres at Coors Field.

“I feel like I’ve been finding my groove the last two or three games,” said Matzek, whose streak of scoreless innings is now at 21. “Just everything is working — fastball location, slider, changeup, curveball. Everything feels right right now.”

It was the Rockies’ first complete game since Tyler Chatwood did it July 13 last year against the Dodgers in Los Angeles. It was Colorado’s first complete-game victory at Coors Field since Jhoulys Chacin did it April 15, 2011 (a 5-0 win over the Chicago Cubs). It was the 12th complete-game shutout in Rockies’ history at Coors Field.

“He’s gaining more and more confidence in each outing,” Rockies manager Walt Weiss said. “And he was able to go strike one. I think I heard 24 first-pitch strikes. When you do that, you’re gonna go deep into the game.

“His maturity and his poise, for me, are what stand out.”

Matzek dominated the Padres, facing just four more batters than the minimum. He struck out six and walked just one.

In the third, around Liriano’s single, Matzek struck out three. He fanned Cameron Maybin swinging at a slider, caught Eric Stults looking at a fastball, then punched out Abraham Almonte on just three pitches.

Through seven innings, just five balls had left the infield, four for outs.

“It’s just another steppingstone to where I want to be,” Matzek said. “I just have to keep moving forward.”

Matzek also had help. Catcher Michael McKenry tracked a Rene Rivera foul back to the Rockies’ dugout in the fourth, reaching over the railing to snag the popup.

And Charlie Blackmon, after a 30-yard sprint, slid feet-first through the dirt into the right- field wall in foul territory in the eighth to get Maybin.

Abraham Almonte’s line drive over Corey Dickerson’s head in left field in the ninth and Almonte’s check-swing dribbler outside the batter’s box for an infield hit in the sixth were San Diego’s only other hits.

“When Tyler doesn’t walk guys, he’s going to be really tough,” Weiss said. “His last pitch in the eighth inning was 94-95 mph. So he showed me that he was still strong at that point.”

Drew Stubbs’ solo home run in the first inning gave the Rockies all the room they needed. Nolan Arenado also homered, a solo shot in the sixth. And Blackmon got an RBI single in the fifth.

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke

Looking ahead

Padres’ Tyson Ross (13-12, 2.60 ERA) at Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (13-10, 4.26), 6:10 p.m. Saturday, ROOT; 850 AM

In his team-leading 29th start of the season (it’s his second consecutive season with at least 25 and third overall), De La Rosa will pitch against a team he’s handled in recent years. Since 2010, De La Rosa is 8-1 with a 3.66 ERA against the Padres. But the Rockies left-hander went just 2-4 in August with a 4.42 ERA. That was after a brilliant July, when he went 3-0 with a 2.30 ERA. Nick Groke, The Denver Post

Sunday: Padres’ Odrisamer Despaigne (3-5, 3.06 ERA) at Rockies’ Franklin Morales (5-7, 5.46), 2:10 p.m., ROOT

Monday: Rockies’ Jordan Lyles (6-2, 4.35) at Mets’ Jon Niese (8-10, 3.68), 5:10 p.m., ROOT

Tuesday: Rockies’ Christian Bergman (2-2, 5.23) at Mets’ Jacob deGrom (7-6, 2.87), 5:10 p.m., ROOT