Topics: Editor's Picks, Finance, Investment banking, Kevin Roose, millennials, Wall Street, Young Money, Business News, News

A half-decade after the financial crash, with Wall Street’s ruinous misdeeds receding into the past, it might seem like the world of investment banking has been practically absolved of its sins.

Bankers themselves have certainly done their best to encourage the impression that they’ve repented: Bonuses are down. New standards were (grudgingly) implemented. Even their once-extravagant holiday parties have been scaled back to human levels of decadence.

But in a remarkable scene toward the end of Kevin Roose’s new book, “Young Money,” the banking world’s bad behavior is once again cast in sharp relief. In it, Roose describes how he sneaked his way into a lavish gathering of Wall Street’s most exclusive secret society, Kappa Beta Phi. Among the gathered horde of investment-banking executives and private-equity moguls — “If you had dropped a bomb on the roof, global finance as we know it might have ceased to exist ” — poor taste was as bountiful as top-shelf champagne. Over the course of the proceedings (which Roose first wrote about for the New York Times in 2012) the attendees casually traded jokes laced with sexism and homophobia, and evinced an startling elitism that would make even Uncle Pennybags blush. By all appearances, these people had learned almost nothing from the (very recent) past.

Which gets at a larger point: While much has changed since 2008, the leadership at the top of the financial pyramid remains largely the same, ensconced in the protective armor of its staggering wealth. But what about the next generation of Wall Street leaders? Will they turn out exactly like their predecessors?

In the course of writing “Young Money,” Roose spent three years following the career development of eight recent Wall Street hires, from the moment they were first introduced into the crucible of high finance. Along the way, as Roose documents with both candor and empathy, their mettle and their principles were repeatedly put to the test. Many of these young people, once the crush of Wall Street’s torturous work schedule sank in, evan began questioning the value of the industry into which they had enlisted.

Last week, I spoke with Roose about the major generational shift that’s shaken the foundations of investment banking, and solicited his forecast for the future of the industry. This interview has been edited for length and clarity.

I think a lot of people right now associate working on Wall Street with an environment along the lines of “The Wolf of Wall Street.” But one of the first things that struck me about your book was how life for a young banker is in many ways exactly the opposite of that. Were you surprised?

I had the same impression you had. I thought Wall Street was all cocaine and strippers and million-dollar bonuses. It turns out not to be the case at all for the people who are on the young end of it. It’s still a place where people make good money: As a 23-year-old you can make more than $100,000 straight out of college. But the culture is much more subdued now. I think most of it has to do with the crash of 2008 and what happened after that: Regulation began to be implemented, and profits fell, and banks became much more austere places.

Young bankers sort of bore the brunt of that. They work these insane hours and they are tasked with some of the most boring, menial work you can imagine. I don’t think they would have the time to go and get drunk even if they wanted to. There’s a thing called the “banker’s nine-to-five,” where you work from 9 a.m. until 5 a.m. the next morning. That’s something [young bankers] all talk about having done at some point in their career.

So you’re right. It’s very much not a “Wolf of Wall Street” culture anymore. In some ways it’s a lot less fun, and a lot more hard work in an unforgiving work environment.

Speaking of the “banker’s nine-to-five,” there’s actually been something like a national conversation recently about the insane hours that young bankers are working. The New Yorker, for example, published an article last month about how, from an empirical standpoint, working people that hard is just not productive, because efficiency goes down substantially after a certain number of hours worked. But it seems like there’s been a lot of resistance in the financial world to changing anything about the way work is structured. Why is that?

Well, in the reporting that I did, and the people that I talked to, I came away with two answers to the question of why these guys are put through such a crucible.

The first is that these banks are essentially client service businesses. So, if your client is Coca-Cola ,and you’re Goldman Sachs, and Coca-Cola needs a spreadsheet changed at 3 a.m. on Christmas morning, it’s your job to do that. So banks actually need to be staffed by hundreds of young people who can jump into action at any moment. The second part, and the thing that I was surprised by: A lot of the young bankers that I talked to sort of took pride in the hours that they worked, in a way to separate themselves from people in other industries.

There’s a thing called “misery poker” where they compare their work loads: One guy will say, “I’m staffed on three deals and I pulled four all-nighters last week”; and the next guy will go, “Oh, that’s nothing, I pulled six all-nighters last week.” So there’s really a sort of status symbol in the amount you work. And for the firm it’s also useful because you’re trying to find out from your young analysts who is real Wall Street material. One of the ways you can do that is by pushing them all to the brink and seeing who sinks and who swims.

I should also say that this is terrifying in a way. These are the people who are managing our 401Ks and overseeing these million-dollar transactions. And on the bottom level, the real work is being done by these young people who are getting two hours sleep a night. So I think that should give us a lot of pause, as people who consume the products that these banks offer.

Some of the people you followed seemed to really push back at that culture, to resent this system that was working them into the ground. Is that kind of resistance becoming more common? Especially after the financial crash and Occupy Wall Street, are young bankers thinking more critically about the places where they’re working?