in: Baby>, Big Kid>, Pregnant>, Preschooler>, Toddler>, You and Your Family>, Dilemmas>, Me & My Kids>, News>, Mom Stories

Most people on welfare do drugs. In fact, they just keep having babies so they can get more benefits. And you know they come from generation after generation of people on welfare. They’re the problem with society today. The entitled. The lazy. Those who refuse to do better.

You can’t tell me you haven’t heard at least one of those stereotypes about people accepting public assistance, right? I know I have. And since Tennessee committed to drug testing every new applicant for six months, they’ve heard some of this before as well. The results were shocking.

Of 16,000 applicants, 37 tested positive for illegal drugs. Let that number sink in for a second. Thirty-seven is approximately 0.2% of 16,000. That means for every 432 people who applied, one got a positive result. I don’t know the going rate for bulk drug tests, but I’d be interested in learning the rate of return on this experiment – all because of a stereotype.

I reached out to a group of moms who receive public assistance, looking to hear the basics of their stories. I expected it would be a sensitive subject, so I made the promise to tackle negativity. Still, I wasn’t certain I would get a response. What happened next was amazing. Moms came at me from every direction to chat about their experiences. Here are a few snippets.

We are just simple people who needed help! We both work. He actually works two jobs an I am a stay-at-mom but also nanny. Sometimes we still can’t make it. – Jennifer My husband had his own small business. He was the sole employee and worked long days, into the night. Still, we could not afford health insurance. Premiums were outrageous. When I became pregnant we had no choice but to apply for Medicaid. The stigma comes from people who don’t understand how expensive private insurance is and that we are not dead beats. – Mary My parents were never on any kind of government assistance. We were poor, living paycheck to paycheck, with my mother working two jobs. But they had too much pride to ask for help. Now fast forward 20+ years to my need for government assistance. I got pregnant with my daughter when I was 25. I had the same assistant manager job for over four years and had health insurance through work. I owned my own home and car. I felt everything would fine. Well the health insurance didn’t pay very much, at all. My OB/GYN required me to either pay the $2000 up front or apply for Medicaid. Once I got approved, they told me to apply for WIC. I didn’t because I didn’t think I would need it. I was wrong. I filled for medical leave through my company but some lady in some office said I left out a page. I got terminated for unapproved medical absence. I found myself suddenly unemployed and at the WIC office. – Shannon

And then I got this tale, which I think sums up how every mom wants the story to end.

My husband was finishing his PhD. Things were tight, but we both worked full-time and he attended full-time classes. We ended up not just pregnant, but expecting twins. Upon breaking down at the doctor’s office because I had no idea how to tell him, the people at the office pointed me to the local assistance office. It was easier breaking the news when I had already covered his biggest fear, the financial part. He came from a wealthy family, which I did not, so it was hard for me to understand why he felt relieved but embarrassed by being on assistance. I was not allowed to mention it to his family. It was a huge help for us. I was on bed rest and the twins came 10 weeks early. They had to use special formula because of being so premature which was super expensive. We could never have afforded it at the time without the WIC program.



We weren’t on it for very long and were happy to finally be on our own feet. He has since become a successful professional, we have four beautiful babies, and live life truly blessed.



We never did drugs or drank, we did not have more kids in order to get more, we actually got off to have more babies. We were just hard working pay check to pay check married couple who needed a little help at a desperate time. – Katie

These moms took on every stereotype. Of course there are the few who ruin it for the many, but keep these women in mind. They and their families are who public assistance is designed for. They want it to be short-term. The help they got supported the lives of their little ones. Remember that.

Photos: USDAgov/flickr