State ER wait times exceed national average

In more than half of Connecticut's emergency rooms, the waiting time to see a health-care provider exceeds the national average of 28 minutes -- a problem that experts say could get worse, as thousands more residents obtain health insurance.

The average wait can stretch to an hour or more at Bridgeport, Rockville General, Manchester Memorial, Waterbury and Hartford hospitals, according to a C-HIT review of federal data. The statewide average waiting time is 30 minutes. Greenwich Hospital, while not among the highest, is still higher than average at 33 minutes.

The longest wait time is at Hartford Hospital, where patients were not seen for 82 minutes, on average; the shortest wait of 14 minutes is at Windham Hospital, the data compiled by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services through 2012 show.

Hospitals have taken some steps to improve their wait times, at a time when emergency departments have seen an increase in patients. But, experts say the task is only going to get tougher as the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, will expand the pool of eligible Medicaid recipients seeking care by at least 15 million nationally.

With a shortage of primary care physicians or those who won't accept new patients, there have been mutterings that ER wait times will only increase when the ACA takes effect in 2014. "That's the million-dollar question," said Dr. Chris Davison, medical director of the Greenwich Hospital Emergency Room. He said there are multiple possible reasons why emergency rooms might be crowded, and the lack of primary care doctors could be one of them. "With the shortage of physicians out there, it's not always easy to get a timely appointment," Davison said. "There certainly is a convenience factor in that our doors are always open."

The lack of access to doctors could get worse as more people get insurance, sending more to the emergency room, Davison said. But he was quick to add that no one knows what the Affordable Care Act's effect will be. In the meantime, he and staff at other area hospitals said they're doing all they can to reduce wait time.

Efforts to reduce waiting times

Officials at several hospitals say they are streamlining ER operations to shorten waits for walk-in patients. They note that patients who arrive by ambulances or with life-threatening conditions are seen right away. Some hospitals post their waiting times on their websites, so people will know what to expect.

Davison said Greenwich Hospital's efforts to reduce wait times include making sure that patients in the emergency room who need to be admitted to the hospital are assessed and moved swiftly to free up ER beds. The hospital also practices something called immediate bedding, meaning that, if a patient comes to the ER and there's a bed available, he or she is placed in it immediately.

But even with these efforts, Davison said, "at some point, patients will have to wait in the waiting room. I don't think there's any hospital with a wait time of zero." The key is to make sure those who are waiting are the most stable and not in need of immediate help, he said. To do that, he said, the hospital takes patients' vital signs almost immediately to determine whether they need to be seen right away.

Elsewhere, Bridgeport Hospital, with an average ER wait time of 71 minutes, recently added two physicians to handle its 81,000 annual ER visits. "The seven-hour wait went out with the tide," said Dr. Rockman Ferrigno, chairman of emergency medicine at Bridgeport Hospital. "We're all challenged by the same thing: how to provide quick, quality, compassionate care."

The focus on ER waiting times comes as use is rising in Connecticut and around the country.

From 1997 to 2007, ER visits increased nationally by 23 percent, the Journal of the American Medical Association reports. The National Center for Health Statistics reports that mean ER waits also climbed -- from 46.5 minutes in 2003 to 58.1 minutes in 2009.

In Connecticut, total ER visits increased by 55,000, or 3.2 percent, from 2011 to 2012, according to the state Office of Health Care Access annual hospital report. The six hospitals with the highest total ER volume were Yale-New Haven, Hartford, The Hospital of Central Connecticut, Middlesex, MidState and Lawrence & Memorial hospitals.

More patients are using the ER because the U.S. population is aging and the number of primary care physicians has not kept up with the demands of sicker people, said Dr. Robert C. Solomon of the American College of Emergency Physicians.

"More people are going to the emergency department because...no one gets turned away," Solomon, an ER doctor in Pittsburgh, said.

Since Hartford is the only Level 1 trauma center in Greater Hartford, it may have longer waits than other hospitals, said Rebecca Stewart, spokeswoman for Hartford Hospital.

The other Level 1 trauma center in Connecticut, Yale-New Haven Hospital, has an average ER wait of 41 minutes, according to the data.

Dr. Jeffrey A. Finkelstein, chief of emergency medicine at Hartford Hospital and The Hospital of Central Connecticut, said Hartford is shortening its ER waits through several steps, including having a fast track for people with minor ailments.

The new Quick Track or Q Track program is also working well, he said, as other patients are monitored in a "results-pending area with 14 comfortable chairs, coffee and a big-screen TV." Q Track is novel, he said, because "it speeds the care for everyone."

Elaina Schultz of Tolland said she has used Rockville's ER often when her husband, Chuck, has fallen or had low-blood sugar, and that he is usually seen in five to 10 minutes, rather than in the 60-minute average reported in federal data. Sometimes, though, he's waited up to eight hours for lab results or to be admitted, she said.

"It's almost like they've forgotten you're there," she said. "But if every cubicle is filled and patients are out in the hall, you have to use your common sense and realize they'll help you when they can."

Hospitals are also working to cut down on the waiting time to be admitted as inpatients from ERs. Stamford Hospital uses a "bed ahead" approach to speed up admissions from the ER. A doctor starts the hunt for a regular hospital bed as soon as a condition that will require admission, such as a hip fracture, is diagnosed, said Dr. Jayson Podber, chairman of Stamford's department of emergency medicine.

Podber said his ER has also reduced its average waiting time to 19 minutes by having a doctor perform triage. "It's more efficient to have one doctor at the front, meeting ambulances and ordering the appropriate tests,'' he said.

Posting times

In 2009, Middlesex began posting its ER waiting times on a website, which now has 36,000 direct hits a year, spokeswoman Peg Arico said. Dr. Jonathan E. Bankoff, medical director of Middlesex's emergency department, said it's one way for ERs to market their services. "We welcome, if you will, a bit of friendly competition," he said.

Windham, The Hospital of Central Connecticut, Johnson Memorial Hospital in Stafford and St. Francis Hospital and Medical Center in Hartford also post ER waiting times on their websites. The Hospital of Central Connecticut also has an iPhone app for patients to check waiting times, and St. Francis even lets patients "check in" to the ER through its website.

Stamford's Podber said one downside to posting times is that it can give patients a false expectation. "It's not like you're taking a number at the deli," he said. "People come in who are a higher priority and need to be seen more quickly and that gets lost.

This story was reported under a partnership with the Connecticut Health I-Team (www.c-hit.org).