Q: Why does marijuana have a bad effect on some people and not on others?

A: While pot mellows most people out, everyone has heard of someone who barricaded himself or herself in a dorm room after a few bongs hits in college. Why do people react so differently to the same drug?

The question itself may be something of a fallacy. Cannabis is not a single drug — it contains dozens of compounds, and they appear to have varying, and sometimes opposing, effects on the brain. Tetrahydrocannabinol, or THC, and cannabidiol, or CBD, have been the subject of some intriguing research. In 2010, researchers showed that pretreating people with a dose of CBD can protect against the less pleasant effects of THC, such as paranoia.

In a similar 2012 study, participants took pills that contained only one of the two chemicals, rather than the combination that you receive in cannabis. The subjects who took THC pills were more likely to suffer paranoia and delusion than those who took CBD.

The researchers’ interpretation is that THC may undermine our ability to ignore routine, unimportant stimuli. Ignoring the ordinary is an important skill — we can’t function if every chirping bird or billboard grabs our attention and refuses to let go. Focusing obsessively on every meaningless detail in the environment may contribute to the paranoia that some pot users experience.

The differing effects of THC and CBD partially explain why some marijuana strains — which differ in the ratios and amounts of THC and CBD — are believed to provide giddy, highs, while others are thought to mellow the user.

There is probably also a psychological element in addition to the neurochemical explanation. Consider the effects of alcohol: There are mean drunks, loud drunks, amorous drunks, withdrawn drunks, teary drunks and many more kinds. There are no differences in the drug itself so there has to be another explanation.

One theory is that some people don’t care very much about the consequences of their actions, even when they’re sober. When these people drink, they get aggressive.

Several other personality characteristics, such as anxiety levels, have been suggested as explanations for how people behave when intoxicated. Most of these studies are based on laboratory scenarios that don’t mimic well the drinking experiences you get in the wild.

In a 2010 twin study, researchers attributed one-third of the variation in alcohol-induced aggression levels to genetic factors. The research was based on self-reporting, though, and the ability to estimate our own anger and aggression levels isn’t necessarily consistent from person to person.

Although the research hasn’t settled on simple explanations, it’s clear that some combination of personality traits, genetics and experience affects how people respond to intoxicants. You can’t blame it all on the drug.

– Brian Palmer, Slate