SANTA FE, N.M. (AP) - Derek Graham’s downward spiral was fueled by alcoholism. He had no relationship with his 9-year-old daughter or his wife. His job suffered - until he ended up in court.

Graham was among a handful of drug court participants who urged lawmakers last week to keep funding for drug courts in New Mexico, a state that has consistently had among the highest rates of substance abuse-related deaths in the nation.

New Mexico spends about $9.5 million on drug courts, with $2.5 million coming from a special account within the Administrative Office of the Courts. A budget proposal floated by lawmakers calls for keeping spending flat. Gov. Susana Martinez’s recommendation would trim that account, which pays for a host of special court services, by more than $1 million.

Funding for drug court programs is included in the special court services category, which includes multiple components such as drug courts and court-appointed special advocates and attorneys.

The governor’s budget recommendation does not propose cuts in funding to the drug court programs and is in line with funding the agency used in the previous fiscal year, her office said.

The decision on how the office allocates money for special court services is its alone, Martinez’s spokesman Mike Lonergan said. He added that the governor supported the drug courts program.

Administrative Office of the Courts Director Arthur Pepin told legislators that courts are legally obligated to provide services but that drug court services are discretionary. Thus, if funding for special court services is cut, he said, drug courts would take the brunt of any reductions.

Court officials used Graham and other program participants to put a human face on the need for drug courts.

Sporting a “Drug Courts Save” button and a “Support Our Courts!” sticker on his lapels, Graham, a 54-year-old real estate broker from Las Cruces, recounted his experience in a drug court program in Dona Ana County 15 years ago. Without it, he told lawmakers, “I would have been in jail today, costing the state money.”

New Mexico’s drug courts serve about 1,025 participants. Court officials estimate the loss of funding in the office’s court services account would result in about 300 fewer participants and ultimately higher costs for the state. Court administrators say costs per drug court client for counseling and rehab are about $22 per day, compared with $93 a day for state incarceration and $65 at county jails.

Graham and others say getting the money is an issue of public safety.

“The more people that you can rehabilitate and change their behavior, the fewer people that are going to be out there drinking and driving,” Graham said.

Rep. Jimmie Hall, R-Albuquerque and House Appropriations and Finance Committee deputy chairman, told court officials that members hope to get them more money.

The main assignment for lawmakers during the 60-day session is hammering out a spending plan for the state. Thanks to dropping oil prices, they have about $60 million less than anticipated for spending increases on education and other government services in the next fiscal year.