Please consider disabling it for our site, or supporting our work in one of these ways

A new generation of indigenous scientists is teaming up with communities, instead of treating them like guinea pigs.

The Akimel O’odham (Pima), a group of Native Americans from Arizona, have one of the highest rates of type 2 diabetes in the world. More than half the adults are affected, and while diet and lifestyle factors certainly contribute, scientists have long suspected that the community carries genetic variants that also affect their risk. Since 1965, the tribe have been intensely studied by researchers from the National Institutes of Health. This work has been a boon to the outside world: It was instrumental in clarifying the heritable nature of type 2 diabetes, and its connection with obesity. But for most of that time, the Akimel O’odham have been passive participants in the research of their lives. The NIH had promised to fund research and develop services that would improve the health of the community. But preventative studies only started in the 1990s, some three decades in, and health programs were small and delivered through the existing Indian Health Service. Meanwhile, a significant amount of money went into studying type 1 diabetes—a disease that mostly affects people of European descent.

Disgruntled, the community withdrew from their partnership with the NIH in 2003, and instead signed a $5 million agreement with a non-profit organization called the Translational Genomics Research Institute (TGen). The team have since published at least eight papers highlighting unique genetic variants that are specifically associated with type 2 diabetes in the Akimel O’odham; they are also looking other conditions that affect the tribe like kidney cancer. Speaking at the 2015 meeting of the American Society for Human Genetics (ASHG), Krystal Tsosie from Vanderbilt University said this case exemplified how indigenous groups are taking charge of their fates in the world of modern genetics. “The Tribe approached the researchers, not vice versa,” she said. “The researchers are more like consultants.” The Akimel O’odham dictated the goals of the project right from the start and retained control over their own samples, effectively loaning them to TGen, who acted as temporary stewards. TGen, meanwhile, agreed not to do any studies beyond the bounds of their agreement, or to distribute samples or publish data without the community’s consent. A tribal elder even blessed the TGen laboratory and its staff. “We’re indigenizing genomics. Our presence alone is doing that.” This case stands in stark contrast to the most infamous collision between genetic research and Native American culture. In the 1990s, scientists from Arizona State University collected samples from the Havasupai tribe to study the genetics of diabetes but, without their knowledge, also used those samples to study schizophrenia, inbreeding, and migration patterns. When the Havasupai found out, they successfully sued the university for $700,000 and banned its researchers from their land. This case, and others, have created an atmosphere of distrust, as Rose Eveleth covered for The Atlantic earlier this year. This pall might also help to explain the relative absence of indigenous groups in genetics research. “Why is that?” asked Keolu Fox, from the University of Washington School of Medicine. “Were we invited to the party and said, ‘No, thank you,’ or were we not invited at all? It’s a combination.”