Brokers are supposed to be paid by insurance companies once a policy is in place. Brokers feel pain of Obamacare

Add insurance brokers to the list of people stymied by HealthCare.gov.

And it’s not just a headache. It’s their income.

Story Continued Below

Some brokers are waiting for the site to be fixed before they deal with clients using it. But those that are sticking with the arduous online enrollment journey are facing a new question: Will I get paid for this?

“It’s almost like they don’t like the insurance agents being involved. That’s what it feels like,” said Kelly Fristoe, a broker from Wichita Falls, Texas.

Brokers say their clients are having trouble entering the right ID numbers in the balky website — and that’s what’s needed for the health plan to pay them.

( Also on POLITICO: Full health care policy coverage)

Agents who have completed training and registration for the federal marketplace can help individuals and small businesses sign up for exchange plans. Federal navigators and in-person assisters are also trained to help. But brokers say they’ve been dealing with insurance for years, and have expertise that lets them walk clients through the complicated new health plan terrain and explain it at a level that will really help people understand the specifics of their options.

Brokers are supposed to be paid by insurance companies once a policy is in place and the first premium payment has been made. Brokers have contracts with the plans on their fees — and there can’t be incentives to move people outside the exchanges.

“If you want our guys to participate in the exchange and help people enroll … you’re talking about a lot of time and resources on their part, which they’re happy to do provided that they’re compensated for their work,” said Diane Boyle, vice president of government relations for the National Association of Insurance and Financial Advisors.

But those brokers’ identification information is slipping through the HealthCare.gov cracks.

PHOTOS: 10 Sebelius quotes about the Obamacare website)

In the chaotic days after the rollout of HealthCare.gov, many brokers were told by call center operators that they could not, or would not, enter a broker’s identification, or the “national producer number.” In other cases, the numbers seemed to be recorded — but then they got caught up in the problems with the corrupted “834” files that the exchanges send to the health plans with enrollment information.

Boyle and other broker advocates were told Nov. 8 by the Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight that call center operators had been notified of the mistake and instructed to accept brokers’ numbers. The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services has urged the call center assistants to record a broker’s identification number during three-way calls with agents and their clients and has encouraged agents to notify the agency if they still encounter problems.

Still, brokers say problems persist. Just last week, Fristoe was helping a client of four years sign up for an exchange plan when a call center operator told him that she could not enter his number. After being unable to resolve the problem on the phone, he and the customer gave up on the Web enrollment and switched to paper.

It can be even harder when consumers start enrollment by themselves and then reach out to a broker midway through the application, said Jessica Waltman, senior vice president of government affairs for the National Association of Health Underwriters. That may be an option for some of the hundreds of thousands of people who have completed applications online but haven’t picked a plan.

WATCH: Best lines from Obama’s ACA mea culpa)

People who started the application — without the broker — can’t go back to enter the ID number if they end up seeking a broker’s help. Without it, the broker doesn’t get credit — and if there’s a problem, the consumer protections wouldn’t be in place either, Waltman said.

“If they want to take action against somebody, they can’t because they’re not going to know who they are,” she said.

Boyle said she has been in touch with CMS about the problem. But until there’s a solution or a good work-around, brokers may prefer to focus on their existing clients than to take on new clients trying to navigate a confusing new system. But that extra help may be what’s needed, Boyle said, in helping uninsured people sign up.

Boyle said brokers may be thinking, “If I’m not sure I’m going to be compensated for additional outreach, why would I go in that direction?”

Brokers insist that it’s in the interest of Health and Human Services — not just the interest of the brokers — to get the problem fixed and enlist the brokers’ help in meeting the target of getting 7 million covered by the end of March.

“If they’d just loosen up and let the agents be involved, then we would be able to show that we can get those numbers up to where they want those numbers,” Fristoe said.