The Bay County Sheriff’s Office arrested Raymond Charles Wagner, 35, in connection with several armed robberies of area businesses and hotels.

On December 23, 2013, the Tom Thumb Convenience Store on Back Beach Road was robbed by a male that brandished a firearm.

On January 2, a white male armed with a handgun and wearing a wig robbed the Hampton Inn at 13505 Panama City Beach Parkway. Information was developed that the suspect possibly departed the scene on a black motorcycle.

On January 10, a white male armed with a handgun and wearing a wig and fake moustache robbed the Sugar Sands Hotel at 20723 Front Beach Road.

On January 16-17, the Bay County Sheriff’s Office and Panama City Beach Police Department conducted a joint operation conducting surveillance on area hotels in reference to the recent beach area robberies.

On January 17, at approximately 8:30 pm, the Panama City Police Department responded to the Ramada Inn at 4306 US 98 in reference to a robbery involving a white male wearing a wig.

On January 18, shortly after midnight, a BCSO Patrol Sergeant observed a motorcycle, matching the description of the one possibly seen during the Hampton Inn robbery, in the area of Front Beach Rd and Joan Avenue. The motorcycle was being followed by a white Chevrolet Tahoe. The Sergeant observed the motorcycle park at a restaurant, and the driver entered the passenger side of the Tahoe. A traffic stop was conducted, and the passenger, Raymond Wagner, fled the area on foot. Investigators with BCSO and the Panama City Beach Police Department responded to assist. Following a brief foot pursuit, Wagner was apprehended.

The investigation led to the execution of a search warrant at the Executive Inn. During the course of the investigation, a handgun, wig, fake moustache and clothing consistent with clothing worn during the robberies was seized. Wagner confessed to the four robberies. It was determined that the motorcycle that Wagner was driving had been reported stolen.

Wagner was charged with Armed Robbery and was booked into the Bay County Jail. Additional charges are anticipated.