Is Denver’s Biennial of the Americas a massive, cultural gathering that just happens to shine a bright light on the city? Or is it an elaborate marketing campaign for our ambitious metropolis masquerading as a hemispheric festival of art and ideas?

As the event enters its third incarnation, with parties, exhibits and high-powered panels kicking off Tuesday, it is shaping up as a little bit of both, though neither one in particular.

In fact, the event’s biggest boosters, with Gov. John Hickenlooper leading the pack, are claiming success on both fronts. This biennial is a multi-tasker, a good fit for the age we live in.

“One of the intentions of the biennial was to have people in Denver and Colorado think about their community in different ways, to be more global, more sophisticated,” said Hickenlooper, who did all he could while mayor of Denver to support the nonprofit event’s start in 2010.

But if business people make connections during the course of meetings, or if artists land work or universities recruit foreign students, well, that’s just the way of the world. And it’s the real power behind the kind of global confab the biennial aspires to be, modeling its various parts after the annual World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, the Venice Biennale or the Aspen Ideas Festival.

“If you’re all at the same conference, there’s an understanding that you’ll take meetings with everybody you can,” said Hickenlooper. “There’s a huge amount of networking going on that pays for the ideas and the culture.”

That thinking keeps the biennial on a mission to be all things to all people.

It specializes in art, setting up world-class exhibits in Denver’s best galleries. But it also specializes in politics and commerce, with flashy panels at the Ellie Caulkins Opera House, moderated by celebrities like Tina Brown and featuring assorted global go-getters, like former Chilean President Ricardo Lagos, Nature Conservancy CEO Mark Tercek and Nora Volkow, director of the National Institute on Drug Abuse.

There’s also a behind-the scenes emphasis on social issues. The biennial hosts a series of day-long “clinicas,” not open to the public, where on-the-ground leaders in education, technology, health and economics chat amongst themselves on international issues.

The variety gives the biennial substance — the quality is high, the subjects serious — but it can be its worst enemy as well. Organizers acknowledge the event still suffers from an identity crisis. Five years in, too many people still ask, “What is the biennial?”

That makes it a tough sell, despite its good offerings, and this go-round might be particularly challenging.

Two years ago, the biennial included large-scale artworks downtown. There was a giant wooden tower on Speer Boulevard, for example, and an artist-made “hotel room” on a large crane in a parking lot on 14th Street. You couldn’t miss it.

This year, the events are more subtle and largely indoors, at the Museum of Contemporary Art, the McNichols Building in Civic Center, a Biennial Pavilion set up in a new office building in LoDo. People will have to come to the biennial instead of it coming to them.

The event has upped its marketing and social media, and it has worked hard to make a name for itself. Slowly, it’s making headway. “Folks are starting to understand how everyone can benefit from this,” said biennial CEO Erin Trapp.

She points to growth in both programming and sponsorship. This year’s budget is $3.5 million, about a third more than the organization reported spending in 2013.

Other local organizations are getting with the effort. The Denver Art Museum, Clyfford Still Museum and Newman Center for the Arts are doing coordinated programming. The Bonfils-Stanton Foundation, an important funder of local culture, stepped in with a $125,000 grant for the art program.

More significantly, the biennial is drawing international backing for the first time, a marker, Trapp says, of its growing reputation. Among the 2015 sponsors is Brazilian mega-bank Itau.

“We have the largest commercial bank in Brazil as a sponsor,” she said. “People are paying attention.”

Still, the biennial is keeping its options open. It wants to draw big crowds this week, but doesn’t want to be thought of just as a party for intellectuals or a Colorado pep rally.

Unlike other cultural gatherings. like the Whitney Biennial in New York or the Spoleto Festival in Charleston, S.C., this event was originally powered by bureaucrats and not artists, and there’s interest in working all the angles.

Last summer, the Biennial of the Americas led a mission from Denver to Mexico City that was as much about touring cultural sites as it was about helping Colorado businesses get a piece of the action as Mexico’s government works to privatize government-run industries.

Next year, there’s talk of a similar trip to Rio de Janeiro. “We’re in it for the long haul,” said Trapp.

Ray Mark Rinaldi: 303-954-1540, rrinaldi@denverpost.com or twitter.com/rayrinaldi