Buy Photo Westchester Clounty Executive Rob Astorino (Photo: Mark Lungariello/The Journal News)Buy Photo

A federal appeals court has sided largely with the federal government in a longstanding battle over housing discrimination, ruling that it can give away more than $5 million in grants earmarked for Westchester County because the county failed to satisfy a requirement in an affordable-housing settlement.

The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ruled Friday that the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development can reallocate block grants totaling $5 million that were supposed to go to Westchester for fiscal year 2013.

The court also ruled that HUD can continue to withhold $750,000 in grants from Westchester for 2011.

Related:Westchester plays "small ball" to increase affordable housing

The judges ruled, however, that Westchester can still appeal a decision on $5 million in grants for 2014 and ordered HUD to hold onto that money until all legal actions were exhausted.

"As a condition for the distribution of millions of dollars in ... funds, HUD required the County to analyze whether the zoning laws in some of its municipalities were exclusionary and, if so, to develop a plan to encourage these municipalities to change their laws. When the County did not comply to HUD’s satisfaction, HUD with held the County’s funding," the judges wrote in the decision, which agreed with a lower-court finding that the federal agency had the right to withhold the funds.

The dispute between Westchester County and HUD stems from a 2009 affordable-housing settlement. The settlement requires Westchester to build 750 affordable-housing units in mostly white communities, and to produce an analysis of local zoning codes to pinpoint exclusionary practices. HUD has rejected the county's analysis, though, and held back federal grants meant for projects in the county as result.

The three judges, José A. Cabranes, Reena Raggi and Richard C. Wesley, said that, while their decision means that HUD can withhold funding, they were not taking sides on the larger issue of housing discrimination in Westchester.

"It bears emphasizing that this decision does not mean that any of Westchester County’s municipalities violated the Fair Housing Act or engaged in discrimination on the basis of race," they wrote in the 52 page decision. "In short, there has been no finding, at any point, that Westchester actually engaged in housing discrimination."

Westchester County Executive Rob Astorino said in a statement that the ruling "vindicates our fight to protect home rule and local zoning."

Astorino has proposed a local program to replace money withheld by HUD. The county is no longer seeking additional federal funds under the Community Development Block Grant program to avoid further pressure from HUD to dismantle local zoning.

Read or Share this story: http://lohud.us/1KCbKQh