A protestor carrying an image of Turing Pharmaceuticals CEO Martin Shkreli in a makeshift cat litter pan, AIDS activists and others are asked to leave a New York lobby during a protest highlighting pharmaceutical drug pricing. A Senate committee launched an investigation last week into drug price hikes by Turing, Valeant Pharmaceuticals, Retrophin Inc. and Rodelis Therapeutics. (AP Photo/Craig Ruttle, File)

Today’s mood: Both chambers are in recess. Congress on Tuesday passed the National Defense Authorization Act after months of negotiations between the House and Senate, PowerPost’s Karoun Demirjian reports. A previous version of the annual defense authorization bill was vetoed by President Obama over its use of the so-called overseas contingency operations fund to boost Pentagon spending. The Senate this time passed the bill with a veto-proof majority.

Headlines

Valeant’s underinvestment in lobbying was ‘a meaningful mistake’: Drugmaker Valeant, which is facing congressional investigations into its drug pricing practices, has spent less on lobbying than similar drugmakers, Bloomberg reports. Bill Ackman of Pershing Square Capital Management, a major shareholder of Valeant, called the drugmaker’s underinvestment in lobbying “a meaningful mistake.” Valeant spent $60,000 during the third quarter of 2015, compared to two pharmaceutical companies closest in market share, Shire Plc and Endo International Plc, which spent $320,000 and $

260,000 during the same period.

Colleges flex lobbying muscle: Colleges and universities in 2014 employed more lobbyists than any other industry except drug manufacturing and technology, and their influence in Washington is growing, The Wall Street Journal reports. From the story: “Over the last two decades, the higher-education industry has beaten back dozens of government proposals to measure its successes and failures. It has killed efforts to tighten rules for accrediting schools, defeated a proposed requirement to divulge more information about graduation rates and eliminated funding for state agencies that could have closed bad schools. The proposals had support from both sides of the political aisle.”

The Hill profiles Joel White, president of the Council for Affordable Health Coverage, a coalition of business groups, insurers and healthcare providers aiming at lowering costs. The group is focused on pushing “smaller-scale, bipartisan changes” to the Affordable Care Act to help small businesses, and is not endorsing Republican efforts to repeal the entire law.

TripAdvisor hires Akin Gump lobbyists: Online travel website TripAdvisor has hired its first outside lobbyists as it pushes lawmakers to look at the alleged practices by some airlines of withholding booking information from travel sites, The Hill reports. From the story: “The online company and industry trade groups have argued that some airlines are restricting price and flight data information from outside websites in order to divert bookings to their own websites, potentially driving up the price.”

Comings and goings

The National Federation of Independent Business (NFIB) today named its new president and CEO Juanita Duggan. The trade group represents 325,000 small and independent business owners. Duggan, currently the president and CEO of the American Apparel & Footwear Association, will succeed NFIB president Dan Danner in February.

Arent Fox has selected Cristina Carvalho as firmwide managing partner. Carvalho, a Washington-based intellectual property attorney, is the first woman to hold the position at Arent Fox. She will start her three-year term in January.

White House associate counsel Daniel Dominguez is rejoining Latham & Watkins after two-and-a-half years in the Office of the White House Counsel.

New lobbying contracts

Chevron Corp. has hired Sidley Austin to lobby on oil and gas legislative and regulatory issues.

Walgreens has hired Brownstein Hyatt to lobby on issues related to provider status for pharmacists, the Pharmacy and Medically Underserved Areas Enhancement Act, and corporate tax reform.

Salt Lake Community College has hired Patton Boggs to lobby on issues related to higher education policy and funding and workforce development.

The Pharmaceutical Care Management Association has hired Hayes Health Policy Strategies to lobby on legislative and regulatory matters matters involving health care, Medicare, Medicaid, issues related to the Affordable Care Act and its implementation, pharmacy benefit issues, and prescription drug costs.