Four out of five firefighters nationwide are overweight or obese, and roughly half of all firefighters who die in the line of duty each year are killed by heart attacks.

But now a group of health-conscious firefighters is trying to change that with a charity it founded called 555 Fitness, which provides daily workout plans — and even free exercise equipment — to thousands of firefighters across the country.

The workouts are designed to not only burn fat and build cardiovascular endurance, but also to prepare firefighters for the challenge of wearing 65 pounds of gear as they climb staircases, break through walls and carry out rescues.

Lt. Robert Piparo, the vice president of 555 Fitness and a certified CrossFit coach, spoke to The New York Times after a grueling workout at the New Brunswick Fire Department in New Jersey.

Q: Why are so many firefighters out of shape?

A: We work crazy schedules, and our sleep cycles are very interrupted. I’m a father of two. My wife works full-time. I could be up all night at a fire, and my wife has to work the next day. So when I go home, I’m Daddy Day Care, and I may not be going to the gym that day or having a good nutrition day.

Q: Has exercise traditionally been encouraged by fire departments?

A: In general, it’s been one of those things where if guys worked out, they worked out. If they didn’t, they didn’t.

Q: Why is functional fitness so important for firefighters?

A: You could be here at the station and go from a dead sleep state to running into a burning building. The National Fire Protection Association says that we have to be at a fire within five minutes of the alarm. So you go from a resting heart rate to about 150 beats per minute in five minutes.

When you go to a regular gym and do 20 minutes of walking on the treadmill and then do a back and biceps routine, your heart rate is never really climbing. But functional fitness training involves full body movements, and it involves an up tempo.

About halfway through our workouts, your heart rate is at max-effort level. But you still have to dig deep to finish. It’s just like in a fire.

Q: Can you walk us through the workout?

A: Today, we did a four-man-style workout. We took a hose that weighs 15 pounds, and one man would put that on his shoulders and run up and down our staircase. He was essentially our timekeeper: After he was done with four rounds of running up and down the stairs, we would all switch stations.

From the steps, you move over to the battling ropes — except we don’t use ropes, we use a fire hose. Then you go over and do box jumps. But instead of using a box, we use the back bumper of our fire engine, which is about 26 inches off the ground.

Finally, we did a farmer’s carry with 32-gallon foam pails. The foam sloshes around inside, so when you’re doing this exercise, it’s building your grip strength.

Q: Can anyone do these workouts?

A: Definitely. A lot of people who go on vacation follow the workouts because they can easily do them in their hotel room or gym. We post different workouts geared toward different activity levels, from beginner to the elite athlete level. And every day we also post what we call an Honor WOD or workout of the day — that honors one of the 343 firefighters killed on 9/11.