With sickening suddenness, the second-largest insurer on New York’s health care exchange is kaput at the end of the month — leaving 215,000 New Yorkers scrambling to secure new coverage.

Among them are 250 patients at Manhattan’s Memorial Sloan-Kettering who had selected Health Republic as the only plan on the exchange that included the renowned cancer center.

In all, one in five New Yorkers who enrolled on the state’s insurance exchange are affected — and all have until next Sunday to find a new health plan, or go without for all of December.

With the clock ticking, Gov. Cuomo must ensure that no patient is left behind — and then make full public accounting of how it was that his Department of Financial Services, which regulates insurers, failed to see this disaster coming even as others did.

Health Republic stood on shaky financial footing from the start, amassing reported losses of $130 million in 18 months.

Regardless, the fledgling nonprofit co-op kept signing up patients attracted by its bargain premiums, while losing money on each and every one.

State regulators insisted they were clueless that insolvency loomed until late September, when they told Health Republic to wind down operations as insurance policies expired.

On Oct. 30 — after concluding Health Republic had understated its financial woes — officials deemed the numbers dire enough to order near-immediate closure.

Exchange administrators moved posthaste to instruct stranded patients to sign up for new plans, barraging them with letters, emails and phone calls.

Is there a Plan B if not everyone lands a new insurer? Officials won’t say. What about those cancer patients, who get only a 60-day reprieve before losing coverage? Officials can’t say.

A product of Obamacare, Health Republic has failed as the President’s signature health insurance program enters terra incognita nationwide.

The Affordable Care Act gave birth to 23 nonprofit health insurers, including Health Republic, with $2.4 billion in start-up loans. The starry-eyed premise of Washington Democrats was that the nonprofits would serve as low-cost competition for profit-making health insurance giants.

New York’s failed co-op alone got a $265 million loan and a later $90 million cash infusion, likely to never be repaid.

So far, 11 co-ops have gone belly up after being denied additional funding by congressional Republicans set on proving Obamacare a failure.

Wall Street analysts had warned months ago that most co-ops were dominoes waiting to fall, lacking the cash and firepower to compete against insurance industry powerhouses.

Where was Cuomo’s Department of Financial Services? The governor must provide a full independent autopsy after all former Health Republic customers are safely reinsured.

Present diagnosis: This was one hell of a costly experiment, in terms both financial and human.