‘It Stops Here’ campaign to focus on support for victims

Follows Sunday Telegraph ‘Man Up’ campaign which urges men to speak up against violence

Cases have rised by 30 per cent in five years

DOMESTIC violence victims will for the first time be “case managed” from co-ordination crisis centres to be set up across the State as a part of a radical overhaul of State government’s response system.

A State-wide database will be established with details of victims and incidents to be shared among police, health-workers and welfare agencies.

Police will also be required to file “risk identification” assessment after an incident to trigger a range of actions from changing locks on doors, calling a crisis meeting to offering legal advice and emergency housing.

The It Stops Here strategy, to be unveiled today, is aimed at stopping victims from having to retell their stories to lawyers, doctors and police while offering greater protection against an offender.

The strategy follows The Sunday Telegraph’s Man Up campaign, which urged men to speak up about domestic violence and to shun abusers - as well as backing Assistant Commissioner Mark Murdoch’s plea for women to trust police to take action against abusers.

It is also the result of a relentless campaign by Sydney psychologist Nanette May, who was left fighting for her life after being attacked by man she met through an online dating service.

In 2011 a scathing NSW Auditor-General’s report slammed the former Government for failing victims with a lack of co-ordination among agencies and little focus on violence prevention.

In September this newspaper revealed the number of domestic violence cases had risen by 30 per cent in the past five years to 130,000, and police are now spending up to 40pc of their time on domestic violence matters.

The Sunday Telegraph can reveal the first two of up to 24 new Central Referral Point centres will be established in Wentworth in southern NSW with a second in Orange in the State’s central west.

The sites were chosen based on the high rates of domestic violence in the surrounding suburbs.

The NSW Police Domestic Violence Liaison Officers (DVLOs) and the Women’s Domestic Violence Court Advocacy Services (WDVCAS) will be responsible for implementing the new referral pathways in the launch sites.

NSW Minister for Women Pru Goward said the framework represented biggest change in the approach to domestic violence in recent years.

“It Stops Here puts victims of domestic and family violence at the centre of the system so that they can access specialised services and the support they require,” she said.

“This framework is the Government’s response to the clear and immediate need to protect vulnerable women and families. It strengthens our approach to violence prevention by changing the way we deliver services and prevent perpetrators from reoffending.

“The It Stops Here reforms have been drawn from various sources including existing evidence, agency experience, the wisdom of service providers and, most importantly, the views of those who have experienced violence.”

In 2011 the Auditor-General’s report said: “Domestic and family violence damages too many people in our community,” the report said.

"Organisations do not have a strategy for working together across the State in response to domestic and family violence."

“There is no shared understanding between organisations of each other’s roles in providing a more responsive system that encourages people to seek help and provides them with support when they do so.”

Domestic violence is the single greatest cause of death, ill health and disability for women aged under 45.

In 2012, NSW Police recorded almost 30,000 domestic violence-related assaults.

The Government received more than 200 responses containing over 700 pages of feedback from the community on how to improve the system.

Other initiatives in the It Stops Here strategy includes a trial whereby offenders who become the subject of an Apprehended Violence Order (AVO) are given legal advice to help them understand their obligations to bring down the number of breaches

DOMESTIC VIOLENCE HOTSPOTS* 1.BOURKE – 4,295 per 100,000 head of population 2.WALGETT – 2,705 3.MOREE PLAINS – 1,679 4.COONAMBLE – 1,258 5.WENTWORTH – 1,061 6.INVERELL – 949 7.WELLINGTON – 894 8.HAY – 814 9.LACHLAN – 787 10.FORBES - 784 *NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research 2012

The strategy will be funded from the $9.8 million, three-year Domestic and Family Violence Funding Program, announced in 2012.

The overhaul of the response system addresses a key area of Nanette of concern among domestic violence victims such as Nanette.

Nanette, whose psychotic ex-boyfriend was deported to Germany after serving just three years of a 25 year sentence, said both the police and legal system failed to act prior her horrific attack in in 2006.

The assault, which occurred after Nanette returned from overseas where she had fled to escape for two months, was so horrific she suffered a brain injury, but it was the process after the attack that really failed victims, she said.

“Victims are the ones who get the life sentences. We have to watch out backs, change out names, protect ourselves and fight for our rights in a system that is very offender-biased,” she said.

“Anything that goes towards a more victim-centred approach is welcomed.

“I am still trying to get my life together.”

DOMESTIC VIOLENCE SNAPSHOT:

-Estimated cost of family violence alone to the Australian economy was $13.6 billion

-Domestic and family violence is estimated to cost the NSW economy more than $4.5 billion each year.

-Scathing NSW Auditor General report says Government’s not doing enough to address underlying problem

-In 2010, NSW Police responded to over 126,000 incidents involving domestic and family violence.

-Domestic violence present in half of all households where children are abused

-Nearly 20 per cent of homelessness is as a result of domestic violence

-Australian studies indicate that domestic and family violence contributes to death, ill health and disability among women under 45 years of age more than any other single factor, including smoking or obesity.

-Two in three victims of violence do not go to the Police

-On average, domestic and family violence kills 36 people each year, but only one in ten victims were known by Police to be in an abusive relationship in the year before their deaths.

-Nearly half of the 92,215 victims and 81,772 perpetrators, who came to the attention of Police in 2010 over family and domestic violence incidents, had a history of such incidents over the preceding five years.

-Twelve per cent (10,680) of victims had been victimised five or more times and 16 per cent (12,980) of perpetrators had been identified as perpetrators five or

more times.

-Domestic and family violence generates a significant amount of work for Government, including nine per cent of police call-outs, 13 per cent of persons charged in Local Courts and significant health and welfare activity.

*NSW Auditor General report into Domestic Violence 2011