In essence, the goal is to burden the government to a point where it collapses from its own weight, hence a new system of government emerges. Items in bold are well on their way to being accomplished while the remainder are already or mostly accomplished.

How to achieve this was truly revolutionary, at least for America. Richard Cloward and Francis Piven were both professors at the Columbia University School of Social Work. Their strategy was formulated in May of 1966 in an article in the liberal magazine, ‘The Nation’, titled “The Weight of the Poor: A Strategy To End Poverty”. Their strategy was to overburden the federal, state and local governments to break the back of free enterprise, thereby precipitating a new system of government.

Unlike groups such as the Black Panthers and the Weather Underground (Bill Ayers) where political change was to be achieved by violent means, Alinsky and Cloward/Piven believed in change from within the system. Their goal was nothing less than to ‘transform’ the United States into a secular socialist society.

The three main suspects in ‘60s/‘70s radical politics are Richard Cloward, Francis Fox Piven and Saul Alinsky. Since most of the leaders of the modern Democrat Party, especially Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton, are adherents to ‘60s/‘70s political views, let’s review the aspects and beliefs of the three people most responsible for those views and how the current national political climate was accomplished.

In 1971, Saul Alinsky, a communist organizer and writer, published his book, ‘Rules For Radicals’, which was dedicated to Satan. It is a treatment of how to achieve and spread radical liberal ‘theology’.

The 12 Rules For Radicals to achieve political change are:

Power is derived from money and people. Never go outside the expertise of your people. Organizations wonder why radicals don’t address the real issues. Radicals avoid things for which they have no knowledge. [The object is to break down the institution, not reform it.] Go outside the expertise of your enemy. Increase anxiety and insecurity. Make the enemy live up to its rules. If the rule is that every letter gets a reply, send 30,000 letters. [Use the system against the system.] Ridicule is man’s most potent weapon. A good tactic is one your people enjoy. They’ll keep doing it without urging. A tactic that drags on too long becomes a drag. Come up with new tactics. Keep the pressure on, never let up. Keep the opposition off balance. The threat is usually more terrifying than the thing itself. Imagination and ego can dream up many more consequences than any activist. Perception is reality. The possibilities can easily poison the mind and result in demoralization. The upshot is that organizations will expend enormous time and energy, creating in its own collective mind the direst of conclusions. Violence from the other side can win the public to your side because the public sympathizes with the underdog. [A well-known union tactic.] Never let the enemy score points because you don’t have a constructive alternative. Pick the target, freeze it, personalize it and polarize it. Go after people, not institutions. People hurt easier than institutions. This is cruel, but very effective.

Hillary Clinton wrote her senior thesis about Saul Alinsky and was offered a job by him. She did not take the position electing instead to go to law school, but she did stay in touch with him for years after. I doubt whether Alinsky would have extended Hillary Rodham a post if he felt she wouldn’t have been a good disciple.

Hillary Rodham Clinton is thoroughly a product of the sixties. Not as much culturally, but politically in its entire dimension. She grew up in the sixties, and probably, like most people, hangs on to a period of her life she thinks made her the ‘successful’ person she is.

Reviewing the Cloward/Piven strategy and the twelve ‘Rules For Radicals,’ can anyone deny this has been our political history these last fifty years? Can anyone deny this philosophy and these tactics have become mainstream in the Democrat Party?

The Democrat Party was traditionally the party of slavery, the party of segregation. Not one democrat voted for the 14th Amendment in 1868, giving blacks full civil rights. The KKK was born out of the Democrat Party as well as Jim Crow laws. In 1892, when the democrats won the House, the Senate and the White House, all Republican-passed civil rights laws were repealed.

In the sixties, the DNC decided to switch sides, but only to the point of winning power, not in solving any vexing issues. It was at this point that the socialists/communists decided to push the Democrat Party (remember the 1968 Democratic Convention) since they were more willing to listen to schemes of power-grabbing.

Fifty years later, after trillions of dollars spent on poverty programs, poverty is at the same rate it was when the ‘War on Poverty’ began. Has the problem been solved? Has Obama solved any major issues? Of course not. Without a good crisis and a promise, they realize that there is no reason to vote in their favor.

Now, much of the American public has been manipulated and taken in. Bernie Sanders, the blatant socialist, has 35% of the democrats’ approval and is giving Hillary Clinton, the secret socialist, a run for her money.

It is time we studied these rules and strategies and understand what they are trying to bring about. Donald Trump seems to have learned them and is throwing them back to the left from whence they came.

America was never about guaranteeing the equality of pay or outcome. It has always been about achieving the equality of opportunity, “life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness”. That’s what freedom and liberty is all about.