Joshua Schnoor, of Barnegat, set up a gofundme account on Saturday to help the residents of the home, Stacey and Ted Vadurro and their two daughters ages 6 and 2, because Schnoor's wife is a friend of Stacey Vadurro. Schnoor said it was a no-brainer to help the family out when he was contacted on Sunday evening by the Asbury Park Press.

Buy Photo Point Pleasant, NJ Fire at a single family one story home 1310 Sunset Avenue in Point Pleasant completely destroyed the home. 030815 Photo: Tom Spader/Staff Photographer (Photo: Tom Spader)Buy Photo

A fire displaced a family with two young children Saturday night and destroyed a Sunset Avenue house, according to the Ocean County Fire Marshal's Office.

The family was not at home when the blaze was reported at 6:40 p.m., said Ocean County Deputy Fire Marshal William Hobson, who was at the house Sunday morning to investigate. No one was hurt, but the house was destroyed, he said.

Fire investigators shoveled through charred debris Sunday morning in front of the house, which was missing a section of roof. Most of its front facade had burned away.

Neighbor Cecelia Rooney, 97, said she saw the flames Saturday evening.

"It's a shock," she said.

Fire companies from Point Pleasant, Point Pleasant Beach, Laurelton and Herbertsville responded to the fire, which remains under investigation, Hobson said.

Joshua Schnoor, of Barnegat, set up a gofundme account on Saturday to help the residents of the home, Stacey and Ted Vadurro and their two daughters ages 6 and 2, because Schnoor's wife is a friend with Stacey Vadurro. Schnoor said it was a no-brainer to help the family out when he was contacted on Sunday evening by the Asbury Park Press.

"Around 7:30 p.m. Saturday night, my wife got a call about what happened to the Vadurro's house and she went running over there to help them," Schnoor said. "When my wife got over there, she said everything is gone. I asked her if I should set up a gofundme account to help them. She said do it.:

And that's what Schnoor did.

As of 7:30 p.m. Sunday, March 8, almost 12 hours later, the gofundme account set up for the Vadurro's has raised over $12,000.

Schnoor also said that a list of items, which are described on the gofundeme account, are being accepted as donations for the Vadurro family and those items can be dropped off at International Tan, located at 2428 Bridge Ave in Point Pleasant during normal business hours.

Staff writer Sherlon Christie contributed to this report. Visit app.com later as more details become available.

Amanda Oglesby: 732-557-5701. aoglesby@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1BVCPv5