Sunday's front-page article "Doctor Deficit" by Jennifer Graham was right on the money. However, one very important point was not mentioned. In my 30-plus years of practicing primary care as a general internist, the single-largest impediment to patient care has not been reimbursement, pre-authorizations for procedures and medications, the development of health care as a multilayered business bloated with overpaid executives, or even Obamacare, although these have certainly been an issue; it has been the electronic medical record.

This was in the works long before President Barack Obama was in office. As opposed to other "industries," in which computers have improved efficiency, they have done nothing of the sort in the provision of care to patients. In the five-plus years since almost all physicians were forced by CMS (The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services) to adopt computerized medical records, most primary care physicians have been spending far more time looking at computer screens after seeing patients than in direct patient care. The result is that almost all general internists I know, in Utah and elsewhere, are still seeing fewer patients per day than they did five years ago, many of us 25 percent fewer.

This is not unique to a particular computer program or to a particular health care system. This is also not just about a learning curve, learning a new way of doing things and then moving on. This is a problem that persists and only shows signs of getting worse. Every time CMS introduces a new level of "meaningful use" (affectionately known among us by its more apt name, meaningLESS use) under the false assumption that it will improve patient care, time spent in data entry goes up.

Thus far there has been absolutely NO evidence that electronic medical records have saved money and, more importantly, no evidence that they have improved patient care. In the experience of all physicians I know, in primary care and otherwise, computerized medical records have in fact proven an absolute detriment in terms of quality of care. As one of my emergency-medicine colleagues put it, "I spent four years in medical school, years in residency, and have been involved in direct patient care for 30 years and have finally reached the pinnacle of my career: I am a data-entry specialist."

The effect of this issue on patients is less access to the physicians who ARE still in practice (let alone those in training, as mentioned in Graham's article), who are already seeing fewer patients in spite of working more total hours than ever before. This is just another example of the unintended consequences of poorly thought-out and poorly executed government intervention in health care, which affects patients and physicians alike.

Kevin Johnson, MD, lives in West Jordan.