Eldora and Nederland residents voice concerns about ski area's growth

Suzanne Kelso works as a Nederland shop clerk and lives in the tiny mountain hamlet of Eldora, affording her perspectives on how an expansion of Eldora Mountain Resort is viewed by its two closest neighbors.

"I would say the majority in Eldora do not want it (the expansion) at all," said Kelso, a 27-year resident of the rustic high-country community. "I think that they definitely feel for the environment, No. 1, taking more trees out. No. 2, noise pollution. Those are the obvious reasons."

But as a clerk at Nature's Own in downtown Nederland, specializing in fossils, minerals, science-related toys and other gifts, she can also speak from a second perspective.

The presence of the resort "definitely makes a difference in our (Nederland) business in the wintertime," she said. "It's good, as far as bringing business to town. It would make a huge difference if the ski area wasn't there."

Kelso finds herself coming down to the same verdict that has been expressed by many, including the Boulder County commissioners, who voiced it in two letters issued last spring. Rather than expanding at all, she said, the resort should focus on improvements that stay within its existing special use permit boundary — commonly referred to as the "infill" alternative.

"I think it's good where it's at," Kelso said. "You can do too much, to the point that it may backfire on you. I think Eldora as a ski resort is at that point where they would be doing too much. Why fix it if it is not broken?"

Advertisement

Eldora planning director Jim Spenst is adamant that standing pat is not an option.

"The master plan, when we upgraded it and it was accepted by the Forest Service, was under the premise that we needed to refine our operation and take full advantage of the terrain that is available to us in order to be sustainable as a business," Spenst said.

"When you look at all of our competitors, whether it be Winter Park or Loveland or Arapahoe Basin or Copper Mountain, people are adding terrain. They're adding on-hill facilities, and in order for us to continue to be a sustainable, viable business, we have to add more terrain, we need to upgrade lifts and we need to have an on-mountain restaurant facility."

Traffic impacts examined

The U.S. Forest Service will soon issue a finalized environmental impact statement, plus a draft of its final decision on Eldora's plans, which will open a 45-day window during which objections can be filed with the agency.

The resort is not proposing a broad expansion of its permitted boundary. If green-lighted, it could push by about 70 to 75 acres toward Middle Boulder Creek on the north, and less than 30 acres toward Jenny Creek on the south.

A number of environmental groups have urged that the resort stay within its current boundaries, including the Indian Peaks Group of the Sierra Club and the Middle Boulder Creek Coalition — itself, an association of several different environmentally minded entities.

Potential expansion effects on the Middle Boulder Creek watershed and wildlife corridors through Eldora have caught the attention of many. But an aspect of an expanded resort's impact that could be more immediately noticed by those in the Nederland-Eldora area relates to traffic.

Area residents were alarmed this past Monday, President's Day, when about 9:30 a.m., cars were reportedly backed up from the resort to the traffic roundabout in downtown Nederland.

The Forest Service and SE Group, the third-party consultant contributing to the environmental impact statement, performed an examination of the traffic impacts to nearby communities under two specific variations of the expansion plans — dubbed "Alternatives 2 and 3," with Alternative 1 being no expansion at all.

It zeroed in on the intersection of Colo. 119 and Eldora Road, also known as County Road 130, which takes skiers to Shelf Road and the resort itself.

Looking at the traffic projections for the 10th highest-volume ski day of the year in 2035, comparing expected traffic both with and without either expansion alternative that is on the table, it was determined that "none of the alternatives result in 10th highest day volumes that would exceed CDOT's design capacity of 1,700 per hour for this segment of the highway."

The portion of the environmental impact statement dedicated to traffic, parking and air quality states: "Continued development in the residential areas surrounding EMR could lead to increases in traffic and emissions in the analysis area." It adds, "Impacts to traffic and air quality could result from construction activity as well as general increases in population in these areas."

And specifically on the topic of traffic, it notes that vehicles turning north onto Colo. 119 from Eldora Road late in the day "would experience greater and greater delays," which could be mitigated by stationing a traffic control officer there, as needed.

However, "There are no other irreversible and irretrievable commitments of transportation access resources associated with this project," the study states.

Proposed bridge

Under any expansion scenario — including no expansion — Forest Service documents show only about 3 percent of the resort's guests arriving by the RTD N bus route, and about 82 percent arriving by cars that are then parked there, with the rest showing up through other means.

But future traffic generated by skiers is not the only issue that has stirred concern locally. The expansion calls for 88 acres of new trails, and up to 164 acres of new gladed terrain — which will require the removal of trees. And that will mean many truck trips through the area.

According to the draft of the Forest Service's environmental impact statement, that could spell between 552 and 628 lumber truck round-trips in and out of the resort over five years, most of those coming in the first two years of an expansion project.

Of great concern to the people of Eldora — a population of 142 in the 2010 U.S. census — is a proposed bridge across Middle Boulder Creek linking the area near the bottom of a proposed new Placer Express detachable six-seat lift on the resort's north side to County Road 130. Some in Eldora fear this will spell additional unwanted traffic and heightened noise pollution in the bucolic area near the popular Hessie Trail.

"We don't believe that the bridge is going to adversely affect anything," said Spenst, the resort's planning director.

"It would be a restricted access bridge used for construction and for maintenance access in the summer, and in the winter it could be used for emergency egress to take people out, down the road to an ambulance in the town of Eldora.

"There are no plans to change the plowing of the road, or anything like that, and in the summer it would be completely secured so that only authorized people would be able to access that bridge. I think their concerns are unfounded."

Diane Brown was a year-round resident of Eldora for 18 years. She still lives there May through October each year and is former president of the Eldora Civic Association Board.

"We've done numerous surveys regarding ski area expansion, and the town is overwhelmingly opposed to any expansion that would come in our direction, and particularly Hessie," Brown said. "This is a real sore point."

Brown said there is skepticism over Spenst's contention that a Middle Boulder Creek bridge would pose no threat to the people of Eldora.

"We're talking about the future," Brown stressed. "Once they get a toe-hold there and punch out the trees and get it flattened out at the base, that's when it's going to start looking more enticing for them" to more thoroughly develop the north side of the resort, more heavily impacting the town of Eldora.

'Great value' in resort

Morgan Ruskay, a 1995 graduate of Nederland High School and former ski instructor at both Eldora and Aspen, lives just outside Nederland and fears the effects of expansion. And, as an avid alpine and nordic skier, she is convinced expansion isn't even needed.

"My concern with the expansion is that it's going to go into an absolutely beautiful area, the Fourth of July and Hessie area, and the (ski) terrain isn't going to improve that much. And then, there's all the stuff into Jenny Creek, the south terrain, which is a pristine area, and isn't going to hold the snow," Ruskay said.

"It's not going to be that great, and is really going to take away from the beauty of Nederland, Colorado, and Eldora."

Not voicing much concern about an Eldora expansion is Nederland Mayor Joe Gierlach. At a public hearing concerning the future of Eldora conducted more than a year ago, Gierlach said, "There wasn't any prevailing sentiment, as usual, in Nederland. There often isn't any prevailing sentiment in Nederland."

The mayor added, "We definitely have worse traffic, or more traffic and crowding, during leaf-peeping season. Last year, we had major traffic jams for that — far more than we've had during ski season from Eldora."

Whatever the fate of the Eldora expansion at the hands of the Forest Service, it will still have to surmount another hurdle, in that expansion would require an amendment to the facility's special use permit through Boulder County.

"We've been anticipating, trying to prepare for what might come from a future review scenario and timing as things move forward on this," said Boulder County Land Use Director Dale Case.

"There's a great value in having the ski area as a recreational amenity. But any expansion should be done in the least harmful way possible," Case said.

Charlie Brennan: 303-473-1327, brennanc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/chasbrennan