SAN DIEGO, August 9, 2014 – It was not boxing’s finest night with mismatches making a mockery of The Sweet Science, putting underdogs at risk for nothing more than maneuvering bankable competitors into position.

The favorites all won. This saves you the trouble of reading the several hundred words to follow as a form of protest. If you want the details, we live to serve.

Danny “Swift” Garcia was true to his name Saturday at the Barclays Center in Brooklyn. So was “Lightning” Rod Salka, hit by thunderbolts from Garcia, who dispatched Salka in short order with three knockdowns in the second round, the final one puttng Salka flat on the canvas after a body shot and a left hook to the head.

Garcia (29-0, 17 KOs) hopes the performance against Salka (19-4, 3 KOs) will make fans forget his lackluster outing against Mauricio Herrera in March, a fight many people thought Herrera won.

Garcia’s size and speed advantage made it the mismatch everyone expected, and Salka seemed like the one struck by lightning. Was it really necesssary for Salka to be sacrificed for this, despite him volunteering for it? No, it wasn’t. These mismatches aren’t good for boxing or for fighters who shouldn’t be in there despite their willingness and heart.

Garcia said he did what he was supposed to do. “No fight is easy in boxing unless you put the hard work in. I put the hard work in, and I got the W… It has nothing to do with my opponent. When Danny Garcia is at his best he can beat any opponent.”

Lamont Peterson (33-2-1, 17 KOs) toyed with Edgar Santana (29-5, 20 KOs) of Puerto Rico like a cat with a mouse for nine rounds. The ringside physician Dr. Barry Jordan finally stopped it at 2:47 of the round, which is permitted in New York. Santana proved he could take a punch, but not much else. Peterson landed 53 percent of his punches to keep his IBF title belt.

Peterson said of his outing, “I was able to show a lot of dimensions of my game. I really should have maxxed on the gas a little bit earlier and got him out of there. I’m not disappointed because I know who I am… It’s good to have a fight. I just wanted to have a fight, work on some things, build for the next one.”

Will fans now get the fight that should have taken place tonight, Garcia vs. Peterson? Peterson wants it; Garcia says he’s willing but that it’s up to manager Al Haymon. “I’m all about fighting the best fighters. I’ll leave that to Al Haymon. If he wants that, he can get it too. Al Haymon picked the hardest fights for me. He picked the fights I was supposed to win, he picked the fights I wasn’t supposed to win. I show up fight night. I have good days and I have bad days but I always find a way to win.”

Daniel Jacobs (28-1, 25 KOs) added another victory and another knockout win over an Australian fighter at the end of the fifth round against Jarrod Fletcher of Australia (18-2, 10 KOs). Jacobs came within a few seconds of getting his 14th first round knockout against Fletcher, but he proved he had some fortitude, steadying himself after the first knockdown to continue for several more rounds

Jacobs kept switching stances, and did serious damage with a right hook from a southpaw stance. He turned it on and moved in to finish Fletcher off for good. The victory makes him the first cancer survivor to hold a so-called title belt, the WBA Middleweight Championship. Gennady “Triple G” Golovkin is the legitimate title holder, designated the “super champion.”

Although perhaps not the pinnacle it was portrayed to be, it’s still impressive to see what Jacobs has overcome. Jacobs said after his family, “Coming back to the ring was my second biggest motivation. It pushed me through. I looked at cancer, I looked at being paralyzed as just another opponent. What boxing has taught me is just that mental strength, any opponent you have, just to overcome.” Jacobs said he hopes to inspire others to be grateful for life no matter what you go through.

Jacobs said he’d like to fight bellow Brooklyn native Peter “Kid Chocolate” Quillin at the Barclays Center in front of the hometown Brooklyn fans. Better Quillin than Triple G.

Australian contenders are on a serious losing streak in the U.S. Fletcher made it a third KO or TKO loss in a row after Daniel Geale lost by TKO to Golovkin; and after Blake Caparello was knocked out by light heavyweight Sergey “Krusher” Kovalev in two rounds.

Gayle Lynn Falkenthal, APR, is President/Owner of the Falcon Valley Group in San Diego, California. She is also a serious boxing fan covering the Sweet Science for Communities. Read more Ringside Seat in Communities Digital News. Follow Gayle on Facebook and on Twitter @PRProSanDiego. Gayle can be reached via Google +

Please credit “Gayle Falkenthal for Communities Digital News” when quoting from or linking to this story.

Copyright © 2014 by Falcon Valley Group