4663366

The defense of Planned Parenthood by the media and politicians is disheartening and disgusting. New videos released last week by the Center for Medical Progress prove that doctors and executives working for Planned Parenthood have committed gruesome crimes that make Dr. Gosnell’s clinic of horrors look tame. Planned Parenthood Federation CEO Cecile Richards has vehemently denied any charges of profiting over the sale of ‘fetal tissue’ a sanitized way of describing aborted baby body parts, yet the videos show clear evidence otherwise.

In the very first video by CMP, Planned Parenthood Federation of America’s Director of Medical Services Dr. Nucatola states between gulps of wine and mouthfuls of salad:

“We’ve been very good at getting heart, lung, liver, because we know that, so I’m not gonna crush that part, I’m gonna basically crush below, I’m gonna crush above, and I’m gonna see if I can get it all intact.”

This appears to be crushing evidence of a callous indifference for human life and the constraints of federal laws banning late term abortion on the part of PPFA’s leadership.

CMP footage of clinic directors haggling over prices, jokingly discussing luxury vehicle purchases from the resulting profits and gruesome images of bloody pie dishes, disprove critics who suggest the videos were heavily edited. Technicians are trained to sort through the body parts in the pie dishes with tweezers, separating and locating the valuable bits to secure them for sale to Stem Partners.

In anticipation of a video showing three top executives from Stem Partners at lunch discussing procuring babies born alive and killed for sale of their organs, the company secured an injunction preventing release of the footage. No matter, discussion of “intact remains” is included in other footage already released to the public.

Rocky Mountain Planned Parenthood of Colorado features prominently in the fourth video; as a technician sorts through fetal remains in a petri dish, their V.P and Medical Director negotiates the sale of baby body parts. In an unrelated development Alliance Defending Freedom filed a complaint against Rocky Mountain Planned Parenthood after learning of a 13-year-old girl brought in for an abortion by her rapist/sexual predator. Rocky Mountain Planned Parenthood performed the abortion but didn’t report the abuse. Criminal.

Then there’s the spending; $548 million dollars of taxpayer funds are sent to Planned Parenthood on a yearly basis. Another $612 million dollars earmarked for “reproductive health services” go to USAID for abortions abroad.

Senator Harry Reid, White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest and a host of politicians have begun trotting out the “you wish to destroy women’s health services” defense. Are they unaware that the Affordable Care Act provides for each and every service that Planned Parenthood does and all of the others that they do not?

Lest we forget, Planned Parenthood does not perform mammograms. They do perform cursory breast exams, which they call screenings, which most women perform on themselves on a monthly basis. STD testing, pap smears, prescriptions for birth control, can all be obtained from an actual doctor of obstetrics and gynecology through Medicaid, a plan through the ACA or at a free clinic of which there are over 9,000 operating in the U. S.

Planned Parenthood has begun circulating information to rally their supporters, some of whom are reeling with disgust from the latest allegations. They claim that they see 2.7 million patients a year, and defunding them would leave a gaping hole in the reproductive health care system. Of course there is an alternative that is more numerous than Planned Parenthood and comes without all of the intendant human body part trafficking baggage: Community Health Centers.

According to Planned Parenthood’s own website (accessed 7/19/205 before the so called “hacking”) they currently operate 666 facilities, some states having only one facility. In stark contrast there are 9,069 federally funded Community Health Centers operating in all 50 states.

Although the abortion giant has taken to whining about defunding efforts; don’t be fooled, they are a formidable enemy. Planned Parenthood has assets in excess of $1.4 billion and excess revenue of $124 million. The $528 million in taxpayer dollars amounts to roughly one third of their income. Planned Parenthood CEO Cecile Richards makes well over $500,000 dollars a year. Planned Parenthood is a funnel for taxpayer dollars to Democrats. In 2014, the abortion giant spent 15 million on Democratic candidates, which is why not one of the Democrats in the Senate or House is willing to join an effort to defund.

The affordable care act permits individual state exchanges to award grants to Planned Parenthood, prompting the Washington, DC exchange to award Planned Parenthood $375,000 dollars of taxpayer funds, kind of like a kickoff gift to celebrate the passage and implementation of the ACA.

Americans have had enough of the excuses and whitewashing of what is clearly an organized crime syndicate hell-bent on selling human baby parts for cash. Instead of crushing unborn babies for their parts as Dr. Nucatola so disgustingly described, we should crush Planned Parenthood out of existence, by defunding it and prosecuting its executives for their criminal behavior.