16.1 million Americans served in the Second World War. Amazingly, some of those veterans are still alive today.

Frank Levingston, who is said to be the oldest living World War II veteran, just celebrated a milestone birthday.

Levingston, who can still recall his Army days, turned 110 years old on Friday, Nov. 13, and says he is thankful to God that he is still here.

“I can remember the day I was inducted in the Army until the day I was discharged,” Levingston told NBC-affiliate KPLC-TV.

An Army private who served in Italy during the Naples-Foggia Campaign (which lasted from Sept. 1943-Jan. 1944), Levingston was discharged in 1945 according to The Associated Press.

“I’ve been through so many dangerous things and I’m still here. I’m thankful to the almighty God for it,” he also told KPLC-TV.

Born in 1905, Levingston grew up in Northern Louisiana as one of seven children. While he did not have much formal education growing up, he says that life lessons from his parents have stuck with him. For example, Levingston says that honesty goes a long way.

“Always be honest and truthful,” Levingston told KSLA News.

Levingston, who is known by many as “Uncle Frank,” says he still feels well and is thankful for each day.

“I think I’m one of the blessed ones,” Levingston said.

Levingston lives in Lake Charles, Louisiana, where his friend Pamela Gobert spends most days with him.

“He’s always got a kind word and he lets me know that sometimes it’s not how you start, it’s how you finish,” Gobert told KPLC-TV’s Erika Ferrando when the news station visited Levingston’s home.

Levingston spent the weekend following his birthday in celebration with family. He told KSLA News, “My family is my life.”

“Every great event that has happened over the last 110 years, he has lived through it,” Levingston’s great niece Shannon Levingston-McCowan also told KSLA News.

In honor of the special occasion, Levingston recently received a birthday letter and a thank you for his service from the White House.

“We trust you take enormous pride in everything you have accomplished and in the ways your service has touched the lives of others,” the letter reads, according to KPLC-TV.

Another World War II veteran, Richard Overton, is 109 years old and lives in Austin, Texas. Overton credits God for his long life.