“It’s ridiculous. It’s propaganda. And frankly, I’m sick of it.”

That is what Carly Fiorina, the former Chairman and CEO of Hewlett-Packard and 2010 candidate for the U.S. Senate in California, had to say about the Democrats’ so called war on women in an interview with TheIowaRepublican.com on Monday.

Fiorina admits that the gap between women voting for Republican candidates and those voting for Democratic candidates remains too large, but she’s hoping her latest political endeavor can help narrow the gap which might help swing control of the U.S. Senate back to Republicans for the first time since 2006.

Fiorina’s Unlocking Potential Project, or “UP” for short, is focused on six states, Iowa, Colorado, Michigan, New Hampshire, North Carolina, and Virginia. While the aim of the group is focused on helping the Republicans get better organized, utilize new technology, and better message to female voters, the group is focused on more than just helping elect female candidates like Iowa’s Joni Ernst to the U.S. Senate.

“Our workshops, our activities, our events are open to men and women. If you look at the states we are playing in, what you will see is that there are a whole verity of matchups,” Fiorina explained. For example, in Colorado, the group will engage voters in a race between two male candidates, while in Iowa the race is between a female Republican and a male Democrat candidate. The group is also active in New Hampshire were the Republican nominee will be a male running against a female incumbent.

“It’s really not about the gender of the candidate,” Fiorina said, “It’s really about the nature of the issues. It’s about how we talk about issues and how we make sure that we don’t continue to insult women as the Democrats are by suggesting they only care about abortion or birth control.”

Fiorina also was quick to point out the fallacy in the Democrats’ was on women. “The reality is that women don’t lack access to abortion and birth control, they lack access to opportunity.” She went on to say that, “Under this administration, women lack access to their doctor and healthcare thanks to Obamacare.”

Fiorina admitted that the Democrats’ war on women messaging has been successful because they make the claim with such insistence. She believes that it can be persuasive for Republican women to stand up and say that conservative policies are better for women. “It’s Democratic policies that hurt women, and the facts clearly support those statements,” Fiorina stated.

Fiorina believes that women are most influenced by other women they know. “We know that every issue is a women’s issue,” she stated. “That’s contrary to the Democrat propaganda that women care far more about reproductive rights [than anything else].” Fiorina believes that if Republicans equip women to push back hard on the war on women, they will have a persuasive argument and make a difference this November. The Unlocking Potential Project is attempting to unlock the potential of women in the political process, women as voters, and as persuaders in a way that hasn’t been done before.

“It’s about activating women,” Fiorina told TheIowaRepublican.com. “Specifically, what we want women to do is reach out to those women who are Republican leaning or occasional voters. Or reach out to independent women who are persuadable and talk with them about the issues.”

With Joni Ernst in a tight race against Democrat Congressman Bruce Braley, the group’s efforts could work well in Iowa where there hasn’t been an open U.S. Senate seat in forty years. Fiorina raved about the Republican nominee, stating, “Joni Ernst is precisely the kind of person that Iowans should want to represent them because she has seen life from [somewhere] other than Capital Hill – because she has served in so many ways.”

Fiorina also believes that it’s important to not to give Braley a pass because the Democratic machine is going to gear up to defend him by hurling ridiculous charges against Joni Ernst. “Why are they doing that?” Fiorina asked rhetorically, “Because it’s all they have.”

“Everything [the Democrats] are putting in their ads is either false or irrelevant,” Fiorina said. “But they can’t run against her record, so what do they do? They throw all this stuff at her. It’s propaganda. It’s scare tactics.” Fiorina pointed out that Braley and the Democrats have already attempted to use their war on women messaging against Ernst. “It’s ridiculous,” Fiorina said, “But they are going to keep doing it because, in the past, it’s worked.”

Unlike other groups that are attempting to influence the 2014 election by running television ads, Fiorina’s group is taking a different approach. “It’s not me coming in and telling these folks what to do. It’s me, our state director, and others, galvanizing resources and providing tools and training so that women who live here can talk to other women they know,” said Fiorina.

“We [Republicans] are under invested in the ground game and have been for sometime,” she admitted. “And yes, this is influenced in part by me having been a candidate before because the people on the ground matter. In the end, it’s all about who shows up to vote, said Fiorina. “While the air wars are important, in the end the most important thing is that people show up and vote,” she added.

“The choice is very clear,” Fiorina said of Ernst, “but we need to make sure that Iowans can see past all the propaganda and look at these two individuals for who they are and what they have done.” Fiorina believes that if Iowans are allowed the opportunity to decide between the two candidates on their merit, Republican Joni Ernst will be end up being the clear favorite.

Carly Fiorina is no stranger to high-profile races for the United States Senate. The former Chairman and CEO of Hewlett-Packard put her own name on the ballot in 2010 in her home state of California.

Fiorina wasn’t expected to defeat Sen. Barbara Boxer, one of the most entrenched liberals to have ever served in the U.S. Senate, but Fiorina campaigned hard, trumpeting her conservative philosophy despite campaigning in the bluest of blue states.

That year, Fiorina received more votes than any other Republican on the ballot across the country. Unfortunately, it wasn’t enough to defeat Sen. Boxer, but the loss didn’t sour Fiorina on politics. In fact, she’s more involved in Republican politics than ever before.

The Unlocking Potential Project is designed to assist the Republican campaign effort in areas where they typically struggle, like technology, grassroots organization, and engaging female voters. The organization’s website says its goal is to, “put boots on the ground and connect with women on a personal level.” Fiorina and her group are heading to Iowa and will hold a workshop designed to equip Republicans, men and women alike, to best support candidates like Joni Ernst and others on the ballot this fall.