Editor’s note: The following is a condensed version of commencement remarks that were to be made Saturday at Quinnipiac University to students who have completed graduate degrees from the College of Arts and Sciences and the Schools of Health Sciences, Medicine and Nursing.

Congratulations graduates. You have chosen well.

Both in choosing Quinnipiac and in choosing a noble career path — improving lives.

Now that you have chosen well, you need to be prepared to think big. Very big!

Advertisement

Tackle the most complex problems. You will create meaningful positive change, but in a complicated environment that is sure to create unintended consequences.

My career began 45 years ago, shortly after creation of the Medicare and Medicaid — two “think big” initiatives, indeed. These programs both created much needed health insurance coverage to the neediest of our population — the elderly and poor. It marked the beginning of unprecedented expansion and change in our health care delivery system. But there was also an unintended consequence — an explosion of cost. Hospitals expanded, pharmaceutical companies grew, technology exploded, compensation for healthcare professionals multiplied beyond anyone’s expectations.

Fast forward 50 years to the Affordable Care Act (AAC), designed in part to solve a problem thought to have been solved by Medicare and Medicaid — namely coverage for the uninsured. But the AAC is designed to solve another unintended problem of Medicare and Medicaid — exponential growth in cost without corresponding improvements in outcomes.

Nevertheless, you should still always think big. It allows you to drive massive change benefitting millions of people while at the same time creating entirely new challenges for the next generation to tackle.

My parents’ generation found a way to free us from the fear of polio — we young baby boomers were the first to be vaccinated as “polio pioneers.” We’ve also have made amazing progress in our ability to treat and survive both cancer and AIDS.

Now it’s your turn. We look to your generation to continue that progress — if I were a betting man, I’d wager you will free us from the dread of Alzheimer’s disease. I believe your generation can achieve a cure.

So think big.

While thinking big, you also should embrace change. Our health care delivery system needs change and Quinnipiac University is at the forefront, encouraging collaboration and inter-disciplinary teamwork. No one group has the answer but working together you can improve quality, improve outcomes and improve value.

Look at what has happened at Masonicare and throughout senior care, where there is now a full continuum of care for seniors in a place they call home. Home might be an independent living apartment, assisted living or a skilled nursing bed. The center of the universe is no longer the hospital, the physician, the insurance company or malpractice attorney. The center of our universe must be the patient.

You are the future of our industry, choosing service of others over service of self. If I’ve learned anything it is this — take care of others and they will take care of you, and success will take care of itself.

And while you embrace change, change is embracing you. My baby boomer generation is also graduating today — every day 10,000 of us graduate to the over-65 class. In 1950 when I was born, we outnumbered the 65-plus population by about 2.5 to one. By 2050, the world will be turned upside down and the boomers will outnumber preschoolers by 2.5 to one.

Your challenge will be to view us as individuals with compassion and caring. We will need your enthusiasm and objectivity. We need you to not give in to ageism. This will indeed be change worth embracing.

Finally today — care deeply. It will make the difference between having a job and having a career.

I spent almost 20 years working for an acute care delivery system. Patients came and went every three to five days. I’ve spent the last 16 years of my career at Masonicare where our patients and residents measure time with us in months and years.

What a great opportunity to get to know people, get to know their life stories, get to know how to add life to their years — not just years to their life.

Through my work at Masonicare I’ve gotten to know many of our residents, and, in turn, have gotten to know myself in a way I would have never imagined. Through these relationships I’ve gained a greater appreciation of the supreme importance of caring for one another.

I used to think my job was to improve the financial performance of Masonicare, but getting to know our residents personally changed all that. Our job is to maximize the potential of each and every person, including ourselves. This is what it means for each and every one of us to care deeply.

The Beatles understood this when they sang, “And in the end, the love you take, is equal to the love you make.”

Think big. Embrace change. Care deeply.

The rest will pretty much take care of itself.

Congratulations. We’re counting on you.

Stephen McPherson is CEO of Masonicare in Wallingford, the state’s largest not-for-profit provider of senior services.