A pizza delivery driver for Papa John’s was shot and killed on Indianapolis’ South-side on Friday night while he was delivering pizzas. The victim has been identified as 30-year-old Daniel Jaffke, not only a pizza delivery man, but also a local musician.

According to WISH, the Indianapolis Metropolitan Police Department stated that the incident had occurred around 7 pm in the 4100 block of Continental Court, just off Hanna and East Streets. Jaffke had reportedly delivered a pizza to a couple in the area. Shortly after receiving their food, the couple stated they went outside and found the man laying face down on the ground.

The Indianapolis Star reported that Jaffke was shot sometime after delivering the pizza, and according to lieutenant Chris Bailey of the Indianapolis Metropolitan Police Department, Jaffke’s black Jeep Laredo was stolen.

Jaffke was reportedly a vocalist and guitarist in several local bands. Family and friends are in a state of shock following news of his death. One of Jaffke’s cousins, Katelyn Rouse, described him as a very dedicated musician who loved everyone around him.

“He just wanted to reach as many people as he could through his music. He wanted to help people through his music,” Rouse told The Indianapolis Star. “It was a real emotional outlet for him, and it helped people along the way.”

This isn’t the first report of a pizza delivery man in Indianapolis who was shot and killed. WTHR reported that 49-year-old, John Sullivan, was not only shot and killed, but his car was also stolen after the attack. The report also stated that two men have been arrested for the murder and robbery.

The two individuals who where arrested in Sullivan’s murder were Jeremiah Roberts, 26, and Derek Romano, 22. Both were apprehended in Buffalo, Wyoming. Family and friends are still in morning over the lose of Sullivan. Misty Hall, Sullivan’s former sister-in-law, said the following:

“I want everybody to know that this was a great man. John was a great man. You could be a stranger and he’d help you. He was known for that, known for being very compassionate and kind.”

As of now, there are no connections between the shooting death and robbery of John Sullivan and Daniel Jaffke, though the similarities are eerie. WTHI has reported that Jaffke’s stolen Jeep has been recovered as of today. “The car was recovered in a parking lot behind a laundromat in the 1600 block of South East Street Saturday morning.” Police have stated that even though they have located Jaffke’s Jeep, they still don’t have any suspects.

[Image via Urbanspoon]