La Romana is a city of about 140,000 people in the Dominican Republic. It’s an increasingly popular destination for tourists craving the turquoise waters of the Caribbean and beaches with sugar-white sand.

Dreams La Romana, a gated, five-star resort, charges about $280 per night for a standard room.

Miguel Castro grew up in La Romana. He might as well have lived a world away.

“My family didn’t have a lot of things,” the Rockies’ promising, 21-year-old relief pitcher said. “The only money we’ve ever really had comes from me.”

Castro could throw a 97 mph fastball when he was 17 years old. Ismael Cruz, the Toronto Blue Jays’ director of Latin American operations, signed Castro for a $43,000 bonus when Castro was 18. Castro didn’t party or buy himself a sports car. Rather, he took care of his parents, who were having medical issues.

His mother, Yesenia Baez, needed a tumor removed. His father, Miguel Castro Sr., a journeyman boxer, had surgery on his prostate. Both are doing fine now. Until Castro received his signing bonus, his parents couldn’t afford their operations.

“Money doesn’t mean a lot to me,” Castro said. “What matters is my parents’ health and being able to help them. They are loving people for me.”

For the record, Castro did splurge on himself, just a bit. He bought himself braces. They came off last summer and his teeth are now shiny, white and straight.

Castro is a 6-foot-5, 190-pound string bean right-hander. The Rockies acquired him last summer as part of the trade with the Blue Jays that sent star shortstop Troy Tulowitzki to Toronto. Castro’s attacking nature on the mound, sizzling fastball, sharp-breaking slider and confounding changeup have made him one of Colorado’s top performers this season.

In six appearances, he has a 1.50 ERA with eight strikeouts and two walks.

Castro suffered a setback when shoulder soreness kept him out of last week’s series at Cincinnati and landed him on the 15-day disabled list Friday. The Rockies, however, don’t believe it’s a serious injury.

“Just some soreness,” general manager Jeff Bridich said. “We wanted to make sure and take care of it right away. We think he’ll be fine after some rest.”

If Castro stays healthy, adds muscle to his frail frame and continues to mature, he appears to be a potential closer.

“Everything Castro throws is special, not just his fastball,” veteran catcher Nick Hundley said at spring training. “He has a plus changeup and a plus slider too. And he’s extremely smart. He’s composed beyond his years. He just has to be more consistent. But there is no question he has the skills to be a front-line, late-game reliever.”

Bridich said the Rockies were unaware of Castro’s magnanimous gesture for his parents when they traded for him. What they did know impressed them enough. He displayed his talents early last season when he made his major-league debut with Toronto on April 6. At age 20 years and 103 days, he was the third-youngest player to debut in the majors last season. He notched his first big-league save April 9.

“It was very apparent for a young guy at the major-league level, and seeing how the Blue Jays handled him, that he was a very good person and a tough kid,” Bridich said.

After the Tulowitzki trade, the Rockies assigned Castro to Triple-A Albuquerque, where he went 2-0 with a 1.32 ERA in 13 innings. Recalled by the Rockies on Sept. 1, Castro struggled with his command. In five relief appearances he was 0-1 with a 10.31 ERA before he was shut down because of a sore back.

Castro has been playing baseball since he was 5. Asked what he loves about the game, he said through a translator: “I don’t have the words, it’s just something that runs through me veins.”

He is earning $507,500 this season, providing comfort for himself and his family that he never imagined.

“That’s pretty much every Latin American player’s experience in the majors,” said Rockies right fielder Carlos Gonzalez, who has taken Castro under his wing. “You get that big signing bonus and then the first big-league contract, and everything changes so quick. But whenever you can do something for your family, it makes you a better person.”

The Rockies have no worries that Castro will become too satisfied with his station in baseball. During spring training, Castro usually was the first player at the Salt River Fields facility in Scottsdale, Ariz.

“I would get there sometimes at 5 a.m., just walking around, sipping my coffee, and he would already be there,” Bridich said. “That stands out big time. He wasn’t there to mess around, or just act like a big-leaguer. He was there to get better.”