Gardner: Obamacare Continues to Hurt Colorado

Senator Cory Gardner (R-CO) spoke on the Senate floor about the impact of the President’s healthcare law on Colorado.



Click here to view related Website : US SENATOR CORY GARDNER Publish Date: 2016-05-21 << Previous Story Next Story >>

Reading: Gardner: Obamacare Continues to Hurt Colorado





1 2 3 >> PoliticalNews.me - May 21,2016 - Gardner: Obamacare Continues to Hurt Colorado



Washington, DC – Senator Cory Gardner (R-CO) spoke on the Senate floor about the impact of the President’s healthcare law on Colorado.













Remarks as prepared:





Mr. President, I rise to discuss the continued broken promises of Obamacare and the negative impacts this poorly planned law has had on my state of Colorado.





As Obamacare continues on a downward trajectory, Americans are the ones bearing the brunt of its failures.





Month after month, headline after headline, Americans are no longer surprised when they hear of another Obamacare disaster as they continue to foot the ever-increasing bill.





Fewer choices, less competition and higher costs.







The President assured Americans time and time again, not to worry, because if you liked your health plan, then you could keep it.







Coloradans quickly learned that this promise was far from the truth.







In late 2013 roughly 335,000 small-group and individual policies in Colorado were canceled due to requirements in Obamacare.





Unfortunately, the cancelations in 2013 were just the beginning. In January 2014 the Colorado Division of Insurance cancelled 249,000 plans because these plans didn’t meet the requirements of Obamacare.







Again in 2015, 190,000 plans on the individual and small-group market were cancelled. In total, according to the Congressional Research Service, over 750,000 health insurance plans in Colorado were cancelled between 2013-2015.





But that still wasn’t the end of it and Coloradans are still receiving cancellation notices.





Within the last months, two of the nation’s largest health insurers, UnitedHealthCare and Humana, announced their intent to exit the individual market place.





The UnitedHealth Group CEO cited that the marketplaces were a risky investment, and that UnitedHealth could not serve these exchanges on an “effective and sustained basis.”





This decision will impact roughly 20,000 Coloradans and beneficiaries of these plans can expect cancellation notices in July.







The disappointment and frustration over a cancelled plan that your family once enjoyed is made worse by the rising costs of the remaining plans.







Americans were told Obamacare would reduce costs for families, businesses and our government.





The Colorado Division of Insurance found that individual insurance premiums for 2016 on the Western Slope rose by an average of 25.8 percent.





One woman, interviewed by the Denver Post, living on the Western Slope saw her premium cost alone rise from $300 per month to $1,828 per month, or nearly $22,000 a year.





She says, “It’s actually like another mortgage payment. I have friends who are uninsured right now because they can’t afford it. Insurance is hard up here.”





An increase of nearly 26 percent is incredible, but in 2014, one study found that nearly 150,000 Coloradans saw their health insurance become 77 percent more expensive.





26 percent increases, 77 percent increases, as we approach new rates for 2017, it appears there may be no limit to the additional costs that Coloradans will have to bear as the result of this poorly conceived law.





Marilyn Tavenner, president and CEO of America’s health Insurance Plans who served as a key





Continued on next page ... 1 2 3 >>



<< Previous Story Next Story >>



Receive a free weekly news summary by email!





Select keywords to find additional stories on this topic:



OBAMACARE DAMAGING COUNTRY COSTS







Send This Story To a Friend Your Name: Friends Email Address: Your Email Address: Custom Message: Captcha: Please enter the string shown in the image



Publisher information protected by image generation.