CMS wants to unlock the potential of medication therapy management (MTM) through a new demonstration project that the CMS Center for Medicare & Medicaid Innovation (CMMI) announced on September 28.

The Part D Enhanced Medication Therapy Management model will test methods of optimizing medication use and improving care coordination among Medicare Part D beneficiaries in hopes of finding the most effective ways to attain the objectives of MTM programs.

CMS is granting basic, stand-alone prescription drug plans (PDPs) the flexibility to design enhanced MTM programs that include interventions beyond the traditional approach.

“By removing disincentives to invest in their MTM programs, CMS is encouraging plans to ‘right-size’ their spending on MTM strategies, including services provided by pharmacists,” a CMS spokesperson told Pharmacy Today. “As a result, plans may propose an expanded range of MTM activities, including contracting with pharmacists to provide enhanced engagement or other services.”

As exists in the current Part D MTM program, any financial compensation to pharmacists under this model would be provided by the participating PDP or contracted vendors, according to CMS. APhA has previously noted that this restriction has limited pharmacists’ opportunities for participation in Part D MTM.

The agency will launch testing in five Part D regions beginning in 2017.

‘Finding creative solutions’

CMS released a detailed report for all stand-alone individual market basic PDPs interested in participating in the demonstration. The report includes preliminary information about the model.

Key elements that CMS outlined in the announcement are in line with strategies APhA has advocated for in order to provide greater value to MTM.

“Finding creative solutions to make Medicare Part D MTM more robust and more effective has been one of APhA's core goals in recent years. CMS’s announcement promotes many of the strategies APhA has long advocated for, including better integrating MTM into patients’ overall health care. CMS’s initiative also aligns with the movement to value-based health care design,” APhA Executive Vice President and CEO Thomas E. Menighan, BSPharm, MBA, ScD (Hon), FAPhA, said in a statement.

CMS noted that a key element will be a “prospective payment for more extensive MTM interventions that will be ‘outside’ of a plan’s annual Part D bid, something APhA has long supported as well.

Currently, CMS requires Medicare Part D plan sponsors to account for MTM services as an administrative cost, which is included in the plan bid.

The model design will include individualized MTM strategies that could enhance the pharmacist’s role. These include, but are not limited to, team-based care delivery models, greater reliance on local pharmacists to identify at-risk beneficiaries and compensate the pharmacist for providing targeted counseling and other MTM services, reliance on prescribers and beneficiaries (or their caregivers) to identify at-risk individuals and refer them for MTM services, and allowing prescribers to order medication histories or comprehensive medication reviews in advance of appointments.

Aligning incentives

The Medicare Modernization Act (MMA) of 2003, which created the Part D program, requires that every Part D plan offer an MTM program in its benefit structure as a quality improvement feature. But CMS recognizes that MTM programs in Part D have not been fully realized, and additional payment incentives and MTM regulatory flexibilities might better achieve the key goals of MTM.

In an analysis of the demonstration on the blog of the journal Health Affairs, Lawrence Kocot, JD, LLM, MPA, National Leader of the Center for Healthcare Regulatory Insight at KPMG, LLP, wrote that: “Proactive approaches to improve care for Part D beneficiaries are neither incentivized nor rewarded by the current MTM program; rather, the emphasis is on procedural processes tied to CMRs and TMRs in order to meet uniform compliance standards for all patients.”

CMS said better aligned financial incentives and flexibility for basic, standalone PDPs to test interventions could include increased reliance upon the pharmacist as a trusted community resource to ensure that targeted beneficiaries are taking their medications accurately and appropriately.

“CMS believes that pharmacists serve a vital role in ensuring that Medicare beneficiaries receive and properly use the prescription drugs upon which they rely,” said CMS’s spokesperson.

CMS said that if the model is successful, plans that implement effective MTM programs will lower overall Medicare expenditures as well as improve patient outcomes. The agency said they expect applicants to propose multipronged MTM programs that target populations at high risk of medication-related issues with specific interventions and engagement strategies that are sensitive to different clinical, cultural, and socioeconomic characteristics of beneficiaries.

APhA is currently analyzing the announcement and plans to submit comments to CMS by the October 16 deadline.