By Aaron Krause, Norwalk Reflector, Ohio McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

Sept. 10 -- WILLARD -- During a special meeting Tuesday, city council voted to accept the firm Chapman and Chapman as the new administrator for the health insurance pool Buckeye Ohio Risk Management Association

City manager Brian Humphress said Willard is one of more than 20 entities that's part of the consortium.

The next step will come Thursday, when other BORMA members vote on accepting Chapman & Chapman as the administrator. If a majority approves the firm, it will become BORMA's new administrator. Humphress said Tuesday it's "unlikely" that a majority would turn the motion down.

Under Chapman & Chapman's administration, the health insurance cost per full-time Willard employee would increase 25 cents , from $5 to $5.25 per month. However, Humphress said Chapman & Chapman's services would save the city $1,650 over what the new rates would have been under other firms that were considered.

The change over to Chapman & Chapman requires a one-time fee of $10,000 to cover transitioning to a new system. But Humphress said that money will come out of BORMA's reserve fund.

On its website, Chapman & Chapman officials describe the company as "a regional employee benefits consulting firm with a national presence. We are privately owned and have a rich heritage of five generations with nine family members over 125 years (since 1886). We believe in, and practice, a nurturing and enabling environment for our associates. We find that this philosophy tends to attract clients with similar cultures. We are also members of NFP, which enables us collectively with 185 offices across 45 states to service over 40,000 corporate clients.

The contract with Chapman & Chapman would be good for five years and renewable for up to two additional one-year extensions.

In other business, council president Josh Gerber said the board will be prepared to announce the city's next manager at the 7:30 p.m. Monday meeting in council chambers, 631 S. Myrtle Ave.

At the last regular meeting, Humphress announced his resignation, complying with city council's request that he do so.

___

(c)2014 the Norwalk Reflector (Norwalk, Ohio)

Visit the Norwalk Reflector (Norwalk, Ohio) at www.norwalkreflector.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 356

[jetpack-related-posts]