Co-founders (from left to right) Brian Trautschold, Jared Houghton, Travis Truett Ambition Solutions

Ambition Solutions Inc., which makes a fantasy football-style app to gamify sales and other enterprise functions, has raised $2 million from SV Angel, Google Ventures and others, Venture Capital Dispatch has learned.

Founded in Chattanooga, Tenn., in 2013, Ambition went through Y Combinator’s winter class with the goal of raising a seed round and returning to its Tennessee roots to begin scaling.

“Chattanooga is a startup too. It’s totally rebuilt itself,” said Ambition co-founder Jared Houghton, referring to the southern city’s focus in recent years on providing fast Internet service and nurturing entrepreneurship. “It’s much cheaper to operate here and we get great talent.”

Seeded with $600,000 from Chattanooga venture incubator Lamp Post Group, Ambition aims to improve on leaderboards, badges and other trappings of early gamification efforts.

Ambition allows customers to define the things they care about for each employee function, like the number of leads generated, demos and deal closings, and then track them by pulling from emails, phone calls and other sources. In this way, each employee is assigned their own “ambition” score, allowing them to compete independently and as part of a team, despite having different jobs.

The startup is in the process of integrating its software to pull data from Salesforce.com’s platform and may explore other data sources as well, Mr. Houghton said.

Ambition sells the software as a service to companies for between $20 and $30 per employee per month.

Mr. Houghton said Ambition employs 13 now and he expects to hire another five or 10 during the next six months. Current customers include phone repair startup iCracked.com Inc. and logistics and shipping companies including Access America Transport Inc. and GlobalTranz Enterprises Inc.

“We [will] sell into Fortune 500 companies in Atlanta, Minneapolis and in Chicago,” Mr. Houghton said, adding the target customers’ locations were another reason for leaving Silicon Valley for Chattanooga. “It’s not like we’re a consumer app.”

Investors also include High Line Venture Partners, Redpoint Ventures, Promus Ventures, Initialized Capital, Acequia Capital and individuals including Paul Buchheit, Justin Kan, Ryan and David Petersen, Anand Swaminathan, Patrick and John Collison, and Bobby Goodlatte.

CORRECTION 6/4/14: This story was changed to correct the name of Ambition Solutions Inc.

Write to Lizette Chapman at lizette.chapman@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @zettewil