Customized TV Listings are available here: www.latimes.com/tvtimes

Click here to download

TV listings for the week of Jan. 11 - 17, 2015 in PDF format

This week's TV Movies

SERIES

Preposterous Pets This new series finds who have odd choices in their animal companions. 8 p.m. Animal Planet

MythBusters Al Jean, the executive producer of "The Simpsons," and the guys test things from the show. 9 p.m. Discovery

The Missing New evidence in the present day brings Tony, Emily, Julien and Mark (James Nesbitt, Frances O'Connor, Tcheky Karyo, Jason Flemyng) closer to learning the truth about Oliver's disappearance in the series finale. 9 p.m. Starz

Ghost Adventures This new episode visits Bell Witch Cave in Tennessee, where an alleged haunting has inspired a number of spooky films including 2005's "An American Haunting. 9 p.m. Travel

Transporter: The Series In this new episode Frank (Chris Vance) helps arrest a counterfeiter (Vlad Ivanov) whose fake medicines have been responsible for the deaths of children. 10 p.m. TNT

MOVIES

Cru Writer-director Alton Glass's 2014 thriller tells the story of high school athletes whose lives are changed one fateful night when they have a near-fatal accident. Keith Robinson, Sammi Rotibi, Antwon Tanner, Richard T. Jones, Alison Eastwood and Melissa De Sousa star. 7 p.m. BET

The Other Woman In this 2014 comedy Cameron Diaz play an attorney who discovers that her boyfriend (Nikolaj Coster-Waldau) has a wife (Leslie Mann), but rather than becoming enemies, the women team up to seek emotional justice. With Kate Upton and Nicki Minaj. 8 p.m. HBO

Sugar Daddies A college student is introduced to a world of older men willing to pay for "personal favors" in this 2015 drama. Taylor Gildersleeve and Peter Strauss star. 8 p.m. Lifetime

A Novel Romance Amy Acker, Dylan Bruce star in this new romance about a novelist who moves to Portland to cure his writer's block and falls in love with his biggest critic. 9 p.m. Hallmark

WEEKEND TALK

SATURDAY

Good Morning America (N) 7 a.m. KABC

McLaughlin Group (N) 6:30 p.m. KCET

SUNDAY

Today Sophia Bush. (N) 6 a.m. KNBC

Good Morning America (N) 6 a.m. KABC

State of the Union Terrorism and responses: Attorney general Eric H. Holder Jr. Paris terrorist attack: Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.); Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.). (N) 6 and 9 a.m. CNN

CBS News Sunday Morning Dean Kamen; Jerry Brown; Will Ferrell and Will Forte. (N) 6:30 a.m. KCBS

Fareed Zakaria GPS Paris terrorist attack: Bernard Henri-Levy; Natalie Nougayrede , The Guardian. Jihadists: Author Aayaan Hirsi Ali ("Nomad: From Islam to America"); author Maajid Nawaz ("Radical: My Journey Out of Islamist Extremism"); Hizb ut-Tahrir. Comparing Paris and Boston attacks: Phillip Mudd; Gen. Michael Hayden. (N) 7 and 10 a.m. CNN

Face the Nation Paris terrorist attack: Attorney general Eric H. Holder Jr.; Rep. Michael McCaul (R-Texas); Sen. John Cornyn (R-Texas); Michael Morell; Bob Orr. David Ignatius; Farah Pandith, Council on Foreign Relations. Panel: Ruth Marcus, the Washington Post; Peter Baker; Jim Vandehei. (N) 8 a.m. KCBS