When Ebola patient Thomas Eric Duncan was misdiagnosed in September and released from a hospital emergency room with what was thought to be sinusitis, he was advised to follow up with his own doctor.

Good advice. Except that as an uninsured foreign visitor, Duncan didn’t have a doctor. He would return to the same ER two days later with worsening Ebola symptoms that eventually claimed his life.

Having a personal doctor is an impossibility for many residents of Dallas County, especially those living in southern areas. The lack of doctors and of other health services is so pronounced in some neighborhoods that a county report calls the areas “deserts of medical resources.”

The 206-page report, “Horizons: The Dallas County Community Health Needs Assessment,” portrays a lopsided health care system, one in which residents of more affluent areas of Dallas County get easy access to the best care while the rest of the county does not.

It not only maps the “deserts of medical resources,” but also pinpoints an obvious result: high rates of early death.

“All of the communities with premature death rates above the Dallas County average are located in the southern side of the county,” the 2013 report states. “South Dallas’ rate is more than twice that of the county. ... Other communities with high rates include southeast Dallas, DeSoto, Lancaster, Wilmer, Hutchins, Seagoville and southwest Dallas.”

For example, cancer-related death rates were 32 percent higher in South Dallas than in the rest of the county. Death from diabetes was 139 percent higher in southwest Dallas than in North Dallas. And African-Americans had a significantly higher death rate from cardiovascular disease than other racial groups.

These are the people who go to the hospital emergency rooms when health problems can no longer be ignored. They have no primary-care physicians, in part because so few practice in their areas.

“It’s horrible,” said Dr. Chris Berry, a family practitioner who has worked in several inner-city clinics. “I see people in their 40s having strokes or losing legs to untreated diabetes. Sometimes, I get upset and I want to raise my fist to the physician community.”

People seeking treatment for minor illnesses have flooded Dallas County’s emergency rooms, according to the Horizons report. But the problem goes beyond a lack of primary-care practices in poor areas.

Other factors pushing people to the ER, it said, include a lack of health insurance and transportation; an inability to afford the co-payments required at a doctor’s office; and concerns about being unauthorized immigrants.

Living in poverty, barely able to pay the rent or buy food, can also reduce the importance of going to the doctor.

“If you are an individual or family with high stress — unemployed or struggling to keep the family together — you probably don’t pay attention to wellness checks. Health is not even on the radar,” said Sharon Phillips, chief of population health at Parkland Memorial Hospital.

Primary care has become the No. 1 reason people visit hospital emergency rooms across the county. More than 50 percent of local ER patients are treated for primary-care health problems, according to the Horizons report.

“Those include both unnecessary emergency department visits for minor, treatable conditions and visits for conditions that progressed as a result of not accessing timely treatment in an outpatient setting,” the report said.

The findings did not generate an outcry among local health authorities, who first saw the report in the summer of 2013. It was written by officials at Parkland and the Dallas County health department with assistance from New Solutions Inc., a New Jersey consulting firm.

The report, which was intended to help hospitals respond better to community health needs, clearly describes a dysfunctional system, one that inadequately serves nearly half of Dallas County’s 2.4 million residents.

“It is a sad norm how many people are suffering here,” Berry said. “But ... it’s sort of an accepted norm. There’s not a sense of urgency in the general population to fix this disparity.”

Dr. Jennifer Edwards, a co-author of the Horizons report, said she was not surprised by its findings.

“They’re not necessarily new problems pertaining to resources south of downtown,” said Edwards, who specialized in public health infrastructure at the county health department until she left to teach at the University of North Texas.

She added, however, that “it’s always helpful to have documentation of the gaps. We have an opportunity to improve access for people in Dallas. It’s very clear that south of downtown is missing out on primary care.”

The county’s public health system cannot keep pace with the uninsured population. “There are 1.1 million people in Dallas County who could possibly use Parkland’s services,” said Phillips, who oversees Parkland’s dozen community clinics. The hospital handled about 286,000 patients last fiscal year.

New patients are not turned away when they try to access the public system, said Phillips. But they must learn to wait for months to see a primary-care doctor, she said.

“We’ve extended our appointments as far out as six months out,” she said. The industry standard for such waits is three months.

Some hospitals have begun to push resources into areas of the county with few if any doctors. Children’s Medical Center Dallas has opened 10 primary care centers, called My Children’s, since 2012. One goal is reduce the strain on its overcrowded emergency department. Half of its new facilities are in southern Dallas County.

“There are so many children that lack access to primary care,” said Dr. Ray Tsai, chief medical officer of Children’s Health Medical Group. “Moving physicians into these areas represents a very specific and strategic investment.”

Methodist Health System has set up more than two dozen family health centers throughout the Dallas-Fort Worth area. Eight are in areas of southern Dallas County that lack primary-care alternatives.

“We understand the uninsured, because Methodist serves a lot of that population,” said Pam Stoyanoff, Methodist’s chief operating officer. “It would be best if they didn’t show up in the emergency room. They’re not getting continuous care, and that’s what they need.”

Methodist has been working with Parkland and Los Barrios Unidos, a West Dallas clinic, in hopes of attracting federal funding for a new clinic in southeast Dallas County, she said. No site has been chosen.

It’s not clear whether the Affordable Care Act will improve primary-care options in Dallas County, said Zachary Thompson, director of the county health department. Uninsured Texans living below the federal poverty level were supposed to be covered by Medicaid under the new law.

Texas political leaders, however, rejected a Medicaid expansion plan under the act, leaving the state’s poorest residents without coverage and, in many cases, without access to medical care.

“If Texas had chosen to expand Medicaid, that would have made a world of difference,” Thompson said.

Still, Dallas County’s uninsured population is believed to have shrunk from 28 percent to 22 percent since the law went into effect, said Sue Pickens Owens, Parkland’s director of population medicine and a co-author of the Horizons report. Mostly, the decrease involved people with incomes above the poverty level who nonetheless qualified for federal subsidies that helped them pay for insurance.

Referring to the lack of primary-care providers in many neighborhoods, she said: “There’s still a big need out there.”

Other safety nets have opened for poor Dallas County residents. They include dozens of church-based clinics that rely on donations and volunteer medical providers. Their patients are typically low-income or uninsured church members.

Small, independent nonprofits are thriving in some places where poverty prevails.

“The need is vast,” said Jenny Williams, executive director of Hope Clinic of Garland, which opened in 2002 and now handles up to 1,700 patients. The clinic has one full-time doctor, one part-time doctor, and 42 doctors who volunteer part time.

“We take care of people in the deepest levels of poverty in the community,” she said. “It’s a tremendous amount of hard work. But at the same time, it’s tremendously rewarding.”