ROSEMONT, Ill., Sept. 17, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- The Midwestern Higher Education Compact (MHEC) announced today its agreement with provider IXSolutions (IXS) for a private health insurance exchange offering direct access to affordable health insurance options to students at higher education institutions in 12 Midwestern states.

IXS is offered as a plug-and-play health insurance solution for institutions that do not or are unable to offer a school-sponsored plan. Using this solution will save administrative time in assisting students in selecting insurance and providing value by offering students access to a wide range of coverage options and additional IXS resources and personal support.

Student access to affordable health care coverage is closely aligned with MHEC's mission. MHEC sponsors a variety of programs to reduce costs and increase student access to college. "We want to make sure that every student on MHEC campuses can have access to health insurance," said Larry Isaak, president of MHEC. "IXSolutions offers a program that is easy for us to adopt and make available to each school in our region that wishes to offer an opportunity for students to purchase insurance."

The private exchange is available to any of MHEC's nearly 1,000 institutions within the 12-state compact, including two-year, four-year, and graduate-level higher education institutions. Once an institution enrolls in the program, students can shop for health insurance in an online marketplace that makes the confusing job of shopping for and purchasing health insurance a bit easier. IXS is also supported by licensed insurance professionals who can answer students' questions, determine if they are eligible for federal subsidies under the Affordable Care Act, and even help enroll them in coverage.

"We're delighted to announce this agreement with MHEC," said John DiVito, president and CEO of IXS. "Access to affordable healthcare is important for everyone, but students on college campuses sometimes get lost in the fray as they age out of their parent's plans or don't have access to group plans through family or work. Our solution makes it possible for them to quickly and easily get the coverage they need so they can focus on their education."

To learn more about IXSolutions, visit IXSHealth.com or call 855-563-6993.

About IXSolutions

IXSolutions was founded by the owners of Flexible Benefit Service Corporation (Flex), leveraging over 26 years of experience in the health insurance and benefits administration marketplace. IXSolutions offers organizations an affordable way to help consumers gain access to health insurance. For individuals and families, IXSolutions offers an easy way to shop and compare coverage options using the IXStore health insurance marketplace. Learn more at www.ixshealth.com.

About MHEC

The Midwestern Higher Education Compact is a nonprofit regional organization assisting Midwestern states in advancing higher education through interstate cooperation and resource sharing. MHEC seeks to fulfill its interstate mission through programs that expand postsecondary opportunity and success; promote innovative approaches to improving institutional and system productivity; improve affordability to students and states; and enhance connectivity between higher education and the workplace. Member states are: Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, and Wisconsin. Learn more at www.mhec.org.

This press release was issued through 24-7PressRelease.com. For further information, visit http://www.24-7pressrelease.com.



SOURCE Midwestern Higher Education Compact