President Barack Obama drew plenty of laughs Saturday night with jokes poking fun at Republicans as well as himself during a lively Gridiron Club and Foundation annual dinner in Washington, D.C.

Some of his chosen topics managed to do both.

The graying chief executive admitted getting crankier as he gets older.

"Next week I'm signing an executive order to get off my lawn," Obama joked.

In addition, Obama said, he's having trouble now with his morning brew. "Coffee really disagrees with me these days," he said, "which is why John Boehner just invited coffee to address the joint House."

Obama's standup routine drew laughs from more than 650 journalists, lawmakers, administration officials and others at the Gridiron's 130th gathering. At this traditional event, Washington gather annually for an evening of joke-telling and charity fundraising.

With the president providing the one-liners on behalf of his administration, Republican Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker and Democrat Virginia Gov. Terry McAuliffe represented their parties in the wisecracks.

Walker is consider a contender for the Republican nomination for president; McAuliffe is a former Democratic Party chairman and a longtime ally of Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton.

Here are 10 of the best jokes by Obama and others at the dinner, based on ones often repeated in media coverage of Saturday's event.

1. Obama noted that Walker remarked recently that he couldn't say whether Obama was a Christian. The president said his religion taught forgiveness and cracked, "So, Gov. Walker, salaam alaikum."

2. The president said he used to think he was technologically sophisticated until learning that Hillary Clinton kept her own email server at home. "Hillary has a server in her house!" he exclaimed. "I didn't even know you could have one of those. I am so far behind."

3. McAuliffe joined others in needling the presidential ambitions of Hillary Clinton. "If Hillary decides not to run ... I decided not to finish that joke," he said.

4. The Virginia governor also joked, "Are any of the Secret Service sober enough to drive me home?" That was a reference to recent reports that drunken Secret Service agents crashed a vehicle into a White House barricade.

5. Obama said he generally likes Boehner, and he noted talk of unhappy House Republicans planning a coup -- "or as Bill O'Reilly calls it, 'reporting from the war zone.'"

6. "I want to acknowledge the leader of the House Republicans, as soon as I figure out who that is." Obama said.

7. McAuliffe also got in on bashing the Fox News Channel talk host and allegations he exaggerated his war reporting. "Bill O'Reilly tried to be here, but he was pinned down by enemy fire." McAuliffe said, adding that suspended NBC News anchor Brian Williams was supposed to be O'Reilly's ride to the event.

8. Obama took aim at Walker, although he made fun, too, of his own changing views on some issues. "(Walker) punted on the question of evolution, which I do think is a problem," Obama said. "I absolutely believe in the theory of evolution -- when it comes to gay marriage."

9. On former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani's claim that Obama doesn't "love America," Obama joked: "If I did not love America, I wouldn't have moved here from Kenya."



10. Walker got in his own digs. "I believe that the president of the United States loves America and every American -- except Rudy Giuliani."

The Gridiron Club and Foundation, founded in 1885, has drawn every president after Grover Cleveland to its annual dinner at least once. Obama made his third appearance, having attended in 2011 and 2013.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.