LARAMIE — The math weighed on Colby Kirkegaard like a 2-ton anvil.

Entering his senior season at Wyoming last year, there wasn’t a drop of daylight on the team’s quarterback depth chart. Brett Smith began the season as one of the Mountain West’s most highly touted players, and Jason Thompson was Smith’s talented backup.

Playing time for anyone else at the position was a pipe dream.

“A lot of times I came home and said: ‘What am I doing here? I should just quit,’ ” Kirkegaard said. “That’s the obvious answer. You’re going to be the senior quarterback on scout team. It hurts your pride.”

Kirkegaard, an Arizona native who played one season at Phoenix College before transferring to Wyoming, decided to use 2013 as a redshirt season. Delaying his final year of eligibility didn’t offer the promise of the starting gig, though. Far from it.

When the Cowboys concluded a 5-7 season last November, Smith still had another year of eligibility remaining and Thompson, the obvious choice as Smith’s successor, had two more years. For Kirke gaard, it appeared it was clipboard deja vu.

“Colby had no hope of playing at all,” said Wyoming wide receiver Dominic Rufran, who graduated from Palmer High School in Colorado Springs.

Fast forward to Wyoming’s camp this past week, and the guy with no hope is poised to be the starting quarterback for first-year Cowboys coach Craig Bohl, thanks to perseverance and a fortuitous chain of events that finally gave Kirkegaard an opportunity.

First, Smith made the curious decision to forgo his senior season and enter the NFL draft. Smith went undrafted, was cut one week after signing a free-agent contract with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers and is now on the practice squad of the Canadian Football League’s Toronto Argonauts.

Then, Thompson transferred to Utah, where Dave Christensen, fired as Wyoming’s coach at the end of the 2013 season, is now the offensive coordinator.

All of a sudden, Kirkegaard’s sacrifice as a career backup gave him a prime opportunity, one enhanced by Wyoming’s transition from a spread offense to a pro-style, West Coast attack that better suits his strengths.

“If I had decided to look somewhere else,” the fifth-year senior said, “this is exactly the kind of offense I would have looked for.”

Bohl’s offense emphasizes sound decision-making from the quarterbacks, who are charged with mastering a bevy of audible calls to ensure proper play selection. Bohl, who was hired last winter after leading North Dakota State to three consecutive Football Championship Subdivision national titles, said Kirkegaard’s maturity has helped him grasp the scheme.

“He takes coaching well, and he owns the mistake,” Bohl said. “Many times the quarterback position has so many other people that function around them. Human nature sometimes says to point fingers at somebody else. He says, ‘I’m ultimately in charge of this group. If something goes wrong, that comes back on my watch.’ “

That accountability has endeared Kirkegaard to teammates. With Bohl aiming to instill a blue-collar culture where players take pride on “grinding every day,” a player who went to work behind the scenes for three years to earn a chance in the spotlight makes for a role model.

“It’s a complete inspiration to see a guy persevere through every situation he’s been through,” center Rafe Kiely said. “From being low on the depth chart to having his name not be out there, to fight through all that and overcome every obstacle he’s had, it’s really inspiring.”

Though Bohl hadn’t officially named his starter by the end of the Cowboys’ first week of camp, he made it clear Kirkegaard was the front-runner.

But Kirkegaard isn’t ready to celebrate, not with daylight still peering through the depth chart.

Asked if he could envision what it would mean to start when Wyoming begins its season at home against Montana on Aug. 30, the animated 23-year-old suddenly became quiet.

“Not yet,” he said, his voice barely above a whisper. “Not yet.”

Nick Kosmider: 303-954-1516 or nkosmider@denverpost.com

Did you know?

The top two quarterbacks on the Wyoming depth chart, Colby Kirkegaard and Tom Thornton, played for high schools 13 miles apart in Arizona. Kirkegaard threw for 5,083 yards and 47 touchdowns during his career at Arcadia High School in Phoenix. Thornton was a dual-threat quarterback at Marcos de Niza down the road in Tempe, Ariz., where he threw for 2,500 yards and 20 touchdowns as a senior in 2011.

Updated Aug. 10, 2014: Due to an editing error, an earlier version of this article misspelled the surname of Wyoming’s quarterback in the headline. He is Colby Kirkegaard, not Kierkegaard.