Barvetta Singletary, a Howard U graduate, followed her dream of helping ruin health insurance for millions of Americans and then try to shoot her boyfriend.

Singletary started out as a policy director for the Congressional Black Caucus' James Clyburn before moving on to becoming Special Assistant to the President. She also, "played an integral role in crafting the landmark healthcare law, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and Health Education Reconciliation Act."

Now we know why ObamaCare is so great. A psycho played an integral role in it.

The White House has placed an aide to President Obama on unpaid leave after she was charged with shooting a gun at her boyfriend, an officer with the U.S. Capitol Police, during an argument. Barvetta Singletary, 37, who is a special assistant to Mr. Obama and also holds the title of House legislative liaison, was charged with assault and reckless endangerment after allegedly threatening and shooting at the man after having sex with him at her home in Upper Marlboro, Maryland. “We are aware of the matter and have temporarily placed the employee in question on unpaid leave and revoked her access to the complex until we have more information,” a White House spokesperson said.

How much more information does the White House really need?

Of course Barvetta had extraordinary qualifications to get where she did. I'm kidding. This is the Democratic Party. She's the daughter of a Democratic official.

She is the daughter of Councilwoman W. Jeanie Brown-Burrows.

Meanwhile the Capitol Police is another nepotism gig and her boyfriend appeared to be doing quite well for himself.

The incident began Friday morning at Singletary’s home in Upper Marlboro, Md., after she and the officer argued, according to police charging documents. Singletary asked the officer about another woman he was dating and left her house to search his Cadillac Escalade for his cellphones, the documents state. When she found the officer’s phones, she also retrieved his service weapon in his bag and demanded that he give her the passwords to his phones, charging documents state. The officer ran back to the house, and Singletary followed, later pointing the gun at him, police said. “You taught me how to use this; don’t think I won’t use it,” police said Singletary told the officer. “Your phone is more important than me holding this gun on you?” Singletary then fired at the officer and missed, the documents state. The officer eventually fled, and “the defendant was observed wiping the gun down with a towel,” according to charging documents.

At least she learned something from this administration. If you commit a crime, cover it up fast.