Am I the only person in South Florida who has known people who died because they couldn't afford health care? I doubt it, but we don't share their stories, and that anonymity makes it all too easy for our elected officials in Tallahassee to detach the reality of pain, suffering and death from the policy and budget decisions they make about health care.

So, Florida's health care "safety net" remains frightfully frayed.

My friends, Evelyn and Susan, worked hard well into their 50s. Evelyn, a secretary, was married, divorced and had a son. For several years, she and her son were carried on her ex-husband's health insurance.

When that coverage ceased, she found a job that included health insurance benefits. The "perk" vanished with her wages when she was laid off. When she developed a persistent cough, she consulted a doctor who ordered an MRI. Friends rallied and raised the $1,000 needed to pay for it. ("Private pay" patients don't get insurance-network discounts). The verdict: early-stage lung cancer — curable, if treated.

With no insurance, Evelyn couldn't find a "provider" willing to treat her as a charity case. She had made too much money working during the previous year to qualify for Medicaid or Palm Beach County's tax-supported health care program.

Her cancer grew. When the cancer became untreatable and thus "life-threatening," she was admitted to a hospital as an emergency patient. She died in a hospice care.

Susan never married. She eked out a living buying and renovating low-rent apartments. When the local economy tanked, she lost her tenants, income and apartments. She found a job at a nursing home and, then, as a live-in caregiver.

When her stomach pains began, she thought she had an ulcer. She sucked on antacids, sought advice from co-workers and periodically stopped eating. The pain spread to her abdomen. The final diagnosis: colon cancer, another treatable condition — for those with money or insurance. Having neither, she died a few months after turning 65 and finally qualifying for Medicare but too late.

With timely treatment, Susan and Evelyn would still be living, productive members of society. Instead they are the symbols — victims, really — of Florida's long-running, frequently callous and, this year, stupefying political debate and budget impasse over expanding Medicaid.

Florida's House Republicans are dug in against expansion. Gov. Rick Scott is railing about suing the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to stop its "gun-to-the-head coercion" to push Florida "deeper into Obamacare."

Only Senate President Andy Gardiner appears to be capable of keeping his cool. He's championing creation of a Florida Health Insurance Affordability Exchange Program to meld the state's framework of health care programs with a private insurance option. Gardiner, a Republican, is vice president of Orlando Health, a group nine Central Florida hospitals. He's won the support of most of the state's hospitals, the influential business lobby Associated Industries of Florida and the Legislature's Democrats.

Exactly what's to be gained by suing CMS isn't clear. The Supreme Court has already held the federal government can't require states to expand Medicaid. The "gun-to-the-head" that Scott cites is better described as a bazooka CMS has loaded with cash — $50 billion over 10 years to cover costs. The governor says the federal government can't be trusted to deliver the money it promises.

If he's talking about Congress, he's undoubtedly right. Last month the Republican controlled Congress passed a pair of budget bills repealing Obamacare. The House also cut Medicaid spending by $900 billion and turned the program into block grants for states to administer. The Senate transformed Medicare into a voucher program. Neither of these budget bills got any Democratic votes. If the package ever lands on President Obama's desk, I trust he'll veto it.

Scott's "Let's Get to Work" political committee says its public-opinion polling finds Floridians evenly split — 44 percent in favor of expanding Medicaid, 44 percent opposed.

Really? That's a poll I'd like to know more about: How was the question worded? When was the poll taken? What's the margin of error? I'm curious, but the answers wouldn't change my bottom line: Denying timely health care to people is immoral.

Martha Musgrove is a veteran journalist formerly with The Miami Herald and Cox Newspapers. mlmcolumn@gmail.com