They began the season as a team whose theme was getting a second chance to achieve its dream.

“So the first thing we did was we showed them Jimmy V’s speech from the ESPY’s,” Langara College Falcons men’s basketball coach Paul Eberhardt was explaining Sunday morning, one sleep after his team’s stunning 88-86 victory over the Red Deer College Kings to capture Canadian Collegiate Athletic Association national championship at Quest University in Squamish.

Eberhardt, of course, was referring to the iconic speech, highlighted by the famous phrase ‘Don’t give up, don’t ever give up’, delivered by Jim Valvano, the late North Carolina State men’s basketball coach, as he waged his courageous battle with cancer back in 1993 at ESPN’s annual awards show.

“We didn’t give up,” continued Eberhardt, “even when things got really tough.”

On Saturday, the Falcons, one season after losing in the 2013 national semifinals, found a way to survive a one-man onslaught from Red Deer guard Lloyd Strickland, who hit four three-point baskets in the final 30 seconds of play.

And if that wasn’t dramatic enough, the Falcons of B.C.’s PACWEST Conference, arrived at Saturday’s final via an even more incredible finish on Friday, as it overcame a 10-point deficit over the final 1:40 of play to force overtime and beat St. Laurent, Que.’s Vanier College Cheetahs 103-102.

Langara’s Elliot Mason hit three triples over that closing stretch of regulation, then worked the pick-and-roll with point guard Brody Grieg, whose lay-in with 5.3 seconds remaining in overtime won the game.

“It was a crazy comeback, one of the most amazing comebacks I have ever been involved with,” said Eberhardt, whose team carried the nation’s No. 1 college ranking into the contest. “We were dead and buried but we didn’t give up.”

Greig, who was later picked the national MVP, scored 24 points in Saturday’s final, to go along with 10 assists and nine rebounds. The Richmond native and R.A. McMath Secondary grad averaged a triple-double over the national championships.

“It is something special to do this with a special group of guys,” said Eberhardt, who over the majority of his coaching career, has coached both college and high school boys varsity teams simultaneously. “I will still be processing this over the spring break. It is such an awesome feeling to get a national championship.”

Eberhardt, a high school teacher at Richmond’s R.C. Palmer Secondary, coached the school’s Griffins to the 2011 B.C. senior boys Triple A title. Last week, Eberhardt coached the Griffins to fourth place at the B.C. senior boys Double A provincial championships in Langley.

Jitinder Lohcham of Langara was picked to the first all-star team, while Mason was selected to the second team along with Jose Colorado of Quest, which finished tied for fifth.