Sarasota's Institute for the Ages, a nonprofit foundation charged with the challenge of both tapping and empowering this region's resource of older adults, is trying something a little different in its third partnership with a company wooing the elder marketplace.

In its first two ventures — with a communications technology startup called Lively and a joint venture between GE and Intel called Care Innovations — local people 50 and over who signed on with the institute's Community-Powered Research Network were tasked with evaluating a product still in development.

This time around, the product — Juvent, one of those vibration machines believed to build bone health by applying low-intensity force when you stand on them — has been on the market for some time. The role for the institute is to help the company figure out what it would take to convince elders that the "exercise" program is worth sticking to.

"We're looking to understand their perceptions so we can shorten the education time for people before they understand it's worth using a Juvent," says Peter Simonson, president of Regenerative Technologies Corp., a Palm Beach company that has licensed patents for the device. "We know that in one to three weeks, they get it. But we're trying to shorten that time."

So the institute, in partnership with the Evalyn Sadlier Jones branch of the YMCA — that's the one in Palmer Ranch — is asking testers 50 and over to commit to trying out the gizmo. Users will be asked to drop by one of two sites and use the Juvent — this means basically standing on it for 20 minutes while it emits a subtle vibration — three times a week for five weeks. The 15-session total can be spread over a longer time to accommodate holidays or trips, said Stacy Prouty, chief operations officer for the institute.

"It feels really good," she said. "But you might want to bring a book."

The study began Nov. 6 and will continue for 10 weeks. Participants will be asked to fill out questionnaires about the experience and their results.

"We want your feedback and honest opinion," Prouty told a roomful of potential testers this week. "We're not here to endorse any products. You're not going to be pitched a product."

But when it was Simonson's turn to talk, the information session started to feel more like a sophisticated sales event. He impressed his listeners with a PowerPoint about the the importance of impact to get cellular fluids moving in our skeletons.

American bodies — especially older ones — are starved for impact, Simonson said.

"We sit in the office all day; we sit in a car; and when we walk, we wear these padded shoes," he told the audience.

Then Simonson moved from the science of bone health to the claims of his product, including testimonials about better mobility, balance and freedom from pain. To drive his point home, he introduced some real people behind the testimonials, including his own mother.

"You'll see a lot of vibration machines out there," he said. "Most of them are dumb shakers. There's a fine line between effective and dangerous."

There's also a fine line between assisting private companies in market research and selling their products for them, institute CEO Tom Essleman observed after the session. He wants to be careful about this as the foundation grows, he said, and plans to convene an advisory board to vet potential research projects.

But the audience at the Juvent introduction, while intrigued by the health claims, did not appear to be a bunch of easy marks. They asked cogent questions about the product's warranty and price.

The warranty is for two years, and the price is $3,500 — "about the price of a good mattress," Simonson said.

That would have to be a really, really good mattress.

For information about becoming a Juvent tester, you can call 365-4243 or email juvent@institutefortheages.org.