Do some votes matter more than others?

Yes, and Tennessee's Secretary of State, who oversees the election process, did not follow how our constitution stipulates votes should be counted, according to a federal lawsuit filed Friday on behalf of eight Tennesseans challenging the results of the Amendment 1 ballot measure.

"Plaintiffs contend that Defendants (Gov. Bill Haslam, Secretary Tre Hargett, Attorney General Herbert Slatery and the seven members of the state Election Commission) violated their rights to due process and equal protection under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution by not tabulating the votes on Amendment 1 in compliance with Article XI, Section 3 of the Tennessee Constitution."

This election was about constitutional power and language, and the lawsuit challenges the constitutionality of strategies encouraging voters to abstain from voting in the race for governor while casting a vote for Amendment 1, which gave free reign to Tennessee's legislature to regulate the how and where abortions could be provided.

According to the Secretary of State's website, 1,352,608 Tennesseans cast a ballot in the governor's race; 1,385,178, or 32,570 more, ballots were cast on Amendment 1. There were 12,463 voters on Amendment 2, another controversial amendment that changed appellate judges from elected to appointed positions, who did not vote in the governor's race. Amendments 3 and 4 both had fewer ballots cast than in the governor's race.

So what? Sour grapes? The people have voted, let it lie.

Regardless of your position on Amendment 1 or 2, we should welcome resolution in this suit. Either the words of our constitution matter, or the whole document is useless — which, after this election, I have come to question whether Tennesseans care much for the individual protections and liberties that were enshrined by the framers in the state's governing document.

At question is whether Article XI, Section 3 means what it seems to plainly say, or does it mean whatever the current Secretary of State and governor wish it to mean?

The second sentence of section 3 reads: "And if the people shall approve and ratify such amendment or amendments by a majority of all the citizens of the state voting for governor, voting in their favor, such amendment or amendments shall become a part of this Constitution."

Seems to say that for a change to be made in our constitution you have to first check that a voter cast a ballot in the governor's race before you count whether a majority of those voters approve of the change, and then that majority must be greater than 50 percent of the ballots cast in the governor's race.

Though somewhat complicated, it does seem straightforward.

Blake Fontenay, director of communications for the Secretary of State, told me on Oct. 30 that, to his knowledge, Tennessee had never interpreted Article XI, Section 3 to mean that only voters who cast a ballot in the governor's race were eligible to vote on constitutional amendments.

The plaintiffs all cast votes in the governor's race and against Amendment 1, according to the Friday filing. Suing to overturn the results are: Tracey E. George, Nashville, a professor of law and of political science at Vanderbilt University; Ellen Wright Clayton, Nashville, a professor of pediatrics and of law at Vanderbilt; Deborah Webster-Clair, Brentwood, an obstetrician and gynecologist; Kenneth T. Whalum Jr., Memphis, pastor of the New Olivet Baptist Church; Meryl Rice, Whiteville, a social worker and small business owner; Jan Liffis, Nashville, a registered nurse; Teresa M. Halloran, Franklin, the volunteer coordinator for Meals on Wheels; and Mary Howard Hayes, Gallatin, former Director of the Public Health Department of Sumner County.

Representing the plaintiffs before the 6th Circuit Court is Nashville attorney Bill Harbison, who is also the president-elect of the Tennessee Bar Association.

"These votes are not counted properly," Harbison said Saturday, "which diminished those who voted no and was a clear violation of their 14th Amendment rights."

John Jay Hooker said Saturday that he expected federal and state challenges on behalf of voters against Amendment 2, which passed by a broader margin that Amendment 1, would be filed this week.

It will be interesting to discover if words mean what ordinary people think they mean.

Reach Frank Daniels III: 615-881-7039, or on Twitter @fdanielsiii

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1qyLavv