Buy Photo As he awaits a kidney transplant, John Vito of Rochester has started a blog foodnstories.com, about his time as the owner of O’Bagelo’s on State Street. (Photo: Karen Miltner/@KarenMiltner/ staff photographer)Buy Photo Story Highlights Rochester restaurateur-turned blogger John Vito began his "Food and Stories: How I Got Here from There" website about a year ago.

The blog averages about 2,000 hits a month.

It's been a way to creatively reflect on his past life as he waits for an organ transplant that will give him enough independence to launch a new career.

After a storied 20-year run, O'Bagelo's closed abruptly in September 2011. But the stories and recipes generated in the legendary State Street eatery are enjoying a second life.

Rochester restaurateur-turned-blogger John Vito began his "Food and Stories: How I Got Here from There" website about a year ago (foodnstories.com).

It's been a way to creatively reflect on his past life as he waits for an organ transplant that will give him enough independence to launch a new career.

"It is really about the craziness and antics of people's lives, of my life, of running the store," says Vito.

While Rochester is a good place to live and work for many reasons — and Vito is one of the cogs that make it so — it is not necessarily the speediest place to get a kidney transplant. Vito is one of 8,668 people in New York state waiting for one. Patients who need a new kidney may wait four to five years in many cases, sometimes longer. The wait times are exacerbated by the anemic rate of organ donor registration in New York in general and Monroe County in particular.

According to a report published last year by Excellus BlueCross BlueShield, only about 28 percent of Monroe County adults are registered as organ donors. The state rate is about 22 percent. Both numbers pale in comparison to the national average of 48 percent.

"The wait is like a dull anxiousness. You don't think about it all the time, but in the back of your head, you know the phone could ring," Vito says.

"There is a looming depression you try to avoid, because you don't have a choice. I am anxious about getting a new kidney but hesitant as well. I don't want someone to have to die for me. It will be a whole new lifestyle with its own set of potential problems."

Suddenly sick

A few years ago, Vito was seemingly at the top of his game.

Prior to closing O'Bagelo's, he was doing double duty as a restaurateur, having opened the Baked & Carved sandwich shop inside Salinger's Pub on East Avenue in January 2011.

He attributed his fatigue, skin discoloration and 50-pound weight loss to the stress of running two businesses at the same time. When he finally took his friends' advice and saw a doctor, he was rushed to the hospital. The diagnosis? Acute kidney failure brought on by untreated high blood pressure. He was immediately put on dialysis, and for days it was unclear if he would even leave the ICU.

To make this life-threatening illness even more horrific, he had dropped his health insurance plan two years earlier — one of the hard choices he had to make as a small-business owner. And to add an unwelcome heap of heartbreak, Vito's father, George, who had been wheelchair-bound for years as a result of an accident, died while his son was in the hospital.

"If I had gone to the doctor and stayed on medication, I could have avoided this," says Vito.

After his 23-day hospitalization, Vito continued to run Baked & Carved for a while, but eventually that proved too exhausting and he closed it.

The dialysis grind

"Dialysis is kind of like a part-time job," he says of his three-times-a-week routine, which starts around 6:30 a.m. at an outpatient medical facility in Brighton.

Vito arrives with hellos and handshakes and even a couple of cheek kisses from staff and fellow patients. He takes off his coat and sits in a reclining chair in a large, brightly lit room as if he were settling in for a football game. He rolls up his left sleeve to reveal two marble-sized bumps on his left forearm where the needles are inserted, and along the side of his limb, a third mound made by a fistula, an implant that connects vein to artery.

One needle draws blood out of his body, the other needle brings it back in. Both are attached to tubes that flow in and out of the dialyzer, a machine as big as a bedroom dresser that filters out the blood's waste and toxins in the blood.

To a newcomer, the hums and beeps and buzzing of all the medical equipment make it hard to hear yourself think, but for Vito, it is almost a comfort, just as the noise of all the appliances, fans and equipment at O'Bagelo's were. "When a certain noise was missing, that's when I would get concerned," he says.

Fellow patients sit in their own recliners, watching television, sleeping, reading or talking with each other. Vito comes equipped with the newspaper and pen. At O'Bagelo's, he could rely on customers to help him with the crossword puzzle. Here, he cheats with his smartphone.

Vito grows more fatigued as the hours pass, but he refused to let himself sleep. Once, he did succumb to a nap, and his arm twitched so drastically that one of the needles pierced through to the outside of the vein. That painful infiltration is not an experience he wants to repeat.

Muscle cramping is a common side effect. So is feeling cold. While the dialyzer is programmed to keep the blood in sync with body temperatures, there can be slight differences. Dialysis patients are also prone to anemia, another chill factor. All the inmates, including Vito, hunker down under blankets.

By the end of the four- to five-hour session, he is drained of energy, physically and emotionally. That punk weariness doesn't fade until 8 or 9 at night.

On days when he doesn't go to dialysis, he feels pretty good.

Buy Photo "The idea of going back into the restaurant grind, which I consider a young man’s game, is very difficult to me," John Vito says of his post-transplant life. (Photo: CARLOS ORTIZ/@cfortiz_dandc/staff photographer)

Food-driven memoir

Now that his health has stabilized and he has time to think about how the next chapter of his life might unfold, Vito, 50, is writing down his past. Each installment of Food and Stories is built with quirky anecdotes, character sketches and business insights he experienced as a small-business owner.

The blog also highlights recipes, some from the restaurant, others from his family or his personal favorites file.

Vito thinks of Food and Stories as a sort of memoir. And the time he now has for writing it?

"I almost feel like I have a midlife retirement," says Vito as he kneads the dough for ricotta gnocchi, which he will serve with a light San Marzano tomato sauce.

It all happens in his apartment kitchen in the Park Avenue neighborhood, which is anchored by the old O'Bagelo's green chalk board and O'Bagelo's wooden counter, which has developed a dip in its flat surface from years of sandwich-making, bagel-slicing and kitchen prep. Now taking over the center of the kitchen, that counter functions as cooking space, writing desk and dining room table all at once.

One Food and Stories installment tells about the aftermath of the Seinfeld "Soup Nazi" episode in 1995, when a long line of smirking patrons had Vito scratching his head in confusion. Finally, a staffer told Vito that people were already pegging him as Rochester's version of the high-strung, dictatorial food vendor.

"Oddly, I was a fan (of the show) and had seen the episode the night before but never made any connections to my own behavior. Although this is now considered a compliment and point of pride for some, I was not happy about it and would not accept it at the time," Vito writes.

But in an odd way, it worked as the shop's non-marketing marketing strategy. For example, early on, Vito had two rules about bagel-with-cream-cheese orders. First, the bagels were not toasted. Logic? Why make a freshly baked bagel stale when he worked so hard to offer them fresh from the oven? Second, every bagel got a massive, 4-ounce smear of cream cheese.

Not all customers liked the practice, but it got people talking, and it got new people coming into the shop. What Vito could have spent on marketing and advertising, he invested instead in cream cheese, whether it was eaten with relish or thrown away in disgust.

Flavors of Rochester: Read more stories about food and drink

"Everyone stood to get a bit of grief or abuse from JV," says Rochester lawyer Gary Muldoon, an O'Bagelo's regular since its opening.

But that irascible personality is what made O'Bagelo's, with its worn-out carpets and rickety chairs, "the crossroads of downtown. … You would bump into everyone from Tom Richards to the guy who ran OTB to the guy in charge of the dirty book store," recalls Muldoon.

While the "stories" section of Food and Stories is a mostly solitary endeavor, the "food" section brings friends to Vito's home kitchen.

Food blog lover Jill Feldman of Rochester is one of those friends who has eaten Vito's food both at O'Bagelo's and at his apartment. In fact, after his illness, she encouraged him to start the blog and share his stories and recipes.

"John is a character, but he has such a kind heart and would do anything for friends and strangers. He is an amazing person," says Feldman.

Her husband, Jon Feldman, does the photography for Food and Stories, and she is on hand to help. "To me it's not work, it's fun. I can't think of a better way to spend a cold, dreary day, or even a beautiful day, than eating John's food in his kitchen, listening to his stories. He can talk about anything," she says.

Vito too thinks of the meals he prepares at home for friends as a "lighter, easier version of my former career."

Thanks to new friends he's made at the dialysis center, he will be incorporating new recipes into his blog, such as chicharrones, or fried pork rinds.

"The nice thing about what I do is that there are so many people working at Clinton Crossings who are from all over the world. Latins, Poles, Russians, everywhere. They know I'm into food and they talk to me about it," says Vito.

With dialysis comes other changes to Vito's daily routine and diet. He must carefully monitor the amount of fluid he consumes, limit the amount of phosphorus, potassium and sodium he eats (which is why his plate of gnocchi comes with an offer for more salt), and take prescribed medications and binders faithfully.

Cooking for himself gives him the reins to better control those variables of diet, he says.

Blogging for others gives a way to channel the yo-yo emotions that come with an uncertain future.

"There are times when I absolutely can't wait to get onto the next phase, but at the same time I'm hesitant. The transplant surgery is difficult, and there will be a new lifestyle to adjust to. I don't want someone to have to die for me," he says.

The transplant landscape

The average wait time for a kidney transplant at Strong Memorial Hospital, one of 15 transplant centers in New York, is about four years, says Rob Kochik, executive director of University of Rochester Medical Center's Finger Lakes Donor Recovery Network. FLDRN coordinates organ donations at 37 hospitals across upstate.

Four to five years is a common waiting period in many parts of the country for kidney transplant candidates, says Joel Newman, spokesman for the United Network for Organ Sharing, a private nonprofit contracted by the federal government to manage the country's organ transplant system. Some regions, such as the Southeast, are shorter, perhaps three to four years, while some areas, such as Northern California, have a six- to seven-year average wait.

The patient's profile — blood type, body size, other medical conditions, etc. — can also affect availability.

According to the UNOS' Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network, only 1,509 kidney transplants took place in New York state in 2014, even though there were nearly six times as many people waiting for one.

Because kidney-threatening diseases such as hypertension and diabetes have become so prevalent, more people need new organs than ever before, says Kochik. Luckily, if a donor organ is not available right away, patients can stay alive for years on dialysis, notes Debbie Yendrzeski, vice president of the Transplant Awareness Organization of Greater Rochester.

On two lists

Vito is on two kidney transplant lists, one in Rochester, where the wait for his blood type could be as long as 54 months, and one in Pittsburgh, where the wait time is far shorter. When the call comes that an organ is available, he has a four-hour window to get himself to the hospital. Following surgery there is a two-month monitoring period before he can resume normal activities.

While a transplant is not a cure for his disease, it does "take away the tether" that comes with dialysis. Vito would need to take antirejection medications for the rest of his life. Plus, he would still be living with the risk that at any point, his body could reject the new kidney, either because of something he did, or simply because it failed, he explains.

During his 2011 crisis, Vito was able to get insurance while in the hospital through the NY Bridge Plan, then bought a plan through the health insurance exchange after the Affordable Care Act went into effect. Without the Bridge Plan and ACA, he says, he would never have been eligible for coverage due to his high blood pressure, a pre-existing condition.

Getting a transplant is his first priority. Making sure it will stick is his second.

Once that happens, he will work on his next career.

"With all the years I have logged into this business, the idea of going back into the restaurant grind, which I consider a young man's game, is very difficult to me, as much as I love it, the cooking and the excitement," he says.

Even after a transplant, his energy levels will likely not be what they used to be.

"The website is the next thing, because I can do it now," he says. "Where it takes me I don't know. But I will tell you that I will be aggressively working on my next adventure."

Buy Photo John Vito comes to dialysis with the newspaper and pen so he can do the crossword puzzle. Others watch television, sleep, read or talk. (Photo: CARLOS ORTIZ/@cfortiz_dandc/staff photographer)

What you can do

The best way to shorten the waiting time for anyone in need of an organ transplant in New York state is to get more adults to register as donors through the New York State Donate Life Organ and Tissue Donor Registry, says Debbie Yendrzeski, vice president of the Transplant Awareness Organization of Greater Rochester.

This registry gives legal consent so that next of kin do not have to make the decision on behalf of a love one at the time of death.

A new website called PassLifeOn.org — which has a related ad campaign — links to the New York State Donate Life website.

Yendrzeski also urges family members to talk about their wishes before a decision has to be made.

Myths about organ donations still abound, says Rob Kochik of University of the Finger Lakes Donor Recovery Network. For example, some people are mistakenly afraid that they will not receive good medical care if they register, even though it is illegal to consider donor status when administering care. Others worry that a loved one who donated organs will not be able to have an open casket funeral, even though the surgical procedures done to remove organs does don't change their appearance.

Other people believe they are too old.

"Unless they have active HIV or active cancer, we encourage everyone to be a donor," says Kochik.

There are several ways to register as a Donate Life organ donor.

1. Sign up when you register to vote.

2. Sign up when you renew or apply for a New York state driver's license or non-driver ID card.

3. If you already have a New York driver's license, but have not registered, you can do so online at the Department of Motor Vehicles website: http://dmv.ny.gov/more-info/register-become-organ-eye-or-tissue-donor

4. If you already have a New York driver's license, you can enroll by mail by downloading a registration form at the state's Department of Health website: http://www.health.ny.gov/professionals/patients/donation/organ/

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1DPS0nx