Topics: blizzards, Climate Change, Global Warming, Video, Weather, Winter, Sustainability News

The Southern U.S. has been paralyzed by a historic ice storm, and the Northeast is well on its way to another foot-plus of snow. If all that wasn’t bad enough, the climate trolls are coming out.

This time, top honors goes to the Federalist, which can’t get over the irony of Senate Democrats scheduling a hearing on global warming right as a blizzard is expected to hit D.C. In fact, there’s good reason to believe that global climate change is linked to extreme weather like this, but arguing that is an advanced move. Demonstrating that cold and snowy weather in no way disproves global warming? Anyone can do that.

Below, three tried-and-true retorts to climate deniers. You can try a fast and simple zinger, back it up with a blunt chart or, if you’re tired of explaining, let one of these smart videos do it for you. Why not try a healthy combination of all three? And, as a last resort, there’s always the weather report for Australia.

The zingers

— SkepticalScience, a reliable font of detailed information, also breaks it down into this one-sentence explanation:

“A local cold day has nothing to do with the long-term trend of increasing global temperatures.”

— Mother Jones’ Tim Murphy is something of an evangelist for the cause:

In one sentence: "Warming things up means the atmosphere can hold more moisture." Science! http://t.co/0jMUBSsoVK — DENALI (@timothypmurphy) February 12, 2014

— Princeton University climate scientist Michael Oppenheimer sums up the current reality of climate change:

“Shorter snow season, less snow overall, but the occasional knockout punch. That’s the new world we live in.”

— And, courtesy of the NRDC, a simple analogy:

“The effect of global warming on our climate is not unlike the effect of steroids on an athlete’s performance: It supercharges storms; it causes abnormal conditions like drought and heat and ultimately, it causes damage.”

The charts

Here, data from the NOAA and NASA clearly shows that global temperatures have been higher than average for the past 37 consecutive years:

This one, courtesy of Skeptical Science, plots the annual numbers of record high maximum temperatures (the red dots) along with the record lows (the blue dots), averaged over the U.S. That black line — the one that doesn’t line up with what’s plotted — shows where the dots would theoretically lie should no global warming or cooling be taking place. You can see how, over time, we’ve ended up with more record highs than lows: