On the heels of the NHL draft and the six-player trade involving Ryan O’Reilly and the Buffalo Sabres, the Avalanche is preparing for the free-agent frenzy Wednesday.

Signing a veteran puck-moving defenseman — or two — is the goal as Colorado hopes to improve its blue line without sacrificing future contract extensions for Erik Johnson, Tyson Barrie and Nathan MacKinnon.

Johnson, the Avs’ top defenseman, could be an unrestricted free agent next summer. Defenseman Barrie and forward Mac- Kinnon are pending restricted free agents after next season. The Avs can afford to wait to extend Barrie and MacKinnon, but extending Johnson before next summer will be a priority. Johnson undoubtedly will get a hefty raise from his $3.75 million cap hit.

The Avs are about $16.7 million under the NHL’s $71.4 million salary cap, although a handful of current restricted free agents including newly acquired center Mikhail Grigorenko, forward Joey Hishon and goalie Calvin Pickard will be given qualifying offers by 3 p.m. Monday.

Depending on how many RFA qualifying offers are given, Colorado will be $13 million to $15 million under the cap by Wednesday.

“We have room, but we also have to make sure we’re responsible because we do have some guys coming up next year,” Avs general manager Joe Sakic said Friday. “Obviously, we’d like to get one more defenseman and we’ll see how that goes. We want to be responsible, and hopefully there’s a fit for us July 1. If it doesn’t work out — we don’t have the guy we want, or the guy or two — we know we’ve got flexibility to do something via trade whether it’s in the summer or September.”

Andrej Sekera is on the open market

Los Angeles’ Andrej Sekera, 29, is regarded as the top left-shooting defenseman under age 30, and he is not expected to re-sign with the Kings by Monday. The Avs prefer a left-shooting D-man to accompany righties Johnson and Barrie on the first two pairings.

Other top-four capable lefties expected to be on the market are Pittsburgh’s Christian Ehrhoff, 32, and Chicago’s Johnny Oduya, 33. The sleeper: San Jose’s Matt Irwin, 27, who went undrafted but now is an excellent two-way player.

The top right-shooting D-men are Washington’s Mike Green, 29, and Nashville’s Cody Franson, 27.