In 2013, AmerisourceBergen inked a 10-year drug distribution deal with Walgreen that took some industry observers by surprise. But it looks like a smart move so far.

AmerisourceBergen (ABC) recently announced that it expects adjusted diluted earnings per share from continuing operations in fiscal year 2014 to increase 21 to 23% from last year with revenue growth in the 35% range. Analysts cite the Walgreen (WAG) joint venture as a key to AmerisourceBergen’s performance well into the future.

“They think outside the box,” said Steven Halper, senior vice president at FBR Capital Markets in New York City. “If you asked me five years ago if they could do a deal like that, I’d have said no.”

With over $100 billion in annual revenue, the Chesterbrook, Pa.-based company primarily distributes drugs — both generics and specialty pharmaceuticals — and other health care products. It also provides pharmacy management, consulting and logistics services.

A Frugal Culture

The company acquired its current name in 2001 when AmeriSource Health merged with Bergen Brunswig. Then-CEO David Yost led the firm through the merger and retired a decade later — after spending more than 36 years at the company.

Yost helped craft the organizational culture, Halper says, emphasizing execution, frugality and customer service.

“Yost used to say, ‘Our competitors stay at the Ritz-Carlton, but we stay at the Holiday Inn when we see clients,'” Halper recalled.

Steven Collis replaced Yost as CEO in 2011. Over his 20-year career at the company, Collis has risen through the ranks and reinforced its culture.

“I love to see promotion from within,” Halper said. “I can’t think of anyone better than Collis to run the company, given his history and his experience.”

Halper used to work at a firm that hosted Collis at several investor meetings. The CEO was impressive.

“His command of the company’s fundamentals is extremely strong,” Halper said. “And he’s got the appropriate level of long-term insight.”

Thanks to Collis’s long-term focus, AmerisourceBergen can stay ahead of industry trends and orchestrate change effectively. With a workforce of about 13,000, the company has low employee turnover and low customer attrition, Halper says.

Under Collis, the firm’s strategic moves have boosted profitability and enhanced its potential for global growth. In announcing the Walgreen deal in 2013, Collis said, “Importantly, these agreements not only expand our U.S. business but also provide opportunities to meaningfully grow our specialty and manufacturer services businesses internationally.”

As part of his long-term strategy, Collis allocates capital with an eye on future events and their repercussions for his business. Part of his rationale for the Walgreen joint venture involved thinking ahead to how the Affordable Care Act would affect AmerisourceBergen.

“They have always been committed to operational excellence,” said Ross Muken, senior managing director at ISI Group in New York City. “They’ve invested in IT (information technology) and warehousing, and been very intelligent in where they’ve invested capital.”