Sioux Falls, SD

Today, twelve women and thirteen men anxiously awaited being named this year's Mr. and Miss Basketball of South Dakota. In the end two very deserving individuals were awarded the honor, with each being the first in their school's history.

"The 2015 Miss South Dakota Basketball, Alexys Swedlund," Jim Hensley announced.

It was no surprise that Saint Thomas More's all-time leading scorer was chosen as this year's Miss Basketball. In her five years on the varsity level Swedlund not only led the Lady Cavaliers to their first tournament appearance, but also to three titles.

"It's such an honor to be able to represent West River and especially St. Thomas More. I'm proud to be the first from there to win this award and hopefully many more after me can also," Swedlund said.

It was a much closer race for Mr. Basketball, but in the end a very deserving candidate was selected.

"The 2015 South Dakota Mr. Basketball is Bo Fries," Hensley announced.

The 6'4" senior averaged nearly 22 points a game while leading Langford Area to their fourth consecutive state tournament. Fries will graduate with a 4.0 GPA and 1,634 career points to his name. However winning this coveted award is the icing on the cake.

"This is definitely at the top of my list. I had a great career, got to play with a lot of great people, and coaches in a great community. It has been a lot of fun. It's definitely a big honor. Of all of the great players in South Dakota that could have received this award, to be among the top of them is definitely a big honor for me," Fries said.

This is not the end of the road for Fries or Swedlund. Bo will take his talents down the road to Northern St. As for Alexys, she will begin her career at Washington St. this fall. Needless to say being the crowned the best in their class lets them both know they can play at the collegiate level.

"Yeah it does build a little bit of confidence, so going out there I know I can compete with those girls and play at that level. I can't wait to get out there," Swedlund said.

"I'm looking forward to going to Northern St. and getting to play with some of the guys that are here today, it should be a lot of fun. It does give me confidence, but it's still going to be tough adjusting to the next level. It's a challenge that I'm looking forward to though," Fries said.

High School

Headlines {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.