The football rests in Colin Kaepernick’s hands.

The Broncos made a push to acquire the San Francisco quarterback as general manager John Elway met with Kaepernick at his Denver home Thursday about restructuring his contract, an NFL source confirmed.

The meeting came on the day Kaepernick’s $11.9 million salary for this season became guaranteed, which eliminated the possibility San Francisco would release him; he carries a $15.9 million cap hit for next season, with about $19.3 million in dead money. For Kaepernick to become a Bronco he must restructure his contract or take a paycut given Denver’s minimal salary cap space. It is considered the biggest hurdle to a deal with a growing belief the teams can reach an accord on draft pick compensation.

San Francisco gave Kaepernick’s agents permission to seek a trade in February, meaning other teams are allowed to speak with him directly. The San Francisco Chronicle first reported the Thursday meeting, the second in two weeks between Elway and Kaepernick.

The Broncos traded for veteran Mark Sanchez and have Trevor Siemian, a seventh-round draft pick in 2015, on the roster. But bringing in a third quarterback — via trade, free agency or the draft — to create competition for the two has long been the plan.

Acquiring Kaepernick, however, would take some roster maneuvering by the Broncos. Denver has only $1.62 million in salary cap space. For any deal to go through, Kaepernick needs to show elasticity with his money. San Francisco could also absorb some of the contract to improve the draft pick involved.

Outside linebacker DeMarcus Ware provided the Broncos relief by converting part of his guaranteed money to a signing bonus and adding incentives to decrease his base salary. The Broncos could clear additional room by releasing or trading offensive tackle Ryan Clady, who missed all of last season because of a torn ACL and is due $9.5 million in 2016.

The Broncos have talked with Clady’s agent multiple times since the NFL scouting combine in February to work toward a contract resolution, and they have signed two linemen — Donald Stephenson and Russell Okung — in the offseason.

Kaepernick has been in Vail this offseason to rehabilitate from three surgeries in the last five months: on his left shoulder, left knee and right thumb. The 49ers’ offseason workout program begins Monday, but it’s not known whether Kaepernick will be cleared to participate. He has bonuses tied to his attendance, and coach Chip Kelly has said he would like a chance to work with the former Nevada star.