Blending the glamour of a posh ladies’ day out with the good-heartedness of a charity fundraiser, a recent Brides Against Breast Cancer event at Sarasota’s Westfield Southgate had a profound impact on hundreds of guests.

Vendor booths, a photographer, a DJ and 10 racks of 600 wedding dresses — from $99 to $799 — for the “Original Nationwide Tour of Gowns” filled the site of the old Restoration Hardware. The objective: To funnel gently worn, reduced-cost bridal gown sales into funding free programs for cancer patients and their families. This was one of about 120 stops this year on a schedule of traveling shows.

“I think everyone knows someone who has been impacted by cancer, so this is an incredibly important cause,” says Amy Paulishak, the senior vice president of the BABC nonprofit, which is based in Lakewood Ranch and will celebrate its third year in December.

“I personally come from a family with a breast cancer history, and have lost two friends under 40 to breast cancer,” Paulishak adds. “So with the BABC events, we’re just given a tremendous opportunity to be able to take something so exciting — a wedding day and the start of a new life for a woman — and provide her and her family members with information to help prevent breast cancer.”

Every show across the nation offers breast cancer resources and materials to help educate the public. The Tour of Gowns raises nearly $2 million for cancer support programs annually; 80 cents out of every dollar from each gown purchase goes toward the cause. Since January 2013, the total viewership for BABC topped 230 million.

“My mother is a breast cancer survivor, so I know what it’s like to see how it can affect someone,” says Karen DeRitter, the event’s manager. “During these events, my favorite part is hearing people’s stories. They’re so inspiring — the strength and the hope.”

At the Sarasota tour stop, brides-to-be had their hair and makeup done by area professionals, and personal shoppers assisted them with selecting their dream garments. Gecko’s Grill and Pub catered the benefit, providing a long table packed with sandwiches. About 200 guests left with scores of colorful gift bags and souvenirs.

Vendors included Angela’s Pure Salon and Spa, an eco-friendly Sarasota locale, where master stylist Robin Tam invited women to visit for primping. She also shared stories about her mother’s bout with breast cancer.

“We want to educate women about using clean beauty products,” Tam says, echoing the mission of the spa's owner/cosmetologist Angela Powers. “We use organic relaxers and purified water, all in an attempt to stay away from hazardous chemicals that are so often present in salons. This is important when it comes to cancer prevention.”

A general atmosphere of fun and pampering helped raise awareness for the breast cancer cause while giving an uplift to those who stopped by.

“Weddings can be very stressful but exciting times, and we want to help make preparing for the experience enjoyable,” Paulishak says. “I think brides nowadays are more connected to philanthropy, so if they can give back on their special day, they’re open to it.”

At the event, DeRitter watched as women oohed, ahhed and purchased numerous dresses for their special days, and she was noticeably touched.

“We’re very lucky to be able to witness this,” she says, “and to know how many people will ultimately be helped by this mission.”

For more information on future Brides Against Breast Cancer events, call 907-9350 or visit bridesabc.org.