Health Clinic Opens on Bell Gardens Campus

By Nancy Martinez, EGP Staff Writer

Students at Bell Gardens High School who have a doctor’s appointment may no longer need to miss a day of class now that a new health clinic has opened its doors on the campus.

From the outside, the new clinic looks like any regular classroom bungalow, but instead of desks, white boards and books, the blue bungalow houses a 16-seat waiting area, clinical lab, six examination rooms and a medical professional seeing patients.

The school-based clinic is operated by the nonprofit Family Health Care Centers of Greater Los Angeles (FHCCGLA), which operates community health clinics in the surrounding area.

“We have the ability to serve the young, students, their parents, teachers and the community at large,” said Yeryca Ramos, FHCCGLA’s chief financial officer.

Regular checkups, sports physicals or doctor’s visits for the common cold or flu could no longer require a working parent to take the day off from work since students can now be seen on campus. And if a student gets sick or hurt on campus, they can be treated for minor injuries instead of waiting for a parent to pick them up, explained Helen Van, a nurse practitioner at the site.

Research conducted in 2005 showed that high school based health centers decrease the number of absentee students. Since then, there has been a growing trend to open school-based centers on campus, Ramos said.

FHCCGLA collaborated with the Montebello Unified School District to transform two portable bungalows at Bell Gardens High School into a clinic and health resource center. The clinic operator will oversee the operation and has agreed to put up $500,000 to purchase medical equipment. They have also received a $333,000 New Access Point Grant from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, which is expected to renew annually as long as the Affordable Care Act continues to be funded, explained Ramos.

The city of Bell Gardens’ high teen pregnancy rate played a role in the opening the clinic opened a few feet from the school’s infant toddler center and teen parent program classrooms.

“There was a growing population of pregnant teens in the community of Bell Gardens, that’s how the need was addressed for this clinic,” said Van.

Montebello Unified already provides free childcare, parenting classes, counseling and encourages minors to graduate from high school though the California School Age Families (CAL-SAFE) program.

Dr. Albert Pacheco – FHCCGLA’s former chief executive officer – previously told EGP the campus location would bring a clinic to an area of high need.

“In this particular area of Los Angeles County there’s a big uninsured, low-income population so there’s a big need,” he said when the center first received the grant in January 2013. There are also a large number of immigrants in the predominately Latino working-class community.

The clinic’s close proximity gives students greater access to preventative measures such as condoms, and testing for sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) and pregnancy without a parent being present.

If a student is pregnant, they will be referred to FHCCGLA’s Bell Gardens Family Medical Center for follow up care.

So far, many of the student visits to the clinic have been for the physicals required to play sports, Van told EGP.

She said the clinic is seeing a good mix of students and people from the area for everything from well-child visits to treatment for chronic and acute conditions such as diabetes and hypertension.

The obesity rate in Bell Gardens is on the rise, Van pointed out.

That corresponds with the findings of a 2015 UCLA Center for Health Policy Research study that found more than 32 percent of Latino adults in California are obese and 40 percent of Latino adolescents are either overweight or obese.

A separate study found that sugar-sweetened beverages are the largest source of added sugar and are associated with increased rates of obesity and other chronic health conditions, such as type 2 diabetes.

To combat the problem, FHCCGLA in the past partnered with Bell Gardens High School and MUSD to encourage residents to eat healthier through the creation of school-based gardens, farmer’s markets and other projects as part of the Campaign for a Healthier Bell Gardens.

“The unique value of BGHS’s school-based health center illustrated the creative collaboration of educators and health care professionals working together to address the multifaceted needs of our children, youth, and families,” said MUSD Board Clerk Lani Cupchoy during the clinic’s ribbon-cutting ceremony Sept. 15.

Services offered at the clinic are provided on a sliding fee scale based on the patient’s income and does not require any form of insurance. Fees start at $30.

“We try to accommodate every patient,” said Ramos, explaining that FHCCGLA staff work with patients to determine which programs they may qualify for to reduce costs. Some patients may not be required to pay anything if they qualify for the county’s My Health LA program, which provides primary health care at no to cost to eligible Los Angeles County residents who are uninsured or un-insurable based on income or immigration status.

A person’s immigration status is never disclosed, said Ramos.

Nearly all students at Bell Gardens High School qualify for free or reduced lunch, a federal standard that is often used as an indicator of poverty. As a result, Ramos told EGP most students and patients qualify for some type of aid.

The clinic is currently open Monday through Friday, 1p.m. to 5p.m. The wait time “is not bad at all” and walk-ins are welcome, said Van. Ramos told EGP the goal is to eventually open the clinic from 8a.m. to 5 p.m.

Since opening, the clinic has averaged about 6 patients a day, but has the capacity to see up to three patients an hour. Ramos told EGP the non-profit hopes in the near future to offer immunizations at the clinic.

“Having a clinic on campus provides easy access to the community,” she said. “We bring health care services to our patients.”

Updated 10-16-15: To clarify Dr. Albert Pacheco is the former executive director of FHCCGLA. Raquel Villa is the new CEO.



Comments