Republicans have been rallying against President Obama’s strategy in the war against ISIS for months but recent events have heightened the GOP war cry.

In particular, presidential contenders and senators facing re-election have sharpened their critique of Obama’s foreign policy in the wake of last month’s Paris attacks and the shootings in San Bernardino, Calif., last week.

The president gave a prime-time address Sunday night intended to quell Americans’ fears and outline his strategy, but, for Republicans, the speech wasn’t enough.

On the presidential campaign trail, Sen. Ted Cruz said he would “utterly destroy” and “carpet bomb” ISIS, while Sen. Marco Rubio said Obama “either refuses to deal with the issue in front of him or is just overwhelmed by it.”

Down the ballot, Republican senators up for re-election were equally critical of Obama’s remarks and overall strategy.

Ron Johnson of Wisconsin called the address “nothing new” and “very disappointing”; Mark Kirk of Illinois said Obama was “doubling down on failed strategies”; and Rob Portman of Ohio called the strategy “fundamentally flawed.”

In terms of next year’s Senate elections, Republicans think that the increased attention being paid to national security will benefit their party.

“I think there’s no question that when the public’s attention is on national security, that we’re operating in a Republican territory,” said Brian Walsh, a former communications director for the National Republican Senatorial Committee. He added that Democrats would prefer focusing on domestic issues, but that “there’s no question that [national security] will be an issue Republicans will want to talk about in 2016 in terms of which party is best equipped to keep the country safe.”

Walsh did admit, however, that Republicans attempting to highlight this issue ran into trouble when Donald Trump called for a ban on Muslims entering the United States. The same GOP senators who criticized Obama’s strategy early in the week spent the following days responding to Trump’s proposal and answering questions about their potential support for the GOP frontrunner.

“Instead of having a real debate over [ISIS strategy], the public’s attention has shifted to Trump’s inflammatory rhetoric on Muslims,” Walsh said.

While Republicans have long seen national security as a winning issue for the party, Obama has often gotten high favorability ratings in this area. In 2011, several months after the killing of Osama bin Laden, a poll showed that six in 10 Americans approved of the way he was handling terrorism. Following rise of ISIS and the Paris and San Bernardino attacks, however, those numbers have flipped. In a poll earlier this week, six in 10 did not approve of the way Obama is handling terrorism, and 64 percent didn’t approve of his handling of ISIS.

Alleigh Marre, a spokeswoman for the NRSC, said that Americans’ fears are more “tangible” after multiple attacks against the West.

“I think voters are really going to go to people that they trust, and the Obama/ Clinton administration or school of thought on foreign policy is what got us to where we are,” Marre said. “I think the gut reaction is going to be wary of and reject where the Democrats are coming from."

Democrats, however, don’t plan to simply play defense on this issue. Along with trying to tie other Republicans to Trump, there are several issues related to the fight against ISIS that Democrats see as weaknesses for Republicans, including the GOP desire to pause or halt the flow of Syrian refugees coming to the U.S. and their votes against Democratic efforts to ban people on the terrorism watch list from purchasing guns. (All GOP senators except Kirk voted against Democrats’ gun amendment to a bill repealing the Affordable Care Act).

“In the last week, Republican senators facing tough re-elections voted to allow suspected terrorists to purchase guns and would still support a potential presidential nominee whose dangerous plan has been dismissed by experts as a national security risk,” said Lauren Passalacqua, a spokeswoman for the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee. “These aren’t the kind of decisions you make if you’re fully committed to protecting Americans.”

Johnson, who is in a rematch against former Sen. Russ Feingold, the man he unseated in 2010, is the chairman of the Senate Homeland Security Committee, a position that gives him a powerful perch to discuss ISIS strategy, including holding a hearing Wednesday on potential changes to the visa waiver program meant to help prevent terrorists from entering the United States.

“Just take a look at the events on the ground. ISIS has not really lost much territory. We've maybe confined it in terms of territorial aspirations. But, you know, it continues to inspire. It continues to grow,” Johnson said in an interview with NPR earlier this week. “As long as ISIS is not overtly losing, they'll continue to be perceived as winners.”

New Hampshire Sen. Kelly Ayotte, who is facing Democratic Gov. Maggie Hassan in her re-election race, has similarly been outspoken on national security issues and questioned Defense Secretary Ashton Carter Wednesday on the administration’s strategy during a Senate Armed Services Committee hearing. She pressed Carter on why the administration delayed going after fuel trucks with airstrikes and pushed for more embedded operatives on the ground to direct those strikes. Ayotte told RCP she expects terrorism and defense to be a major factor in next year’s election.

“I think it’s on the top of people’s minds,” she said. “Without security you can’t have prosperity; without security you can’t have freedom and so I think people inherently understand that we need to keep the country safe and that’s obviously going to be a foremost concern for my constituents in light of both what’s happening around the world and in the United States."

Corry Bliss, campaign manager for Portman, similarly said that national security would be a key issue in the Ohio Senate race against former Gov. Ted Strickland, and threw a jab at Strickland’s support earlier this year for the president’s nuclear agreement with Iran.

“National security will be one of the defining issues of this election cycle. When it comes to national security, it would be hard to find a more out of touch candidate than Ted Strickland,” Bliss told RCP in a statement.

Jenny Donohue, a spokeswoman for the Ohio Democratic party, responded by criticizing Portman’s vote on the terrorism watch list and guns, saying: “It’s shocking Senator Portman would talk about national security judgment after he voted to let potential terrorists buy guns just last week."

In Illinois, the issue that separates Kirk from the frontrunner in the Democratic race against him, Rep. Tammy Duckworth, is Syrian refugees. In the wake of the Paris attacks, Duckworth called for increasing the number of refugees coming to the U.S. while Kirk called for a pause until there could be 100 percent certainty they aren’t a security risk. Kirk’s campaign released an ad last week referencing the Paris attacks and criticizing Duckworth’s refugee stance as dangerous, while the Duckworth campaign accused Kirk of being “driven by fear and willing to compromise American values.”