Buy Photo Greg Landsman, center, is considering running against Hamilton County Commissioner Chris Monzel if Democrat Sean Feeney withdraws from the race. Party Chairman Tim Burke is at right and Cincinnati Councilman P.G. Sittenfeld is at left. (Photo: The Enquirer/Cindi Andrews)Buy Photo

I'm your Greater Cincinnati political columnist, taking you beyond the headlines and behind closed doors. Email candrews@enquirer.com.



Hamilton County Democrats had a disappointing Election Day in what's supposed to be purple territory, even if they didn't do quite as badly as their statewide counterparts.

Of seven contested judicial races, Democrats won just two, both for Common Pleas: Incumbent Jerry Metz held off a GOP challenge from Charles Miller of Keating Muething & Klekamp, 52 percent to 48 percent; and attorney Pat Foley ousted appointed GOP incumbent Carl Stich, 54 percent to 46 percent.

In the highest-profile judicial race, however, Republican Common Pleas Judge Ralph Winkler bested former Cincinnati Mayor Charlie Luken for probate court, 53 percent to 47 percent.

"I'm very familiar with Winkler; he does a good job," Mount Washington resident Donna McDonald said after voting Tuesday. "Luken I wasn't real thrilled with on council."

McDonald didn't vote a straight ticket, also picking Democratic attorney Jennifer Branch, who lost to incumbent Juvenile Judge John Williams, 53 percent to 47 percent, in another of the more close and contentious judicial races.

Tuesday's results left Democrats searching for a silver lining. Hamilton County Democratic Chairman Tim Burke noted that the party did pick up one judgeship it didn't have previously, as well as a state Board of Education seat that it shares with Warren County. Cecil Thomas handily kept the 9th Ohio Senate District blue despite a strong push and a lot of money from Republican Charlie Winburn. And Auditor Dusty Rhodes easily held off challenger Mike Mezher Jr.

"I'm not trying to be Pollyanna – we got our asses handed to us," Burke said. "That's slower progress than I'd like."

In addition to Luken and Branch, other Democratic losses included Fanon Rucker for the 1st District Court of Appeals and Ray Pater for Hamilton County Domestic Relations Court. Courthouse races aside, Micah Kamrass was unable to hold the 28th Ohio House District that's being vacated by fellow Dem Connie Pillich in northeast Hamilton County, and Republican Commissioner Chris Monzel coasted back into office despite some community anger over his removal of Music Hall from the icon tax in August.

Burke's Republican counterpart, Alex Triantafilou, was thrilled with Tuesday's results in a county where President Barack Obama took 26,000 more votes than Republican Mitt Romney two years ago.

"This county goes back and forth," Triantafilou said. "It's purple. But it's red tonight."

And Tuesday's results will mean judgeships for three more Republicans: Judge Russell Mock will be leaving a vacancy on Municipal Court after being elected to the Court of Appeals; Winkler's win will leave a Common Pleas judgeship open; and Patrick Dinkelacker, who was elected to Common Pleas, will leave a Court of Appeals opening.

Gov. John Kasich will make those appointments based on recommendations from the county, and Triantafilou said early Wednesday that he had already begun hearing from Republicans interested in the jobs.

While Republicans move onward and upward, Democrats are assessing where they go from here. Rob Richardson Jr., a Hamilton County Democratic insider, said his party needs to make changes at both the state and local levels.

"This wasn't a good night no matter how you look at it," he said. "It's clear that mistakes were made. I'm not necessarily pointing to any particular person."

Richardson wants to see better candidate recruitment and a grassroots infrastructure that doesn't depend on presidential campaigns to get out the Democratic vote.

Burke, however, feels good about the prospects of several young Hamilton County Democrats.

"Micah may have lost tonight, but he's a superstar in the making," Burke said. Cincinnati Councilman P.G. Sittenfeld "is our next statewide candidate, I think."

He also mentioned state Rep. Denise Driehaus and state Rep.-elect Christie Bryant as rising stars.

Richardson said the party and its candidates also need take a hard look at their messaging: "When you let one side define the issue and you're always reacting, you lose. Democrats have had trouble going on offense. Look at the Affordable Care Act. Democrats run away from it even though it's working."

Conversations are sure to continue as the reverberations of this midterm election are felt from the halls of Congress to the halls of the Hamilton County Courthouse.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1tZAMl6