A man looks over the Affordable Care Act (commonly known as Obamacare) signup page on the HealthCare.gov website in New York in this October 2, 2013 photo illustration. REUTERS/Mike Segar

3911764

While the media thoroughly covers the federal government shutdown, much less attention is paid to problems with the roll-out of the Affordable Care Act (better known as Obamacare).

The media is paying a blind eye to the potential civil rights crisis it paves the way for.

Obamacare’s glitches and long waits for would-be applicants are well-documented, but there’s part of the rollout not catching the attention of many in the media.

As the Washington Examiner noted before the official enrollment even began, Obamacare applicants must provide some sort of identification verification. While that officially does not include a state-issued ID, it seems this exemption doesn’t protect America’s most vulnerable from having to jump through what have been described as far-reaching and insurmountable hoops.

Social Security cards, for example, are valid identification for Obamacare, but don’t forget that getting one requires proof of identity and U.S. citizenship. Per the Social Security Administration’s own website, one can only prove their identity with some form of state-issued identification.

It appears that, in order to receive Obamacare subsidies, enrollees may need state-issued identification.

It’s ironic, then, that Attorney General Eric Holder recently sued the state of North Carolina over its new voter ID law. The state law allows prospective voters three years — until the 2016 elections — to obtain a valid ID to vote. Obamacare, available for enrollment as of October 1, begins punishing those without identification in just three months through its individual mandate.

Seeing the hypocrisy here is unavoidable, but more important is what all this reveals about the voter ID debate.

Liberals fight relentlessly to protect minorities – particularly African-Americans – from alleged barriers to voting. On the surface, this seems commendable. But, considering it is nearly impossible to participate in today’s economy without valid identification, there is more to the ID issue than voting rights.

It is virtually impossible to open a checking account, travel by rail or air and apply for college or most jobs without proper identification. Subsidies offered through Obamacare are now also out of the reach to those lacking state-issued identification.