A Central Wisconsin man got to do something most never get the chance to do in a lifetime; he got the opportunity to introduce the President of the United States.

Brent Brown of Mosinee, a self-proclaimed republican, wrote a letter to president Obama thinking he wouldn’t even open it. His message caught his eye and Brown was welcomed to meet and introduce the President Thursday in Milwaukee.

“(I want) to present to you, the man that saved my life, and the President of this great United States of America, Barack Obama,” Brown said as he introduced Obama.

Brown’s message to the President was simple.

“I wanted to thank President Obama for saving my life for the Affordable Care Act,” Brown said.

Brown has an autoimmune disease that, without the Affordable Care Act, could have killed him; since the inception of the Affordable Care Act, he's been able to afford the medicine and surgeries to help cure the disease.

And when asked if he got an ultimatum from a doctor, Brown said he didn’t.

“Not this long to live, however, the last time that I was in the hospital, it was pretty serious and grave,” Brown said.

Brown was able to get health insurance and have surgery to help cure the disease.

“I am in the process of recovering, of healing, and hopefully returning to a normalcy in life; something that has been lacking for a very long time,” Brown said.

According to Brown, the meeting was “other worldly.”

“’The opportunity of a lifetime’ is the first phrase that would come to mind,” Brown exclaimed.

Eau Claire Republican Chair, Mike Conlin, says some people are no longer alive and some people are alive because of the Affordable Care Act, but the price of healthcare hasn’t changed.

“It did nothing to address these causes for the high prices for healthcare in America; all it did was change the insurance rules,” Conlin said.

Brown came to Eau Claire tonight for a live interview on the show “All In with Chris Hayes” on MSNBC. Brown said he will remain a Republican, but his meeting with the President is something he’ll never forget.