Product rolled out at Longmont Triathalon

Longmont triathlete Jim Hallberg is a Boulder Salt Co. client. Boulder Salt is a salt product which provides potassium, magnesium, and calcium along with the sodium. Endurance athletes are a main target demographic of the company, although its founders say the product will benefit anyone. ( Lewis Geyer / TIMES-CALL )

The origins of Longmont-based Boulder Salt Co. reach back more than a decade, to when founder Bruce Neeld was living in Ohio.

Boulder Salt Co. bouldersaltcompany.com

"I had the opportunity to do a lot of water analysis," said Neeld, a research chemist by trade. "Parts-per-million, there are probably hundreds of things in there. If I went down to parts-per-billion, there are probably thousands of things in there.

"I analyzed enough water that it kind of scared me."

So he decided to make his own water. Just distilling water didn't taste good, and he knew it lacked some key chemicals that water has that are beneficial, so he started experimenting with chemicals — electrolytes — he could add to his water.

He landed on a blend of sodium, magnesium, potassium and calcium, and those are the ingredients in Boulder Salt, the company's flagship product. It was formally introduced just a few weeks ago at the Longmont Triathalon.

Boulder Salt Co. is back after a major disruption that almost completely derailed the company. In fact, one brief conversation during a carpooling session brought the company back from the brink with a brand new focus and some key new team members.

Jeff Linroth, the company's vice president of finance, said he was first told about Boulder Salt Co. by his wife, Sue, a triathlete who had a chance meeting with Neeld while the two were carpooling with some mutual friends down to the zoo one day. Linroth, a business consultant and financial adviser, was no stranger to start-up companies but he said he took an approach of "healthy skepticism" when setting up a meeting with Neeld.

Advertisement

"I started to get excited after I had a couple conversations with Bruce," Linroth said. He said that after listening to Neeld "thoroughly and carefully," he was convinced that Neeld's knowledge and passion to make Boulder Salt Co. a success was a good reason to become involved.

"Usually when you have those two things you can find the business structure that will drive that idea forward and make things happen that will help people," Linroth said.

Bad news out of China, and then a breakthrough

Boulder Salt Co. sells its products in a box containing 60 individual packets — each packet one serving — or in bulk one-pound bags. So far the product is only available online. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

Neeld came to Colorado in 2006 to work for Circle Graphics, a company that hired him to start its chemistry department. Circle Graphics is a Longmont-based company that makes billboards and signage of all sizes, including ones big enough to decorate the sides of skyscrapers. It decided to start designing its own paper and inks instead of paying a third party.

"It was about 2008 when the idea gelled that I wanted to form a company," Neeld said, based around the formula that he had created for making his own salt. Sebastian Sanchez, another chemist Neeld had hired to work with him at Circle Graphics, liked the idea and agreed to be part of the salt company. In a matter of months the pair had created a website, advertising the product, and not long after Neeld found himself in Beijing, meeting with a Chinese client.

The Chinese were hungry for nutritional products such as his that came from the U.S., Neeld said, and over the next couple of years it was everything that he and Sanchez could do — using a manufacturer in Denver — to keep up with demand from China.

But the Chinese government stepped in and started levying a huge new tax against Neeld's product that it never had before, effectively shutting down business in China almost overnight.

Simultaneously going through some difficult personal issues at home, those were dark days, Neeld recalled.

"Sebastian wasn't quite as close to throwing in the towel as I was," Neeld said last week. "Thank goodness he wasn't."

It was during that time that Neeld met Sue Linroth on that zoo trip. He told her the story of the failed China business opportunity, and told Linroth, a triathlete and endurance-sport enthusiast, about his product. The key was the electrolytes, he said.

It's a simple formula: sodium, calcium, magnesium and potassium. Each serves a particular purpose, and it took a couple dozen recipes to get the balance of effectiveness and taste just right, he said. The salt can be sprinkled over food, or mixed with water in a bike bottle.

"He was a chemist by profession, but a natural, holistic nutritionist by passion," said Linroth, adding that she was immediately intrigued.

"From the athlete's standpoint, I was thinking this is a terrific product. ... (I thought) my husband's a business consultant and I'm in marketing — I thought we might be able to help him."

A year and a half later, Boulder Salt Co. is up and running. Along with endurance athletes, the target markets are restaurants and, especially, schools, Jeff Linroth said.

Schools have been ordered to reduce the amount of sodium kids consume, and Boulder Salt Co.'s formula does just that without reducing the taste at all, Neeld said.

So far it's only available online, but the four see a lot of potential. They also see the opportunity for the product to do some real good in developing countries, where nourishment continues to be a major health problem.

"My goal is to get this healthy salt into the hands of as many people as we can," Neeld said.

Longmont-based triathlete and coach Jim Hallberg is a fan of the product. Introduced to it by Sue Linroth, he said he recommends it to his clients who are also endurance athletes.

Hallberg said he likes to use Boulder Salt Co. as an additive to his food, as well as mix it in gels that he makes to chew on while he riding long distances. He said you don't need to be a hard-core athlete to see the product's benefit.

"Anybody's who's just recreationally active would see benefit from this," Hallberg said.

Incidentally, the name "Boulder Salt" does not stem from the fact that our county seat is known globally as one of the fittest places on the planet, Neeld said, although that certainly doesn't hurt. He said his son actually gave him the idea for the name.

"Looking under the microscope, my son said, 'there's boulders in that salt,'" Neeld said. "It has big particles and small particles. That's part of how it tastes different too."

Currently the business is run out of Neeld's home, but plans are to move the manufacturing of the product to Longmont once sales pick up, Jeff Linroth said.

Contact Times-Call staff writer Tony Kindelspire at 303-684-5291 or tkindelspire@times-call.com