<p>File photo (NBCSL/SPECIAL TO THE NEWS SENTINEL)</p>

By Tom Humphrey

Joseph E. Armstrong started down the political path as Knox County’s youngest commissioner in 1982, moved on to positions of power and influence at the state Legislature under Democratic rule, then — after Republicans gained control of the General Assembly — gained national prominence as president of the National Caucus of Black State Legislators.

At age 58, his two-year term as caucus president ended in January, and he had settled into a legislative role as an often-outspoken advocate for minority viewpoints who was nonetheless willing to work with majority Republicans on business-related matters as a respected senior state lawmaker.

Armstrong, elected to represent House District 15 in 1988, is tied with House Speaker Beth Harwell and Deputy Speaker Steve McDaniel, both Republicans, for being the House’s most senior member after election to 14 two-year terms.

He won his seat by defeating former Rep. Pete Drew, who was elected as a Democrat but switched parties to become a Republican in a district that included most of Knoxville’s black population, then and now. Armstrong had just over 55 percent of the vote in defeating Drew.

Photo gallery: Joe Armstrong through the years

As a county commissioner, Armstrong rose to become vice chairman of the Knox County Commission. As a legislator in the days of Democratic dominance, he became chairman of the House Health and Human Resources Committee at a time when the panel was involved in legislation that implemented TennCare and other measures that laid a foundation for today’s laws on state health care.

He held the same role years later when Democratic Gov. Phil Bredesen moved to reduce enrollment in TennCare — a move Armstrong opposed and, in the process, helped modify before the cuts took place.

Armstrong also served a term as chairman of the Black Caucus in Tennessee’s Legislature.

He was appointed by President Obama to the White House Health Task Force on Health Reform in 2009, a part of the president’s efforts toward developing, implementing and enacting the Affordable Care Act. In this year’s legislative session, he made several speeches in support of Gov. Bill Haslam’s Insure Tennessee proposal to expand Medicaid in the state that was killed by the GOP majority.

Armstrong held the House Health Committee chair when prosecutors say the events occurred that led to Wednesday’s indictment on fraud and tax evasion charges tied to an increase in the state’s cigarette tax, enacted in 2007 at the urging of then-Gov. Phil Bredesen.

Armstrong had long advocated higher cigarette taxes, declaring as Health Committee chairman that anything reducing consumption would promote health. A year before Bredesen’s tax increase was approved, he sponsored a bill raising the cigarette taxes with revenue earmarked for lowering the state sales tax on food. After Bredesen’s bill passed, he declared the 42-cents-per-pack increase “should have been a dollar.”

Under state law, each pack of cigarettes must bear a stamp as evidence the tax has been paid. State officials reported tax collections spiked just before the tax hike went into effect and then fell substantially below projections in July of that year, just after the law took effect. The state revenue commissioner at the time attributed the numbers to dealers stockpiling tax stamps at the lower rate before the increase became law.

Armstrong’s wife, LeTonia, is a longtime lobbyist for pharmaceutical companies. For years, she represented Abbott Laboratories in Tennessee and other southeastern states. The company split into two divisions in 2011, and LeTonia Armstrong continued as a regional lobbyist for one of them, AbbVie — although she stopped registering as a lobbyist in the Tennessee Legislature in 2012, records indicate, while continuing to represent Abbvie in other states.

Armstrong, the youngest of eight children born in Knoxville to Charles Louie and Pauline Armstrong, graduated from Holston High School. Armstrong has described his father as a devoutly religious man.

He was previously married to Alethia Armstrong, who when he first ran for the House in 1988 was a research analyst for the Senate State and Local Government Committee, then chaired by state Sen. Avon Williams, D-Nashville. Armstrong has three children by that marriage.

Armstrong has had various business interests, ranging from insurance and banking to serving as chairman of the board for TenGasco, a natural gas distribution company.

He is the owner of Knoxville radio station WJBE, through a limited liability company called Arm & Rage. He bought the station two years ago when it was known as WWAM and then changed the call sign to WJBE — the name used by a past Knoxville station established by famed soul singer James Brown. Under Brown, those letters stood for James Brown Enterprises.

Armstrong was a sales representative for WJBE in the late 1970s while attending the University of Tennessee, where he graduated with a degree in business administration in 1981.

He has been active in various civic organizations, ranging from the Boys & Girls Club to the Optimist Club and from the NAACP to the Beck Cultural Exchange Center. He is a trustee of First A.M.E. Zion Church.

Armstrong has had a pile of awards over the years, including being named twice as Legislator of the Year by the National Caucus of Black State Legislators and once by the Tennessee Association of Human Resource Agencies, along with a humanitarian award from the Tennessee chapter of the Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks of the World.

His tenure as a legislator has not been without controversy, perhaps most notably from the national perspective when in 2011 he objected to the University of Tennessee bookstore selling breath mints — marketed as “Disappointmints” — mocking President Obama. After his objections, UT took the product off the shelves. Armstrong subsequently said he’d made a mistake.

This session, Armstrong led a lonely and unsuccessful effort to mandate seat belts on school buses after a fatal crash involving two buses in Knoxville. Members of the Republican majority opposed the move as too costly for school systems.

But he often worked with Republicans on other issues, particularly less-noticed quirks in state law. For example, he and former Sen. Stacey Campfield, R-Knoxville, jointly and successfully sponsored a bill allowing cosmetologists to give manicures to the disabled at their homes — as opposed to prior law that said manicures could be provided only at a licensed place of business.

In general, Armstrong has a reputation of a crafty, amiable lawmaker with a sense of humor, well versed in parliamentary procedural maneuvering, always aligning with fellow Democrats on social issues but willing to talk compromise, as a release announcing his leadership of the black caucus indicated in 2013.

“Rep. Armstrong stresses political participation on all levels of government, believing it is the one true way to improve the quality of life and assure freedom and equality for all," the release said. "He is often quoted as saying, 'Voting is our choice of hope.' ”