ST. LOUIS — For one inning, Jorge Soler and all those Chicago Cubs rookies looked like playoff-tested veterans and the St. Louis Cardinals appeared shaken.

That’s all it took.

Kyle Hendricks and Addison Russell had successful squeeze bunts and Soler capped a five-run (all unearned) second inning with a two-run homer off Jaime Garcia, and the Cubs held off the Cardinals 6-3 on Saturday night to even their NL division series at a game apiece.

“Listen, I can’t be more proud of our guys,” manager Joe Maddon said. “When you win a wild-card game like we did, I promise you, you settle in. We didn’t win yesterday, but we were not overwhelmed by anything.”

Maddon made all the right moves a night after the Cubs lost the opener 4-0. Now the teams shift to Wrigley Field for Game 3 on Monday, the first playoff game at the friendly confines since 2008, where Chicago’s 22-game winner Jake Arrieta faces St. Louis’ Michael Wacha in the best-of-five series.

“Getting back there 1-1 with our big dog on the mound, the atmosphere is going to be good,” Cubs first baseman Anthony Rizzo said.

BOXSCORE: Cubs 6, Cardinals 2

The usually steady NL Central champion Cardinals made two errors as the Cubs didn’t hit the ball out of the infield in scoring their first three runs in the second.

“It is hard to watch a club that’s played so well defensively, see a couple things happen that are kind of uncharacteristic for us,” Cardinals manager Mike Matheny said.

Making his first postseason start, Soler connected off Garcia (0-1), who was lifted because of a stomach ailment after the second. The Cubs have been working Soler back into the mix after he returned from a left oblique strain in mid-September.

“All I was trying to do was help the team win,” Soler said through a translator. “He got a ball up where I could hit it hard.”

Garcia told the team he felt a bit ill about an hour before the game but thought he would be fine.

“I was going to pitch, it was my game,” Garcia said. “I worked so hard all year for this situation and unfortunately it didn’t go my way, but no excuse.”

Dexter Fowler, Soler and Starlin Castro each had two of Chicago’s six hits in a game played in front of a lively crowd of 47,859, a postseason record at 10-year-old Busch Stadium, which included thousands of Cubs fans.

Soler also doubled and walked twice in the Cubs’ first postseason victory since 2003. Chicago had lost seven straight Division Series games.

The Cardinals homered three times, including a leadoff long ball by Matt Carpenter. Consecutive shots by Kolten Wong and pinch-hitter Randal Grichuk with two outs in the fifth chased Hendricks one out shy of qualifying for the victory in his postseason debut.