Pull it together Here are some more ways to pull your look together, courtesy of Boulder professional stylist Marian Rothschild (marianrothschild.com), author of the book, "Look Good Now and Always." • Accessorize: Wear sunglasses when it's sunny. When it's breezy, wear a scarf that flatters your skin or matches your eyes. Swap out your old glasses for a pair of classic, plastic frames in a color that matches your hair. • Wear a sport jacket: Pair a jacket with slacks or properly fitting, dark-wash jeans in a straight cut. • Vest side: Consider wearing a vest. Just make sure it buttons comfortably. • Go black: Black shoes match everything. Pick narrow-toe (not round) slip-ons or lace-ups. • Add blue: When wearing a suit, pair it with either a blue shirt or a blue tie. • Stand up straight: Slouching will get you nowhere — career-wise, date-wise and respect-wise.

Kendall Qualls was so appalled that he took a photo of the man, dining in a nice restaurant. A VPL (visible panty line) had nothing on this man's VPC (visible plumber's crack).

"I've seen enough underwear by now, and man, it's killing me. The involuntary exposure is not a pretty sight," Qualls says. "I'm sad that I have to say it, but it happens too frequently: Wear a belt."

That's his first piece of advice for the modern American man.

He also thinks every man should own a navy blue blazer and a collared shirt, either a polo or dress shirt.

These aren't revolutionary ideas, but they are far from commonplace in today's society, says Qualls, of Erie. He says the degeneration in the American man's attire is directly linked with the decline in chivalry, manners and, well, self-respect. He's working on a book about this topic, "Man up and Dress Up: Reviving American Masculinity and Chivalry."

Kendall Qualls, of Erie, is working on a book about cleaning up the way American men dress and act. (Courtesy photo)

"It's starkingly embarrassing for American men. We need to sharpen this up," Qualls says.

"Man Up" will identify some of the common concerns about how men look and act and provide specific solutions that any man can implement to transform his life, and that of the women around him, Qualls says.

Multiple studies have shown women aren't impressed with how men treat them these days. One study, by Scaramouche & Fandango, found 61 percent of women polled preferred the image of a man in the '50s to young men of today, in large part because of their manners.

That's not to say we should regress to the '50s and remove women from the workforce, Qualls says.

"But just because women have advanced doesn't mean we're off the hook" and can let it all go, Qualls says.

Qualls says his campaign has nothing to do with socio-economic lines; hyper-casual dress of the typical American male — a T-shirt and baggy jeans — spans age, income and is not just relegated to notoriously relaxed Colorado.

"The message is for American men that they need to sharpen up," he says.

Qualls is running a Kickstarter campaign to raise money to publish his book nationally. Otherwise, he hopes to self-publish it.

Qualls, vice president of marketing for a $27 billion global medical device company, says he's not blaming men.

"They don't know any better," he says. "Believe me, it's not being rude. The culture reinforces this. What has happened to the guys?"

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay