Praha Restaurant & Bar Food: 3 stars Service: 2 stars Ambience: 3 stars Price: $$-$$$ Address: 7521 Ute Highway, Longmont Contact: 303-702-1180 or praharestaurant.com Hours: 4:30 p.m.-close Tuesday-Saturday Credit cards: Accepted Noise level: The sound level was initially low but escalated considerably as a large holiday party was seated. But once they had their entrees and the group was intently focused on their dinner, the noise dropped back to low..

Just north of Hygiene between Longmont and Lyons on Colorado Highway 66, you'll find the Praha Restaurant and Bar, a venue easily mistaken for one of the farmhouses dotting this area. But step inside, and you'll discover that Praha, whose name references the Czech capital, Prague, more closely resembles a quaint European country inn.

A friendly greeting awaits those entering the dining room. While the table settings lean more toward a white tablecloth formality, touches of folk art and the staff's hospitable vibe set the stage for a comfortably leisurely meal.

Serving happy hour and dinner, Praha boasts a bistro menu featuring entrees such as marinated steak and Provencal chicken with lemon and olives. But the more intriguing and rarefied choices are the Czech specialties ranging from pork schnitzels to beefy sauerbraten.

The kitchen boasts a chef with European experience, including stints in some of Austria's grand hotels. The mastery of classic fine-dining technique one would expect was unmistakably evident in the $7 escargot starter. A trio of snails arrived accompanied by airy puff pastry rounds dressed in a delicate but lively garlic herb butter that complemented but did obscure the escargot's subtlety. The escargot themselves were of optimum texture, eschewing rubbery consistency and instead resembling quality shellfish with a hint of give.

A green side salad, which costs $5 with an entree, spotlighted the appealingly mellow house vinaigrette. This dressing was a traditional composition relying on just the right measure of red wine vinegar, rounded out by aromatic herbs. The greens were bracingly fresh, and their eye-catching, if not artful, presentation indicated the kitchen put some thought into their display.

Soup, included with my entree, changes daily. The special du jour was dubbed the Princess Caroline, which triggered a brief flashback to '70s vintage People magazine covers. Building on a carrot base, adorned with bright rosemary and possessing a low key creaminess, this revelatory soup was far more nuanced and complex than the ingredients would indicate.

Drawing on the bistro selections, my dining companion opted for the $19 shrimp spätzle entree. Translated as "little sparrows," the featured pasta is best described as a hearty hybrid of a noodle and a dumpling. My dining companion found comforting pleasure in this dish, and the consistency favorably evoked a properly crafted risotto. Havarti horseradish sauce was the crowning touch, adding the pleasures of a solid macaroni and cheese in a more sophisticated package.

The $38 Praha Haus Special is a perfect choice for either the indecisive or the Czech completist. Served on a plate best described as a sprawling piece of real estate, this course can easily feed two. A wienerschntizel achieved perfection in light breading and frying, making for a grease-free delight spotlighting enjoyable pork flavor. Less successful was an overdone roast duck quarter that was devoid of any pink meat. A potatoes Lyonnaise side also would have benefited from less cooking, although the red cabbage accompaniment nicely balanced sweet and sour. The star of the plate was the the rahmschnitzel, which is not an '80s metal band. Instead, it was an impeccable blend of wine sauce and mushrooms atop a tender pork cutlet that held considerable rustic charm and heartiness.

There was no doubting the friendliness of the servers, although some of their presentation wasn't as polished as one would expect. For example, a different staffer from the one who had served us for most of the meal assumed dessert duties, and he disclosed he was new to the job. His identification of one of the $8 sweets as a brownie was off the mark — it was actually a rum ball. Fortunately there was no harm from this misidentification, as my observant companion had correctly identified this treat. The rum ball was thoroughly shot through with rich chocolate flavor, and it didn't go overboard on the alcohol.

The Granny Smith strudel is as satisfying as can be, highlighting tart sweet apples melded with whipped cream, earthy nuts and buttery pastry. Praha sells a ready-to-bake takeout version, and it's easy to see why this would be a popular item. The less scrupulous might even pass it off as their own, from an old family recipe.

Given the location and prices on the upper end of moderate, Praha might work best as a special-occasion spot. Yet, if one craves a meal skillfully balancing both classical technique with rural heartiness, you'd be hard-pressed to do better than a dinner of a starter, rahmschnitzel and strudel.