Mid Penn Bank, which already has an office in Tower City, will expand in Schuylkill County by acquiring Miners Bank, pending approval by regulators and shareholders of the companies.

“We’re merging into (Mid Penn),” George H. Groves, president and chief executive officer of Miners Bank, said Thursday.

The merger, which Mid Penn and Miners anticipate will be completed early in 2015, along with the planned acquisition of First National Bank of Minersville by The Gratz Bank, will leave Schuylkill County without a bank headquartered within its boundaries.

Mid Penn Bancorp Inc. is the parent company of Mid Penn, which has 14 offices and is headquartered in Millersburg. Miners Bank, whose parent company is Phoenix Bancorp Inc., has four offices — Frackville, Minersville, Tremont and Conyngham — and is headquartered in North Manheim Township.

Groves said the merger is a necessary step for Miners, Mid Penn and their customers.

“The economic environment for small banks is a very challenging one,” he said.

It is harder for small banks to create revenue than it is for large ones, Groves said. In addition, the changes brought about the federal Affordable Care Act, greater competition and increased regulations also have made life more difficult for small banks, according to Groves.

Miners Bank’s customers will benefit from the merger, Groves said.

“They’ll have more products and services, especially on the consumer side,” he said.

Additionally, business customers will be able to borrow greater amounts of money as a result of the merger, according to Groves.

While Miners will be merged into Mid Penn, Groves said its four offices will retain the Miners Bank name.

Groves said Miners also will keep its headquarters office on Route 61 between Pottsville and Schuylkill Haven, and will operate as Miners Bank, a division of Mid Penn Bank.

According to Mid Penn, Phoenix board Chairman Vincent J. Land and board members Robert Moisey and Noble C. Quandel Jr. will join its board after the merger is completed.

Under the terms of the merger, Phoenix shareholders will receive either 3.167 shares of Mid Penn common stock or $51.60 in cash for each share they own, according to Mid Penn.

“The merger enables Mid Penn and ... Miners Bank to work together to bring the best in banking products and services to the communities in which we operate,” Rory G. Ritrievi, president and CEO of Mid Penn, said.