Viewpoints on abortion, the Ebola virus, marijuana and health care — and nearly $2 million in campaign cash — now divide Bucks County Congressman Mike Fitzpatrick and Kevin Strouse, his Democratic challenger for the 8th Congressional District seat.

On Thursday, more than 200 people packed a Bucks County Community College campus room as Fitzpatrick, a three-term Republican U.S. representative, fended off attacks from Strouse, a former CIA analyst who moved to the area two years ago.

Strouse took the podium and immediately went on the offensive, reminding voters of the 16-day government shutdown in October 2013.

Fitzpatrick, in turn, reminded voters of his Levittown roots and "Bucks County common sense."

Strouse said he would legalize marijuana — an idea Fitzpatrick called "awful."

The congressman said Strouse would ignore the nation's $17 trillion debt and increase spending.

8th Congressional District Debate Contributed Photo, THE MORNING CALL U.S. Rep. Mike Fitzpatrick, R-8th District. U.S. Rep. Mike Fitzpatrick, R-8th District. (Contributed Photo, THE MORNING CALL)

The Democratic challenger argued a vote for Fitzpatrick would lead to "two more years of inaction, finger-pointing and blaming the president."

'Shrinking middle class'

Asked about the middle class, Strouse said he would support "fundamental, sweeping investments" in education, infrastructure and tax reforms.

"If we don't have the best-trained workforce in the world, then we won't have the most dynamic economy in the world," he said. "I am a believer that we can grow our way out of debt."

Fitzpatrick pounced on those remarks. "He wants to increase taxes and increase spending," Fitzpatrick told the audience.

8th Congressional District Debate Frank Pronesti, The Morning Call Democrat Kevin Strouse is a candidate for U.S. Congress in Pennsylvania's 8th District. Democrat Kevin Strouse is a candidate for U.S. Congress in Pennsylvania's 8th District. (Frank Pronesti, The Morning Call)

"I think Washington has taken too much away from the middle class," he continued. "They take away your choice in everything from education to health care. They say that everybody has to have this health care."

Affordable Care Act

Strouse called the Affordable Care Act a "good first step." Some 7,400 residents of the 8th District have received health coverage because of the Obamacare, Strouse argued, citing a July 2014 report by the House Committee on Energy and Commerce.

Fitzpatrick isn't buying that. "I would say an equal number have lost their health care under the Affordable Care Act," the congressman insisted.

National Security and privacy

Fitzpatrick said he's voted against re-authorizing the Patriot Act because he's "not convinced that enough is being done to protect our privacy." Numerous times he voted against extending provisions of counter-terrorism and surveillance programs born out of the Sept. 11 attacks.

"Some of these agencies are infringing on the privacy rights of American citizens," he said.

Strouse said he worked with many intelligence officers at the CIA.

"I didn't meet a single one who joined because they wanted to spy on Americans," he said. The overreaction of Congress was the real fear at CIA, Strouse said. "Because if we get attacked again, our legislators will overreact and take away our civil liberties," Strouse added.

Politics and political parties

Asked about gerrymandering, Fitzpatrick and Strouse each pledged support for a non-partisan commission to redraw the political boundaries in Pennsylvania. Strouse said he believes voters registered as independent should be allowed to vote in primary elections.

Fitzpatrick talked about term limits and an end to government pension plans. The congressman also said he'd been consulted before the last congressional redistricting.

"When our district was being redrawn, I was being told by folks in Harrisburg, 'You know, if we take off the lower half of Bucks County and make it part of Philadelphia that would make it an easier seat for you to win,' " Fitzpatrick said. "My answer was no, absolutely no."

Marijuana

Strouse said he'd vote to legalize pot.

"I think the bigger problem we have now in this country is a criminal justice problem, and we're throwing way too many men, typically young poor men, into prison, for non-violent crimes, and that's where they learn to become violent criminals," Strouse said.

Fitzpatrick called legalizing pot "an awful idea."

"It's a gateway drug to so many other drugs," Fitzpatrick said. "It's going to increase use. It's going to increase the need for treatment facilities. We already have a drug problem in this country. This is only going to make it worse."

Gay marriage

Same-sex unions are an issue for states to decide, Fitzpatrick said.

For Strouse, gay marriage is a no-brainer. "We need to move forward in history," he said. "Let them get married."

Ebola

Fitzpatrick said he wants a travel ban on West African nations where the Ebola virus is active. "This is a virus that needs to be contained and destroyed where it is," Fitzpatrick said. "To permit unrestricted travel … is dangerous."

Strouse accused Fitzpatrick of playing politics with the disease. "A travel ban is sticking our heads in the sand," he said. "We need calm rational leadership on Ebola. If you're worried about getting sick this winter, get your flu shot."

Money and supporters

Fitzpatrick raised $2.89 million in the run up to the election, campaign finance records show. Nearly half of that money came from political action committees.

An analysis by the Center for Responsive Politics showed top campaign contributions to Fitzpatrick from Comcast Corp. ($18,500), the Newtown engineering firm Teletronics Technology ($14,500), McCaffery Auto Group ($12,600) and numerous law firms.

As of Sept. 30, Fitzpatrick had $2.2 million cash on hand, according the Federal Election Commission.

Strouse's war chest pales in comparison. He reported $1.3 million in campaign donations, with about 15 percent coming from PACs.

Top contributors to Strouse's campaign include representatives from the investment brokers Turner Investments ($11,550), Energy Capital Partners ($10,400) and Jane Street Capital ($9,300).

Nearly all of that money is gone, however. As of Sept. 30, the Democrat reported just $174,000 in the bank.