POLITICO JOURNALISM INSTITUTE Mental health advocates: Loss of subsidies would take big toll in Florida

This story is part of the POLITICO Journalism Institute, a journalism training program offered to students by POLITICO. The program allows students to write, edit and produce news stories.

If the Supreme Court rules to eliminate insurance subsidies for millions of Americans, mental health care in Florida would be especially hard hit.

Story Continued Below

Florida has the most at stake in this case since it has more people receiving subsidies than any of the 34 states that depend on the federal exchange. Of about 6.4 million people affected, 1.3 million Floridians could potentially lose federal advocates subsidies, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation.

The state ranks 49th in per capita spending on mental health care, which is about $37.28 per person. As such, a loss of subsidies would leave Florida’s “underfunded system” even more crippled, said Dr. Steven Ronik, chief executive officer for Henderson Behavioral Health in Hollywood, Florida.

This month, the high court is expected to decide whether the Affordable Care Act allows people who buy medical coverage from the federal exchange are eligible to receive subsidies. Mental health advocates say these subsidies have been crucial in making it possible for the mentally ill to afford health care. As a result, a loss of subsidies could have devastating health effects and strain the health care system, advocates and providers say.

“I think what's going to happen is most people — without the subsidies, they won’t be able to afford insurance. They will become uninsured, and their options would be, if they get sick, to essentially go to an emergency room,” Ronik said. “So it would be a terrible decision … because we’re going to pay for it in other ways.”

To make matters worse, Florida is stuck in political limbo over Medicaid expansion, which could potentially bring health coverage to about 800,000 Floridians.

And though Florida legislators have introduced at least 22 bills in an effort to reform their state’s mental health care this past legislative session, most of the measures went nowhere, including bills that would have improved coordination between state and mental health programs. Some of the efforts also sought to reform the way people with mental illness are dealt with in prisons, schools and other public institutions.

Overall, the Affordable Care Act increases access to mental health care by requiring most insurance companies to offer coverage for mental health and substance abuse services with coverage being comparable to coverage for medical and surgical care. People with mental health issues have often struggled to afford care, advocates and providers say.

“The affordability of mental health and addiction coverage has been one of the major barriers to people getting appropriate mental health and addiction services,” said Mark Covall, president and CEO of the National Association of Psychiatric Health Systems. “So obviously, any change that would make those insurance policies more expensive — or in many cases, unaffordable — that would be a major negative for people who have mental and addictive disorders.”

When people go without coverage and treatment, a mental illness can fester into psychotic episodes, suicidal and homicidal urges and can lead to incarceration, said Denise Marzullo, director of Mental Health America of Northeast Florida.

Even though states form contracts with hospitals and clinics to provide funding for the uninsured, Florida’s second-to-last-place funding for mental health treatment forces hospitals and clinics to reserve resources for people with the most serious conditions, Ronik added.

In addition, Florida law requires that patients be provided with 30 days of medication once discharged from a hospital or clinic. But if those patients don’t have health insurance, they are not likely to continue treatment, Marzullo said.

One option for the uninsured is community-based mental health programs, but Marzullo said there aren’t enough of these programs in Florida and there aren’t enough psychiatrists participating in these organizations.

Untreated mental health disorders can have a domino effect on other aspects of a patient’s health and life, notes Jay Wolfson, a public health, medicine and pharmacy professor at the University of South Florida. Since mental and physical health are intimately connected, accessing mental health services can affect access to other care, such as treatment for diabetes or cardiovascular disease, Wolfson said.

In addition, untreated mental health disorders can lead to job loss, addiction and other hardships for families, Wolfson noted. “Mental health has a double-pronged effect.”

Authors: