He teamed up with celebrity chef Pete Evans for a clean living tour and worked as a personal trainer for Angelina Jolie while she was recently filming in Australia.

And it's not hard to see exactly why former reality star Luke Hines is a favourite among the famous.

The buff My Kitchen Rules contestant showed off his sculpted physique on Saturday when he stripped down to his budgy smugglers on Sydney's Bondi Beach.

Scroll down for video

Buff body: Personal trainer and former My Kitchen Rules star Luke Hines showed off his rippling abs as he went for a dip in Bondi on Saturday

Beach body: The 30-year-old hunk put his sculpted physique on display and soon relieved himself of his shorts and hat

Making the most of the Summer sun, the 30-year-old was spotted working on his tan on the iconic stretch of coastline.

His rippling abs on display, the blonde hunk quickly relieved himself of his board shorts and snap back cap to reveal a powder-blue pair of Speedos with the word 'Sydney' scrawled across the back.

After indulging in a refreshing dip he pushed his wet hair back away from his face and laid out in the sun to dry off.

Stripping down: He went for a quick dip in his budgie smugglers before laying out in the sun

Upcoming launch: Luke has a lot on his plate at the moment with his paleo cook book due to be released in January

The gorgeous Bondi based PT has continued spreading his passion for nutrition and fitness after his stint on My Kitchen Rules.

After appearing as a fitness expert on Today Tonight, Luke and his reality TV partner-in-crime Scott Gooding are preparing to lunch their paleo cook book Clean Living at the beginning of next year.

He also recently embarked on a nationwide eating and lifestyle tour with MKR judge Pete Evans.

Throughout a series of seminars the pair gave an inspirational guide to overhauling your lifestyle to better your health and fitness.

Encore! He also recently announced a second clean living tour with MKR judge Pete Evans

Healthy living: The pair lead a series of sessions with Pete teaching people how to overhaul their lifestyle to better their health and fitness

The sessions was so successful, Luke announced earlier this month that they will be returning to the road in 2015 for a second Australian and New Zealand tour.

'I'll be travelling the country with @peteevanschef to 26 locations with events packed with cooking and conversation,' he wrote on Instagram.

'After our first tour, I feel we covered off the science in depth and now this is all about putting it into a practical presentation and offering affordable solutions for busy families and people.'