New Danville Regional Medical Center CEO Alan Larson said he was optimistic about the future of the Danville health care system when he addressed the Danville Pittsylvania County Chamber of Commerce on Tuesday.

“There are a lot of projects we are excited to continue to build,” Larson said.

Larson gave updates on the Chatham health clinic construction, behavioral health, physician recruitment and other programs set up by his predecessor, Eric Deaton. He also talked about the future of health care in America and how hospitals are responding to an aging population and the Affordable Care Act.

The new CEO started off by discussing the state of health in the United States. Larson said the population of the country was aging rapidly, and more Baby Boomers have started retiring. Thus, there are also fewer and fewer young payers into programs like Medicaid and Medicare.

While the population is aging, the number of those who suffer from illnesses like cancer, heart disease and mental conditions was also increasing, Larson said.

“The challenge for us is how, with an aging population with more and more morbidity and more disease, how do we focus and use resources,” he said.

Larson said employees were responding to both those changes and the Affordable Care Act in three main ways. First, they were promoting health in the workplace and taking proactive steps to keep employees healthy. They were also relegating those issues to third-party providers. Finally, some larger companies were not getting involved in health care at all, instead paying employees a stipend for health issues.

Hospitals needed to respond to these challenges with comprehensive care plans created around the needs of the patients, Larson said.

Patients in Danville were divided into three categories: low, rising and high risk. Larson said the low-risk group — 80 percent of patients — were of the most concern. The challenge is how to get them off the couch and staying healthy.

Lastly, Larson provided updates on several hospital projects. He said the Chatham clinic had encountered a slight delay in getting started, but should be open by the beginning of 2016. Additionally, the hospital has a new radiation oncologist on staff and was implementing more behavioral health initiatives. The hospital also was continuing to push physician recruitment efforts.

Larson said he was excited to learn more about the Danville community in the coming months.