Why can't we kick our £6 billion caffeine habit? Analysing our super-sized love affair with lattes to go



We spend £6.3 billion a year in the UK on takeaway coffee and our daily fix is fuelling one of Britain’s fastest-growing industries with each of us spending around £400 a year and £16,000 over the course of a lifetime... So why can't we break the caffeine habit?



'We love the routine of grabbing a coffee on the way to work, or when meeting friends'



Though it is little more than hot water and milk, coffee – preferably in a ‘to-go’ cup clutched in a perfectly manicured hand – has become the non-negotiable luxury of our generation. Despite it being an indulgence, and a poor-value one at that (see below), many of us cannot do without it.

We can trace the allure of the takeaway coffee back to Sex and the City’s Carrie Bradshaw – and today no A-lister’s ensemble is complete without a coffee cup. We want to copy their style, and their caffeine habit seems a key part of it. There is something chic about the nonchalant clasping of a skinny soya cap or double shot americano that we want for ourselves.

Caffe Nero

The coffee-shop industry has grown at an unprecedented rate – 7.5 per cent last year alone, defying the sluggish economy – with the ‘branded’ segment (high-street giants including Costa and Caffè Nero) now 1,000 per cent bigger than 15 years ago.

New coffee shops are popping up on our high streets every week (North London’s Holloway Road boasts a staggering 24, while Gloucester Road in Bristol has 23). And one in five of us now visits a coffee shop on a daily basis.

‘Britain has become a nation of coffee drinkers,’ says Jeffrey Young, managing director of market research company Allegra Strategies, which predicts that by 2017 the UK coffee shop market will exceed 20,000 outlets with a turnover of more than £8 billion.

Coffee seems to be an affordable treat, a little pick-me-up, offering instant gratification for a (relatively) small financial sacrifice. When times are tough, we may not be able to afford a holiday or a meal out, but a £2 coffee can still give us pleasure.



A caffeine habit is costly, though. Over the course of a lifetime the average coffee customer will spend around £16,000 on takeaway drinks – which could alternatively buy you a month in the Maldives, a vintage Porsche or a diamond necklace from Tiffany & Co.

Katie Holmes Alexa Chung Helena Christensen

Sarah Jessica Parker Gwen Stefani Miley Cyrus







Clinical psychologist Oliver James on our coffee addiction

Oliver James



Firstly, coffee provides a brief shot of adrenalin that makes you more alert (in scientific terms, putting you into fight or flight mode), which is why people often have a coffee first thing. The second is purely social – we love the routine of grabbing a coffee on the way to work, or meeting friends in Starbucks. Coffee shops also provide a practical service in that they’re a place to wait, to take some time out, to meet people. People also crave the perceived ‘cool factor’ of holding a takeaway coffee cup while strolling along the street.

Where does our love originate from?

Unless you’re having a double espresso, often what you’re drinking amounts to little more than warm, coffee-flavoured milk. But it’s precisely these hot, milky drinks that have soothing powers – a lot to do with the fact that milk is the first thing we have as babies and why we’re advised to have a mug of hot milk if we can’t sleep. The milk having some coffee grounds in it is almost irrelevant. Subconsciously, a hot milky drink evokes feelings of being looked after. We crave the comfort coffee provides.

Can we really become addicted to coffee?

Yes, but coffee is, in fact, way down on the list of addictive substances – behind alcohol, narcotics, salt, sugar and nicotine. If you were to give up coffee you’d be unlikely to experience withdrawal as you would with other substances – often our ‘addiction’ to coffee is more social than physical.

Coffee is one of our favourite ‘drugs of solace’ – when we feel anxious or stressed, we seek out a solace in order to feel loved or comforted. These can be anything that makes you feel better – from checking your emails to a chocolate bar. It is often the case that people who can’t start the day without a coffee are in fact mildly depressed. They require a little ‘solace’ before they feel able to get going. We all give so much every day – to our employers, spouses, friends, family – that we want something back, and in many cases coffee fills that void. selfishcapitalist.com

Londoners on their coffee habits

Felicite Philips, 37, advertising professional 'I grab a large triple shot americano [£1.95] every day on the way to work - it really perks me up. Normally I'm a Caffè Nero girl but I was surprised to discover that Eat does great coffee, too. Siobhan Box, 20, Student at Bournemouth University 'It has to be Starbucks for me. I have one every day - what can I say, I'm American! I go through phases with different favourites but at the moment it has to be a skinny vanilla latte [£2.70].' Angela McGill, 50, Merchandise manager 'Joe & the Juice on Regent Street makes the best skinny latte [£2.10] in London. I buy a gift card from there on a Monday and that usually sees me through the week. I couldn't give it up.'

Gretta Cole, 43, Cycle shop owner 'I tried to give up three years ago, but couldn't shake the habit of my morning filter coffee on the way to the shop. I love the ritual of it.' Sally-Anne Argyle, 32, stylist (left) 'You can really taste the coffee in Pret's flat white [£2.10]. I hate coffee that's just essentially warm milk.' Charlotte Kewley, 30, stylist 'I grab a soya cappuccino [£2.10] from Pret every morning on the way into work.' Shareen Miller, 33, Skincare trainer 'Leon's americanos are stronger than most and only cost £1.95. They know me in there now and make it just how I like it - smooth and strong with the milk on the side.'

THE COST OF BEING A COFFEEHOLIC ● A recent survey found that 16.1 million Britons drink at least one takeaway coffee a week. Together we spend £122 million a week. Over the course of a lifetime, the average coffee drinker will spend £15,725; for the one in ten who needs that extra hit of caffeine, the figure is nearer to £30,000. Many people see their takeaway coffee fix as a non-negotiable treat. However, 70 per cent of

those surveyed by OrSaveIt (a money-saving app) said they would try to cut back this year.

● A medium-sized cappuccino at Costa costs £2.45, so a caffeine fix five days a week on the way to work costs us around £50 a month.

● Cutting out a shop-bought coffee plus sandwich for lunch (a sandwich can set you back £3 to £4) can save you up to £7 a day. Spread over a 47-week working year that’s a saving of £1,645. If you put it all in your pension over ten years that’s already £26,450.



Coffee tips from a champion barista

Bearded Yorkshireman Gwilym Davies has come a long way from his nameless coffee cart on East London’s Whitecross Street. After gaining a reputation for his killer cappuccino – which would often see a queue of customers snaking down the street – he went on to be named World Barista Champion in 2009 and set up Prufrock Coffee. Prufrock is a super-hip café-cum-training facility where they not only serve coffee, but also pass on the torch to wannabe baristas or those who just want to improve their skills at home.

THE COFFEE SHOP REVOLUTION ● 1650 England’s first coffee house opens in Oxford, run by Jacob, a Lebanese Jew.

● 1652 London’s first coffee house - run by Sicilian-born Pasqua Rosee - opens in St Michael’s Alley, Cornhill.

● 1701 During the 18th century, coffee houses become known as ‘penny universities’ as that is what customers paid to enter. It is said that students could learn more from debates there than from their books.

● 1978 Brothers Sergio and Bruno Costa open the first Costa coffee shop on London’s Vauxhall Bridge Road.

● 1986 Pret opens its first shop in London. Today there are more than 300 Pret A Manger shops worldwide.

● 1994 Sitcom Frasier hits our TV screens, introducing us to America’s coffee culture.

● 1995 US sitcom Friends comes to the UK; the six main characters frequent coffee house Central Perk.

● 1997 Gerry Ford founds Caffè Nero in London.

● 1998 The US coffee company Starbucks buys the Seattle Coffee Company and its 65 stores in the UK.

● 2007 James Hoffmann becomes the first Briton to win the World Barista Championship.

● 2009 1,000th UK Costa coffee store opens.

● 2012 The British coffee shop market grows by 7.5 per cent to be worth £5.8 billion. The branded coffee chain segment (Costa, Starbucks, etc) is now ten times the size it

was 15 years ago.

● 2013 According to the British Coffee Association, we drink about 70 million cups of coffee per day.

Gwilym, 46, became hooked on coffee after stumbling upon a job as a barista in New Zealand’s Atomic Coffee in 2007 while travelling after leaving his ‘proper’ job. Luckily it just happened to be one of the best and most progressive café roasteries in the world at that time and he was able to hone his craft there.



He believes much of his success can be attributed to the fact that he ‘likes people, and cares desperately that they get the best cup of coffee that I can make’, whether that be one of his legendary £2.80 cappuccinos or the orange, chocolate and cinnamon-infused blend that won him his prestigious title.

His coffee of choice? ‘A small single-shot traditional cappuccino. No chocolate, of course.’ And from a proper cup – ‘drinking coffee from a paper cup is rubbish’.



In a market saturated with chains such as Starbucks, Costa and Caffè Nero, how can small independents such as Prufrock make their mark? ‘By doing something different, offering a new experience. One thing I’d never compete on is price – if you try, you will fail,’ says Gwilym.

‘At Prufrock we try to offer an accessible, tasty coffee experience to everyone, from the busy commuter who “just wants a coffee” to the enthusiast who came to London from abroad just to visit coffee shops.’



Next Gwilym plans to take the experience of independent boutique coffee mainstream.

‘I am creating a European Barista Network with the Speciality Coffee Association of Europe to help spread ideas and information; I also have an international coffee training school in Prague where businesses and baristas visit for courses.’



My top coffee haunts



Prufrock, of course

You’ll always find a happy face behind the counter at The Espresso Room, 31-35 Great Ormond Street, London WC1, theespressoroom.com.

Rapha Cycle Club serves consistently great coffee, 85 Brewer Street, London W1, rapha.cc/london.

Outside London, Laynes is my favourite, 16 New Station Street, Leeds LS1, laynesespresso.co.uk.

How to make great coffee at home

● Buy fresh roasted, traceable coffee beans. Make sure you check for the roast date – up to three weeks is optimum, more than six and there is a big drop in flavour. I love the coffee from a farm called La Bolsa in Guatemala – it is satisfyingly sweet with a creamy, almost custard feel in your mouth. You can buy it from Square Mile in London, shop.squaremilecoffee.com.

● Grind fresh – lots of coffee shops will do this for you or you can buy a grinder. I use a Porlex hand grinder when travelling and a Baratza for home. Grind a little at a time to keep it as fresh as possible, and keep it in an airtight container between cups.



● Filter your water – unfiltered water taints the flavour of your coffee while pH and hardness levels will affect flavour. In short, unfiltered water can ruin an otherwise beautiful coffee.

● Take your time – coffee tastes so much better if you sit and enjoy it rather than rushing to gulp it down.



Prufrock Coffee, 23-25 Leather Lane, London EC1, prufrockcoffee.com, 020 7242 0467

Liv Chen, 28, fashion retail worker 'Coffee shops are a great place to meet people - I couldn't do without the ritual of my morning visit.' Anna McKeon, 30, Visual Merchandiser 'I live in New York where coffee is a real culture. I've discovered Allpress Espresso in Shoreditch which does a brilliant double-shot espresso [£2.50] and is cheaper than the high-street chains.'