Former Chillicothe Police Chief Roger Moore has filed a lawsuit to get his job back. The city fired Roger Moore last month for insubordination and bad behavior. On Thursday afternoon, the former chief gave a different reason why he thinks he was fired: retaliation.

While fighting back tears, Former Police Chief Roger Moore talked about workers compensation claims tied to his late wife and why he believes that claim is the real reason why he was terminated.

In the past, we've seen former Chillicothe police chief Roger Moore arguing with a patron outside of a bar and arguing with a trooper who'd stopped him for speeding. But today, a very quiet and calm man spoke lovingly about his wife's last days. "I took my wife to the bathroom. I bathed my wife, I cleaned my wife, I did everything I could for her. It was the hardest thing I ever had to do in my life."

Moore says his wife Elizabeth worked as a firefighter for 15 years at a station where the health and safety issues were well documented.

Roger Moore speaks from the steps of the Ross County Courthouse

He says he's had to fight for the workers compensation benefits that were due to him from her untimely death. "I was the Chief of Police on March 31st when the city appealed the worker's comp decisions on behalf of my wife."

Moore acknowledges what he calls "past issues," but says he did everything that was asked of him to apologize to anyone the mayor says he offended.

"The only issues cited by the mayor, since the filing of that appeal on March 31, were those with the superintendent and the Sheriff and those reasons themselves are not good reasons to fire me."

Now, Moore says he will fight to get his job back because all he wants to do is serve the people of Chillicothe. "The mayors are elected and come and go but I am a civil service chief," Moore said.

The lawsuit was filed late Friday afternoon.

Chillicothe Mayor Jack Everson says the idea that Moore was fired for a workers compensation claim is off the Mark. He says that would be illegal and his termination letter clearly spells out why he was let go.