The Dec. 7 editorial “United against the ‘Cadillac’ tax” ignored several reasons that a broad, bipartisan coalition is against this tax on some health-insurance plans. The editorial board did not consider the wage trade-offs that workers make over the years to maintain their health-insurance plans, the impact of geographic differences in living costs or the claims costs for older, sicker workers and dependents. Nor did it note that such a tax could lead employers to cut back health-insurance benefits or drastically increase employees’ co-payments or deductibles.

The National Bureau of Economic Research and others have found that patients with higher cost-sharing are less likely to take drugs they have been prescribed and that higher co-payments can worsen the health of those who are already sick. Taxing health benefits could lead to unintended but nevertheless dangerous consequences that are antithetical to the aims of the Affordable Care Act.

Randi Weingarten, Washington

The writer is president of the

American Federation of Teachers.

The recent “Cadillac” tax editorial missed the mark regarding the so-called virtues of the Affordable Care Act’s tax on employee benefits.

To suggest that doing away with on-site clinics, flexible spending accounts and other benefits is good policy and will reduce health-care spending is misguided. Manufacturers have identified health-care expenditures as one of their top business challenges. The ACA has done nothing to mitigate those concerns. Most manufacturers will tell you that coverage is more expensive as a result of the law.

The editorial called the tax the ACA’s “most important coverage-expanding, cost-controlling provision.” This is a tax on coverage that’s already being provided, so it does nothing to expand coverage.

According to a study by the National Association of Manufacturers, if costs were to increase at a rate slightly higher than the average over the past 15 years, the tax would be responsible for 2.6 million jobs lost and a reduction in household income of $3,800 by 2035. Furthermore, virtually every employer and employee would be subject to the tax.

The editorial board isn’t looking at the whole picture.

Joe Trauger, Washington

The writer is vice president of human resources policy and government relations for the National Association of Manufacturers.