Emergency management officials are bracing as floodwaters already roaring through towns along the South Platte River reach levels old-timers fear will exceed those recorded in the flood of 1965 that deluged the Front Range and northeastern Colorado.

All the foothill and mountain streams that have seen record levels the last three days — including the Cherry, Clear and Boulder creeks, and the St. Vrain, Big Thompson and Cache la Poudre Rivers — drain into the South Platte.

River levels in cities along the South Platte from Greeley northeast to Julesburg on the Nebraska border are expected to experience crest flows through Wednesday.

Morgan County Office of Emergency Management director Steve Enfante said knowing floodwaters were headed their way allowed the county to begin evacuations early and get ahead of potential snafu’s.

The unincorporated towns of Goodridge, Weldona and Orchard were evacuated Saturday morning.

Enfante couldn’t provide exact numbers on the total amount of people evacuated but said it covered a significant area.

Smaller evacuations occurred at a few motels along Bottle Road and Interstate 76 in Fort Morgan, with the city’s main park that spans the river covered in water and evacuated as well. Many bridges in the county have also been breached, Enfante said.

“We’re in a waiting game right now. We can’t determine the extent of damage until the river starts receding and it’s still moving pretty good,” Enfante said. “We’ll just have to wait.”

The National Weather Service was predicting water flows near Weldona to peak Sunday afternoon at near-record flows of 44,671 cubic feet per-second. Tuesday morning, the river was running at about 350 cfs.

Near Hillrose, BNSF Railway workers were dumping loads of gravel attempting reinforce the railroad bed as the South Platte widened to within 6-feet of the track. The line is used to move coal from Wyoming to a power plant near Brush.

In the town of Sterling, 45-miles east, officials are reporting that the South Platte continues to rise and is flowing over several bridges, forcing some road closures.

Between 100-150 people were evacuated in low-lying areas along the South Platte between Atwood and Sterling, said Logan County Emergency Operations spokeswoman Sheryl Lopez.

She added that the river is expected to peak around 8 p.m. Sunday.

According to a media release, the city has opened a shelter at Sterling Middle School and large animals can be kept at the Logan County Fairgrounds.

Housing 2,585 inmates — including all of Colorado’s death-row inmates — the Sterling Correctional Facility has incurred no damage and no evacuation plans will be needed, said Colorado Department of Corrections spokesman Roger Hudson.

“Our facilities are running at normal besides the Denver complex, which has minor water damage in the visitation areas,” Hudson said.

He added that visitation times at the Sterling facility have been cut short to ensure visitors can make it home safely Sunday evening.

In the far northwest section of Washington County, Prewitt Reservoir is quickly filling after low-water levels forced the closure of the boat ramp this July.

Washington County Emergency Management spokesman Chris Packer said his department received a report Sunday morning from a sheriff’s deputy that the rising waters had not yet breached the reservoir.

“That’s something we believe will probably happen, but we really don’t have a plan in place if it does,” Packer said.

Packer said reverse 911 calls were sent out Friday residents in the small sliver of Washington County the South Platte runs through. Approximately 50 homes in the area faced mandatory evacuations. Packer said a few people refused to leave.

One road in the area has been washed out, and three bridges flooded.

“For us, we’re probably going to lose those bridges, which then cuts off that little portion of the county to rest of the county,” Packer said. “Their ability to go for resources will be good to the north, however.”

Sitting just a few miles south of the Nebraska border, Julesburg in Sedgwick County will be the final town in Colorado the floodwaters pass through.

This weekend, water flows were in the double digits. Water flows are expected to crest Wednesday at a record 12,000 cfs.

Sedgwick County Emergency Management Office director Mark Turner said the South Platte runs about three-quarters of a mile outside of town with a flat floodplain separating it from the town.

“Right now we’ve got everybody moving cattle and livestock out of the river bottom” Turner said. “There’s a couple residences that are packing everything up.”

No large evacuations are planned and the hope is the floodwaters won’t hit many sections of town, he said. The last major flood to hit Julesburg happened in 1965.

“We really don’t know what might happen because we’ve never seen this much water come at us before,” Turner said.

Austin Briggs: abriggs@denverpost.com, twitter.com/abriggs10 or 303-954-1729