Celebrity Hot News

Miley Cyrus, Liam Hemsworth 2013 Break Up: ‘He Is Over Her’ ‘We Can’t Stop’ Singer Pushed ‘Paranoia’ Actor to the Limit After VMA Performance, Wedding Off

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Twitter/@staralbum)

Miley Cyrus' performance at the VMAs was apparently the last straw for fiance Liam Hemsworth. Perhaps the on-and-off relationship for the "Hunger Games" star is over as it looks like he is ready to call it quits once and for all.



Miley Cyrus’ MTV VMA performance definitely sparked some interesting reactions and didn’t earn a lot of praise, especially from her current boyfriend.



“He is over her and wants to make a clean break,” said a source to Us Magazine. “No more back and forth.”



The source also added that apparently Hemsworth is just weeks away from permanently calling it off.



Currently, the couple reside together at Cyrus’ home in L.A.’s Toluca Lake. However, they are acting as if they are roommates rather than lovers.



“They’re not even sleeping in the same room,” said another source to the magazine.



Hemsworth wasn’t at the awards show, however he noticed the buzz about his girlfriend’s performance and the attention it got. His family doesn’t seem too happy about it either and is urging him to break things off.



Cyrus and Hemsworth are rumored to be on the rocks following the “We Can’t Stop” singer’s performance with Robin Thicke to “Blurred Lines.” Hemsworth was not pleased with the show they put on and called it “mortifying.”



“The VMAs is the straw that will break him,” said a source. “He wants out of the relationship.”



The actor and singer have been on and off in recent months, and sometimes act “as if they were strangers.”



The couple was last seen together at the premiere of Hemsworth’s movie, “Paranoia,” in Los Angeles on August 8. The couple decided to spend time apart over the Labor Day weekend after Hemsworth flew to London to support his brother at the world premiere of his new movie, “Rush.”



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.