During the first enrollment period for the Affordable Care Act, more than 733,000 Texans signed up for health insurance under President Obama’s healthcare reform law. And of those, more than 55 percent—roughly 410,000— purchased plans through Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas.

With the second enrollment period approaching in November, BCBSTX has shifted its priorities to helping the new clients understand the insurance plans and how they can secure preventive care.

The company is working with more than 160 partners—churches, community centers—to help spread the word about the availability of healthcare.

Chief Medical Officer Dr. Dan McCoy spoke with D Healthcare Daily last week regarding its new strategy and the upcoming enrollment period. The interview has been edited for length and clarity.

D Healthcare Daily: Texas insured three quarters of a million people during the last enrollment period. More than half of those were plans purchased through BCBSTX. Are you happy with the outcome?

Dr. Dan McCoy: It’s a big job, so going forward and working through BeCovered (Editor’s note: texas.becovered.org is BCBSTX’s branded clearinghouse for insurance plan and network information) and making sure they’re aware of what their options were.

We’re happy with what we were able to achieve in getting Texans health insurance, but going forward there’s always room for improvement and at the end of the day the more who have access to healthcare the healthier the state will be.

D: Part of the challenge with the healthcare reform law is helping educate first-time insurance carriers of how their plan works and what types of services they can now receive. Has Blue Cross done anything to appeal to its new customers?

McCoy: Yes, they need an understanding of how to access the system. If they’re historically going to the ER to access their care, they need to know how to find a primary care physician and take advantage of preventive health plans to get care for their family.

Between Jan. 1 and July 31 of this year BCBSTX enrollees accessed 243,000 wellness visits, 104,000 biometric screenings and 26,000 had mammograms. Me, when I look at those numbers I get excited, the second part of the job is helping people understand how to get the most value out of the healthcare coverage and take care of their bodies.

D: What do those numbers indicate?

Those numbers tell me that people are not just purchasing health insurance, they’re using it and they’re using it to make themselves healthier. When I see 243,000 well visits, that’s people going to the doctor for preventive health visits, learning about their diabetes and cholesterol, so yes, I’m excited for that I not only want people to have access for health insurance I want them to have access to coverage and make things healthier for them and their families.

D: You’ve engaged a number of partners in the communities where you’re present such as churches and community centers. Talk about these.

DM: I can tell you we’ve had a whole group of community partners who have been with us from the beginning.

In Texas, there are over 160 and these include groups like the NAACP and the San Antonio Housing Authority. There are 66 partners I know of in Dallas, including the health clinics. They span the gamut from big organizations to churches to clinics and small associations.

We believe those kind of partners know what it takes to educate stakeholders. Becovered initially acted as an agent to improve literacy around people’s opportunities around health insurance, what it meant, where you can get it. This year, we’ve expanded it to work with those community stakeholders and partners to be able to talk to get the best value from the health system. And you know, I think to me, that shows the tremendous power of working with these community partners and utilize health insurance for gaining that overall health improvement.

D: Can you talk about some of the obstacles to care that you’ve seen or heard of from your new customers?

DM: We’ve taken an active and aggressive approach to making sure people understand what their options are. When somebody purchased a health insurance policy from us, we did active outreach with them. This could have began before their coverage started. I like to think of it as developing a strategic plan for their health, and for many people they’ve never had insurance before or if they had it, they may have lost it.

So we offered tools finding a primary care physician, teaching them about what’s the best way to gain the most value for the health insurance you’ve just purchased. We worked with those members one on one and Be Covered Texas is a great opportunity to do that as well on a larger basis; those community partners help inform within the community in the stakeholder groups.

One of the things we did on the Texas side is we launched and redesigned the website. It had more information than just learning what your options were. We included a fact sheet on there, a glossary of terms, now we have an insurance fact sheet so people who have access know what to do now that they actually have insurance. We also captured real stories around real people throughout Texas about what to do once they covered.

D: What are you doing to prepare for the new enrollment period?

DM: We worked with our community partners to reach more than 3 million people throughout the state. We used social media and online outreach to reach over 7 million people. Last year was the first time for that event (Be Covered Texas) and I think we certainly learned from that experience and learned what the challenges were.

This is a journey and as we continue to do these events from year to year we’re going to get better and better as to understanding how not only to enroll people but teach them to get the best value for their health insurance.

D: And how does one get the best value for their health insurance?

DM: Let’s say you go into your physician with lower back pain and she ordered an MRI, call the number on the back of your card and say, ‘find me an in network facility.’ That can possibly give you some guidance so you can be empowered to make the best decisions.

Also, in talking to one of our advisers on the phone, you can have access to support tools, online resources, which can be directed to so you can learn more about your particular illness so you can make a better judgment.

An educated patient member is the best patient, knowing what’s going on and helping you make the best decision is what it’s about.