Despite concern that adding fluoride to drinking water can impact children's mental development, a new study out of New Zealand has found no basis for that fear.

The researchers compared two groups of people — those who grew up in towns providing fluoridated water, and those who grew up in neighboring towns that didn't. The study subjects were all born in 1972 or 1973, and followed until they reached the age of 38.

The study targeted its scrutiny on their exposure to fluoride in the first five years of their lives, a crucial time in brain development. After that, IQ has been established and is thought to be largely immutable.

"Our analysis showed no significant differences in IQ by fluoride exposure," said lead author Jonathan Broadbent.

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends children drink water that has been fluoridated naturally or through the addition of fluoride in order to prevent tooth decay. So effective has fluoridation been that the CDC has recognized water fluoridation as "one of 10 great public health achievements of the 20th century."

However, New Jersey ranks 49th in the nation in terms of the percentage of its residents who drink water that has sufficient flouride to prevent tooth decay. Roughly 1.2 million of the state's 8.2 million people, or 14.6 percent, drink fluoridated water.

Legislation to force towns to provide fluoridated water have been proposed over the years, but have never passed. Opposing the move are municipalities, who object to the mandated cost, and residents who believe the chemical to be harmful.

In examining their study participants, the researchers tried to account for socioeconomic differences, birth weight, breast-feeding and education. "In line with other studies, we found breastfeeding was associated with higher child IQ, and this was regardless of whether children grew up in fluoridated or non-fluoridated areas," Broadbent said.

"Our findings will hopefully help to put another nail in the coffin of the complete canard that fluoridating water is somehow harmful to children's development. In reality, the total opposite is true, as it helps reduce the tooth decay blighting the childhood of far too many people."