Topics: AIDS, daniel franzese, Editor's Picks, HBO, HIV, Looking, Entertainment News

Most films and TV shows made in recent years that address HIV are period pieces. HBO’s “The Normal Heart,” from last year, is an adaptation of a 1985 play that starts its storytelling in 1981. “Behind the Candelabra,” made in 2013, ends with Liberace dying of AIDS in 1987. The Oscar-nominated 2009 film “Precious” was based on the novel “Push,” published in 1996; the similarly lauded “Dallas Buyers Club” (2013) is set in the mid-‘80s, and the script was first drafted all the way back in 1992. Whether it’s remakes of milestones in activist theater, like “The Normal Heart” and “Angels in America,” or a new depiction about a past event, like “Dallas Buyers Club” or last year’s British dramedy “Pride,” the implication is the same: The time when AIDS mattered is in the past.

Except on HBO’s original series “Looking,” a half-hour slice-of-life show about the gay male community in San Francisco. (It’s worth noting that outside of HBO, television would not be saying anything about AIDS at all; both TV movies above are also from the network.) This season, one of the show’s protagonists has met and fallen in love with an HIV-positive man named Eddie, played by Daniel Franzese (who before this role made his reputation on the iconic 2004 film “Mean Girls”). The second season, which concludes Sunday night, has charted Eddie’s romance with Agustín (Frankie J. Alvarez), following the ups and downs not just of their commitment to each other but of the particular issues linked to a mixed-status relationship—the rhythm of drug dosages, the technicalities of precautionary measures, and of course, the anxiety of possible infection.

Eddie stands very alone. The last character on television to be HIV-positive in their present-day timeline was Ron Rifkin’s character Saul Holden on ABC’s “Brothers and Sisters,” in a story line that unfolded from 2009 to 2011. Before that, Adam Brody had a role in 2009 on FX’s “The League” as an HIV-positive character whose status is played up for laughs (the self-absorbed protagonists wonder if his medication makes him better at fantasy football than they are). In the past decade, the number of HIV-positive characters on American TV is so small you can count it on one hand, depending on whether you count animated characters (“South Park”) or teen soap operas (“The Best Years”).

“Looking” offers a very rare portrait of modern-day infection, one overlaid with both worry and a great deal of hope—Eddie is living a life that would have been unthinkable for most HIV-positive people just a few short years ago. I sat down with Franzese, who is himself an ambassador for the Elizabeth Taylor AIDS Foundation, to talk about the unique challenges of playing an HIV-positive character who is in the process of falling for someone negative.

What is very poignant about this story line is this very terrifying disease lurking underneath what is otherwise the stuff of regular life— breakups and making up and going out and whatever. It’s a challenge to translate both the run-of-the-mill concerns and the very real, dangerous stuff, and a lot of that has come through in your performance.

I have such a gracious scene partner in Frankie J. Alvarez. He really was just as committed to telling this story as I was, and telling our [characters’] identity as a couple. We knew the potentially shielding effect that this would have on audience members; I definitely think people who aren’t in this sort of mixed-status relationship could still take away from a romance from this but what I’ve been most happy about is the response that I’ve gotten from people who are in mixed-status relationships who have seen this.

I think just in general, regardless of status, everybody feels sometimes that they’re in a position where something like that in a relationship is a deal breaker. People have a little trepidation sometimes letting their heart let go, for some reason, and I felt this story line would have to be a mix of that and this issue, but in every relationship, everyone has something that makes them hold back.

I just came back this weekend from being a special guest at this bear convention, Texas Bear Roundup in Dallas, and so many people would come up to me privately and say, I’m positive and my partner is negative and I can’t tell you how many times we’ve had a scare or how many times I’ve been through that with other men.

The feedback that I got was, I wish I could’ve watched this season with my partner when we first started liking each other, so we could have had an idea of the things we might encounter. I would know how PrEP can help and how it’s natural to be afraid sometimes, and how to deal with that. I think watching that play out is going to help a lot of couples in the future.