A block party that feels like a family reunion.

That’s what Community Connection of Northeast Georgia hopes to create when the organization presents the Athens Pig Roast 3-7 p.m. Saturday at West Broad Farmers Market.

In addition to the roast, the event includes music spun by DJ Mahogany, yard games and a bounce house for kids.

The free event is the first of four community pig roasts scheduled this spring to help Community Connection collect 2,000 surveys as part of a community-wide health needs assessment conducted in partnership with St. Mary’s Health Care System, Athens Regional Medical Center and Athens Regional Health System.

The health needs assessment is mandated by Affordable Care Act.

“The idea was to bring something to the community that most people haven’t had a chance to experience and I liked the novelty of a pig roast,” Community Connection Executive Director Fenwick Broyard said of organizing a festivity to help collect surveys. “We also wanted to create a fun event that would bring the people in these neighborhoods together so they can get to know each other and, hopefully, build social bridges in the community.”

Community Connection will host a pig roast each month through June at Clarke County School District locations in different commission districts. Attendees are encouraged to go to the pig roast held in their commission district. The West Broad Farmers Market, located at 1573 W. Broad St., serves Districts 3, 5 and 6.

Admission to each pig roast is free, but attendees must complete an anonymous survey to enter. They can fill out the survey at the gate with the assistance of volunteers on iPads, or fill it out ahead of time by visiting www.athenspigroast.com. Each survey takes about five minutes to complete. Attendees that fill out surveys ahead of time will be given a unique number to present at the gate to gain admission to the event.

The survey begins with a Google map asking survey takers to place a “pin” as close to their street as possible while still remaining anonymous. Once the pin is recorded, all of the answers to questions that follow are tied to that geographic code point on the map, Broyard said. Survey questions include demographic information such as age, race and income level, as well as questions about health coverage and access to healthy food and medical services.

The answers, along with the geographic code, will be used to create a community-wide map that will act as a visual tool to determine where needs in the community exist and if necessary services exist in those areas, Broyard explained.

In addition to creating a baseline of social service needs and medical issues in northeast Georgia for the health needs assessment, the information gathered from the surveys also will feed into Community Connection’s new Community Platform software. It includes an inventory of community needs and assets and a database to be used by operators of the agency’s 2-1-1 referral hotline, which helps residents in need find services.

“We want everybody’s voice to be heard during this data collection process (from the needy to those who are economically successful) because we want to know what’s going on in Athens so we can see where the disconnects are,” Broyard said. “Athens has got everything we need to meet people’s needs ... but we need to work to make sure that our resources are being strategically paired with the needs that they can best address.”

Anyone unable to attend a pig roast in their area is encouraged to fill out a survey online. The deadline to turn in a survey is June 28.

Follow reporter April Burkhart at www.facebook.com/AprilBurkhartABH.