Nursing students present research

Thirty-eight senior undergraduate nursing students at Misericordia University presented their capstone projects to the campus community at the annual Nursing Research Poster Day program in the Catherine Evans McGowan Room of the Mary Kintz Bevevino Library.

The program featured poster presentations on the Affordable Care Act, root cause analysis, millennium goals, core measures and other topics.

The student research topics were approved by faculty advisors at the beginning of the spring semester.

Participants in the program include Holly Reese, Nanticoke; Shelby Brochetti, Wallkill, New York; Claudia Henry, Lyons, New York; Brittany Delancey, Montrose; Samantha Knowlton, Clifford; Kelly Zirnheld, Mountain Top; Lauren Ford, Mountain Top; Veronica Warshaw, Honesdale; Amanda O’Brien, Dallas; Brittney Rosencrans, Sweet Valley; Brooke Anderson, Blue Bell; Alicia Norato, Robbinsville, New Jersey; Jillian Balberchak, West Pittston; Julia Boyd, Laflin; Katrina Blannett-Kasper, West Pittston; Angel Shope, Cameron, North Carolina; Katie Barto, Severna Park, Maryland; Emily Hegner, Langhorne; Kelsey Heimbach, Selinsgrove; Nicole Klees, Montgomery; Lacey DeGraw, Honesdale; Emily Kudlacik, Parsippany, New Jersey; Amanda Turoni, Scranton; Brooke Carey, Forty Fort; Beatriz Chavez, Wilkes-Barre; Jessica Owen, Edwardsville; Alyssa Bazink, Mayfield; Genevieve Minnich, Mickleton, New Jersey; Sherry Chen, Kingston; Samantha Baro, Douglassville; Matthew Brown, White Haven; Yuri Pelepko-Filak, Trucksville; Matthew Stephenson, Tunkhannock; Cory Balko, Falls; Tyler Hessert, Williamsport; and Chris Evans, Exeter.

Remembering Lincoln

The Scranton Civil War Round Table marked the 150th anniversary of the Assassination of President Lincoln earlier this month by laying a wreath at the Lincoln Monument in front of the Scranton Club.

The wreath was placed by Round Table members Tracie Passold, Tom Jordan and Jennifer Ochman. Upon placing the wreath, Round Table Chairman Tom Moran said a few words about Lincoln and how his death brought the official close to the war and then offered a moment of silence in remembrance. Other members in attendance included Don Holdridge, Steve Thompson and Bob Sulger.

The Scranton Civil War Round Table was formed in November and offers members an opportunity to come together monthly to listen to Civil War presentations and discuss related themes. The next meeting will take place on May 12 at 7 p.m. at the Catlin House, 232 Monroe Ave., with a program on “Civil War Home Life” by Amanda Silva.

High notes

Carmen Francesco, daughter of Joe and Allison Francesco of Beach Lake, will be one of two interns through the Unitarian Universalist College of Social Justice assisting a public trust set up for the socio-economic empowerment of tribals, daits, women and other deprived sections of Indian society located in Mahrashtra, India.

After graduating from Honesdale High School in 2013, Carmen en-rolled at Prescott College in Arizona to pursue a dual major in social and environmental justice and secondary education in the social sciences. During her eight-week summer internship, Carmen will teach English and basic life skills at the residential school for girls of the Katkari tribe, a group with a female literacy rate close to zero.

“There is so much that we take for granted when it comes to education in the United States,” Carmen said. “I feel blessed and excited to be given such an extraordinary opportunity to help others.”