Boulder Valley Ice prepares to break ground on new facility

The machines were moving at Superior Town Center at the corner of McCaslin and Highway 36 in January. Earth was turning and being graded in preparation for the first building at the 157-acre site. ( Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera )

After preliminary grading work on the Superior Town Center this spring, the dust has settled at the massive project site southeast of the U.S. 36 and McCaslin Boulevard interchange.

The initial flurry was followed by weeks of inactivity after Boulder Valley Ice — which plans to build a 160,000-square-foot indoor sports complex with an attached 60,000-square-foot medical building — ran into financial eligibility issues due to the bond process that the Town Center is using to funding its infrastructure, BVI president of development Luke Taylor said.

Taylor said as of last week, those issues have been resolved, BVI's loan has been approved and construction on the new BVI facility is getting ready to go vertical.

"It could have been resolved much sooner but unfortunately the (Small Business Association) doesn't operate very quickly. Our project was sitting on their desk for two months," Taylor said. "We're hoping to start construction by the end of the month. It all depends on what kind of winter we have, but we're hoping to have the whole thing up and running by next summer."

BVI originally hoped to open at least one of its planned two-and-a-half indoor ice sheets this month.

The BVI delay has put construction on hold for the entire Superior Town Center project. Though the BVI facility is technically a separate project from the $700 million, 157-acre mixed-use Town Center development by Ranch Capital LLC, Taylor said the rest of the development has been waiting on the sports and medical center.

Advertisement

"It's the big facility that's going to attract a lot of people to that area, so I guess a lot of the other groups want our piece to be going first in order to commit," Taylor said.

BVI estimates that once complete, its new sports and medical center will attract 1.6 million people annually as a regional hub for hockey and soccer.

Martin Toth, Superior's assistant town manager, said the plat and development plan for the BVI facility have been approved by the town and the construction pad is set.

Toth said once BVI breaks ground the rest of the Town Center project should begin taking shape.

"That Phase 1 really is BVI," Toth said. "That's the construction trigger. There was a sequence that had to be worked out and the construction calendar has yet to catch up. When they start going vertical, that's when everything will start falling into place."

The Town Center is projected to take years, if not decades, to build out entirely.

Contact Colorado Hometown Weekly staff writer Doug Pike at 720-648-5022 or piked@coloradohometownweekly.com