Obamacare brought health insurance to 10.3 million people who previously did without, government data show. It also brought a legal quirk that is nothing to smile about.

The law’s confusing treatment of pediatric dental benefits forces childless people to buy separate pediatric dental insurance policies they will never use. And states’ varying interpretations of the law require parents to take extra care to make sure their kids get the dental benefits they need.

I’m middle-aged and I have no kids. But when I bought an individual health insurance policy from New York insurer Empire BlueCross Blue Shield, the salesperson insisted the law required me to buy a separate pediatric dental policy. So I pay $4.50 per month — or $54 per year — for an insurance policy that gives me no benefits.

Insurers sell similar policies to childless adults in California, Colorado, Washington and other states.

Elsewhere — including Connecticut, Rhode Island and the District of Columbia — pediatric dental insurance is embedded in everyone’s Obamacare coverage, said Colin Reusch, senior policy analyst at the Washington-based Children’s Dental Project.

Including pediatric dental coverage with emergency room care, doctor’s office visits and other mandatory health insurance coverage saves everyone money. If New York embedded pediatric dental in my health policy, my total Empire BlueCross premium might drop a couple of bucks per month, Reusch said.

Embedding the coverage also makes sure children are always covered under their parents’ health policies, he added. That’s easier than covering them under separate, dental-only policies like those sold to adults.

But embedding pediatric dental coverage brings a different set of issues. Some health policies impose the same high deductibles on pediatric dental services as on other benefits, Reusch notes. That can make a routine trip to the dentist overly expensive. Reusch says parents should seek health policies with lower deductibles for pediatric dental care.

Parents need to pay attention to the issue if they plan to shop for health insurance when the next Obamacare open enrollment period begins Nov. 15.

The pediatric dental insurance oddity comes from a collision between Obamacare, states’ traditional regulation of the insurance industry, and the U.S. tradition of selling dental insurance separately from health insurance.

Pediatric care — including pediatric dental care — is among the basic coverages all health insurers must provide new enrollees in individual and small group policies under the Affordable Care Act, which is Obamacare’s formal name. Pediatric dental care isn’t required for group policies offered by large employers, though insurers generally provide it anyhow.

Other coverages are also mandatory under Affordable Care Act rules. Everyone with an individual or group Obamacare policy is covered for maternity and newborn care – including men and women beyond childbearing age. Obamacare policies also must include hospital care, mental health and substance abuse services, and prescription drugs.

Everyone pays for those mandatory, embedded coverages, even if they don’t need them. Obamacare is insurance, and one of the ideas behind insurance is to share costs among a broad group of people.

Two-thirds of cancer survivors incur debt (3:06) Roughly two-thirds of cancer survivors do not have enough household income to cover treatment-related expenses.

But when it passed the Affordable Care Act, Congress decided pediatric dental care would be handled differently. The law permits pediatric dental to be sold separately, like adult dental insurance. Reusch said Congress probably passed the rule to minimize disruption to the traditional dental insurance marketplace.

The law also left it to states to figure out how to provide pediatric dental coverage. So different states have different rules. Some embed pediatric dental in all Obamacare policies, while others mandate that it be sold separately.

It gets worse: Even within state governments, the rules are interpreted in different ways.

In New York, a spokesperson for the state Department of Health said Empire BlueCross is wrong to sell separate pediatric dental coverage to childless customers like me. But another agency, the Department of Financial Services, contradicted the Health Department by saying separate pediatric dental policies can be required. Empire says it follows Department of Financial Services rules.

What happened in Colorado was weirder. Under the state’s rules, insurer Delta Dental provides special pediatric dental policies to the childless for a monthly premium of $0.

Colorado insurers can’t charge the childless more than $1.50 per month for separate pediatric dental coverage, “because it is a no-benefit policy,” said a spokesperson for Colorado’s Department of Regulatory Agencies.

Some Colorado insurers embed pediatric dental care in Obamacare policies, while others sell it separately, said Adam Fox of the Colorado Consumer Health Initiative. “It’s left up to the insurers,” he said.

Some states are trying to fix the mess. California will require pediatric dental insurance to be embedded in all Obamacare policies next year, and thus will end the practice of selling separate policies to the childless.

Until it’s fixed everywhere, buyer beware.

Bill Sanderson blogs about New York-area utilities at www.nypowerandlight.com.