Q: Is it OK for a woman to use an obstetrician/ gynecologist as her primary care doctor?

A: There’s nothing inherently wrong with going to an obstetrician/gynecologist for routine preventive visits — these doctors are trained to provide such services — but a recent study suggests that women who choose an OB/GYN as their primary physician may miss out on more comprehensive care.

Donna Cohen, a family physician and associate director of the family practice residency at Lancaster General Health in Pennsylvania, and her colleague Andrew Coco analyzed information from two large data sets containing information on patient visits.

The researchers evaluated 7,882 records of doctor visits for preventive gynecologic visits that occurred between 1999 and 2008. About 81 percent of these visits were made to an obstetrician/gynecologist; the rest involved a primary-care doctor.

The analysis revealed that primary-care physicians were nearly 2.5 times as likely as OB/GYNs to address such problems as mental health issues, metabolic conditions and circulatory, respiratory, digestive and skin diseases during a preventive gynecologic visit.

An OB/GYN is primed to focus on your reproductive system and may be less attuned to other aspects of your health, says Robert Wergin, president of the American Academy of Family Physicians.

Family doctors learn to deliver services ranging from routine heart disease and diabetes care to Pap tests and even obstetrics, Cohen says. “I was just up all night delivering babies,” she points out.

Many women don’t know that a family physician can provide birth control, Pap tests and other women’s health care, Cohen says.

“They think they’re supposed to go to another doctor for that.”

Cohen’s study found that the vast majority of women see an OB/GYN for their annual visit, and Barbara Levy, vice president of health policy at the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), says that’s OK. OB/GYNs are trained to deliver more than just Pap tests, she says.

One study found that nearly half of obstetrician-gynecologists considered themselves primary-care providers.

“We know a patient’s background, her children, her worldview,” Levy says.

ACOG has issued guidelines for well-woman visits, and these include not just Pap tests but also cholesterol screenings and immunizations.

Yes, Cohen’s study found that women were more likely to receive non-gynecologic diagnoses during a preventive care visit at a family physician than at the OB/GYN’s office, but that doesn’t mean that the specialists are overlooking these health problems, Levy says.

“Women who have a lot of medical issues generally don’t see me for their primary care, and those who do are generally healthy,” she says.

But Wergin says making a family doctor your primary physician could save you time and money by sparing you extra referrals and visits.

“If you come in to me and you have something simple like a rash, that’s part of what I do — I don’t refer you to dermatologist,” he says.

– Christie Aschwanden, The Washington Post