Jones still No. 1 back, but he'll get plenty of help

The mystery to the Boulder High offense is minimal.

The mastery of tackling TJ Jones, though, is enough of a task that the Panthers are still gearing their offense toward the senior running back this coming season.

Coming off a year in which he led all of Class 5A in rushing during the regular slate (1,699 yards, 17 touchdowns), his athleticism and toughness clearly unmatched, Jones will get his touches. The Panthers, though, might be going about it a different way.

"He's a big threat, and so anything we can do to make our offense more successful, we're trying right now," said quarterback Aiden Chandler, who is tops on the depth chart at quarterback entering the season.

The Boulder Panthers will boast one of the most explosive running backs in the state in senior TJ Jones. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

The Panthers ran a lot of single-back sets in 2014, and Jones made it work for a blistering 7.6 yards-per-carry average. This year, they're hoping that having senior Ellis Carroll in the backfield as a fullback will open up even more things.

Carroll will be busy switching numbers in-game so that he'll be eligible for the line, too, but his position alongside Chandler in the shotgun formation comes with its benefits.

"He's a great back, and whatever we can do to get him into the end zone is what we've got to do," Carroll, a 6-foot-2, 225-pound college prospect, said on Saturday. "(Having a fullback) helps keep the defensive backs and (linebackers) off him a bit more, and just helps him do what he does."

"With Ellis back there, that just puts another lineman on the field, and we had enough linemen that we feel can be good to where we were able to do that," said head coach Bob Simmons, who in his third year at BHS is hoping to turn a corner. "Ellis is a big kid and athletic, 225 pounds, and that's only going to help TJ."

Carroll should get some carries, too, and the Panthers are looking at sophomore Patrick Fletcher as a player who could spell Jones with effectiveness.

Big numbers may still be in store for No. 34, but the hope is they'll be able to keep him a lot more fresh through the season by playing him less on defense, too.

"We have to be smart about it, and he'll hopefully just be a spot guy on defense," Simmons said. "We have to come up with a secondary that will allow him to rest, and we have some kids that are going to step up. We hope to find a trend-setter on offense, and another trend-setter on defense that will step up at the point of attack. You don't want him getting hit too many times on both sides of the ball."

In a three-year-window mentality that often accompanies coaches in new situations, 2015 is that benchmark for Simmons — a former Oklahoma State head coach and CU assistant who has made a lot of programs better.

The Panthers won five total games in 2013 and 2014, but that was without a lot of senior experience. This year, Simmons is excited about the core of four-year players he has, as well as the numbers overall.

"I feel good from the standpoint, first year we had four seniors, next year we had five, and now we have 17," Simmons said. "You feel good going into the season with that leadership, that they've been to war and are tired of losing. We need to turn some of the tight losses into wins, and I'm excited to have those type of guys lead this football team."

A lot of his players have seen the changes Simmons has brought over the past couple seasons, too, and they believe that a turnaround begins this year.

"The coaching staff has done a great job and we're being taught up every week," said Kobi Boynton, a senior linebacker and tight end. "We're ready to play more physical."

"I think this is going to be a good team, and I think this is out year to prove some people wrong," Carroll said.

Follow Adam on Twitter: twitter.com/AdamDunivan24