Three generations of musician's clan lend their chops

Three generations of Taylors jammed to Otis Taylor's unique brand of blues at the Trance Blues Festival Saturday afternoon in the basement of eTown Hall in downtown Boulder.

Bright-eyed, 7-month-old Woods Haren, Taylor's grandson, smiled and shook a maraca as he sucked furiously on a pacifier with a plastic, brown mustache affixed to the top. Woods later sat on a musician's lap, a pair of yellow headphones lending him an air of sophistication as the youngest member of an eclectic, all-ages crowd.

Mom Cassie Taylor, an accomplished singer/songwriter, took the microphone at one point. She said she's taking a brief hiatus from the music scene while Woods is young.

Then there was Otis Taylor, himself, with a mint-green electric guitar, who invited festival-goers up on stage to serve as the back-up "choir" to his simple, seemingly impromptu "Coffee Woman" song. The song appeared on his 1996 album "Blue-Eyed Monster."

Taylor calls Boulder his hometown, but he's known the world over by blues aficionados, with his award-winning music appearing in Hollywood movies such as "Public Enemy" starring Johnny Depp, and "Shooter," starring Mark Wahlberg.

Taylor characterized himself as a songwriter/storyteller who tells stories about social-political issues. The "trance" piece of this particular brand of blues is the repetition of the same chord and the length of the songs, some of which can last 15 minutes, Taylor said.

Advertisement

Ask Cassie Taylor if she comes from the same mold as her dad, and she laughs. While she loves to tell a good story, she said, she also likes to include many chord changes in her music. Cassie Taylor said she became a songwriter because her dad told her that was the only way to make money in the music industry. She lives in Kansas City, Mo., with husband Chuck Haren and Woods.

Dozens of other musicians participated in the festival, which was part-sing-along, part-seminar for attendees. It also was a way for Taylor to promote his latest album, "Hey Joe Opus/Red Meat."

"People dig him," said James Thomas, eTown Hall's house manager. "He continues to have a following of blues fans ... and they attach themselves to him."

Otis Taylor has won two Blues Music Awards as well as France's Académie Charles Cros. He also was a fellow in the Sundance Institute's Film Music Program.

Cassie Taylor watched Woods carefully at the festival to make sure he wasn't getting overwhelmed by new sounds and people. The baby-sized headphones Woods wore to protect his hearing were the "first thing on the baby registry" when she and her husband found out they were pregnant, Cassie Taylor said.

"He always surprises me," the mom said of her young son. "I always wonder if it's going to go well or go badly, and so far, it always goes really well."

Beth Potter: 303-473-1422, potterb@coloradohometownweekly.com