The Morning News: Uber Exec in Town, Woman Killed After Being Hit by Metro Bus, and a Video Chat with Mike O'Brien

A top Uber adviser says drivers have no need for collective bargaining rights. MikeDotta/ Shutterstock

With Less than Two Weeks Until the City Council Votes on a Bill to Let Drivers Unionize, Uber is Ramping Up Its Presence in Seattle: As I reported yesterday, the company is running new TV and radio ads about how great it is to drive for Uber, particularly emphasizing the problematic argument that all of its drivers relish the "flexibility" it offers. Today, David Plouffe, a former adviser to Barack Obama who's now working for Uber, will speak at an event hosted by the Downtown Seattle Association and Seattle CityClub called "Uber and the Future of Work." The Seattle City Council is set to vote on the unionization bill December 14.

"We Believe Drivers Have Ultimate Control." That's what Plouffe told Daniel Beekman at the Seattle Times about the discussion in Seattle around giving drivers the right to unionize. "We believe the drivers have ultimate control, in that they decide when and whether to drive on the platform,” Plouffe said. “Some of the discussion up here is no doubt more political than based in reality.” Not everyone agrees.

Crosscut Has a Look at the Challenges Ahead for the Unionization Bill: Right here.

An Elderly Woman Died After Being Hit by a Metro Bus: It happened near the Northgate Transit Center and she was 90 years old, KING 5 reports.

Elderly woman dies after being hit by Metro bus in Seattle https://t.co/y4D6iF96ju pic.twitter.com/NGpJ3DSG5h

— KING 5 News (@KING5Seattle) December 4, 2015

State Ethics Board Considers Free Meals for Legislators: "A state ethics board this year imposed a hard limit on how many free meals state lawmakers may take from lobbyists: 12 a year," the Seattle Times reports. "Now, questions have arisen that vex special interests, politicos and bellies alike: What counts as a meal?"

Seattle Police Union Claims It's "Under Attack" by Black Lives Matter Activists: Recently, activists released a report on police union contracts across the country that called out parts of Seattle's police contract as obstacles to police accountability. In response the Seattle Police Officers Guild posted a link to the report on its Facebook page with the caption: 'Yes folks... We are under attack... All the while other unions (Teachers) get a free pass when they break the law...'" As Ansel points out, there are several problems with that.

Raise your hand if you want to talk to Seattle City Council member Mike O'Brien about climate change today. City of Seattle

Join Our Chat with Mike O'Brien from Paris Today at Noon: Today at noon (that's 9 p.m. in Paris), we'll be holding a live Google+ Hangout with Seattle City Council member Mike O'Brien, who's in Paris for the climate talks. Check back here on Slog for the live-streaming interview or tune in directly on Google+ or YouTube.

Want to Ask O'Brien a Question? You'll be able to do that directly through Google+ or you can tweet questions to @strangerslog. (If your question is whether he's there on your tax dollars, KUOW reports he's paying his own way.)

This Week on Blabbermouth, Our Week-in-Review Podcast: Sydney Brownstone is on the show to talk about Bertha's impending restart and her timeline reviewing exactly how we got to this fucked up place and journalist David Neiwert is on to talk about whether Donald Trump is a fascist. Plus, Jen Graves and Charles Mudede are back on the show. Listen here.

Taylor Swift: Big fan of the Seattle Symphony. Those dudes in the background: Big fans of looking creepy. a katz/ Shutterstock

Taylor Swift Gave $50,000 to the Seattle Symphony: "In a letter to music director, Ludovic Morlot, Swift wrote that the Seattle Symphony's Grammy-winning recording of John Luther Adams' Become Ocean inspired her donation," Rich reports. 'According to the press release sent out this morning, Swift 'praised the beauty of the composition, the musicianship of the orchestra and reminisced about going to hear her local symphony with her grandmother.' Swift's gift has been allocated to the Link Up: Seattle Symphony program, which teaches third through fifth graders about various compositions and culminates in a kind of pro-am performance where the kids play alongside the orchestra. The money will also go to the musicians’ pension fund.

The San Bernardino Shooting Victims: The Los Angeles Times has small and heartbreaking bios for each of the 14 people killed in this week's mass shooting: "A father of six. A free-spirit who befriended strangers in the grocery store checkout line. A mother of three who made a life in America after the Iranian Revolution. The youngest was 26. The oldest was 60." Here's the latest on the shooting.

The Pentagon Will Open All Combat Jobs to Women: "Women will now be eligible to join the Navy SEALs, Army Special Forces and other Special Operations Units," the Washington Post reports. "It also opens the Marine Corps infantry, a battle-hardened force that many service officials had openly advocated keeping closed to female service members."

The U.S. Senate Voted to Defund Planned Parenthood: And unravel the Affordable Care Act. The president is sure to veto both.