12:45 UPDATE

The cold and wind are here to stay for the afternoon. Temperatures in the 20s have come with wind gusting over 20 MPH. These conditions are causing wind chills to be in the single digits and low teens -- we can expect this level of cold for the rest of the day.

Snow showers are also possible. A few flurries are starting to show up n Fairfield County. As snow shower-generating conditions continue to strengthen over the Great lakes this afternoon, snow flurries and snow showers will start to meander into southern New England. A quick coating is possible from these. Some locations might get up to one incjh of snow. A lot of Connecticut won't see any snow from these; it's a matter of "the luck of the draw."

--Mike Cameron

***Previous Discussion***

SNOW IN PLACES THIS MORNING

A much-anticipated arctic cold front is moving through the state as I type! And there's enough lift with this front to support snow showers and a few snow squalls across the state this morning.

Accumulations in many locations in the state will range between a coating to an inch. In some towns that see a squall, there may be a quick 1”-2”.

The arctic front will also bring wind and cold. Gusty winds are already starting to develop this morning. Temperatures are between 25 and 30 degrees in most areas, and will stay there during the day today. Wind chills will be in the teens, sometimes dipping into the single digits as the wind gets gustier.

THIS MORNING'S COMMUTE

Because of the snow, colder temperatures and the wind, this morning's commute isn't going to be the easiest. Given that today is Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, traffic volume should be lower; but for those of you on the roads, please be careful as slush and black ice are possible. Use some extra minutes to get to work safely.

WINTER COLD THIS WEEK

Winter cold will be entrenched during the day today. Temperatures will be locked into the 20s and the wind will kick up, with northwesterly gusts at 30-40 MPH. The wind will bring wind chills into the single digits this afternoon. Here's the good news: the dry air will be instrumental in making for a lot of sunshine.

There may also be a little more snow this afternoon. With the arrival of all this cold air, the lake-effect snow showers will churn strong and some of them will meander all the way into southern New England.

Tomorrow will be partly sunny blustery and cold. Morning temperatures will be in the upper single digits and teens. Afternoon highs will only be in the mid to upper 20s. Wind chill readings will be in the single digits and teens most of the day. High pressure will be over the Great Lakes and low pressure will be over the Maritimes; in between, a strong pressure gradient will exist, which will be the cause of strong wind again.

Wednesday may turn out to be a cloudy day, after a partly sunny start. A weak area of low pressure in the “middle altitudes” will be moving through the state. This system may bring a period of cloudiness and – perhaps – a flurry. It's going to be another cold one with early morning lows in the teens and afternoon highs in the low and middle 30s.

Thanks to high pressure, Thursday and Friday morning look good too. We should enjoy partly to mostly sunny skies Thursday and more cloudiness Friday as the wind turns more easterly. It’ll be breezy at times and seasonably cold with highs in the low and middle 30s. Overnight lows will be in the teens and lower 20s.

WINTER STORM POSSIBLE LATE FRIDAY AND SATURDAY

A winter storm is possible Friday afternoon through Saturday morning. The models are coming into better agreement, all showing that there will be a classic medium-sized nor’easter moving through the region. The center of low pressure will be close to the “40-70 benchmark,” which positions the storm in a prime spot to give us snow. And, if the models are correct, there will be a good amount of cold air to maintain a mainly snow event for much of interior New England. It is likely there will be a mix to sleet along the Shoreline, maybe some freezing rain. However, this changeover would not be for very long. If this scenario pans out, this storm would be a good 6” storm for most of the state, one that may earn a name. We’ll see. It should go without saying that, even when the models agree, a forecast six to seven days out can always need adjustment.

QUIETER LATE SATURDAY AND SUNDAY

Tranquil and temperate weather will come after the storm. As high pressure builds in, skies will clear. Lows will go into the 20s Saturday night and rise into the upper-30s and low-40s with sun Sunday.

JANUARY AVERAGES AND EXTREMES

January is here and it is typically the coldest month of the year. However, that wasn’t the case last year when February was the all-time coldest month on record. On January 1st, the normal (or average) high is 35 degrees and the normal low is 19 degrees. The normal high dips to 34 degrees by the 7th and the normal low dips to 17 degrees by the 9th. By the 31st, the normal high is back up to 35 degrees and the normal low rises to 18 degrees. Normal snowfall in January is 12.3”.

January can be a month of big weather extremes. The mercury reached as high as 72 degrees on January 6th in 2007, and it plunged to 26 degrees below zero on January 22nd in 1961. That is the all-time coldest temperature on record for the Greater Hartford Area. I am sure many of you remember January 2011. That’s when we had a record 54.3” of snow at Windsor Locks. It was the all-time snowiest month on record!

THE WARMEST DECEMBER ON RECORD

By leaps and bounds, Connecticut experienced the warmest December in 110 years of record keeping. The average temperature at Windsor Locks for December 2015 was 43.3 degrees, an amazing 11.7 degrees warmer than normal and – more amazingly -- 4.7 degrees warmer than the previous record of 38.6 degrees in December of 1923!

December was wetter than normal, but snowfall was well below normal. Total precipitation for this month was 4.25”, which is 0.81” above normal. Total accumulation of snow and sleet was 1.0”, which is 6.4” below normal.

2015 WAS A YEAR OF RECORDS

2015 ended with a record warm month, but it didn’t start out that way. In fact, the first quarter (January, February, and March) of 2015 was the all-time coldest on record. February was brutally cold with an average temperature of 16.1 degrees, making it the all-time coldest month on record! It was the 3rd snowiest February on record with a total of 31.9” of snow at Windsor Locks.

The weather pattern switched from very cold to very mild by late spring. In fact, May was the warmest on record with an average temperature of 66.1 degrees (6.6 degrees warmer than normal).

During the period from May through September, we had 18 days with a high temperature of at least 90 degrees at Windsor Locks, which is only 1 day above the annual norm. The hottest temperature this summer was 95 degrees on July 29th.

The summer season featured only a few severe weather events. A strong microburst produced damaging wind gusts of 90-95 mph in the North Haven area on June 23rd. However, no tornadoes were reported in Connecticut this summer and we were not directly affected by any tropical storms or hurricanes.

The autumn season (September, October, and November) was quite mild! September was the 3rd warmest on record and November was the 6th warmest on record. Overall, the autumn season tied for the 5th warmest on record.

Most of the year was marked by unusually dry weather. It was almost a daily topic during our weather broadcasts throughout much of the summer and fall. In fact, we ended the year with a moderate drought across much of the state. Total precipitation in Windsor Locks came in at 39.21”, which is 6.64” below normal. Total precipitation for the year in Bridgeport was 35.05”, which is 7.69” below normal.

Many daily temperature records were also broken in Windsor Locks and Bridgeport in 2015.

Meteorologist Mike Cameron with Scot Haney

“Copyright 2016 WFSB (Meredith Corporation). All rights reserved”