Most hospital systems and many doctors and others in the health care chain are intensely focused on keeping people out of the hospital.

There is major focus on "super-utilizers" -- patients who end up in the hospital five or more times in a year.

It's a critically important situation, since these patients account for a big chunk of the nation's health care bill, with much of it footed by taxpayers through Medicare and Medicaid.

RELATED: A new look at Pennsylvania super-utilizers

Super-utilizers, who are very sick and who are often very old, deserve little of the blame. Heart failure is one of the most common reasons they end up in the hospital. So is septicemia, which is a blood infection which can result from mistakes made at the hospital.

For several years, midstate hospitals have been focused on keeping chronically-ill people, who tend to become super-utilizers, as healthy as possible, and reducing their need for hospital care, which is the most expensive kind.

Some of it involves making sure patients get the best possible hospital care, so they don't need to be re-admitted as a result of things such as infections.

Much involves the care they get after they leave the hospital. As a result, hospitals are forging new collaborations with nursing homes and home health agencies to make sure people get the right follow up care.

Hospitals are doing things such as following up with patients by phone to make sure they are taking their medications, and fully understand their follow up instructions.

In some instances, hospitals are sending medical crews to the homes of patients dealing with especially complicated medical situations, to make sure they understand their medical situation and are able to do what is needed for a good recovery and to remain stable.

Individual doctors' practices also are deeply involved, taking a more proactive role in keeping chronically ill patients as healthy as possible, and using electronic records to take a central role in coordinating patients' care.

At the same time, the government and private insurers are increasingly holding hospitals and doctors accountable when patients need to come back to the hospital or require an excessive amount of care.

Geisinger Health System, for example, has a program called ProvenHealth Navigator which focuses on the patients and conditions which lead to super-utilization.

Dr. Thomas Graf, Geisinger's chief medical officer for population health, said Geisinger has made "significant reduction" in hospitalizations among the people it cares for, and especially significant reductions among patients such as those with heart failure and end stage kidney disease.

A newer Geisinger program, called Proven Wellness Neighborhood, focuses on Scranton-area counties and is intended to "connect people with needed care and social support." Graf said the program, less than a year old, has "helped over 1,200 patients with thousands of care gaps."

The situation is complicated, and far from settled. Some of the new programs are part of Obamacare, and thus will be resisted by some leaders regardless of the outcome. Some will be fought by entities that benefit from the existing flawed system, which nonetheless, sucks in a huge sum of money.

And there's still legitimate debate about which are the best incentives, and whether government or private forces are best-suited to curing the health care system. Stay tuned.

Here are some stories which look at a few of the efforts in central Pennsylvania:

Big-name midstate hospitals penalized in toughest-ever crackdown on medical mistakes

PinnacleHealth joins with upstate providers for new Obamacare-related organization

Highmark says paying doctors more can lead to lower costs for everyone