Buy Photo Former Gov. Steve Beshear, left, and current Gov. Matt Bevin. (Photo: Matt Stone and Dylan Buell, the CJ)Buy Photo

In a video entitled "If It Ain't Broke, Don't Fix It," an advocacy group founded by former Kentucky Gov. Steve Beshear blasts current Gov. Matt Bevin over widespread disruptions in health coverage and other public benefits through a new state system called Benefind.

"Gov. Matt Bevin's vow to dismantle Kentucky's health care safety net is coming true," an announcer intones at the opening of the one-minute video created by Save Kentucky Healthcare.

The video claims the Bevin administration “mismanaged” the rollout of the system, which was designed and built under the Beshear administration by Deloitte Consulting at a cost of $100 million.

The system meant to provide simple, one-stop shopping for benefits such as health coverage and food stamps instead has resulted in "turmoil and confusion, health coverage discontinued, Medicaid canceled, long lines, panic and no answers from Gov. Bevin," the video claims.

A spokeswoman for Bevin did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

An executive with Deloitte Consulting said last week that officials believed the system was ready to be launched at the end of February. The federal government had approved it and it had been thoroughly tested but "there were some issues that didn't present themselves until after the system went live," said Deborah Sills, with Deloitte.

"None of these issues are caused by any changes the current administration has made to the system's purpose or design," Sills said.

Bevin and his top human services officials held a news conference Thursday in which they acknowledged problems with the launch.

"It has not worked as anticipated," Bevin said at the briefing, adding his officials are working to correct the problems with Benefind, the $100 million system, and ensure people retain benefits.

Bevin officials said that thousands of letters had gone out in error telling people they are being cut off benefits such as Medicaid health coverage and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, or SNAP, more commonly known as food stamps

The Courier-Journal reported Friday that some people already have lost benefits, such as health coverage through Medicaid, and have found it nearly impossible to get help.

“To knowingly jeopardize the health care of thousands of families in Kentucky is incomprehensible and irresponsible.” Former Kentucky Gov. Steve Beshear on Bevin's launch of Benefind

Those who call a state hotline routinely get a recorded message to call another time because of a high volume of calls. People seeking help at state benefit offices have encountered jammed waiting rooms, long lines and hours-long waits for assistance.

Bevin has said the problems are not linked to his administration's plan to close kynect, the state's health insurance exchange launched under Beshear as part of the Affordable Care Act, and transition people to the federal site, healthcare.gov.

He said Benefind is designed to serve as a single site where people can enroll in all state benefits, including Medicaid coverage people have been able to obtain through kynect.

The video released Monday challenges that.

"Gov. Bevin is using it to help dismantle kynect," it says.

In a news release, Beshear said Bevin launched Benefind too soon, before all the technical problems were worked out.

"To knowingly jeopardize the health care of thousands of families in Kentucky is incomprehensible and irresponsible," Beshear said.

Contact reporter Deborah Yetter at 502-582-4228 or at dyetter@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1MOfym6