A Cuban gives the thumbs up from his balcony decorated with U.S. and Cuban flags Friday in Havana, the day the U.S. eased travel and trade restrictions with Cuba, the first concrete steps towards normalizing relations with the Cold War-era foe. ( YAMIL LAGE / AFP )

A private cobbler works with a U.S. flag in the background in Havana. (YAMIL LAGE / AFP)

HAVANA, Jan. 7 — The 16,000 Cuban doctors who volunteer serving overseas are the second-most important source of revenue for Cuba after tourism. This is according to Dr. Gisela Coutin, assistant professor of public health and specialist in biostatistics. She has served in Angola. She was one of several expert lecturers who briefed the Boulder Cuba sister city organization currently visiting Cuba. Universal free health care and education are discussed with pride in this island nation of 11.4 million people.

Deteriorated infrastructure, dingy and overcrowded housing are widespread in urban Havana. Yet Christmas trees, nativity scenes and colorful lighting are seen in active churches. A visit to a synagogue showed how a neighborhood Jewish community managed since the revolution of 1959.

Vintage Chevrolets, Buicks and Fords along with bicycle taxis and frequent metro busses are major transportation modes plus considerable pedestrian traffic on cobblestone streets. Food ration coupons barely supply family needs as has been the case over the last 10 years.

"Viva Obama" was called out to us from a neighborhood shop keeper. She was one of many who chronicled a recent warmth to the new U.S. -Cuban accords. Javi, our friend and historian, put the local sentiment this way: "We were overjoyed with the new possibilities of exchange and friendship but I await with guarded optimism."

***

Advertisement

SANTIAGO DE CUBA, Jan. 11 — New, colorful facades add a patchwork of bright shades of yellow, pink, purple and blue to homes, offices and shops in this old and original capitol of Cuba. Gone are the portraits of the Cuban Five, seen everywhere in January 2014. They have all been returned home as a result of the Obama-Castro deal of Dec. 17, 2014.

The Boulder sister city group visited the tomb of José Martí, Cuba's national hero, and San Juan Hill, where Lt. Theodore Roosevelt and the Rough Riders helped U.S troops defeat the Spanish in 1898.

The two most dramatic changes we have noticed from a year ago are the large number of tour buses and dramatically-improved national highways and directional signage. However, almost no motorized vehicles are seen in eastern Cuba. People are on horseback, oxen are plowing fields, and untold dozens are waking great distances.

In our sister city area of Yateras we were welcomed by the mayor and performing school children. We had visits to a senior center and an outdoor sports complex . The leader of the local changui band at the Casa de Changui was wearing his Bolder Boulder T-shirt, our gift of several years ago. The Stone Zoo sculptor passed away this last year leaving behind 436 life-size animals from all over the world that he had carved in situ on the mountainside rain forest. His son and grandson are continuing the work of portraying animals in ecological relationships. But the sculptors have never seen the creatures they have created out of the limestone. This is the only tourist attraction in the region.

A pedicab ("bicitaxi" in Cuba) with a U.S. flag drives along a Havana street. (YAMIL LAGE / AFP)

A visitor overlook and interpretive center giving view to the U.S. Guantanamo naval base and prison had just opened and has attracted mainly Cuban visitors. The Cuban docent who provided binoculars for us to get a better look expressed hope that relationships will improve with "Obama's declaration of friendship."

***

BARACOA, Jan. 14 — Today this art mecca of Cuba, located on the northern coast near the eastern tip of the island, bustles with horse-drawn carriages, bike-pedaled taxis and uniformed school kids. Cars are scarce. Truck taxis carry workers who have harvested sugarcane, coconuts and bananas. Cocao for chocolate production is a major agricultural activity. People mingle in the evening in a triangular park in front of a cathedral built in the 1500s. It was restored by Italian philanthropists and Cuban workers and proudly houses the wooden cross planted on a sandy beach near Baracoa. Christopher Columbus is said to have placed the cross there to claim the land for Spain in 1492.

A vintage American car with a U.S. flag on its door drives along a street in Havana on Friday. (YAMIL LAGE / AFP)

Wood shingle houses of last year are now brightly painted. Dozens of bed-and-breakfast options thrive as they have expanded from private homes called casas particulares. Restaurant menus include the once very rarely seen lobster, shrimp, beef, lamb, fish and desserts of coconut and chocolate ice cream.

Household items including clothing continue to be in short supply in this rather remote Cuban town. No large markets exist and ice cream today has disappeared from the outlets we knew from last year. Vegetable peddlers with hand carts ply the neighborhoods with a limited supply of green beans, garlic, bananas, yucca roots and tomatoes.

Despite the hardships, tiny artist studios continue to produce colorful and creative paintings with apprentices studying under the dozen or more masters. Music and dancing late into the night by local residents and a modest number of tourists is the same as it was years ago. The World Heritage UNESCO-designated Alexander National Park serves as the picturesque backdrop to this hidden gem of Cuba. The towering Yunke or table mountain reminded us of our Flatirons. Cuban people including school children have an increased sense of conservation and protect their many threatened species such as the manatee and the colorful Polymita picta, or Cuban land snail, in the lagoon and mountain forests.

Perhaps one of the most poignant remarks was made by our very personable 30-year-old guide, a mother of twin girls, when she asked, "Will the Americans still like us when the blockade is lifted?"

Spense Havlick is a member of the Daily Camera Editorial Advisory Board, professor emeritus at CU and president of the Boulder Cuba Sister City Organization. Email havlick@colorado.edu