Al Birch at the Denver Post. (Courtesy History Colorado / Estes Park Trail-Gazette)

For over a century, the ruins of his dream home have watched over Estes Park, only a short walk from the nearby cabin he built almost entirely with his own hands. While Albert Birch's dwelling place is a famous local landmark, less is known about the man. Come enjoy a summer evening and a chance encounter with Mr. Birch, one of the most colorful and notorious promoters of early Estes Park. Learn about his local ties, his time as a Denver newspaperman and his connections to Colorado history. Mr. Birch will be conjured by historic portrayalist Kurtis Kelly for this special "evening on the knoll". The Estes Park Museum Curator of Education will follow the talk with interpretation of Birch's cabin.

Identical programs will take place on Thursday, June 26 and Friday, June 27 from 6 to 7 p.m. The reenactments will be on the grass in front of the Birch Cabin at the Knoll-Willows Open Space located behind Town Hall and the Estes Valley Public Library. A flat, dirt trail is the only way to access the cabin. Comfortable shoes, blankets or folding chairs are encouraged. Free program; no reservations are necessary.

Kelly has been performing in historic re-enactments for over 15 years. In addition to Stanley, he has performed as pioneer Abner Sprague, entrepreneur F.O. Stanley, and land baron Lord Dunraven. "Hearing history from a first-person perspective allows it to come alive," Kelly says. "Through storytelling and personal anecdotes, we feel a familiar connection to these individuals that makes us appreciate them with renewed interest and new insights." Kelly is the Adult Services Supervisor at the Estes Park Public Library.

Advertisement

Located at 200 Fourth Street, the Estes Park Museum is open on Fridays and Saturdays from 10 a.m. until 5 p.m. and Sundays from 1 until 5 p.m. The mission of the Estes Park Museum is to collect, interpret and preserve local history, as well as to present exhibits, programs and events for the education and benefit of residents and visitors of all ages. For more information call the Estes Park Museum at 970-586-6256 or visit the museum's website at estes.org/museum. Admission to the gallery is free.