Being a band parent used to be easier. In elementary school, it was mostly listening to a fifth-grader attempting to coax sound — any sound — out of a trumpet, the timer set to make sure the required 20 minutes were filled.

There was a concert or two, and being polite to the former in-laws. In middle school, the theme was parades: making sure the boy made it to the meeting spot, watching for the green-and- white Sabin Middle School banner, then trying to get pictures of my marcher once I found his curly head in the moving formation.

It was never getting tired of “The Imperial March (Darth Vader’s Theme)” from “The Empire Strikes Back” and “Secret Agent Man” as they took form in my living room and of watching the band members make their way down streets during Veterans Day, the Festival of Lights, St Patrick’s Day, and the Apple Blossom Festival parades, year after year.

In eighth grade, there was jazz band, and the awful minutes waiting for my boy’s solo: Would he hit all the notes?

Now he’s in high school. In the spring, there are concerts, once with an original composition, my son and all the other trumpeters rising at the end to sound a thrilling fanfare, the evocation of the triumph of effort. And in the fall, it’s all about marching band. “Parades?” I asked. “Oh, we do them, but parades are boring. It’s the performances that count!”

And they do. Suddenly, I’m driving to the high school for a 5:30 a.m. call. Every weekend there’s an event at some high school stadium, where you sit in baking sun or howling wind, waiting, watching for the five or 10 minutes when your child’s band performs its piece and, well, a sort of dance routine.

As many as 70 girls and boys dress up in uniforms designed to look like those of Napoleonic armies, complete with feathered hats that require their own boxes. They make hundreds of careful, almost mincing, choreographed steps, creating circles, squares, diamond formations and lines. They’re joined by teams of students dancing with huge flags, deliberately flowing and graceful to contrast with the ram-rod vertical of the instrumentalists.

High schools field all kinds of groups. At a recent competition, a sparse mountain town band bravely negotiated a version of Dvorak’s symphony “From the New World,” a little unevenly, but their last fortissimo iteration of “Going Home” still brought tears to my eyes.

A band from Albuquerque, huge and synchronized, practically invaded in their retelling of World War II, complete with a short outtake of the “day of infamy” broadcast, and dancers dressed in enchanting period costumes. This year, my son’s group lounged against split rail fences as a soloist sounded the final notes of “Simple Things,” ending their rendition of Copeland’s “Appalachian Spring.” Then, as one, the members sprang into a band pose and marched slowly off the field.

When I tell my European friends about all this, they respond with slightly patronizing smiles. That’s not surprising. The best musical performance I heard on a recent visit to Prague was from a cello quartet, whose studied nonchalance (and untucked shirts, and bare feet) belied the thousands of practice hours that underlaid their technical proficiency. And that was just a show for the tourists on Charles Bridge. This band thing is a very American art, steeped in its unique mixture of effort and bling, unabashedly kitschy and tear-evoking in its earnestness.

I love being a band parent.

Eva Syrovy teaches school in in Colorado Springs. She was a member of the 2010 Colorado Voices panel. The Colorado State Marching Band Championships are being held this weekend at Falcon Field at the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.