As national Democrats focus on revamping their strategy for future elections, they are looking to Connecticut Gov Dannel P Malloy, who won while many candidates in his party lost on Election Day.

Heading into the campaign season this year, Malloy's unfavorability ratings were so high that pollsters questioned whether he could pull off re-election. Political opponents put a target on the governor's back early in the year, identifying him as one of the country's most vulnerable incumbents.

But in a Republican surge year, Malloy managed a victory, embracing an Obama-style populism from which other Democratic candidates shied away. While others in the party distanced themselves from an unpopular second-term president, Malloy stood side-by-side with President Barack Obama in the weekend before the election.

A progressive liberal who in the past four years has advanced policies popular among Democrats, Malloy used his first-term record to shape his re-election message, pointing to legislation he signed to expand gun control, to raise the minimum hourly wage, and to require that businesses offer paid sick time.

Last week, the Democratic National Committee announced a "top to bottom assessment" of the party's mid-term losses in the 2010 and 2014 elections. A party committee will review campaign strategy issues, and is expected to publish a report early next year on how Democrats can improve performance.

A national Democratic operative characterized Connecticut as a bright spot in a disappointing election year, and said the DNC committee is likely to look to lessons from Malloy's re-election.

An early takeaway by observers was Malloy's willingness to campaign as a champion of progressive issues, which has made the governor a good messenger for Democrats. Candidates elsewhere were unwilling or unable to take on that role, fearing that close alignment with the party platform could hurt them in a year in which approval ratings for Obama have been low.

Embracing Presidential Platform

"What made Malloy distinctive this year was that he did not distance himself from President Obama, as many others did," said Ronald Schurin, a professor of political science at UConn.

"I never ran away from the president. I believe in the policy initiatives of this administration," Malloy said at a press conference the day after he won re-election, praising his own cabinet for "the best implementation of the Affordable Care Act of any state in the nation."

U.S. Rep. Jim Himes, D-4th District, said the governor did not shy from issues like the minimum wage increase and the Affordable Care Act, Obama's signature health care reform law.

Himes is a possible contender for the chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. Positioned to take a leadership role, he spoke about the challenges facing the national party. "I think it's a fair criticism of the Democrats and the president … that we have poorly communicated a number of really important things."

On issues like the Affordable Care Act and the Dodd-Frank financial reform law, "we've been on the defense rather than the offense," Himes said. "I hold all of us a little bit responsible. … The instinct was quite often to be shy about the policy achievements."

But "Malloy didn't do it here," he said.

Democrats' Issues Win, Candidates Lose

National Democrats say they are puzzled by the fact that this year, their issues won while their candidates lost. As voters in other states elected Republicans to public office, they also gave approval on ballot referendums to the same progressive policies that defined Malloy's record and his campaign message.

In Washington state, voters approved a ballot measure to require a background check on all gun sales — which was a key provision in the post-Newtown gun control package that Malloy signed into law last year.

Minimum wage increases — which Malloy has enacted twice in the past two years — won approval in five states, even as voters elected Republican Senate and gubernatorial candidates.

In Massachusetts, voters elected Republican Charlie Baker as governor, while voting yes on a paid sick leave ballot measure.

The trends were similar in town and county elections, where voters approved other measures to raise the minimum hourly rate, to expand investment in early childhood education (as Malloy did this year with a 10-year, $200 million investment in pre-kindergarten slots), and to ban fracking waste (also signed into law in Connecticut this year).

Speculating on why voters opted for traditionally Democratic policies on ballots but chose Republican candidates, Himes said the party "failed nationally to stitch together a coherent and persuasive economic policy platform."

While candidates support a minimum wage increase, he said, a small percentage of voters earn the minimum wage — and choose instead the candidate who they feel will take the economy in the best direction.

Running On An Economic Platform

American Federation of Teachers President Randi Weingarten, whose national teachers' union spent $600,000 to boost Malloy's chances this year, said the governor "actually ran on something — he ran on an economic platform of shared prosperity." By pointing to progress in Connecticut, including "the best month of job growth in 20 years and the lowest unemployment rate," Malloy convinced voters he was the best choice to lead the state, Weingarten said.

Most candidates supported by teachers' unions lost this year. The two exceptions were Malloy and Democrat Tom Wolf in Pennsylvania, where education policy was a central campaign issue. Elsewhere, Weingarten said, the election was a referendum on the economy.

"People want a good economic agenda and the people who actually made that case won. Ironically a lot of the Republicans were smarter about it than a lot of the Democrats" she said." Even though on the issues, the American people want the investments in public schools, want wages to be higher … they clearly didn't hear that from the candidates that lost."