It is just after breakfast one day in mid-May next year. Ed Balls embarks on the journey he made every day for many years, through the Treasury in Whitehall and up to the office of the Chancellor of the Exchequer.

Only this time, Mr Balls is not an adviser, along with Ed Miliband, helping Gordon Brown to end boom and bust – he is the Chancellor on his way to begin work on the first budget of a newly elected Labour government and Mr Miliband is Prime Minister. What might they have in mind for the economy and which taxes are they planning to raise?

Of course, the assumption is that this scenario will remain fantasy because a Labour government simply isn’t going to happen next year. It is all but unimaginable, say many at Westminster, and Tory MPs heading off for the summer recess this week are in an optimistic frame of mind.

According to this logic, Mr Balls will not become Chancellor and get his hands on the UK economy because Mr Miliband will never become Prime Minister. With the economy recovering and the Labour leader’s personal ratings at rock bottom, it is widely assumed that the Conservatives will emerge as at least the largest party in the Commons after the general election next year.

But with less than 10 months to go, the polls still stubbornly refuse to conform to the fashionable view. Labour’s lead in several polls published last week was up at a comfortable seven points.

Despite economic confidence soaring in the last year, thanks to the return of growth and the easing of inflation, there has not been a corresponding boost in the standing of the Conservatives. With the flaws in the electoral system favouring Labour, and Ukip still polling strongly as a protest vote for those who hate the established parties, the Tories remain stuck down in the low 30s when they need to be much higher to win.

In this way, Mr Miliband and Mr Balls could well get into power almost by accident, and without any widespread public enthusiasm for their leadership or economic policies. In such circumstances, it is worth taking Labour’s proposals on taxation and the economy extremely seriously.

Even if Mr Miliband does fall short of an overall majority, the Liberal Democrats stand ready to do a deal with Labour next year. In preparation, there are even signs that Labour policies on increasing taxation have begun converging with those of the Lib Dems.

Last month, Mr Balls brought Labour’s plans for a so-called “mansion tax” on properties worth more than £2m in line with proposals backed by Nick Clegg, the Lib Dem leader. Mr Clegg says the implementation of such a tax would be a non-negotiable demand in coalition talks. Vince Cable – who could take over from Mr Clegg as Lib Dem leader if Mr Clegg loses his seat – is an equally enthusiastic advocate of a mansion tax, although this could cost him in his own seat of Twickenham, where home values have risen sharply.

It has been estimated that homeowners hit by the levy would have to pay an average of more than £23,000 per year, on top of what they already pay in income tax, VAT and other taxes.

Mr Balls says that the money would be used to introduce a 10p income tax starter rate, similar to the band abolished by Gordon Brown. However, analysis by property firm Knight Frank last year suggested that for the mansion tax to raise £2 billion, as Labour says it will, it would have to be levied on houses valued at £1.25 million.

Senior Labour figures have also admitted that it looks like a tax on London, where prices have risen fastest in recent decades. The Blairite Tessa Jowell warned that it could force some people to sell up in the capital, while Lord Adonis, the former transport minister, described it as Labour’s most unpopular policy.

A mansion tax would certainly create all manner of perverse outcomes, hitting those who have a large asset but perhaps not a large income. In response, Labour is proposing to include a “little old lady” clause, to protect a pensioner with a low income who happens to live in a large home that has risen above the mansion tax threshold.

But that simply means that the amount she owes each year in mansion tax will be rolled up and paid from the estate after death. When she dies, the state could take the lot, with whatever little is likely to be left over going to the beneficiaries in her will.

The potential impact on the price of expensive properties – driving prices down as wealthy homeowners sell up – is unlikely to trouble many less affluent voters at first, although if prices at the top fall, it is likely that a decline would ripple through the rest of the market.

Another danger is that, despite Mr Ball’s assurances, as with any new tax introduced, once it is in operation the ratchet tends to work in only one direction. In subsequent budgets, thresholds can either be reduced to capture more taxpayers or frozen, with more homeowners caught.

The Treasury has form in this regard, under governments of both the major parties. The Conservative/Lib-Dem coalition’s policies, designed to deal with the deficit, will have dragged a further two million people into the 40p tax band by 2015/2016, hitting 5.3 million in total, according to the Institute of Fiscal Studies. The 40p tax was originally designed for only the very wealthy.

But the Tories are convinced that the mansion tax is a particularly potent symbol because they can present it as a direct attack on ownership and on people with homes that they have paid for out of income that was already taxed.

For this reason, the Tory high command wants Labour to make as much of the mansion tax in the election campaign as possible, believing it will put off aspirational voters who might not pay the tax but would fear it in the future.

“The mansion tax is unbelievably toxic for them,” says a Tory member of the Cabinet. “They are saying that if you want to get on in life, Labour is against you.”

Labour rejects this charge. Says a senior aide: “We’re about more taxation on wealth to reduce taxation on income for lower and middle earners. If the Tories want to have a row about taxation, we’re up for it.”

But the mansion tax is only one of a list of potential tax rises being considered. Labour is committed to reintroducing a 50p tax on those earning more than £150,000. This is not likely to impact on the wealthiest, who can afford expensive advice on minimising their tax bill. It will hit professionals, however, and may worry those who hope to earn such an amount in future. The Tories claim that it will also drive away investment, because high earners will be reluctant to move to the UK.

There have also been reports that Labour is considering a rise in National Insurance, to pay for increased spending on the NHS. Mr Balls denies that it will happen.

However, the party is definitely aiming for a graduate tax, and a further tax on bankers aimed at bringing in £2 billion is planned. In addition, Labour is committed to increasing tax on pensions for higher earners.

Individually, some of these rises might be popular. Cumulatively, the danger for Labour is that they create the impression among voters that the party wants to return to more government spending funded by an ever-expanding list of taxes, eventually right down the income scale.

“They don’t have an economic plan,” said a Tory aide. “They have random interventions on issues they think popular such as freezing energy prices, but nothing coherent. They have not done proper policy work for four years and they have just relied on the expectation of Tory unpopularity.”

Labour disputes that. Its strategists continue to believe that the Tories are defending the wrong voters, and that tax rises aimed at the very affluent will be popular.

But the Tory cry from now until polling day will be that the country cannot afford another Labour government, after what happened to the economy on the watch of Mr Brown. A woefully inadequate system of banking regulation, combined with a lending boom and government spending rising faster than inflation, left the UK particularly badly exposed when the financial crisis appeared in 2008. Britain suffered one of the worst downturns of the major developed economies.

Lynton Crosby, the Tories’ strategist, is firing up Conservative campaigners with the message that this is a “forward not back” election, and that the Tories have to stay focused on explaining that the country cannot afford to allow Labour – and Mr Balls – back in.

A Cabinet minister said yesterday: “Labour’s numbers such as they are just do not add up. People need to wake up to the risks.”

Another minister said: “The economy is a massive vulnerability for Labour because they don’t have a coherent economic argument. They say nothing really about how to grow the economy, about how to grow a bigger cake. It’s all about how to slice up the cake differently. It’s all about redistribution.”

There have also been tensions between Mr Balls and Mr Miliband, with the shadow chancellor concerned that the Labour leader has portrayed the party as too anti-business, with his talk of taming capitalism. Efforts have been made in recent weeks to redress the balance. A recent Labour dinner in London for business even succeeded in attracting one of the architects of New Labour, Lord Mandelson.

The suggestions of strain between the leader of the Opposition and the shadow chancellor are denied, much in the manner that reports of tensions between Tony Blair and Gordon Brown used to be denied with a straight face by spin-doctors at the height of the New Labour era. Says a Labour MP who despairs of Mr Miliband’s leadership. “Ed (Balls) is actually the one trying to restrain Miliband from going too far on tax and business.”

A situation in which Ed Balls is the taxpayers’ last line of defence might be regarded by the Tories as something of a gift in campaigning terms.

Mr Balls himself has been keen to stress that there will be difficult decisions for a future Labour government to make on spending. He has also been keen to avoid the party being boxed in by too many specific commitments that might give the Tories a clear line of attack before the election.

However, Mr Miliband has never hidden his instincts, and his enthusiasm for the principle of higher taxes. When he was campaigning to become Labour leader in 2010, he said that the party had been “too timid” on tax when it was last in office. The indications are that Mr Miliband is preparing to be much bolder on tax and spending if he defies fashionable opinion and makes it to Number 10.