Ryan Hunter-Reay celebrates at the finish line after winning the Indianapolis 500 in the closest finish ever, beating Helio Castroneves by .06 seconds. Credit: Reuters

By of the

Indianapolis — Ryan Hunter-Reay unapologetically cloaked himself in red, white and blue, the All-American boy besting an international field in an event known worldwide on a uniquely American holiday weekend.

Once the engines and the applause quieted Sunday, one cheer cut through an American sports mecca in the heartland: U-S-A! U-S-A! U-S-A!

"This is the history of auto racing," said the blond-haired, blue-eyed, freshly crowned winner of the 98th Indianapolis 500.

"This is the biggest event in the world, the biggest single-day sporting event in the world. It's the one that everybody wants to aim for and shoot for."

And hit it he did.

The Texas-born, Florida-raised Hunter-Reay became the first American since Sam Hornish Jr. in 2006 to win at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway on Memorial Day weekend, denying relentless Brazilian Helio Castroneves his fourth Indy title.

For a guy who was saved several times from the IndyCar scrap heap, who then won a championship driving for one of the most famous names in American motorsports, it couldn't get any better.

"I grew up as a fan of this sport first and foremost. I was just fascinated, especially with this race," said Hunter-Reay, who gave team owner Michael Andretti his third Indy victory.

"When I was a kid, I looked up to the Andrettis, I looked up to Foyt, Unser, Mears, it was always trying to get there. That was the top right there.

Just to have a shot at it like this is unbelievable."

The race was packed with subplots: a possible fourth four-time winner, a NASCAR champion making his debut to start a day-night doubleheader and three drivers with the opportunity to win in back-to back starts.

Castroneves missed by six-hundredths of a second — a little more than a car length — in his bid to match A.J. Foyt, Al Unser and Rick Mears for the all-time victory lead. Still, he led more than one lap for the first time since 2009, his third victory, and scored his first top-five finish since then, as well.

"It's frustrating to be so close to something only a few guys did," Castroneves said. "But I do not take it for granted. ... Unfortunately, it wasn't our day."

Kurt Busch finished sixth in his first open-wheel start, matching the best performance of any driver competing in both the 500 and the Sprint Cup Series Coca-Cola 600 on the same day. The first was Tony Stewart, the co-owner of Busch's NASCAR team and a champion driver in both series.

Defending race winner Tony Kanaan fell out of contention when bad luck turned worse on his second pit stop. The Brazilian ran out of fuel, and his team stripped out a gear in the starting mechanism while trying to get the engine refired. He finished 26th, 23 laps down.

Colombian Juan Pablo Montoya, who won in his only previous start in 2000 before Formula One and NASCAR beckoned, finished fifth. And Canadian Jacques Villeneuve, the 1995 winner who won an F1 title and dabbled in a variety of racing since, was never really in the picture en route to 14th.

Meanwhile, Hunter-Reay just took care of business, methodically picking his way forward from his 19th starting position into first at the midpoint. From there he led nine times for 56 laps, both highs for the race.

"The guys did perfect changes on it," Hunter-Reay said. "Every time, it was just what I needed. That's what it takes to win the Indy 500."

After a caution-free first 149 laps, the last quarter of the race turned choppy. By then Hunter-Reay and Castroneves had established themselves as the top contenders, along with Marco Andretti, Michael's son, pole-sitter Ed Carpenter and James Hinchcliffe.

Hinchcliffe and Carpenter were eliminated in the same accident after a restart with 25 laps to go. Hinchcliffe made an unanticipated run down the inside of Carpenter for second place just as Townsend Bell tried on the outside, and Hinchcliffe and Carpenter both slammed the first-turn wall.

Then Bell crashed out 10 laps from the end. Damage his car inflicted on the barrier that cushions the Turn 2 wall caused officials to stop the race for repairs. The resulting shootout was the last thing the leader Hunter-Reay really wanted to see.

Hunter-Reay had been beaten a year earlier under similar circumstances, finishing third after Kanaan and Carlos Munoz swept past on a late restart.

But Andretti, also Hunter-Reay's race strategist, offered encouragement.

Castroneves had to fight not only Hunter-Reay but also shake the younger Andretti. At least twice in the final laps Castroneves did pull ahead briefly, but only once did he hold the top spot when they crossed the start-finish line.

The most impressive pass by Hunter-Reay came down the back stretch with four laps to go when he nearly went to the grass half a lap after losing the lead.

"Once you put the nose inside, nothing you can do in terms of blocking, trust me," Castroneves said. "I think both of us used every inch of the track. ... I mean, at the end there is stupid and then there's bravery. I think we're right on the edge, both of us, really trying."

Hunter-Reay forced Castroneves to make his last-lap move on the outside. By the time Castroneves got alongside, Hunter-Reay already had an arm raised in celebration of the second-closest finish in the race's history.

Marco Andretti was another three-tenths of a second behind.

"It's a weird thing," Michael Andretti said of his dual roles of strategist for one driver and father of another. "I'm secretly watching him saying, 'C'mon, get up there. If you can pass him, do it.'

"There were a few times when Marco tried to get up there, but I saw his car didn't have the speed. ... If we were going to win it, it would most likely be with Ryan."

With Munoz finishing fourth and Busch sixth, Andretti Autosport fielded four of the top six finishers.

Andretti hired Hunter-Reay to a race-by-race deal in 2010 and then found sponsorship to run him full time. Hunter-Reay rewarded Andretti with an IndyCar Series title in 2012 and now delivered his team its third Indy crown.

Despite hundreds of laps led and near misses from three generations, the Andretti family scored its only driving victory with Mario in 1969. Michael was asked if being a winning owner made up for personally coming up short.

"I don't dwell on those things," he said, "because I've been the luckiest guy in the world, had a great career."

So now has Hunter-Reay, and at just 33 he has time to keep building.