'Upscale casual' establishment will feature wood-fired pizza oven from Naples

Business partners Suzanne Alley and Jeff Noffsinger stand together in the space that will become Origins Wine Bar & Wood Fired Pizza as they talk about their plans for the restaurant in Lincoln Place at Fifth Street and Lincoln Avenue in downtown Loveland. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

LOVELAND -- Two Northern Colorado residents who met in wine school are pouring their love for wine and fine food into a new restaurant in downtown Loveland.

Jeff Noffsinger and Suzanne Alley plan to open Origins Wine Bar & Wood Fired Pizza in Lincoln Place this fall, possibly by Thanksgiving.

The 5,500-square-foot space at the southwest corner of Lincoln Place's ground floor, 500 N. Lincoln Ave., has been vacant since the apartment building opened seven years ago. The new restaurant would occupy about 3,300 square feet.

According to a statement from Noffsinger and Alley, Origins "is about fostering community, conversation and culture through a creative, seasonally inspired menu focusing on wine and food pairing that promotes sustainability with locally sourced ingredients."

They described the restaurant as "upscale casual."

During a tour of the unfinished space recently, the partners pointed out chalk lines on the floor that denote where each section of the restaurant and bar will be built.

Pizza Bistro

The pizza bistro area, which will have a hand-built wood-fired pizza oven from Naples as its centerpiece, will be family-friendly, the partners said. This is where the pizzaiolo will be tossing the dough and building the signature thin-crust Napoletana-style pizzas.

"There will be an area for kids with low stools where we'll let them play with pizza dough and keep them occupied while Mom and Dad are having a cocktail," Alley said.

Origins also will have a large U-shaped bar, a dining area on the Lincoln Avenue side and a comfortable cocktail lounge in the windowed corner.

Noffsinger and Alley also pointed out the "wine hive" area inspired by the hexagonal aluminum wine-rack system of the same name. The partners will play off the honeybee symbolism.

"A beehive is all about working together and building community," Noffsinger said.

A Wine Library Cellar Room will be reserved for special events, and the partners said they plan to give wine-appreciation classes there.

The two are wine sommeliers — trained in the finer points of the fruit of the vine — and originally planned to open just a wine bar in downtown Loveland. But they saw a need for the kind of food and atmosphere they are planning for Origins, they said.

Besides pizza, they will offer tapas-style plates, salads and Italian-styled paninis.

Downtown's Potential

Alley, who lives in south Fort Collins, worked for more than 30 years as an international flight attendant for American Airlines.

"I like to say I did a lot of R&D for 30 years, sampling the best food and best culture," she said of her travels to Europe and South America.

Downtown Loveland resident Noffsinger has a background in city planning. He and Alley said they feel that downtown Loveland is reaching a "tipping point" and is ready to grow.

"I had this great feeling that there's a lot of potential here," he said.

The partners have requested an incentive from the city to help them with their construction, according to Loveland economic development manager Mike Scholl.

A proposed agreement, which requires City Council approval, would provide $17,000 for the tenant improvements and a waiver of materials use tax up to $3,000.

The incentive would need to be repaid through city sales tax collection within two years; otherwise, the owners would have to pay the difference.

Stuart Thomas, a broker with Cassidy Turley Commercial Real Estate in Fort Collins, said his company took over the marketing of Lincoln Place's commercial space from a Boulder-based company that wasn't having much success.

He said he took a different approach to marketing the long-vacant space and took the price off the listings.

"Our goal is to have a tenant come to us," he said. "We'll build a deal around what works for the tenant and the landlord."

Thomas also has leased the Lincoln Place space vacated in November 2012 by Enchante Salon. The new tenants, who are in the process of remodeling, plan to announce their new lounge soon.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Craig Young at 970-635-3634 or cyoung@reporter-herald.com. Follow him at twitter.com/CraigYoungRH.