U.S. Rep. John B. Larson, the Democrat representing the state's 1st Congressional District, is seeking his ninth term in Congress, a career point when some members begin to lose their enthusiasm and rely on their seniority. Mr. Larson hasn't succumbed to that strain of Potomac Fever. He stays active in the district, picks good issues to champion and, in a badly polarized Congress, is more than willing to work with Republicans to get something done.

The Courant endorses him for re-election over Republican challenger Matthew Corey, a small-business owner in Hartford.

Why Mr. Larson?

Mr. Larson, 66, of East Hartford is a pragmatist with common sense. He supports a strong defense and goes to bat for Pratt & Whitney, as the 1st District representative must, but is appropriately cautious about U.S. military ventures abroad. He never supported the Iraq war, and recently voted against arming the so-called Syrian moderates, believing Congress should have an open debate on the subject and the Obama administration should have an exit strategy.

He supported airstrikes on ISIS and would like to see a broad coalition of allies bring stability to the region so that Congress can focus on domestic issues such as immigration reform and infrastructure.

As for infrastructure, Mr. Larson was a strong backer of the Water Resources Reform and Development Act, passed by Congress earlier this year, which should help rebuild the nation's ports, waterways, dams and levees. In supporting this legislation, Mr. Larson is addressing both national and local concerns. The 70-year-old dike system in Hartford and East Hartford on the Connecticut River are in need of upgrading, and for that, federal assistance is needed. Mr. Larson well realizes that a failure of the dike system could be catastrophic.

Dikes aren't the only aspect of the nation's infrastructure in need of an upgrade; the highways, bridges and railroads do as well. Last spring Mr. Larson proposed a domestic Marshall Plan for infrastructure, a bold and necessary idea, as well as five- or six-year transportation bills, instead of nine-month bills, so states can plan and executive transportation infrastructure projects.

Mr. Larson is an advocate for campaign finance reform on the federal level, as well as tax reform, limits on congressional gerrymandering, increased Connecticut and U.S. manufacturing and other useful measures. He's in tune with his district on most of these measures, and should be sent back to continue his work.

Why Not Mr. Corey?

His opponent, Matthew Corey, 50, of Manchester is another in a long line of (mostly) unknown soldiers the GOP has sent into the fray in the heavily Democratic 1st District.

Mr. Corey owns two businesses, including the popular McKinnon's Irish Pub in downtown Hartford. The Republican publican has never held public office. He is a passionately pro-business conservative running to provide the people "with a voice in Washington." He doesn't have finely honed positions on issues; he'd like to abolish parts of the Affordable Care Act, abolish most of the U.S. Department of Education and give younger people another choice for retirement savings besides Social Security. He also favors lowering the corporate tax rate.

He criticizes Mr. Larson for his support of a carbon tax several years ago, saying it would cost jobs, and also criticized Mr. Larson for failing to gain National Park status for Coltsville in Hartford, saying Mr. Larson has been working on it since 2002 and it's a "simple" project. No one even vaguely familiar with this hugely complex financial, environmental and political challenge, which predates 2002, would ever say that.

Mr. Larson and his longtime chief of staff John Rossi (who recently was lured away by Hartford Hospital) have shepherded the Coltsville project to a point where it is poised for passage. That would cap what has been a productive tenure for Mr. Larson.

Mr. Larson is cross-endorsed by the Working Families Party. Also running is Green Party candidate Jeffery Russell of Glastonbury.