White House stands by Carter, but also offers praise for Iraqis

The White House on Tuesday offered cautious words of support for Defense Secretary Ashton Carter, whose recent statement that Iraqi troops often lacked the “will to fight” prompted a backlash from Iraq’s leaders.

White House spokesman Josh Earnest said Carter’s comments were “consistent with the analysis that he’s received from those who are on the ground,” but he also stressed that in many cases Iraqi troops had shown bravery in their battle against Islamic State militants.

Story Continued Below

Carter’s comments, made in an interview with CNN, came days after Iraqi troops lost the city of Ramadi to the militant network, also known as ISIS or ISIL.

“They vastly outnumbered the opposing force and, yet, they failed to fight, they withdrew from the site,” Carter said.

Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi took issue with Carter’s assessment, telling the BBC that it was based on inaccurate information.

“They have the will to fight,” Abadi insisted, saying the ISIS attack came “from nowhere… with armored trucks packed with explosives, the effect of them is like a small nuclear bomb — it gives a very, very bad effect on our forces.”

By Monday, Vice President Joe Biden was on the phone with Abadi, assuring him that the U.S. recognizes “the enormous sacrifice and bravery of Iraqi forces,” according to the White House.

Earnest said Tuesday that the Iraqi government “has acknowledged is that the setback that they’ve experienced in Ramadi was at least in part attributable to a breakdown in military command and planning.” He also pointed out that many of the troops in Ramadi “were not forces that had benefited from the training” offered by the U.S. and its partners.

He said the White House was pleased that the Iraqi government announced Tuesday that it was starting a new mission to retake Ramadi. The exact status of that effort was unclear, however: The Associated Press reported there were no signs of immediate troop movement.

Carter’s contention that America can do little beyond offer training and equipment if the Iraqis won’t defend themselves came as the administration faces renewed pressure at home to put more U.S. troops on the ground.

“George W. Bush at least had the guts to reverse and respond with the surge,” said Sen. John McCain on CBS’s “Face the Nation” on Sunday, referring to the infusion of 30,000 new troops into Iraq in 2007. “I wish, I pray, Barack Obama would do the same thing.”

Obama stayed above the fray on Memorial Day, but his remarks at Arlington National Cemetery offered a reminder that he is deeply averse to intensifying U.S. military involvement overseas.

“For many of us, this Memorial Day is especially meaningful; it is the first since our war in Afghanistan came to an end,” Obama said. “Today is the first Memorial Day in 14 years that the United States is not engaged in a major ground war.”