“The Honeywell, Flambeau, and Orion lawsuits are essentially all trying to answer the question of when does encouraging participation in a wellness program transition to requiring employees to participate in the program,” says Caleena Svatek, an attorney at Chamblee, Ryan, Kershaw & Anderson, a Dallas-based law firm.The conflict is mainly due to the language found both in the ADA and the Affordable Care Act (ACA), according to Svatek.“The ADA requires submission to medical examinations or inquiries to be voluntary, but the ACA allows for a financial incentive or surcharge," Svatek say. "Balancing both the ADA and the ACA can make promotion of wellness programs difficult for employers."

The crux of the discussion is twofold: the meaning of “voluntary” and the loss of funds.

“Some commentators have questioned the ‘voluntariness’ aspect when looking at lower income workers, as the premium savings may be so compelling that participating in the wellness program is not truly voluntary,” says Gordon M. Berger, an attorney at Ford & Harrison in Atlanta.

“What makes the term ‘voluntary’ confusing is the fact the ACA authorizes a more nominal surcharge or financial incentive,” Svatek says. “At point does a financial inducement turn a wellness program from voluntary to involuntary? That answer is still to be determined.”

But Tom Harrington, an attorney at Washington, D.C.-based The Employment Law Group, says that “The EEOC has provided guidance on how it interprets ‘voluntary.’”

“According to the EEOC, a wellness program is ‘voluntary’ as long as an employer neither requires participation nor penalizes employees who do not participate,” Harrington says. “This is the key issue: such wellness programs have to actually be voluntary. They can’t compel participation by imposing enormous penalties such as shifting 100% of the premium cost for health benefits onto the back of the employee or by just firing the employee who chooses not to participate."



The current scenario doesn't quite offer that freedom of choice.



"Having to choose between responding to medical exams and inquiries -- which are not job-related -- in a wellness program, on the one hand, or being fired, on the other hand, is no choice at all payment,” Harrington says. Savings is an issue for both employees and employers.