With tens of thousands of illegal alien children crowding detention centers in Texas and Arizona and taking up temporary homes in American military bases, the Department of Health and Human Services apparently wants to make sure they have enough condoms and gay culture.

And it’s spending big money to do it.

According to a $350 million grant announced by the people who brought you Obamacare, the DHHS is stressing “family planning services” in its request for proposals from potential residential care providers that can take on the task of caring for thousands and thousands of children from Central and South America now overwhelming the government facilities designed for them.

Already, the number of children arrested after crossing the Rio Grande is expected to reach 60,000, according to CNS News. That’s 815 times the number arrested after crossing in 2011, according to CNS.

It’s not enough for a progressive government like Obama’s that such children just be given food and shelter.

Their sexual-identity needs must be cared for as well, according to the DHHS, along with whatever kind of birth control they favor apparently.

“Residential care providers are required to provide or arrange for the program required services in a manner that is sensitive to the age, culture, religion, dietary needs, native language, sexual orientation, gender identity, and other important individual needs of each UAC,” the grant states, according to CNS.

Now, on one level the “family planning” part might make a certain amount of sense. Any time thousands of young human beings of sexually active age get together, couples are going to – well, get together.

So, trying to make sure that a flood of teenage illegal aliens doesn’t become a flood of pregnant illegal aliens might be a sensible precaution.

But only in a government driven by hyper political correctness would ensuring a comfortable homosexual lifestyle for the new arrivals even be a consideration.

All of this is being handled by the HHS Office of Refugee Resettlement.

At some point, sane people have to question this administration’s absolute obsession with things homosexual. These are children who crossed international borders illegally, who don’t have their parents and families and are stuck in a legal limbo thanks to Obama’s now-trademark fecklessness — and DHHS minions are trying to make sure their gay lifestyle, if they have one, is comfortable.

Chances are, sexual intercourse that doesn’t involve rape fears isn’t way up on their list of concerns.

In every other country in the world “refugees” get a sack of flour and possibly potable water.

In Obama’s America, apparently, they’re supposed to get videos of Michael Sam’s draft day display of affection or Laverne Cox’s Katie Couric interview.

With any luck, the Dems and Obamabots figure, some of the boys might decide to marry each other and become good little “Modern Family” Democrat voters.

If we knew you were coming we’d have baked a cake.