The Oklahoma State football team held its annual Pro Day inside the weight room at Boone Pickens Stadium and at the Sherman E. Smith Training Center Thursday, with 26 former Cowboys working out in front of 42 total NFL personnel.

Among the athletes working out were 24 players from last year's 10-3 squad, as well as former Cowboys Alex Elkins and Evan Epstein. Plenty of attention was on NFL combine attendees Justin Gilbert and Josh Stewart, but several other athletes turned in impressive marks as well.

Safety Daytawion Lowe had perhaps the biggest day of all, running an impressive 4.45 seconds in the 40-yard dash and recording a vertical leap of 37.5 inches. To put those marks into perspective, only one safety ran a faster 40 time (4.42) and two safeties recorded a higher vertical (38 in.) at this year's NFL Combine.

"I think it went well," Lowe said. "There is always room for improvement, but overall I think today went pretty well."

Lowe's 40 time and his vertical were the best respective marks of the day, but it should be noted that Gilbert elected not to run the 40-yard dash and used his NFL Combine time of 4.37 seconds. Other bests included Shamiel Gary's broad jump of 10-3, Tyler Patmon's 20-yard shuttle time of 4.12 seconds, Patmon's and Steven Sumpter's 60-yard shuttle times of 11.23 seconds, Patmon's three cone drill time of 6.8 seconds and Epstein's 30 bench-press reps of 225 pounds.

Among cornerbacks at this year's NFL Combine, Patmon's 60-yard shuttle mark would have ranked third, his three cone drill sixth and his 20-yard shuttle eighth.

Stewart improved two of his NFL Combine results, turning in a 4.59 in the 40-yard dash and a 4.32 in the 20-yard shuttle. He also had a solid day in position work running routes and catching passes.

"My goal was to come out here today and just be better," Stewart said. "I wanted to have a better day than I did at the combine and just work really hard because that is all I can do. I think I did that today so I'm excited and looking forward to the coming months."

Gilbert, an All-American and Thorpe Award finalist, used his NFL Combine numbers for most of the tests, but did impress in position work.

"I wanted to [run] but my agent said my time was pretty good at the Combine and I didn't need to run," Gilbert said. "I talked with Coach Glass a couple days ago when I was still trying to decide whether or not to run the 40 and he said I had one of the fastest times there so I didn't really need to run. I relaxed a little bit today and just kind of took it easy."

Other notable results from OSU's 2014 Pro Day included Parker Graham's 29 bench-press reps, Gary's 4.5 40 time, Tracy Moore's 37-inch vertical leap and Charlie Moore's and Alex Elkins' 10-2 broad jump.



Pro Day Quoteboard





Cornerback Justin Gilbert

On not running at Pro Day

"I wanted to but my agent said my time was pretty good at the columbine and I didn't need to run. I talked with Coach Glass a couple days ago when I was still trying to decide whether or not to run the 40 and he said I had one of the fastest times there so I didn't really need to run. I relaxed a little bit today and just kind of took it easy."

On who helped their stock

"Daytawion (Lowe) looked like he was moving pretty fast in his 40. I still don't know his time but I know he was moving. I'm anxious to see what his time was."

On the NFL people assuring him something good will happen

"I'm hoping so. I'm just playing along with it right now and being friendly with everybody. I'm just trying to be the best person that I can be throughout this whole process and hoping for the best come."

On if he ever imagined NFL coaches would be watching him train

"I've pictured this day ever since I was little in Pop Warner football. It's finally about to come true and I just thank God for the many blessings he bestowed upon me."

Receiver Josh Stewart

On his goal today

"My goal was to come out here today and just be better. I wanted to have a better day than I did at the combine and just work really hard because that is all I can do. I think I did that today so I'm excited and looking forward to the coming months."

On his favorite part thus far

"Just knowing that I'm doing all this for my family. My dream as always been to play in the NFL so there's nothing better than that."

Safety Daytawion Lowe

On his performance

"I think it went well. There is always room for improvement but overall I think today went pretty well."

On his 40-yard dash

"It was somewhere around 4.4 and that is what I have been working for so I'm happy about that."

On preparing for the NFL Draft

"It's been a lot of fun but it's also been a lot of hard work and dedication. It's a once in a lifetime opportunity so I'm taking advantage of it."

On where he has been training

"I've been training with Markel Martin here in Stillwater. We are both good friends and he has already been doing this for a couple years so he has been helping me get ready."

Defensive Tackle Calvin Barnett

On how he felt

"I feel like it went alright. I didn't do anything special in my opinion. I'm fresh off the meniscus repair that I had so I don't feel like I'm in good enough shape yet. I'm going to schedule another workout here soon, probably in April, so I can get into better shape and try and do better."

On what he wanted to prove

"Just my dedication and my heart. I really shouldn't have been doing these drills and I shouldn't have run, but I did that for them to have something on paper to show that I can fight through things."

Offensive Lineman Parker Graham

On how today went

"I didn't do as well as I wanted to in the 40, but everything else I felt good about. I came and gave everything I had. Hopefully that turns out well for me."

How he's been preparing for today

"Just working out every day almost. I've been working out here in Stillwater. I had a great time doing that. I had to rely on myself for self-motivation to get ready for today, and I felt like it went well for me."

On what he was trying to prove

"A lot of guys don't realize how athletic a lot of us are. I just wanted to show my athleticism and how well I move, and I think I did that today."

On what he worked on the most

"Overall strength and overall explosion. Doing little things with technique to get ready for today and getting in front of the scouts. I'll keep doing that until May comes around."

Receiver Tracy Moore

On his weight loss

"I've been training in Miami, Fla. I weighed in at 204 today. I will gain some more and put it back on the right way. I wanted to be a little lighter for the 40. When I went down there, I was about 220 and then I got down to 200. Then, I was like no that's too much and had to put some back on."

On if he helped himself today

"Yeah, I definitely feel like I helped myself. Just losing the weight I feel much better and I'm moving much quicker. I feel like I did help myself."

On where he thinks he stands NFL-wise

"Honestly, I don't know. I let my agent handle that kind of stuff and I just train and get ready to play. After Pro Day, I might go back to Miami and keep working out. I'm going to get ready to do some team visits so we'll see."

Quarterback Clint Chelf

On how he felt

"I felt good. I feel like I threw the ball pretty well today. A lot of my times and my jumps accomplished what I wanted to today. It's been a really great experience and a lot of fun. I felt good out there."

On how he's been preparing

"I've been training in Tyler, Texas and living with Charlie Moore. It's a free place to live and he's been taking care of me. It's been fun. I've just been working out down there and working out in Dallas with a quarterback coach. I've been doing a lot and staying busy."

On what he thought about the whole experience

"It's exciting. I think that's the first word that comes to your mind. We were all out here yesterday talking and we were ready to get out there and go. We've been training for this, specifically, for the last two months, but really your whole life. Playing football, it's what you do. It was really exciting for all of us. We were all anxious and nervous a little bit, but at the end of the day you have to go out there and perform and do what you've done your whole life. It was a great experience and something that I'll remember for a long time."

On continuing his career

"I'd love to keep playing. That's why I'm out here and that's why I've been training. If I'm fortunate enough to get a shot I'm going to take advantage of that."