To address the complex health needs of cancer patients during and after their treatment, Ohio State University has opened up a new emergency department dedicated solely to those patients, staffed by oncologists and emergency medicine physicians who have been trained in the same treatment protocols and care guidelines.

"It was insightful on the part of our leadership to plan for the needs of cancer patients and their families by making resources available to make a cancer specific unit in emergency department," said Dr. Thomas Terndrup, chair of the department of emergency medicine who joined OSU in July 2013. "Right now we estimate that 6,500 patients with active oncologic conditions currently go to the emergency department."

The new department is part of OSU Wexner Medical Center's larger emergency department. It features emergency medicine physicians and nurses working with oncologists and nurses from OSU's The James Cancer Hospital (the formal name of which is the OSU Comprehensive Cancer Center - Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital and Richard J. Solove Research Institute) to manage the emergency care of cancer patients.

Even before patients come in for care, their oncologists provide information on their full health history to the ED through electronic medical records.

Cancer patients often experience severe dehydration, fever, neutropenia (lowered white blood cell count), high blood calcium levels, viral infections and severe fatigue – often stemming from treatment that weakens their immune systems.

The OSUCCC-James cancer emergency department is part of the 21-floor, 1.1 million-square-foot freestanding cancer hospital that will open in December. Included in the ED are private treatment rooms.

Those rooms, in which cancer patients can be placed in isolation in a negative air flow space, were included to reduce exposure to infectious diseases – critical to bone marrow transplant patients and others with compromised immune systems.

Also included are 15 treatment stations with private bathrooms, natural light and quiet space for family physician conversations – the antithesis of an often-noisy emergency department environment.

As part of their planning, the OSU team traveled to MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston. In 2010 MD Anderson created the first academic department of emergency medicine in a comprehensive cancer center.

"They were very inviting and encouraging about helping us understand what they had done in their cancer hospital," Terndrup said

OSU will measure success by how well patients and families think they're providing care, and by how quickly they do it.

"You can deliver great cancer care, but if it takes a long time to do it, it's not really that great," Terndrup said. The goal, he said, is to reduce wait times, not only in how long it takes for a patient to be seen, but how long it takes to figure out what is wrong with a patient so the right care can begin.

Cleveland Clinic, UH services help cancer patients

bypass emergency department to get critical care

It's not just patient satisfaction that is the driving force behind more specialized emergency care for cancer patients.

"The James will save money if patients are diverted from [regular] emergency room to somewhere else," said Dr. Matt Kalaycio, chair of the Cleveland Clinic's department of hematology and medical oncology.

Another cost-saving is reducing hospital readmissions, a number that hospitals have been tracking closely since the federal government began exacting financial penalties for too many patients who return to the hospital fewer than 30 days after being discharged.

With that in mind, the Clinic's Taussig Cancer Institute several months ago launched a low acuity clinic that mimics the care that cancer patients would receive at an emergency department without having to go there.

Within five days of leaving the hospital, cancer patients come back to the low acuity clinic, on Taussig's first floor, to have their symptoms assessed and controlled with intravenous fluids or other treatment.

Although Kalaycio does admit to a certain amount of jealousy over OSU's new cancer emergency department ("They have 15 treatment stations. We have one room"), the Clinic doesn't need the same huge set-up, he said.

Last month the Clinic broke ground on a $276 million Cancer Institute on Carnegie Avenue at East 105th Street.

"Our idea for the low acuity clinic is the right course," he said. "The way OSU practice differs from ours is that their physicians have labs, are academic physicians -- they're not necessarily available day to day."

University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center also offers similar acute care services. In late 2008 it opened the Fast Track Clinic to provide treatment for sickle cell patients at the first signs of a crisis. Because the fields of hematology (blood disorders) and oncology (cancer) often overlap, sickle cell patients are treated at Seidman.

Well above 50 percent of UH's sickle cell patients were coming back within 30 days of being discharged, said Wendy Miano, director of nursing at UH Seidman Cancer Center.

Initially, the clinic was only able to accommodate 10 patients a week, even though the need was four times that, Miano said.

With funding from the Affordable Care Act, UH expanded its services - now named Acute Care Service - in the fall of 2013. By the end of that year, the service was treating 60 to 80 patients a month, and readmission rates had dropped to 42 percent.

In February, the Acute Care Service added cancer patients who are being treated with chemotherapy and radiation at the same time.

"We are beginning to use it to proactively manage patients and preempt cancer treatment side effects," she said. "In our head/neck and bone marrow transplant population, we are pre-scheduling people for routine assessments. We're getting a history on how patients are managing sleep, nutrition, pain management. It keeps them from coming back to us sick and depleted."

In January 2015, acute care will expand to weekends at UH's main campus, and on Saturdays at UH Chagrin Highlands.

"It's more cost-effective compared to going to the emergency room," Miano said.

One risk of a cancer patient going to an emergency room without health care providers well-versed in treating them is that, by virtue of them looking less healthy (the result of undergoing active treatment), those patients are more likely to be admitted, Miano said.

"If we can manage symptoms by phone triage, [treatment in] the infusion center or by assessment, we're likely going to be able to send them back home," she said.

Cancer side effects are not the kind of side effects that go away overnight. But as treatments improve, those side effects are becoming less toxic, said Kalaycio of the Clinic.

"Over time, investments like cancer emergency rooms might become obsolete," he said. "We might not need them."