Leave Alec alone!

South Nyack, N.Y.: I continue to be amazed at the viciousness directed at Alec Baldwin and his beautiful wife Hilaria (“If he wasn’t a star, she would be free,” Nov. 15). Here is a man obviously in love with his wife, and who just had a baby, being vilified and mercilessly ridiculed by Linda Stasi for his tears on the witness stand and other very private emotions.

Yet I did not hear one word directed at his, yes, stalker. So, here it is: Genevieve Sabourin, you should be ashamed of yourself. Whether or not Baldwin ever had a relationship with you, sexual or otherwise, get over it. It is over and so are you. That you continue to harass and drag out your 15 minutes of fame only reinforces the fact that you are a pathetic woman with too much time on your hands.

I do not know the Baldwins personally, but they have my sympathy. As to Stasi, she needs to find another cause, one that does not support abuse of other human beings, especially if they just happen to be more famous than the rest of us. Grace Araujo

Bully boy Baldwin

Manhattan: Not that I am in love with the paparazzi types, but I loathe bullies even more. Alec Baldwin — who seems to chase only those he can physically intimidate — is using his wife and baby as a phony excuse for asking the press to stay away. He was already attacking people before he had them. Jim Bitros

Low-class Kelly

Bronx: I guess it’s time for Ray Kelly to start cashing in on his notoriety as police commissioner by talking to Playboy magazine (“Dumpin’ on de Blaz,” Nov. 15). Here are a couple of questions Kelly should answer in his next one: If all the young residents in the projects looked like Justin Bieber, would he still be a believer in stop-and-frisk? Now that he’s looking for a new job, would he be interested in being the head of security at Macy’s or Barneys? Virgilio Carballo

We’ll know soon

Rockaway Park: I have a question for Voicer Tim Caravello and all the other right-wing people predicting criminals will roam the streets of our city with impunity simply because our incoming mayor does not support the current stop-and-frisk policy: Will you write in a year from now to admit that you were wrong? I doubt it, since people like you, who seem to lack empathy for those who are the innocent victims of this tactic, rarely admit to being wrong about anything with political implications. Anthony Johnson

Obama v. Bush, Obama edition

Manhattan: All the people saying President Obama lied about Obamacare, and that his lies were worst than those of President George W. Bush, should take into account that Obama went on TV and apologized. Bush never did. For whatever reason, people were misinformed and the buck stopped with Obama, and he owned up to it. Bush never did. And if we put the two on a scale, we find the Bush lies cost thousands of American lives, while Obama’s have cost zero. Only in America could someone compare the two. Ray McEaddy

Obama v. Bush, Bush edition

Trumbull, Conn.: How can Voicer Robert Rundbaken even equate the Iraq war with people losing their health insurance? The Iraq war was voted on by Democrats and Republicans. The information may have turned out to be untrue, but it was there at the time. Obamacare was voted on strictly along party lines. As Nancy Pelosi said, “We have to pass the bill so that you can find out what is in it.” There was much bribery and coercion involved to get enough votes to pass an enormous bill that affects the economy of this whole country — and that should have been debated and thoroughly examined before it was passed. Joyce Pinto

Cash chasers and care haters

Far Rockaway: It appears to me that doctors opt out of Obamacare because they can’t get huge payouts for the patients they see. My dermatologist’s office charged my insurance company $175 to remove two skin tags. A tissue pathology lab charged $259 to analyze the samples (negative, by the way). Kudos to my doctor, who knew that the insurance payment would be small. But what about the people whose doctors dropped them because they want to be paid more? All I can say is that this brings the term “ambulance chaser” to a higher level. Ora Reed

Quit scapegoating Obamacare

Schenectady, N.Y.: The Affordable Care Act is not the reason Voicer Helen Jaeger’s copays, deductibles and so on are going up. As with all of us, her premiums increase along with the amount her insurance company pays out in claims on her behalf and on behalf of other subscribers included in her rating group. The ACA has started to decrease the cost of health care. The President is trying to make sure your fellow Americans can do what you and I already can — see a doctor. Diane Hombach

Looking up

Jamesburg, N.J.: I’m tired of reading about how bad the Obamacare website is. The first two weeks were horrible, but since then I’ve opened an account and shopped. New Jersey has 27 different policies to compare, and I’ve been on the site three or four times a week doing so. I haven’t bought yet because I have until Dec. 15. You don’t buy the first car or house you look at. John Yancsek

Smear job

Washington: Tammi Rossman-Benjamin baselessly asserts in her Op-Ed “Anti-Semitism, academic freedom and Brooklyn College” (Nov. 14) that I support “anti-Semitic” policies, “condone terrorism” and “advocate the elimination of the Jewish state” in my effort to change U.S. policy toward Israel and the Palestinians to support human rights, international law and equality. Yet she marshals not one iota of evidence to substantiate these allegations. Her spurious claims not only are meant to discredit me and the U.S. Campaign to End the Israeli Occupation (which I serve as the national advocacy director) but to pressure university administrators to crack down on Students for Justice in Palestine chapters to try to prevent them from organizing on campus to expose Israeli apartheid and advocate for Palestinian rights. Josh Ruebner

Flashback

Bronx: In 1988, new schools Chancellor Richard Green challenged stakeholders to envision all students as worthy and entitled to share in the American experience. He urged our city to “reject illiteracy as a norm in some of our communities and move toward a quality of life which is the very foundation of an educated society.” We need our next chancellor to be a seasoned educator, with a vision and a road map for getting us there. As Green reminded us: “In the final analysis, we must remember that we will be judged by only one standard — the extent to which we have improved achievement scores for all students.” The time is now! Phyllis C. Murray

The Black of fire

Ridgewood, N.Y.: To Voicer Nancy Rogan, who wants firemen to work the same hours as cops: You obviously know as much about us as Cathie Black did about the schools — nada! We work two 24-hour shifts per week. I suggest you stick to your 9-to-5 job and enjoy the holidays. Francheisko Perez

Colorblind

Staten Island: Where does Voicer Stephanie Ortiz get her information? As far as I’m concerned, the firefighter who comes to save me can be any color, so long as he or she is capable of performing the job. Get over it — the best person wins no matter what color! Joan Sere

Call for comment

Brooklyn: Of about 4 million registered voters here, only a million voted. Can anyone explain it to me? Joseph R. Kayata

An outdated pledge?

Edison, N.J.: The Daily News has a problem with Melissa Mark-Viverito not pledging allegiance to our flag. Yet it is our First Amendment right not to do so. If you have an issue with the councilwoman, make it one of policy. Tracy Connors

Cano’s gotta go

Manhattan: The New York Yankees have an obligation to try to field a championship-caliber team. Overpaying Robinson Cano would undermine that objective, particularly given his unwillingness to run out ground balls and pop-ups, his lack of discipline at the plate and his post-season choke syndrome. This fan would rather have a second baseman who hustles, gets clutch hits in big games and shows some loyalty to his fans and his team, especially when that team has offered him a generous contract. Mark Rosenthal