People Moves: Carlyle, Guggenheim, Victory Park

Carlyle adds operating executive; Guggenheim expands restructuring group; Victory Park hires Upacala Mapatuna as chief investment officer

Michele Alexander was hired by Bracewell LLP as a partner. Alexander, most recently with Lowenstein Sandler LLP, advises companies on M&A, securities and other capital markets matters.

Terrence Allen has joined Pepper Hamilton LLP as a partner. Allen, previously with Gibson Dunn & Crutcher LLP, concentrates on M&A, asset sales and recapitalizations.

Fernando Araya was hired by Antarctica Advisors International Corp. to lead the firm’s new office in Chile. Araya previously led Rabobank’s M&A team in Chile.

Thomas Bremner has been promoted to partner at Adams Street Partners. Bremner, who has been with the PE firm since 2013, focuses on growth equity investments in the health care sector.

Ryan Budlong was promoted to managing director at Harris Williams & Co. Budlong focuses on M&A in the food and beverage, restaurants and retail sectors.

Oliver Currall is now with Sidley Austin LLP as a partner. Currall, most recently with Kirkland & Ellis LLP, advises private equity firms on tax matters related to M&A.

Erik Dahl has joined Sidley Austin as a partner. Dahl, previously with Kirkland & Ellis, concentrates on M&A and cross-border leveraged buyouts.

Frank Dworak has been promoted to partner at K&L Gates. He represents clients on tax matters related to M&A.

Stuart Erickson has joined Guggenheim Securities’ restructuring group as a senior managing director. Erickson, most recently with Miller Buckfire, focuses on restructuring and recapitalizations.

Richard Farley was hired by Kramer Levin Naftalis & Frankel LLP as a partner. Farley, most recently with Paul Hastings, will chair the firm’s leveraged finance group.

John Geaneotes is now with BMI Mergers & Acquisitions as an M&A adviser. Geaneotes, previously with Deloitte Consulting, focuses on M&A in the life sciences and manufacturing sectors.

Joseph Goldrick has been promoted to partner at Adams Street Partners. Goldrick is responsible for the firm’s North American and Latin American secondary investments.

Renée James was hired by the Carlyle Group (Nasdaq: CG) as an operating executive in the telecommunications, media and technology group. James, a former Intel Corp. (Nasdaq: INTC) president, will advise the PE firm on operational and due diligence for potential sector investments.

William Kuntz has joined Peak Rock Capital as a principal. Kuntz, most recently with Housatonic Partners, will focus on investments in the technology sector.

Adam Larson has joined Kirkland & Ellis as a partner. Larson, previously with Vinson & Elkins LLP, advises private equity firms on M&A in the energy, consumer and financial services sectors.

Robert Lee is now with Rimon Law as a partner. Lee, previously with Foley & Lardner LLP, concentrates on cross-border deals in Asia and Latin America.

Brennan Libbey was hired by Livingstone as a partner. Libbey will head the firm’s Los Angeles office and business services group.

Upacala Mapatuna (pictured) has joined Victory Park Capital as chief investment officer. Mapatuna, most recently with Goldman Sachs Group Inc. (NYSE: GS) will oversee Victory Park’s current and future funds.

James McNerney Jr. has joined Clayton Dubilier & Rice as a senior adviser. McNerney, a former Boeing Co. (NYSE: BA) CEO, will assist the PE firm in evaluating potential investments and creating strategies for portfolio companies.

Randall Mehrberg has joined Jenner & Block as a partner. Mehrberg, most recently with Vail Resorts, concentrates on restructuring and bankruptcy.

Frank Monaco was hired by Mayer Brown as a partner. Monaco, most recently with Hogan Lovells, represents insurance companies, investment banks and other financial service firms on M&A.

Naomi Ogan has been promoted to partner at K&L Gates. Ogan concentrates on M&A, venture capital and other financings.

Fatema Orjela was hired by Sidley Austin as a partner. Orjela, previously with Kirkland & Ellis, concentrates on M&A in private equity.

Michael Parisi was hired by Alston & Bird as a partner. Parisi, previously with McGuireWoods LLP, focuses on M&A financing and debt restructuring in the health care, media, retail and manufacturing sectors.

Harsh Patel was promoted to Principal at Victory Park Capital. Patel is responsible for making investments in middle market companies outside the U.S.

Lauren Pryor has been promoted to partner at K&L Gates. Pryor focuses on M&A and divestitures.

Bryan Robson has joined Sidley Austin as a partner. Robson, mostly with Kirkland & Ellis, advises lenders on acquisitions.

Patrick Rogers has been promoted to partner at K&L Gates. Rogers focuses on M&A along with other corporate transactions.

Vittorio Salvadori di Wiesenhoff has been promoted to partner at K&L Gates. He advises on tax matters related to M&A and private equity.

Sava Savov has joined Sidley Austin as a partner. Savov, previously with Kirkland & Ellis, focuses on all aspects in private equity.

Tom Schramkowski was hired by Seyfarth Shaw as a partner. Schramkowski, most recently with Troutman Sanders LLP, focuses on M&A in the agriculture, technology, manufacturing and energy sectors.

Brent Spiller has been promoted to managing director at Harris Williams & Co. Spiller advises clients on M&A in the lifestyle brand along with the garden and pet sectors.

Gordon Watson was promoted to partner at Victory Park Capital. Watson focuses on direct private debt and equity investments in the specialty finance sector.

Morgan Webber has been promoted to partner at Adams Street Partners. Webber focuses on the firm’s U.S. health care and consumer portfolio.

Matt White has been promoted to managing director at Harris Williams & Co. White concentrates on M&A in the energy and power sectors.

Laila Worrell was hired as a managing director in the Boston Consulting Group’s private equity practice. Worrell, previously with Accenture, will advise investment firms on due diligence.

Achi Yaffe was hired by GI Partners as an operating principal. Yaffe, previously with Lee Equity Partners, will support the PE firm’s portfolio companies.

Michael Zappert has been promoted to partner at Adams Street Partners. Zappert is responsible for sourcing late stage venture capital investments in the software and technology space.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: