Nuclear Terror: “Mind your own business” is the State Department’s message to the public on previewing a deal that may let Iran get a nuclear bomb. The Most Transparent Administration In History strikes again.

Maybe an Iran nuclear deal really is the ObamaCare of foreign policy, as White House deputy national security adviser Ben Rhodes once quipped to liberal activists.

Fox News’ Greta Van Susteren on Tuesday asked State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki a very basic question about the Iran nuclear deal that Secretary of State John Kerry is in Europe this week to make the final push for.

“When there is a proposed deal, will the American people get sort of a real strong briefing on it before it’s actually signed, sealed and delivered, so that we can have our thought whether it’s a good deal, bad deal, so we can have some input?” she asked. “Or is this going to be signed and then we are going to hear about it?”

Psaki replied that it is a pact “negotiated between leaders of countries. That’s traditionally and historically how international negotiations have worked.”

In other words: no way, Jose.

This, amazingly, sounds exactly like the position taken by House Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi when she was speaker of the House five years ago, using every legislative trick to impose socialized medicine on the American people.

Pelosi infamously claimed, “We have to pass the bill so that you can find out what is in it.”

Sixteen months ago, on NBC’s “Meet the Press,” Pelosi doubled down: “I stand by what I said there: When people see what is in the bill, they will like it.”

Behold the apparently boundless arrogance of our rulers, who claim to govern us democratically. This is not the way representative government is supposed to work. The people are supposed to be able to examine proposed laws thoroughly before enactment.

This is why we have committees in both the House and Senate, a panel or subcommittee for nearly every matter under the sun, from our armed forces to fisheries. They call experts or subpoena witnesses, place them under oath and then hopefully ask tough questions from various philosophical viewpoints.

The senators and congressmen are expected, both in committee and on the floor of their chamber, to debate and take well-considered positions on the details of such legislation, especially major bills that have profound effects on citizens’ lives.

How much more so is this the case when it comes to negotiated pacts with enemy powers, as in the case of the world’s leading terrorist sponsor state as it hurtles toward producing weapons of mass destruction?

The International Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations’ overseer of illicit nuclear weapons activities, says that Tehran has answered just one of the agency’s dozen questions on the military aspects of its nuclear activities. This is the body expected to make sure that Iran doesn’t cheat.

Yukiya Amano, head of the IAEA, told the Washington Post: “Recently, the progress is very limited.”

But this isn’t “recent” at all. It’s much worse than that.

Iran agreed all the way back in 2003 to provide information and access to its nuclear program. But in 2006 — nine years ago — it stopped doing so.

A dangerous nuclear deal based on appeasement cannot be forced down a blind America’s throat because we have a president seeking a foreign policy legacy.