President Barack Obama’s presidency will end on January 20, 2017. Kent Nishimura / Ka Leo O Hawai‘i 

Abraham Lincoln, who is President Barack Obama’s favorite president, once said, “Whatever you are, be a good one.”

Obama has proved that a leader does not need to use excessive force to get a country moving. It requires collaboration, patience, understanding and a great amount of leadership. He was the president that America needed to lead the country.

Unemployment Rates have lowered

There were key accomplishments that greatly helped America progress as a country over the last eight years. According to a statement made by Obama, the American job market created 2.5 million new jobs in 2015 alone.

A report published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that 242,000 non-farm employment jobs were added in February of 2016 with an average of 228,000 jobs per month between December 2015 and February 2016. In a period of 69 months, 13.7 million jobs were created in the private sector.

According to Reuters, the unemployment rate had fallen to five percent in October 2015. Obama brought the nation out of the recession by passing the Obama Stimulus Plan, also known as the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA). This was a plan to specifically bring the American people out of the financial crisis, three months after passing the Act, the recession ended.

While he is being criticized for the things he did not achieve, those responsible for the crash of the market have not yet taken full responsibility.

Obamacare aided people with health care

According to Obama, “The rate of the uninsured in America dropped below 10 percent for the first time ever” with the implementation of Obamacare (also known as the Affordable Care Act).

In addition, over 17 million people have gotten coverage and the number of uninsured Americans has dropped by 16.4 million since Obamacare went into effect, according to The Atlantic. The rate of uninsured Americans also decreased by 30 percent, which is the most it has decreased in 40 years.

Though there was a lot of criticism early on, mainly because many individuals did not understand what Obamacare was, it has proven to be successful.

With Obamacare, individuals are required to have a health plan, or they will be fined. As stated under the Obamacare facts, it “improves the health care industry, including the minimum standards of what health insurance must cover.” The program helps areas with individuals who cannot afford expensive insurance plans, as each individual is able to pay for healthcare based on their income and circumstances.

Obama worked to improve climate change effects

Obama has guided America as a leader in the Paris COP21 (or the Conference of Parties) climate talks that concluded with the signing of nearly 200 countries in efforts to decrease the usage of harmful chemicals in the fight in maintaining global warming below 2°C. This is the first time in over 20 years that a universal agreement has been made regarding the climate.

Same-sex marriage achieved new horizons

The legalization of same-sex marriage in all 50 states by the Supreme Court changed American society. This historic event sent a message out to the world that the United States is a country that values equality and the pursuit of happiness.

Obama is a president who not only believes in equal opportunity but also in happiness; every individual should have the right to be happy and to be with whomever they choose.