The United States suffers from the highest teen birth and sexually transmitted infection (STI) rates in the developed world. How do we alleviate such imminent trends, when according to national and state data, there were 305,388 births to adolescent women in 2012 alone, and nearly half of all STI diagnoses affected youth between the ages of 15 and 24?

Abstinence-focused prevention programs have historically been utilized in the majority of states across the country. However, according to the Guttmacher Institute, 88 percent of youth who pledge abstinence until marriage are less likely to use contraception, and are less likely to get tested for STIs.

A growing body of research claims comprehensive sex education bolsters reproductive health rights and prevents unwanted pregnancies, yet these policies continue to face political barriers across local jurisdictions. According to Siecus and State Policies in Brief, Colorado passed a law supporting comprehensive sex education funding in 2007. The law, which was moderated through House Bill 1081 in 2013, allows schools the right to appeal to the State Board of Education by way of an “opt-out” clause.

The clause allows individual school districts to enact their own parental permission policies and, by virtue of its nature, contradicts evidence indicating teen pregnancy rates decline when comprehensive sex education policies are in place. Flexibility and variability within the law, in this case, undermines the opportunity for inclusivity, and weakens the current state of comprehensive sex education in Colorado.

After a Republican victory in the 2014 mid-term elections, it will be particularly difficult to advocate for a budget that increases funding for comprehensive sex education in place of abstinence-only programs. The Colorado Department of Education needs consistent support of progressive school boards that have transitioned from abstinence-only curriculum and, in addition, can channel political capital through sponsorship of reproductive rights and gender equality campaigns.

Further, comprehensive sex education programs support lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgendered and queer (LGBTQ) identifying youth through a sexuality education component. The “not-until-marriage” narrative, inherently, discriminates against LGBTQ youth, and continues to undermine progressive human rights trends in the United States.

Why act now?

Abstinence-only programs are not only losing funding but, according to the FY15 budget, a policy window also has opened for more progressive reproductive health initiatives. The Obama administration ushered in a new era of sex education in the U.S., eliminating two-thirds of federal funding for abstinence-only programs, and providing up to $190 million for initiatives that support evidence-based teen pregnancy prevention and more comprehensive approaches to sex education under the Affordable Care Act (ACA).

According to the Guttmacher Institute, the ACA incentivizes states to provide comprehensive sex education, yet grants flexibility in terms of implementing programs appropriate to different needs. As of 2014, state legislatures in Arizona, Georgia, Hawaii, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, New York, Oklahoma, South Carolina and Washington have followed suit in support of inclusive and comprehensive sex education.

As the 2016 elections approach, local school districts must support the Colorado Department of Education in sustaining statewide comprehensive sex education. The standardization of sex education is imperative because policy inconsistencies encourage political tensions between school districts, and undermine the potential for inclusive reproductive health care initiatives. In absence of public responsiveness, comprehensive sex education may be swept under the rug by outdated and conservative curriculum.

While teen pregnancies and STIs are prevalent issues affecting youth in the U.S., current abstinence-focused sex education programs are inadequately mitigating these issues. Reach out to local school boards in support of standardized comprehensive sex education policies. Doing so will defend the reproductive rights of Colorado youth.

Alison Kent is pursuing a master’s degree in public administration from the University of Colorado Denver.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.