Lack of Medicaid expansion puts some Floridians in new doughnut hole

The unintended coverage gap in the new health-care law will put a large group of uninsured residents right in the middle — not earning enough to qualify for tax credits available through the exchange, but earning too much to qualify for Medicaid.

Nearly 1 million Floridians will fall through a large doughnut hole next month when the health insurance exchange — a key element in the Affordable Care Act — opens.

"They're out of luck," said Ron Pollack, executive director of Families USA, a health advocacy nonprofit.

On the flipside, more than 1.7 million Floridians will be able to enroll in the exchange and receive a tax credit to make their health premiums more affordable, according to an analysis from Families USA released Friday.

Currently about 3.5 million Floridians lack health-care coverage.

The coverage gap was not an intentional part of the original Affordable Care Act, but a result of the Supreme Court's decision last year, say those familiar with the specifics of the law.

Although the Supreme Court upheld the overall health-care law, it struck down the requirement that states expand Medicaid coverage up to 138 percent of the poverty level, said Larry Levitt, senior vice president of Kaiser Family Foundation. The high court voted to leave that option up to the individual states.

Florida is among 23 states that have thus far opted not to expand their Medicaid programs. Twenty-four states have chosen to expand Medicaid, and the rest are undecided, according to the Urban Institute, a nonpartisan think tank based in Washington.

Who qualifies?

In Florida, the new health insurance exchange, which opens Oct.1, will offer tax credits to lower and middle-income individuals and families, earning between 100 percent and 400 percent of the federal poverty level. The credits will go to offset costs of health insurance purchased through the exchange.

Using 2013 figures, that would mean individuals earning between $11,490 and $45,960 a year, and families of four earning between $23,550 and $94,200 would qualify for a tax credit.

But individuals and families who make less than 100 percent of the poverty level — and who don't qualify for Medicaid — don't have an affordable option, said Pollack.

In general, to qualify for Medicaid in Florida non-working parents must make 19 percent or less of poverty level, and a working-parent household would need to make 56 percent or less, said Chris Lee, spokesman for the Kaiser Family Foundation, a nonprofit health advocacy group.

Floridians without children are not eligible for Medicaid unless they are disabled.

That leaves 995,000 Floridians in the coverage gap, according to estimates from the Urban Institute.

"The biggest problem in states like Florida is that the poorest of the poor will be left out in the cold," said Pollack.