In advance of the Nov. 1 opening of the third annual open enrollment period for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act, the Obama administration is targeting 10.5 million uninsured Americans who qualify for health care coverage through the marketplaces the law created.

"Most of those have concerns about the cost and they're hard to reach," said U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services Sylvia M. Burwell in a media phone call on Thursday. She said 80 percent would qualify for subsidies or tax credits, but with more than three-quarters having less than $1,000 in savings, and about half having less than $100, they needed education about its affordability.

Last year, 85 percent of marketplace consumers received an average tax credit of around $270 per month, according to the HHS.

About 5 million, or half the targeted demographic, are the so-called "young invincibles," aged 18 to 34, and almost 60 percent are male, said Burwell.

The government has set a goal of signing up more than one in four of the 10.5 million identified uninsured to boost "effectuated" overall enrollment to 10 million (from the current 9.1 million) by the end of 2016. While the numbers of people selecting a marketplace plan for 2016 may reach as many as 14.1 million, Burwell said, the administration expects the usual attrition to result in 10 million "effectuated," those who actually retain their marketplace insurance through the end of the coverage year. "It's a strong, realistic goal," she said.

To achieve this goal, the government is targeting particular demographics and localities for intensive outreach. It did not divulge this year's budget for outreach, which in the past has shown that one-on-one contact with "navigators" is the most effective way to enroll people in appropriate insurance coverage. In Hampton, health care navigator Jamila Allen of Enroll Virginia, said her office would have all the information on available insurance plans the week before enrollment starts.

For the first time, re-enrollment will account for most of those signing up in this enrollment period — between 7.3 million and 8.8 million — which ends Jan. 31, 2016, said Lori Lodes, communication director for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. An additional 1 million are expected to transfer from the individual market to buy plans through the marketplace. The penalty for failure to purchase health insurance by those who qualify under the ACA individual mandate, which started at $95 the first year, increases to $695 next year.

Last year more than 385,000 Virginians enrolled through the state's federally facilitated marketplace, www.healthcare.gov.

Salasky can be reached by phone at 757-247-4784.