It has become a common mantra among Democratic politicians who are challenged on their voting records to blame Charles and David Koch, otherwise known as the Koch brothers, for abysmal poll ratings for President Obama and his signature health care legislation.

Recently, Senate Majority Leader said Harry Reid said that every American who said they had a horror story with Obamacare were lying and no one was having problems obtaining health insurance coverage. When he was called out for his statement condemning millions of Americans, he backtracked and said he was instead referring to ads by the Koch brothers, calling them “un-American” for engaging in the political process.

Sponsored Links

Indeed, the two have been running ads in competitive districts reminding voters of Democratic lawmakers in their districts who voted for Obamacare. It is unclear why Democrats are opposed to these ads since House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi has said Obamacare is a winning issue for Democrats.

However, the Democrats also have their own billionaires who contribute to their causes as well.

Tom Steyer, a hedge fund billionaire and Democratic campaign contributor, referred to David Koch as “just a famously evil person.” Interestingly, during the 2012 presidential election, Democrats excoriated Republican candidate Mitt Romney for having the same occupation as Steyer.

If one were to do a casual web search, they would believe that all the Koch brothers do is engage in politics against Democrats, but the truth is far more complex than that. In reality the pair is heavily involved in philanthropic efforts, including liberal causes such as environmental issues.

Deroy Murdock, a columnist for the Washington Post, notes that Wildlife Habitat Council president Robert Johnson has noted that Koch Industries Inc. has been a leader in the area of biodiversity, wildlife habitat enhancement, land restoration, and conservation education, each of which are areas traditionally associated with left-wing causes.

While the pair has been portrayed as not wanting people to have healthcare, they also spend large amounts of their own money in the area of finding cures and treatments.

Following a 1991 plane crash that David Koch was in that killed everyone in first class; he was diagnosed with prostate cancer. These incidents inspired a passion for philanthropy in the area of medicine, where he has given over $506 million.

Among the donations is $100 million for cancer research at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and another $100 million for a new ambulatory care center for the New York Presbyterian Hospital.