CLEVELAND, Ohio -- This election season, cleveland.com started thinking more like a voter. We wanted to explore each presidential candidate and examine the good and the bad, from the perspective of a voter casting a ballot in either the Democratic or Republican primary.

We came up with five reasons to vote for each candidate, as well as five arguments for voting against each of them. These are not our opinions, just what we think are the strongest pro and con arguments.

Here's our pro-con list for Hillary Clinton. We hope it helps you make up your mind before the Ohio primary on March 15. Please add your reasons in the comments below.

Five reasons to vote for Hillary Clinton:

She's experienced. Hillary Clinton boasts an impressive resume. She's worked in neighborhoods. She's worked in Congress, and the White House. And she's worked in foreign affairs. That makes her the candidate most qualified to run the country. As a lawyer, she helped investigate President Richard Nixon. As First Lady, she worked closely with husband Bill Clinton during his time in the White House. As the senator from New York, Clinton helped rebuild New York City after Sept. 11. As secretary of state, Clinton helped create a ceasefire deal between Israel and Hamas.

She's pro-immigrant. Two in three Americans believe immigrants living in the country illegally should be allowed to stay, and have a path to citizenship, according to an August Gallup poll. Clinton supports comprehensive immigration reform that would allow law-abiding immigrants to more easily become naturalized citizens. Clinton wants to deport individuals who pose a threat to American safety. She is in favor of giving refugees seeking asylum a fair chance.

She wants to build on the Affordable Care Act. Clinton said at a debate this month that she believes President Barack Obama's health care initiative gave about 90 percent of Americans the ability to receive health insurance. Clinton pledged, if elected, to allow the remaining 10 percent to receive coverage. She wants to make healthcare more affordable, and make it more appealing for states to expand Medicaid programs.

She knows how to work across the aisle. Clinton pledged to find common ground with Republicans to get legislation passed, in an interview with the Concord (N.H.) Monitor. As a senator and secretary of state, she routinely worked with GOP lawmakers, including South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham and Arizona Sen. John McCain. But she vowed to stand firm on certain, important issues. "I worked across the aisle all the time," Clinton told the Monitor. "I will do whatever it takes to reach out to anybody, anytime, anywhere in pursuit of common ground on issues that I think are important for the country — but I will also stand my ground."

She has a plan to combat gun violence. Clinton wants to create tougher background checks for gun owners. She wants to prevent severely mentally ill people from obtaining guns, and keep assault weapons off the streets. These changes could help prevent future mass killings. Assault weapons were used to kill the children at Sandy Hook Elementary School in 2012, and government workers in San Bernardino, California last year. "I don't know how we keep seeing shooting after shooting, read about the people murdered because they went to Bible study or they went to the movies or they were just doing their job, and not finally say we've got to do something about this," Clinton said on her website.

Five reasons to vote against Hillary Clinton:

She's embroiled in an email scandal. Clinton violated security rules by using a private email server to send emails while working in the U.S. State Department — and could have compromised national security in the process. At least 65 of the more than 30,000 emails are classified as secret, according to The New York Times. Clinton said in 2015 that she used a private email account for work because she wanted to carry one phone. She later revised that statement, and said that she accessed her email on an iPad, too. The FBI is looking into how Clinton handled certain classified information, according to the Times. Her explanation seems simple enough: She used the private email account as a matter of convenience. But with the job title like "Secretary of State," Clinton had a critical obligation to protect the American interests. And she failed in this regard. She could have exposed closely guarded American secrets. Bottom line: National security trumps convenience. Always.

She made mistakes on the Benghazi issue. The 2012 attacks on an American diplomatic building in Benghazi, Libya, left four people dead, including Chris Stevens, the American ambassador to Libya. Republicans maintained that the Obama administration ignored intelligence about the attacks and attempted to hide information in the days following the attack, according to NBC News. That turned out not to be true. But Benghazi forced Clinton into the spotlight, and she faced tough allegations from Republican lawmakers in Congress. In 2013 congressional hearings, she admitted that she didn't want to rehash the Benghazi attacks that occurred under her watch. She didn't want to reflect on her mistakes. "Nobody wants to sit where I am and think now about what 'coulda, shoulda, woulda' happened in order to avoid this...It is our job to figure out what happened and do everything we can to prevent it from ever happening again," she is quoted as saying in U.S. News and World Report. About 44 percent of people said they were not happy with Clinton's response to the attacks, according to an October NBC News and Wall Street Journal poll.

Voters have Clinton fatigue. Voters are as tired of the Clintons as they are of the Bushes. American politics is becoming too dynastic. Clinton would follow her husband, former President Bill Clinton, into the White House. Does America really want to take a time machine back to the 1990s?

She has trust issues. Clinton is difficult to like. Only 34 percent of Ohioans trust her, according to an August Quinnipac poll. Her inappropriate use of a private email server to send classified documents, and the perception that she hid emails from government investigators are a turnoff.

She has authenticity issues. Clinton constantly appears rehearsed, calculated and composed. And the act comes off as insincere, robotic and pandering. No one knows the real Hillary Clinton; we see the different characters she puts on to win the presidency. Who is Hillary Clinton? Whoever you want her to be.