Louisiana-based Level Homes has been constructing houses at Bridlewood Farms in Ridgeville. Provided

New, moderate priced properties with plenty of space are available at Bridlewood Farms northwest of Summerville — and that’s on the level.

The houses, ranging from 2,300 to 3,000 square feet, are built by Level Homes. Priced from the low to mid $200,000s, they are located in Ridgeville close to Givhans State Park and the Edisto River. They’re also minutes away from the new Volvo factory, which broke ground last month.

“You’ll discover gracious living at a very affordable price,” marketers say.

As of early last month, Bridlewood Farms had six finished houses remaining. Level Homes, headquartered in Baton Rouge, La., raised the residences. The three- and four-bedroom homes are ready for immediate occupancy, according to Carolina One New Homes, which is handling sales.

Level Homes, which has been constructing houses for 15 years, says it’s “committed to offering affordable, quality homes in the Charleston area.” The builder provides an array of designs and price ranges and its dwellings exceed customer expectations, whether first-time buyers or empty nesters, backers say.

Bridlewood Farms sits in Dorchester County and within the “acclaimed” Dorchester II school district, Carolina One New Homes says. The community is close to Summerville and major employers Boeing, Bosch and Volvo.

“These traditional-style homes feature an attached two-car garage, covered or screened porches, landscaping, elegant staggered cabinetry and granite counter tops,” according to Carolina One New Homes.

Attractions in the Ridgeville community include a neighborhood pool, playground and a stocked fishing pond with dock. Bridlewood is also close to canoeing and kayaking, blending “quality and affordability with a classic Lowcountry lifestyle,” the new homes division says.

To view the sales model at 2138 Pimlico Drive in Ridgeville, contact Ali Bring at 843-226-1043 or ali.bring@carolinaone.com.

Carolina One New Homes, a division of Carolina One Real Estate, started up in 1994 and now represents 34 new-homes communities.

Reach Jim Parker at 937-5542 or jparker@postandcourier.com.