Republican Sen. Ron Johnson of fields questions from attendees during a luncheon at The Madison Club in Madison on Oct. 9. He has made reducing the federal deficit and spending a key part of his re-election campaign, in which he faces a challenge from Democrat Russ Feingold. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Ron Johnson won a seat in the U.S. Senate in 2010 by making the federal budget his signature issue, warning voters that runaway spending and debt were "threatening our freedom."

Since Johnson took office in January 2011, the debt has kept growing, though at a slower pace, and federal spending has remained fairly steady. So has the manufacturer used his accountant's eyeshade to start addressing that imbalance or has his opposition to the federal deficit been more symbolic than successful?

With Johnson facing a tough challenge from Democrat Russ Feingold in 2016, voters will have to decide.

Johnson said he and other Republicans in Congress could take some credit for keeping spending lower than what President Barack Obama and his fellow Democrats in the Senate wanted.

"It's been a messy process and I'm not going take full credit for it but it's because of the tea party movement, because of fiscal conservatives, we've spent" less, Johnson said recently. "We have to take credit for the fact that we actually have restrained the growth of government."

The annual federal deficit peaked at $1.4 trillion at the height of the recession in 2009 and has improved since then along with the economy.

But it's still sits at nearly $500 billion for this year, or about three times as much as in 2007.

The total debt owed to groups outside the U.S. government rose to $13 trillion this year from $9 trillion in 2009, or 44%, according to the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office.

Federal spending rose relatively little between 2010 and 2015, but it still sits about 23% higher this year than it was in 2008.

Democrats say Johnson hasn't been a real factor in those changes.

He hasn't sought the kind of compromises needed to balance the federal budget and has been too willing to back costly military spending such as his recent call to commit U.S. ground troops to Syria as part of a coalition with other nations, they said.

"It's an outrageous contradiction that Senator Ron Johnson has spent countless hours giving a PowerPoint presentation on his 'signature issue' then voted against the bipartisan policies currently responsible for reducing our nation's deficit. Senator Johnson has spent his time in Washington ... lecturing, not acting," said Martha Laning, chairwoman of the state Democratic Party.

Republicans point out that Johnson was in the minority for his first four years and still has to work with a Democratic president.

Johnson says he has helped bring about lower spending and debt while avoiding risky tactics such as a government shutdown.

Over the past five years, Johnson:

■Sat on the conference committee between the House and Senate that helped put together the first joint budget resolution to pass in six years.

The plan approved in May lays out spending targets to balance the budget over a decade, though committees still have to draft legislation to impose the trillions of dollars in spending cuts.

Democrats say that the budget would mean unacceptable cuts to programs such as medical research, food stamps and federal student financial aid.

Republicans say the plan represents the first balanced budget since 2001.

Bob Bixby, executive director of the Concord Coalition, said the GOP budget is similar to those put forward by Obama in that it contains some "unrealistic expectations" in terms of future spending and tax collections.

"It's a blueprint," Bixby said of the GOP budget. "In some sense, it's a vision. It's a political statement."

Within that budget resolution, Johnson inserted amendments requiring the CBO to project the federal budget picture over 30 years and put together a one page summary of federal income and expenses.

Johnson says that simplifies the government's financial challenges for ordinary citizens.

■Argued strongly for repealing the federal Affordable Care Act, sometimes known as Obamacare, and offered last spring a plan to transition the country's health care system away from it.

Johnson also sued to end health subsidies for members of Congress and their staffs under the law.

That lawsuit was thrown out by the U.S. 7th Circuit Court of Appeals in April

■Voted for some budget deals, despite his opposition to federal spending and the ACA.

For instance, Johnson supported funding the federal government in a September 2013 vote before that fall's government shutdown.

"I don't want to play brinkmanship with the American economy," Johnson said at the time

Johnson also voted last month for a stopgap funding measure to keep the government funded and backed the bipartisan two-year budget deal that was brokered in December 2013 by U.S. Rep. Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) and Sen. Patty Murray (D-Wash.).

The deal sought to end the type of stalemates that triggered the government shutdown two months earlier.

■At other times, though, Johnson voted on conservative principle rather than pragmatism.

In January 2014, just a month after backing the Ryan-Murray agreement, Johnson voted against a bipartisan spending bill that tracked the earlier deal, saying it didn't do enough to eliminate waste.

In August 2011, Johnson voted against the bipartisan Budget Control Act, which at the time was projected to cut deficits by about $2 trillion over 10 years.

For his first two years in the Senate, Johnson served on the Appropriations Committee, where by his own account he was often out of sync with other members, including his fellow Republicans.

"Most of the votes we had in committee I was losing 29-1 or 28-2," Johnson said in February 2013 after stepping aside.

In the majority, Johnson has served as the chairman of the Homeland Security and Government Affairs Committee.

There the senator said he has sought to use the panel to expose federal waste and abuse, such as the dangerous overprescription of painkillers at the Tomah Veterans Affairs Medical Center.