Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

CHICAGO (AP) — Cubs fans got on their feet and roared, a rousing ovation for the person they hope will lead their favorite team to prominence.

Joe Maddon was the man of the moment Saturday, and the reception for Chicago’s new manager was every bit as warm as it was loud.

Maddon is quite popular around town these days, particularly on the North Side. After all, many believe the long-suffering franchise is poised for bigger things and he’s just the guy to lead them there.

“Bring on the expectations,” he said.

The Cubs did just that this offseason, signing ace Jon Lester to a six-year deal worth $155 million at the winter meetings in December. But the move that signaled they really were ready to accelerate their rebuilding project happened in late October, when they hired Maddon away from Tampa Bay.

Never mind that they had already told Rick Renteria he would be back for a second season. The Cubs couldn’t resist going after one of the game’s top managers.

Now, he’s got a team that features a three-time All-Star in Lester at the top of the rotations established young players such as shortstop Starlin Castro and first baseman Anthony Rizzo in the lineup and a line of promising prospects that the Cubs hope can help them end a World Series championship drought that dates to 1908.

All that optimism aside, the fact remains — Chicago has five straight fifth-place finishes in the NL Central. The Cubs won just 73 games last season, although that was an improvement from 66 in 2013. And while prospects such as Javier Baez and Jorge Soler arrived at the majors, there are still big questions surrounding this team.

“Please hold us accountable,” President of Baseball Operations Theo Epstein told fans. “We’re trying to win. We’re also continuing to try to grow the organization. That means we’re going to be throwing a lot of young players out there. We ask for your patience with them because it’s a process. But hold us accountable.”

It’s not just the roster that has a different look.

The long-awaited renovation to Wrigley Field is finally underway, a five-year, $575 million overhaul of a ballpark that turned 100 last season and the surrounding area.

President of Business Operations Crane Kenney said the organization discussed playing a year or two at Miller Park in Milwaukee but decided against that.