Technically Incorrect offers a slightly twisted take on the tech that's taken over our lives.

Coke/YouTube screenshot by Chris Matyszczyk/CNET

It's one thing to teach the world to sing, it's quite another to teach it to be nice on the Internet.

This, however, is the challenge that Coke has set itself for Super Bowl weekend.

Yes, it's going to sponsor the idea of everyone posting love poems instead of the usual haikus of hate. It's going to encourage Democrats to praise the Republican senate. It's going to feature a Ted Cruz tweetstorm lauding Obamacare.

I'm so sorry. I was bathing in forceful positivity for a moment. This is because I read a quote offered to Ad Age by Coke's group director of integrated marketing content, Jennifer Healan.

She said: "Our goal is to inspire America to become a collective force for positivity."

Oh, Jennifer have you been to Congress lately? Have you seen the inequality charts? Did you see how negative New Yorkers were about a bit of snow?

Clearly, Healan and her Coke cohorts are undeterred. They have already released a teaser for their big event.

Of course it includes the hashtag #makeithappy. You needed to ask? It also promises "The Internet may never be the same."

During the Super Bowl, there will be a longer ad. The company will also release some Web-only "vignettes" featuring those who have truly suffered on the Web, like the first openly gay NFL player, Michael Sam, and race driver Danica Patrick.

The VP and GM of Coca-Cola Trademark Brands, Andy McMillin, explained to Ad Age: "The brand is at its best when it expresses a point of view that reinforces its values and represents the cultural times and communities in which our brand lives."

Some might wonder whether our cultural times are rather more divisive than uniting and rather more frightened than bubbly. They might also consider whether it's possible to be relentlessly positive and constantly spied upon.

Still, Coke's intentions are, no doubt, noble. Everyone knows the Internet is a veritable cesspit of emboldened fools.

So I can't end on a negative note, can I?

Let's think about these cultural times of ours. People are turning against the heavy consumption of sugary, fizzy drinks, no? That's positive, isn't it?