With a new year and new Senate alignment, Pennsylvania Sen. Bob Casey said again Thursday that Congress should repeal the medical device tax that was designed to help pay for part of the Affordable Care Act, but not at the expense of the whole law.

"I have supported the repeal of the medical device tax," Casey said in a conference call with reporters. "If we can get a consensus, we should also arrive at a consensus on how to pay for it. I don't think we're there yet."

It's still early, but that might be the understatement of the day.

Healthcare businesses can be divided into sectors - doctors, hospitals, insurers, pharmaceutical companies, medical device companies.

Collective sacrifice for the sake of improved health for as many Americans as possible is not really part of their business model. All of them - including some supposedly nonprofits - want to make and keep as much money as possible. All point to parts of the ACA that are horrible to them and, therefore, a threat to the republic, even if they benefit from other parts. All pay for lobbyists to argue their cause. All of them - except those nonprofits - face pressure from investors of all sizes. Like many, including regular folks, they love government when it helps them and dislike government when it taxes them to pay for all of it.

The 2.3 percent medical device tax is the most-often cited complaint of the medical device industry, which has businesses in Pennsylvania and New Jersey. The industry trade group, Advanced Medical Technology Association (AdvaMed, link here), said the tax has already cost thousands of jobs, though the Washington Post Fact Checker suggested the claim is overblown (link here).

Casey's understatement relates to the Democratic-Republican divide. Generally, Republicans want to repeal ACA entirely. Generally, Democrats want to keep the ACA for all the benefits, and keep improving the system where it is weak. Republicans now control both houses of Congress, so passage of legislation to repeal the entire law is possible. President Obama has said he will veto such bills.

Where it gets more complicated is Republican attempts to kill the ACA piece by piece. With that in mind, they will argue for simply repealing the medical device tax, without a funding replacement.

Casey is among a group of Democratic senators in favor of repealing the device tax, but not at the expense of the whole law. That Democratic group includes Sens. Al Franken (Minn.), Amy Klobuchar (Minn.) and Elizabeth Warren (Mass.). Not surprisingly, all have medical device companies in their states.

Chuckling first, Casey said, "I'm sure there will be a lot of healthcare votes and I think they will be difficult to pass because there won't be a lot of Democratic support. I've tried to be open and look for ways to improve ACA, but I'm not interested in dismantling the whole law, as the other side is."

Gregory W. Daniel of the Brookings Institution wrote in November that one concern for Obama and other ACA supporters is that if they compromise on the device tax, all of the other previously-mentioned sectors will increase their lobby efforts to carve out their own benefit. (The link is here.)

Daniel wrote, "The tax's fate will be determined by a couple of key questions: Will enough Democrats turn up in support of a repeal? And will President Obama support the repeal? White House officials said the administration would be willing to review the tax in a broader discussion of the ACA, provided that opponents find a way to replace the $30 billion in funding the tax was projected to raise over the next decade. It's not yet clear how the budget shortfall will be replaced. Alternatively, if the President does not support the repeal, and instead indicates that it will be vetoed, Republicans will need to have enough Democratic support for a veto-proof majority. The decision is also further complicated by the fact that a repeal could also encourage a domino effect from other industries, particularly hospitals that have voiced discontent over steep federal cuts. A 'me too' response could put about $370 billion at risk over the next decade."