SAGINAW, MI — While state Sen. John Moolenaar was the financial underdog in his 4th District Republican congressional primary race against Paul Mitchell, the same cannot be said about the general election.

According to reports submitted to the Federal Elections Commission, Moolenaar, R-Midland, has spent 15 times more than his Democratic opponent Jeff Holmes, D-Alma, from April 1 through Sept. 30.

The winner of the Nov. 4 general election will take the seat being vacated by longtime U.S. Rep. Dave Camp, R-Midland.

Moolenaar, 53, has spent a total of $752,789 on his campaign while Holmes, 54, has spent a total of $49,940.

"We're working hard to raise funds and get our message out," said Moolenaar who is in the final year of his first, four-year term in the Michigan Senate.

If Moolenaar wins the 4th District race, he will vacate his spot serving as the 36th District state senator.

According to Moolenaar, much of the funds his campaign earmarked for advertising went to combat negative ads run by Mitchell during the primary.

Mitchell, of Thomas Township, spent nearly $5 million of his own money in a bid to capture the congressional seat.

While Moolenaar has spent more than $200,000 on television and radio advertising, only $601 of Holmes' expenditures have gone to advertising, according to his FEC filings.

"I think it helps him get more name recognition," Holmes said of Moolenaar's large campaign budget.

Despite Holmes calling the race an "uphill battle," he is working to get his name out to voters through means that don't cost money.

"I've had a lot of opportunities to attend candidate forums," Holmes said.

Both Holmes and Moolenaar are scheduled to take part in a Saginaw County candidate forum 6:45 p.m. Tuesday, Oct. 28, at Carrollton Middle School, 3211 Carla.

The candidates likely won't discuss their difference in spending during the forum, but they will discuss their differing political views.

According to Holmes and Moolenaar, one of the key issues where they differ is the Affordable Care Act, also commonly referred to as Obamacare.

If elected, Moolenaar has stated he will work to repeal the Affordable Care Act, while Holmes has said he will work to support and improve it.

"I believe that there are serious flaws with Obamacare," Moolenaar said. "It is a very flawed system to build a healthcare system on."

Holmes, an Alma physician, stated he has seen the ways in which the Affordable Care Act has helped his patients.

"I could really help to inform the conversation," he said.

Moolenaar and Holmes also differ on many issues where they stand on opposing party lines. Holmes is pro-choice while Moolenaar is pro-life; Holmes supports same-sex marriage while Moolenaar does not.

Despite his clear financial lead, Moolenaar said he never planned to leave the campaign trail early.

"I'm gonna continue to run very hard," Moolenaar said. "It's a process where I learn more about the district as I campaign in different parts of the district."

Moolenaar's largest expenses include advertisements, a voter survey, direct mailing and yard signs while Holmes' largest expenses involve website design, software and consulting fees.

Some of the largest expenditures by Moolenaar's campaign as listed on the FEC website:

Four payments totaling $200,051 to Strategic Media Services of Arlington, Virginia for radio and television advertising

$27,000 to Public Opinion Strategies, LLC of Alexandria, Virginia for a voter survey

Two payments totaling $20,679 to Arena Communications of Salt Lake City, Utah for direct mailing

$12,259 to E Design Company of Grand Rapids for yard signs

Some of the largest expenditures by Holmes' campaign as listed on the FEC website:

Nine payments totaling $16,989 to NPG VAN of Washington, D.C. for website design, support and software

Five payments totaling $11,636 to Walter H. Zinn Jr. of Jackson, Mississippi for consulting fee and expenses

Two payments totaling $5,000 to Amber McAndrews of Mount Pleasant for consulting fees

Two payments totaling $3,232 to Sawicki & Son of Detroit for yard signs

Libertarian candidate William Tyler White of Bath and U.S. Taxpayers Party candidate George M. Zimmer of Byron are also running for the District 4 seat.

Neither White nor Zimmer have submitted financial reports to the Federal Elections Commission. Candidates are only required to file with the FEC after they raise or spend $5,000 or more.

In terms of total fundraising, the gap between Moolenaar and Holmes is nearly as large as the spending gap.

Moolenaar's campaign is funded entirely through donations, which come to a total of $973,458. Holmes' fundraising efforts brought in $80,291 and to supplement his budget, Holmes' took a $25,550 loan from himself for the campaign.

Moolenaar received individual contributions from familiar names in the Great Lakes Bay Region. Many of the contributors listed their employer as Dow Chemical Co., where Moolenaar formerly worked as a chemist.

A look at notable contributions to Moolenaar's campaign:

Andrew Liveris, Dow Chemical Co. CEO, contributed the maximum individual donation of $2,600

M.J. (Matty) Moroun, owner of the Ambassador Bridge, his son Matthew Moroun and his daughter-in-law Lindsay Moroun all contributed the maximum individual donation of $2,600

Peter and Samuel Shaheen, who run SSP Associates Inc., each contributed the maximum individual donation of $2,600

Andy Coulouris, former Democratic state representative for Michigan's 95th District and current Dow Corning lobbyist contributed a $250 donation

Holmes' individual contributions came largely from the local medical community that he is a part of, as a family physician at Alma Family Practice.

A look at notable contributions to Holmes' campaign:

Jeffrey Plott, CEO of Great Lakes Petroleum, contributed a $2,500 donation

Michael Selmon, Alma College provost, contributed a $500 donation

Raymond Ford, program director for CMU Public Radio, contributed a $500 donation

Mark Santamaria, president and CEO of MidMichigan Medical Center - Gratiot, contributed a $250 donation

Individual contributions are not the only donations the candidates have received, with Moolenaar receiving a total of $359,279 from various committees and Holmes receiving $4,050 from committees.

Moolenaar's campaign saw contributions from political action committees including:

Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Michigan PAC

Dow Corning Legislative Action Team

The University of Michigan PAC

KochPAC

KochPAC is the political action committee for Koch Industries, a group of companies owned by billionaire conservative activists Charles and David Koch. The Koch brothers regularly contribute to campaigns across the country.

In total, 59 committees have contributed to Moolenaar's campaign.

By comparison, only four committees have donated funds to Holmes' campaign. They are:

Midland County Democratic Party

National Education Association

Saginaw County Democratic Party Federal Political Action Committee

America's Leadership PAC

America's Leadership PAC is run by U.S. Sen. Debbie Stabenow and donates to select Democratic candidate campaigns.

To see complete Federal Elections Commission reports for Moolenaar, Holmes or any other candidate in a federal race, visit the FEC's website.

The 4th District covers 15 counties in central and northern Michigan, reaching from just north of Lansing to Cadillac. The district includes all of 13 counties — Clare, Clinton, Gladwin, Gratiot, Isabella, Mecosta, Midland, Missaukee, Ogemaw, Osceola, Roscommon, Shiawassee and Wexford — as well as portions of Montcalm and Saginaw counties.

More information on all four candidates in the 4th District race is available through MLive's Michigan Voter Guide.

— Jessica Shepherd is a reporter with MLive/The Saginaw News. Contact her at 989-996-0687, email her at jessica_shepherd@mlive.com or follow her on Twitter or Facebook.