Topics: 1 percent, Books, Editor's Picks, George Gilder, Henry Kravis, Ivan Boesky, Lehman Brothers, Michael Milken, Business News

Liberators in Pinstripes

Economic calamity and elite paralysis nourished another oddly related fable: the Wall Streeter as heroic revolutionary. In this tale, the corporate old guard had become ossified and sclerotic, complacent, bureaucratic, and risk averse. On their watch the economy was withering away, losing its combative muscle, its indigenous American taste for the audacious. What native entrepreneurial urges still lived on were disabled by a bewildering labyrinth of government regulations, restrictions, and inhibitions. Together business and public bureaucracies were responsible for the arteriosclerosis afflicting the national economy. They needed dismantling. Fortunately, there were men ready to face the Goliath.

A capitalist version of liberationist theology, at one time the eccentric faith of outlying circles of revanchist businessmen and marginalized conservative intellectuals, gathered momentum all through the dolorous 1970s. An aged ideological alloy combined reverence for the free market with a seething resentment of state interference and the servile demoralization it allegedly encouraged.

Such ancient ideas were now defended by the latest applications of differential calculus and probability theory. But what gave this ­old-time religion added force, first of all among a rising generation on Wall Street and soon among a milieu of nerdy ­techno-entrepreneurs, were the unprepossessing social origins of these young men.

Precisely because many of them, like Ivan Boesky and Carl Icahn (or for that matter Bill Gates or Steve Jobs), were not to the manor born, but were instead strivers from the middling classes, they genuinely believed and were able to convince legions of followers and admirers that they had come to storm the fortresses of the ancien régime. Richard Fuld, who eventually ran Lehman Brothers and ran it into the ground, attended the University of Colorado and hawked bonds for a living. AIG was founded by the son of a woman who ran a boardinghouse; he later turned it over to Maurice “Hank” Greenberg, whose father owned a candy store on the Lower East Side. Greenberg in turn appointed Joseph Cassano, the son of a Brooklyn cop, to manage the London­-based credit default swap operation. Stan O’Neal, who mismanaged Merrill Lynch into near bankruptcy, was the son of a farmer turned GM worker. Carl Icahn, the son of a cantor, was a ­lower-middle-class kid from Queens whose smarts got him to Princeton and then to Wall Street. Once there, he exercised a raging temper and a petulant contempt for the old­-boy network from whom he regularly extracted tribute in the form of “greenmail” that temporarily at least allowed top management to hold on to its executive suites.

Self­-proclaimed champions of the disenfranchised shareholder and saviors of a business underclass denied access to ­life-sustaining bank credit, men like Icahn turned Wall Street into a combat zone where the forces of market freedom faced off against the overlords of yesteryear. The inventors of this ideological drama were capable of the most cynical and self­-interested deceptions while remaining true believers in its underlying moral allegory and economic axioms: the shareholder as the oppressed victim, management as the great usurper.

It was this sense of mission that transformed these corporate raiders, merciless practitioners of the ­lean-and-mean approach to corporate ­reorganization, into cultural heroes during the Reagan era and beyond. They promised to open up the marketplace for capital to that discriminated­-against mass of American businessmen who lacked the size and connections to command the attention of the big banks. They fearlessly attacked the entrenched managements of the very largest corporations whose timidity, addiction to routine, and limited vision kept stock prices artificially depressed, depriving their shareholders of their rightful gains. In this brave new world, the formal legalities of property rights trumped all other social claims. This was the “right” ne plus ultra that the New Deal had momentarily abridged.

Ironically, as time passed, each new hosanna to the shareholder invoked a more and more migratory, shadowy presence, a kind of massless mass, whose purpose in life seemed less and less to do with ownership and management and more and more to do with speculation. The idea of being tied down to a particular piece of property in the age of financialization seemed like a fool’s game­ — until everything went smash.

Every act of this Wall Street insurgency had its disinterested or even nonmaterial justification. If their outsized mergers and acquisitions made them stunningly rich, they produced handsome returns for holders of mutual funds, college endowments, savings and loan institutions, and pension funds that bought the high­-risk/high­-return junk bonds which financed these transactions. If men like Saul Steinberg, Carl Icahn, and Ron Perelman and the immaculately coiffed circle of anonymous suits serving them seemed almost indecently awash in money, at least they worked liked demons to get it, putting in inhuman hours, beginning their days at four in the morning, ending them at midnight. For them, hard work, an American sacrament, was an aphrodisiac; they were a living reproach to the stereotypical Wall Street banker whose day began at ten and ended at three, with an intermission for a ­three-martini lunch.

Taking on the stuffed shirts like Felix Rohatyn of Lazard Freres or the urbane, ­French-accented Michel Bergerac, head of Revlon (as Ron Perelman, an uncouth upstart out of Philadelphia, did in his hostile take-over of the company in 1985), was depicted as class warfare, ­American-style. The have-not-enoughs were confronting the have-too-muches (even though Perelman himself craved nothing more than to climb to the summit of social notoriety). Somehow, the fate of the American dream seemed to be at stake. And if in the immediate aftermath of ­root- ­and-branch corporate reconfigurations, landmark industrial plants shut their doors; if whole communities became ghost towns; if middle management lived in terror of its own ­extinction — in the long term, this was a kind of tough­-love patriotism; it would strengthen America against its rivals in a global economic jungle where only the fittest survived.

When they lobbied ferociously for a defanging of the government’s regulatory apparatus or for the repeal of keystone pieces of New Deal legislation like the Glass­-Steagall Act, these young lions did so to extend the realm of freedom, to remove the dead hand of the government bureaucrat, and to unleash the creative energies of the enterprising individual. The willingness to be savage, and to wear that savagery like a medal of honor, was the whole point; this was a revenge fantasy against America’s ­white-shoe crowd, who had forfeited their right to rule.

A choir of youthful publicists provided intellectual cover for the new knighthood. In his best-selling “Wealth and Poverty” (its title an ironic and perverse echo of the Henry George classic), George Gilder explained that “to help the poor and middle classes one must cut the taxes of the rich.” Fatuities like this soon became commonplaces of our political life and remain so to this day.

No mere public policy scrap, this was a crusade with a metaphysical bottom line. Richard Darman, Reagan’s deputy secretary of the treasury, lambasted the business establishment as “bloated, risk averse, inefficient, and unimaginative.” Freedom morphed into a synonym for free enterprise. An anti-elitist revolution from above, it exuded a messianic aura. Corporate America was to be saved from itself, from its fat cat complacency. Stripped of poorly earning assets, malingering workers and their featherbedding unions, and doddering and absentee managers, American business would rise again. Only men who had risen from social obscurity could appreciate and meet the challenge. They came armed with the necessary irreverence, fearlessness, and appetite for the new. They could reinvent the world in their garages or sweep away those cobwebbed gray flannel suits. Only they had the foresight to spot, and the derring‑do confidence to resurrect, companies languishing in ­commercial oblivion, financially distressed but latent with untapped potential­. They could be freed, but it would take the valor of a new financial knighthood.

Michael Milken’s Aladdin­-like junk bond leveraged buyouts, mega-mergers and acquisitions made him the chief knight of the realm. Raised in California, nerdy, married to his high school sweetheart, residing in the same suburb he grew up in, supremely arrogant, yet notably modest in what he drove, dressed in, and lived in, he was perhaps an unlikely candidate for the role. He nonetheless exerted a mesmerizing influence, a charisma that had limos lining up on Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills at four in the morning to do deals, convinced, as one of his more perfervid admirers gushed, that “Michael is the most important individual who has lived in this century.” Why not? Contemporary observers thought they spied a social revolution in the making. Milken was its Lenin.

Household names in American ­business — TWA, U.S. Steel, Gulf Oil, Walt ­Disney — were all of a sudden in play and threatened with absorption into some alien acronym of financial abstraction. ­One-third of the companies on the Fortune 500 list in 1980 no longer existed as independent entities a decade later. Employment rosters at the Fortune 500 fell from 16 million in 1979 to just over 11 million in 1993. Three thousand mergers worth $200 billion took place in 1985 alone. By the end of the century, Fortune, anointing America “a Trader Nation,” announced that there was “a revolution underway, and it’s changing the way we invest and work and live.”

Milken’s social revolution overturned Wall Street’s historic hierarchy. The firm he worked for, Drexel Burnham Lambert, had been distinctly minor league; now it and a handful of other new arrivals, like Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts & Company, were cock of the walk. “Relationship banking” — that genteel world lined with mahogany walls hung with Old Masters, resting on time­-tested traditional dealings between particular banks and their corporate mates, a relationship premised as much on family and social ties as it was on mere ­moneymaking — gave way to (indeed, was run over by) “transactional banking.” Here every new deal was open to negotiation, each a new test for some Wall Street financial house to prove its commercial bona fides all over again, and all deals were subject to the singular criterion of the highest return produced in the shortest time.

Nasty microbattles for control took place inside venerable firms like Lehman Brothers, where languorous Ivy League patricians turned out in rimless spectacles and the omnipresent breast­-pocket hankie were challenged by shirtsleeved, uncouth, ­cigar-chomping geeks from the trading floor staring out at the world through stylishly obtuse, thick­-framed black glasses. As one magazine profile noted, Mesa Petroleum’s T. Boone Pickens, a corporate raider of the first rank, although a WASP, “never loses a chance to dramatize his persona as a plain­-talking country boy engaged in a populist battle against an effete elite.” Frank Lorenzo, who wrestled to the ground the old­-line management of Eastern Airlines, was the son of a Spanish immigrant who went out of his way to emphasize his ethnic origins by listing his given name in Who’s Who as “Francesco.” It was all symbolic of fresh blood getting pumped through the aerated arteries of an aging financial organism.

An All-American Infatuation