Senegal is one of the few frontier markets that Moody’s expects to climb up the credit ratings chart in the next few years. Dereje Belachew/iStock

Strong growth potential has lured investors into frontier markets over the past two decades, but only a few of those countries are likely to climb up the credit ratings chart in the next few years, according to Moody’s Investors Service.

The ratings agency defines frontier markets as those that are below investment grade, and that rely primarily on subsidized financing from institutions such as the World Bank to cover their spending needs.

In a new report that looks into 29 of them, Moody’s identifies a number of benchmarks for assessing progress, such as the ability to implement institutional reforms, fiscal responsibility in government and relatively rapid gross domestic product growth. But it warns that “only a few” are likely to make much progress over the next two to three years.

Indeed, many frontier markets have been hit hard by the slump in commodities prices, and the consequent slowdown in foreign investments, said Moody’s. Both those factors are related to the global commodities boom of the last decade, a result of strong demand from China. But growth in the Asian giant is now slowing, commodities prices have fallen sharply, and frontier markets are feeling the effects.

WSJ Frontiers Newsletter Enter your email to sign up for WSJ Frontiers’ weekly newsletter

The biggest problems facing these countries now stem from rising debt levels and the need to borrow from overseas, as well as weak government institutions, Moody’s said. Many governments have had some of degree of debt forgiveness, and yet their debt burdens have climbed steadily since the global financial crisis. On average, frontier markets are now slightly more indebted than emerging markets, said Moody’s.

Increasingly, these countries are turning to the market for borrowing, which comes at a higher cost than their traditional subsidized lending rates.

The track record in terms of credit ratings is poor. The report says that nearly half of all frontier market economies have seen their credit ratings fall since Moody’s first began covering them.

The handful of countries that are in a position to see their rating rise are those that have sought to control spending and that have strengthened institutions to create more stable and predictable environments that are attractive to investors. Moody’s mentions Georgia, Honduras and Senegal as noteworthy examples, and it has positive outlooks on their ratings.

The longer-term picture is more promising, the ratings agency said. “Frontier markets will ultimately comprise a significant share of the global population, and their rapidly growing middle classes mean they will account for a lion’s share of the global consumer market,” it said. As these markets open up for international investment, hone their institutional capacities, and bolster their fiscal positions, their credit profiles will strengthen, it said.

Write to Emese Bartha at emese.bartha@wsj.com.