LOS ANGELES — Clayton Kershaw struck out 11 only to be thwarted again in the postseason.

The reigning NL MVP walked three in the seventh on the way to his fifth consecutive playoff defeat, getting outpitched by Jacob deGrom in the Los Angeles Dodgers’ 3-1 loss to the New York Mets on Friday night in their NL Division Series opener.

Kershaw’s skid is the longest such streak in Dodgers’ history. During it, the left-hander has received just eight runs of support in 29 1-3 innings. He tied a season high with four walks.

“Each game is a little bit different,” he said. “It didn’t work out this time.”

Kershaw still has just one victory to his credit in seven career playoff games.

“We lost the game and that’s kind of how you’re measured at this time of year,” catcher A.J. Ellis said.

DeGrom struck out 13 over seven scoreless innings in his postseason debut and Daniel Murphy homered off Kershaw for the Mets.

DeGrom (1-0) limited the Dodgers to five hits and one walk. The right-hander’s strikeouts tied the franchise playoff record set by Tom Seaver in Game 1 of the 1973 NL Championship Series.

Kershaw (0-1) gave up the seventh playoff homer of his career. Last season’s NL Cy Young Award winner allowed three runs and four hits in 6 2-3 innings.

“I got outpitched, plain and simple,” he said.

Kershaw walked the bases loaded in the seventh, before Mets captain David Wright had a two-out, two-run single off Pedro Baez that put New York up 3-0.

“Obviously, you can’t walk that many guys,” Kershaw said.

Runs will likely again be at a premium when the Dodgers try to even the series Saturday night in Game 2. They start major league ERA leader Zack Greinke against Noah Syndergaard of the Mets.

With an unseasonable game-time temperature of 92 degrees, both pitchers came out throwing heat. Kershaw, the major league strikeout leader with 301 in the regular season, retired six of his first nine batters. DeGrom, last year’s NL Rookie of the Year, struck out two batters in each of his first four innings.

DeGrom became the first Mets pitcher with 10 or more strikeouts in the playoffs since Dwight Gooden in Game 1 of the 1988 NLCS at Dodger Stadium. DeGrom retired his final 11 batters, subduing the white towel-waving crowd of 54,428.

Jeurys Familia got four outs to earn the save.

Murphy homered leading off the fourth to give New York a 1-0 lead before Kershaw retired the next three batters.

“The Mets had a really good approach, good plan and they really grinded him well,” Ellis said of Kershaw.

The Dodgers finally scored in the eighth on Adrian Gonzalez’s two-out RBI single off Tyler Clippard that left them trailing 3-1. He struck out in his first three at-bats.

Kershaw nearly helped himself in the fourth when the Dodgers trailed by one. With two runners on, he hit a long flyball to center field that was caught by Yoenis Cespedes to end the inning.

The left-hander threw 22 pitches in the first inning, including 12 on a walk to Wright. In the second, a ball hit by Lucas Duda went off Kershaw’s right foot, but he didn’t appear to be affected and struck out the next two batters to end the inning.

Los Angeles lost its third straight postseason game, having been beaten in four games by St. Louis in last year’s NLDS. The Dodgers lost the final two games, with Kershaw tagged for the loss while pitching on three days’ rest in Game 4.

STREAKING ELLIS

Ellis went 1 for 3 to extend his playoff hitting streak to 11 games, tying Carl Crawford for the longest such run in Dodgers’ franchise history. He is hitting .400 during the streak and has hit safely in 14 of his 15 career playoff games.

SEAGER’S DEBUT

Rookie Corey Seager started at shortstop for the Dodgers in his postseason debut. He went 1 for 4 with a double. At 21 years, 165 days, Seager became the youngest position player to start a playoff game in club history and third-youngest ever behind Fernando Valenzuela (20 years, 339 days) in 1981 and Johnny Podres (21 years, 4 days) in 1953.

CESPEDES’ STRIKEOUTS

Cespedes was hitless in four at-bats, including three strikeouts, just the second time this season he was fanned three times in a game. He was still playing for Detroit on June 24 at Cleveland when Carlos Carrasco struck him out twice and Cody Allen once.

UP NEXT

Greinke (19-3, major league-best 1.66 ERA) starts for the Dodgers against Syndergaard (9-7, 3.24). Greinke beat the Mets 4-3 on July 4 at home in his only start against them this season. Syndergaard had a no-decision in the Mets’ 2-1 win at Dodger Stadium on July 3 in his only career start against Los Angeles.