SAN FRANCISCO, March 9, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Zipongo, the digital health company that makes it easy to eat well, announced that CEO Jason Langheier, MD, MPH will present at the 16th Annual Employee Health Conference, sponsored by the Conference Board, on both March 10 and March 17, 2016. Dr. Langheier will be joined in his presentations by executives from key customers including IBM.

The bi-coastal conference will be held in both New York City (March 10-11) and San Diego (March 16-18) and convenes top employers and industry leaders to share case studies, best practices and practical next steps to help employers cope with the nation's fast-evolving healthcare agenda. Dr. Langheier and his co-presenters will review new and innovative ways to meet the Affordable Care Act's 2016 requirement that self-funded health plans provide nutritional counseling services for specific populations.

In his March 10 presentation at the Marriott Marquis in New York City, Dr. Langheier will join Ellen Exum, Director of Health Benefits & Health Promotion for IBM, in a session called "Digital and Provider Nutrition Counseling Step Therapy: Fulfilling 2016 ACA Requirements Cost Effectively." The session will explore how deeply personalized first-line digital nutritional counseling works to cost effectively foster healthy behavioral economics and clinical results, and connect people who need additional support to second-line care providers.

Dr. Langheier's March 17 presentation at the Hilton San Diego Bayfront in San Diego is called "Ways to Meet ACA Nutritional Requirements by Fostering Engagement, Health Outcomes & ROI." In this intimate discussion, Dr. Langheier will review how to provide effective nutritional solutions that alter individual behavioral economics, while simultaneously providing data to help drive changes in menus and local food environments.

In both talks, Dr. Langheier will share Zipongo's experience working with some of the nation's largest employers to improve the health of employees and populations by making healthy eating and food buying easier on mobile, web and in person.

About Zipongo

Zipongo is a San Francisco-based digital health company that makes it easy to eat well. We work with employers, health plans and other wellness partners looking for an easy way to engage their members in healthy and sustainable eating habits that drive positive results. Zipongo's proprietary MealRx™ personalization engine delivers individualized recommendations tied to convenient, real-time actions that enable healthy eating at home and at work, including healthy recipes, meal planning tools and discounts and incentives to healthy groceries. We provide a HIPAA-secure, easy-to-implement software-as-a-service platform that runs on web, mobile and tablet. Learn more at www.zipongo.com.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20151014/277177LOGO

SOURCE Zipongo