Buy Photo John K. Lloyd (right), president and CEO of Meridian Health, looks over to (from left) Robert C. Garrett, president and CEO of Hackensack University Health Network; Joseph Simunovich, chairman of Hackensack; and Gordon Litwin, chairman of Meridian, during an October 2014 news conference about the proposed merger. (Photo: Mark R. Sullivan/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)Buy Photo

Meridian Health and Hackensack University Health Network on Tuesday signed a definitive agreement to create New Jersey's largest health care system.

The new company, to be called Hackensack Meridian Health, will have 25,000 employees and 11 hospitals, stretching from southern Ocean County to Bergen County. And it is the latest in what has been rapid expansion for Meridian. The Wall-based hospital system said last month it is moving forward with plans to merge with Raritan Bay Health Services Corp., which has hospitals in Old Bridge and Perth Amboy.

The agreement with Hackensack was first announced in October. And it still requires state and federal regulatory approval, which could take six months to a year.

Meridian CEO John K. Lloyd and Hackensack CEO Robert C. Garrett will be co-chief executive officers for 21/ 2 years. Garrett then would become the sole CEO. They spoke with the Asbury Park Press Tuesday afternoon and explained what's in store.

What does the merger mean for patients?

The merger would give Meridian patients access to Hackensack's specialists in cancer care and neuroscience without needing to go to New York or Philadelphia, Lloyd said.

Meanwhile, it would help Hackensack follow Meridian's lead and provide more care outside the traditional hospital setting, Garrett said.

"We want to provide access to care," Garrett said. "That's one of the goals of this merger – provide better access to residents we serve."

What does the merger mean for employees?

Meridian is the Shore's biggest employer with 12,000 employees. Hackensack is about the same size.

The new company could lay off workers who have similar jobs, but employees involved in patient care would see little impact, Lloyd said.

The company hasn't settled on a location for a new headquarters, but it expects the site to be close to the midway point between Wall and Hackensack, the executives said.

"As we get closer to final approval, we're looking at nonclinical areas to see if there's a potential savings, but at this point it's very premature to say if we would or wouldn't have reductions," Lloyd said.

What does the merger mean for your pocketbook?

Hospital consolidation typically results in higher prices because it gives hospitals more clout in their negotiations with insurance companies, according to a 2012 report by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, a Princeton-based research group.

But hospital executives said the landscape has changed. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, often called Obamacare, has forced hospitals to work more closely with insurance companies to deliver care more efficiently.

"I think things have changed dramatically," Lloyd said. "Health insurance companies are looking for value. Even if you're a large health system, they're looking for the same thing."

MERIDIAN-HACKENSACK MERGER AT A GLANCE

•Wall-based Meridian operates five hospitals in Monmouth and Ocean counties: Jersey Shore University Medical Center in Neptune; Ocean Medical Center in Brick; Riverview Medical Center in Red Bank; Bayshore Community Hospital in Holmdel; and Southern Ocean Medical Center in Stafford. It is expected to take over Raritan Bay Medical Center's two hospitals in Old Bridge and Perth Amboy. Additionally it operates K. Hovnanian Children's Hospital in Neptune.

•Hackensack University Health Network is the largest health care system in northern New Jersey. It operates four hospitals, including HackensackUMC in Hackensack; HackensackUMC Mountainside in Monclair; HackensackUMC at Pascack Valley in Westwood; and Palisades Medical Center in North Bergen. Additionally it operates Joseph M. Sanzari Children's Hospital in Hackensack.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1Hf2DFT