(This story was updated at 3:10 p.m. with more information on the federal government extending open enrollment.)

New Jersey health insurers are reporting strong demand for the 2015 Affordable Care Act health plans they're selling via HealthCare.gov, where the state is on track for total enrollment of more than 222,000, well above the 162,000 who signed up for the first year of Obamacare in 2014.

Last year, three insurers competed to enroll New Jerseyans, most of whom qualified for federal subsidies to defray the cost of health insurance. This year, those three — Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey, AmeriHealth New Jersey and Health Republic Insurance of New Jersey — were joined by two more competitors: UnitedHealthcare and Oscar Insurance.

Although open enrollment for 2015 officially ended Sunday, the federal government has extended the deadline until next Sunday for those who tried to enroll on time but couldn’t complete the application either because of a temporary technical glitch or delays caused by heavy last-minute volume.

So while the final tally won’t be in for at least a week, insurers are encouraged by what they’ve seen so far.

Last year, Horizon and AmeriHealth, both well-known insurance brands, signed up the majority of New Jerseyans. Finishing third last year was Health Republic, a new, co-op insurance company whose startup was funded by the ACA. Because Health Republic had just launched in 2014, it had to build its brand from scratch in the New Jersey market.

All three said that, in 2015, they are building upon their first-year 2014 success.

Horizon’s 2015 enrollment “has been robust; we have outpaced our gains from 2014, and expect a strong finish as final applications are submitted,” Tom Vincz, Horizon spokesman, told NJBIZ. “Based on our preliminary review of results, we expect to grow our position as New Jersey’s No. 1 insurer for the individual market. We’re pleased that consumers responded and chose Horizon for their coverage needs, including tens of thousands of new members.”

AmeriHealth NJ spokeswoman Jill Roman said: “We will have a true sense of membership in a few weeks. What I can tell you is that we are pleased with the volume of individuals we have seen purchase our plans. We believe this is the result of our successful renewal campaign, which included grassroots community outreach as well as proactive communications via mail and telephone.”

Roman said the company’s incoming consumer call center handled approximately 57,000 phone calls between the start of open enrollment last Nov. 15 and Sunday, Feb. 15. In addition, she said AmeriHealth proactively made 97,000 calls to members to assist in explaining the renewal process and what options are available in 2015.

James Martin, chief executive of Health Republic, said the startup insurer is seeing significant gains in enrollment this year. For 2014, the new company enrolled about 4,500 New Jersey members. Health Republic said as of last Friday, two days before the official end of open enrollment, it had signed up about 55,000 New Jerseyans. That number could grow as more people sign up this week, during the special extension granted by the federal government.

The turnaround, Martin said, reflected the fact that Health Republic responded to the competition and to the feedback it got from customers, and made significant changes to its products for 2015.

“We retooled and went to the market with some plans that apparently people found quite attractive,” Martin said “Things are going well and we are now exceeding our business plan for Year Two.”

Health Republic’s insurance plans were generally more expensive than the competition in 2014, so in 2015 the company reduced premiums overall between 10 and 15 percent.

Martin said the company found out customers didn’t want to have to get a primary doctor’s referral before seeing a specialist, so Health Republic eliminated that requirement from most of its plans. And while Health Republic has a very large network of New Jersey hospitals and doctors — the company uses the extensive QualCare network — Martin said customers want to be able to use doctors in New York and Pennsylvania, and the company is offering that option this year.

Health Republic has 21 plans this year, up from 9 in 2014. One new plan is a lower-cost, innovative plan that encourages members to use “patient-centered” medical practices where patient care is coordinated by primary care physicians. And in Monmouth County, Health Republic is offering a less costly plan for members who use CentraState Medical Center and its network of Monmouth County physicians.

Martin said the company’s experience shows that competition has a beneficial impact on the health insurance market:

“Clearly, competition causes you to measure and compare your plans and products to what else is out there, and then you have to get into the pricing competition. Where are you compared to where your competitors are and where should you be? What does your strategy look like for the future? As in any industry, comparing (your products) with what is going on with your competitors is absolutely essential — and it has a bearing on the market.”

AmeriHealth’s Roman said that, in 2015, the company’s Tier 1 Advantage Plan, which provides enhanced cost benefits, remains its top-selling product. Roman said the AmeriHealth Community Advantage Plans, originally co-branded with Cooper University Health Care, remain among the company’s Top Five selling plans. “To date, we have seen 32 percent growth over the membership in these plans from 2014. We believe this growth was driven by the plans’ expansion into two additional metallic tiers and the addition of Cape Regional Medical Center and Shore Medical Center, which expanded availability from three counties to five in South Jersey.”

Both UnitedHealthcare and Oscar said they will report on their enrollment experience in New Jersey after the extended open enrollment period ends on Sunday.

Although open enrollment ended Feb. 15, anyone who was in line but couldn’t enroll by that deadline has until this Sunday at midnight to sign up. Since 2014, the ACA has required most American to either get health insurance or pay a penalty — and individuals who are uninsured are finding out what their penalties will cost them as they file their tax returns by the April 15 deadline.

To help those facing penalties, the federal government is now considering reopening health plan enrollment at HealthCare.gov for a brief period during tax time this spring.

U.S. Health and Human Services Region II Regional Director Jackie Cornell-Bechelli told reporters during a conference call Wednesday that HHS is “Considering a special enrollment period during tax filing time” which she said would enable people to enroll in coverage for 2015, and avoid paying a 2015 penalty when they file their taxes in 2016.

“That is something that we are considering, but we don’t have a firm yes or no or what that window will look like,” she said.

U.S. Rep. Frank Pallone (D-Long Branch) said during the conference call that he is urging HHS Secretary Burwell to create a window for Americans to enroll in health coverage during tax time to avoid the penalty next year.

Pallone said the 11.4 million who enrolled nationwide through Feb. 15 exceeded the Obama administration estimates of between 10 million and 11 million for this year.

And he said the New Jersey numbers also exceeded expectations: “This is a fantastic result, to have a quarter million New Jerseyans enrolled. I can’t stress enough how important this is. If people don’t have health insurance and they end up paying for medical care out of pocket, the consequence for their budget and their family is overwhelming.”

State Sen. Nia Gill (D-Montclair) told reporters during the conference call: “The message that was delivered, that health insurance is just a phone call or click away, really took root and demonstrated what we all knew, that access to health insurance is something that not only do we need but people want it and they will seek it out. With our federal partners and the people on the ground, we did not in New Jersey let any obstacle stand in our way. We worked through any obstacle to reach the people and our partners are to be applauded.”

ALSO ON NJBIZ:

Exclusive: Wells Fargo names Larisa Perry region president for New Jersey, New York and Connecticut

Velez to step down as Department of Human Services commissioner

Drugmaker's expansion could bring 300 new jobs to East Windsor