Lincoln graduates seven

The Lincoln High School class of 2014 moves their tassels after receiving their diplomas during their graduation ceremony Friday in the Fort Morgan Middle School auditorium. ( Rachel Alexander / Fort Morgan Times )

Lincoln High School student speaker Cristian Garcia speaks during the school's graduation ceremony on Friday in the Fort Morgan Middle School auditorium. School board president Roger Segura and Superintendent Ron Echols look on. (Rachel Alexander / Fort Morgan Times)

"Have fun and make good choices."

This was the advice Lincoln High School Director Vicki Davis gave to the school's graduates during commencement exercises Friday in the Fort Morgan Middle School Auditorium.

Seven students received degrees from the school — Jessea Brown, who was unable to attend the ceremony; Nancy Espinoza; Cristian Garcia; Theron Pace II; Ryan Cano; Adrianna Garcia and Sonia Malpica.

Davis broke down what she meant when she told her students the make good choices: C — "Challenge yourself. Don't ever settle or sell yourself short." H — "Help yourself. It's up to you make the life you want." O — "Optimism. Approach each day with a can-do attitude." I — "Integrity. Let you actions match your words." C — "Care and compassion for others." E — "Enthusiasm and endurance. Greet each day with a smile and always finish what you start." S — "Sensible. Use your head, think before you act."

The Lincoln High School 2014 graduating class gathers on the stage steps of Fort Morgan High School's auditorium to watch a class slide show during their graduation ceremony Friday. (Rachel Alexander / Fort Morgan Times)

Cristian Garcia served as the class's speaker at the event.

"In the past, each of us have had our own troubles that brought us to Lincoln," he said. "And during this time together, we have learned more than just civics, more than just math and more than how to write a speech. We have discovered what we're capable of and that is being able to accomplish our goals."

The class had invited Mike Gross, the health and physical education teacher at Fort Morgan High School, to give the commencement address during their ceremony.

Gross based his speech on lyrics from the class song "Fly Like an Eagle" by the Steve Miller Band — "Time keeps on slippin', slippin', slippin' into the future."

"Tonight one leg of your journey through life ends, but another begins," he said. "Believe it or not you have the world by the tail and you can accomplish anything you set your mind to."

He said the fact that the students were at graduation was proof of their will power.

"For one reason or another, the traditional way of getting to graduation did not work for you and that's why you're graduating from Lincoln," Gross said. "However, I believe that it is a bigger accomplishment for you than traditional students because you persevered."

Mike Gross, health and physical education teacher at Fort Morgan High School, gives the commencement address "Time keeps on slippin', slippin', slippin' into the future" during Lincoln High School's graduation ceremony Friday in the Fort Morgan Middle School while school board president Roger Segura and Superintendent Ron Echols look on. (Rachel Alexander / Fort Morgan Times)

Gross reminded the students that from this moment on they are in charge of their own lives.

"With that being said, your happiness is dependent on your level of responsibility," he said. "You are the future generation that has the ability to literally change the room."

He told the graduates that Facebook was started in the dorm room of guys who never graduated college, while Apple and Disney were started in garages.

"You don't have to be rich to change the world," he said.

He gave advice that he said would help the graduates change world, including eat well, exercise, meet people from around the world, read things they don't agree with and know why they don't agree, find ways to enjoy life and teach children not to be bullies.

The Lincoln High School class of 2014 chats on stage after processing into the Fort Morgan Middle School auditorium during their graduation Friday. (Rachel Alexander / Fort Morgan Times)

"And finally, think about a career and don't get a job," he said.

All of the graduates were presented with $500 scholarships to attend Morgan Community College.

Contact Times Editor Rachel Alexander at 970-867-5651 ext. 230 or editor@fmtimes.com