Senator Ted Cruz speaks at a campaign rally Sunday at Faith Christian's community center in Lafayette, Indiana. (Photo: Mark Felix/for the Journal & Courier)

Republican candidate Sen. Ted Cruz wants Greater Lafayette residents to know their votes matter in the primary election — not just for the future of his campaign, but for the future of America.

"Fifty-one hours. We are 51 hours away from the polls closing in Indiana," he reminded a crowd of about 1,500 at Faith Community Center in Lafayette Sunday. "This is a battle for our kids, this is a battle for our future, it's a battle for our freedom. The men and women here are going to decide the course of this battle not just for Indiana, not just for the Republican party, but for the entire country."

Hoosiers are getting the special treatment from presidential candidates like Cruz who are making stops in their hometowns to gain last-minute votes in the state's pivotal primary election on Tuesday.

Cruz needs the state's 57 delegates to have a chance at stopping Donald Trump from gaining the 1,237 delegates needed to automatically win the Republican nomination.

Trump is leading the delegate count with 996, while Cruz has 565 and candidate John Kasich holds 153, according to Associated Press data.

A poll released Sunday puts Trump on top among Indiana Republican voters, with 49 percent support. The NBC News/Wall Street Journal/Marist poll puts Cruz in second with 34 percent, while Kasich trails behind with 13 percent.

Just days before, a Mike Downs Center for Indiana Politics poll placed Cruz in the lead with 44.8 percent. Trump followed with 29 percent and Kasich stayed at 13.3 percent, according to the poll conducted April 13-27.

Gov. Mike Pence endorsed Cruz on a conservative radio talk show Friday, applauding his defense of the U.S. Constitution, efforts to repeal Obamacare and strong support for the "sanctity of life."

Cruz's conservative agenda aligns with a pool of Hoosiers who are against same-sex marriage and allowing transgender women to use women's restrooms, a hot-button issue in the state. Conversely, Trump said transgender people should be able to choose which bathroom they use.

The bathroom topic didn't come up Sunday, but faith and family values were a strong theme in Cruz's speech, as well as the speeches beforehand from his wife Heidi Cruz, TV and radio personality Glenn Beck and his running-mate and former presidential candidate Carly Fiorina.

"God is making sure that every single person, every single voice is being heard this time around," Beck said.

Faith was also a big selling point for Greater Lafayette attendees, many of whom said they were raised conservative Christians.

Supporter Paul Refior, of Lafayette, held up a sign up that read "Pray for Ted" as the candidate spoke.

Refior said he's pro-life, a member of the National Rifle Association and a lawyer who's a strong believer in the U.S. Constitution as law — all things for which Cruz stands.

Cruz walked the walk of a family man at the rally. His two young daughters stood beside him briefly on the stage and also shook hands with supporters as they and Heidi Cruz walked back to the campaign bus.

One family-focused comment did cause a slight lull in cheers, however. As an attempted jab at First Lady Michelle Obama, who has actively fought against childhood obesity during her husband's presidency, Cruz said his wife would bring back tasty food to school lunches.

"When Heidi Cruz is First Lady, French fries are coming back to the lunch room," he said.

Cruz also made remarks about Trump's personality, President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's private email server.

"I can just think of Hillary thinking of Carly, tossing and turning — in her jail cell," he said, nodding to the FBI investigation.

Clinton has repeatedly said the account wasn't criminal.

Along with shots at his contenders, the Cruz campaign's continuous comments on how he will bring the country back to its constitutional roots and his references to former President Ronald Reagan went over well with the crowd.

"The Constitution is as relevant today as it was when it was written," Fiorina said to a roaring audience.

But differentiating Cruz from Trump and bringing in Fiorina might have been the most important tactic to reel in some undecided voters.

Marissa Heerdink, of Lafayette, hadn't been following the campaign very closely and mostly had read about Trump in the news. But she said the rally opened her eyes to how Cruz has stuck to his promises and maintained the same viewpoints throughout his time in office.

She especially admired how Fiorina, the first woman to lead a Fortune 20 company, climbed the career ladder so successfully.

"I now know who my vote is going for," Heerdink said.

Read or Share this story: http://on.jconline.com/1TEtWgd