University of Chicago Medicine's $124 million plan to shuffle beds at two facilities hit a bump when regulators said the hospital already has more capacity than is justified under state standards.

In a report released last week, the staff of the Illinois Health Facilities and Services Review Board found that the number of medical-surgical beds, a category that includes most inpatient beds, exceeds demand for inpatient services in the medical center's service area. While U of C wants to maintain the 338 medical-surgical beds it currently operates, the staff found that just 304 beds were justified by historic utilization patterns.

A U of C spokesman declined to comment.

It's the second time the staff has raised concerns about excessive medical-surgical beds at U of C. Last year, the medical center reactivated 38 beds at the Bernard A. Mitchell Hospital building, which had been mothballed after the Center for Care and Discovery opened in February 2013.

That move brought the medical center's medical-surgical bed count to the current level. Hospital officials said then that — regardless of the state standards — they were experiencing increased demand for care and needed to ease crowding in the emergency department. The board, which regulates health care construction to prevent duplication of services, approved that project despite the staff's findings.

The current application, which the board is scheduled to consider on July 14, is part of a plan to build out two floors of the new building that were left undeveloped. The proposal calls for moving 122 medical-surgical and 32 intensive care beds to the 10-floor facility from Mitchell, which is less than a quarter-mile away.

Increasing demand for inpatient beds bucks industry trends, experts say. Over time, the number of beds needed at a hospital usually decreases as medical technology and techniques improve, said Jim Unland, an Elgin-based health industry consultant.

Bed use also may drop in the future as patients insured through the Affordable Care Act come face to face with the costs of care. Though having coverage insulates them from the astronomical bills they would see as uninsured patients, many Obamacare plans have high deductibles that require consumers to pay thousands of dollars before cost-sharing kicks in.

“Many analysts, including myself, believe that there's a 50-50 chance of declines in hospital utilization as patients start to fathom how much more of the cost of a medical episode they themselves will have to pay,” Mr. Unland wrote in an email.

SPECIAL CASES

Academic medical centers like U of C are special cases, however. It has a high-performing management and draws many more patients from around the region than a community hospital, so it may not be held to the same utilization standards, Mr. Unland said.

Other health care experts noted U of C's position among Chicago hospitals.

“Their acuity level is high,” said Elyse Forkosh Cutler, CEO of Sage Health Strategy in Chicago, referring to the severity of illnesses among U of C patients. “They're a regional medical center, particularly when it comes to cancer care.”

As standard practice, the planning board's staff releases reports on whether projects meet standards for several criteria, including the need for services. The board often approves projects that don't meet all state standards.

U of C also has proposed to increase the number of beds in intensive care by 12, to 126, an area where it says there has been crowding. It also wants to increase the number of observation beds to 46 from 15.

The staff found the proposed ICU and observation bed increases compliant with state rules.