BDO Data Confirms 2015 Was Good for Public Restaurant Companies

By Nicholas Upton

Last year was good for restaurants, and new data from BDO confirms that public companies fared pretty well, with low commodities and a little more traffic. But labor costs are going to be even bigger news this year.

The consulting firm’s year-end report showed same-store sales were up across the board, cost of sales were down and prime costs dipped some.

The fourth quarter especially saw plenty of innovation and deep discounting among the big QSR players. The biggest news was Burger King unveiling a hot dog product and the major change at McDonald’s with the addition of all-day breakfast.

“People weren’t quite sure what all-day breakfast would do for Q4, but it certainly seemed to do well for them and got them to positive same-store sales for the year,” said Dustin Minton, an assurance partner with BDO.

Among public companies, same-store sales came in at 3% overall, with the pizza category leading the industry with a 6.4% same-store sales growth—up from 4.5% in 2014. Behind pizza, fast casual grew by 4.9%, a sharp slowdown from 2014 (5.8%) due mostly to Chipotle’s dismal comps; which were negative 14.6% in Q4 for a flat .2% for 2015.

“We expected Chipotle to have an impact on the fast casual segment in Q4,” said Minton. “And they certainly did.”

Upscale dining bumped up 1% to 1.7% overall. The growth may signal a trade-up from casual dining, which sank to 1.6% comp growth, down from 1.8% in 2014.

Commodity costs were down sharply in 2015, making room for deep discounts and the bevy of value options as restaurants use low prices as fodder in the battle for market share.

Pizza is definitely getting the benefit of dramatic reductions in key cheese and wheat costs, which are down 13.5% and 10% respectively. Pork for pepperoni and sausage are also down sharply, dropping 23.4%. Overall, the dip in commodity prices evens things out after a sharp increase in costs in 2014, when beef jumped 19.1%, pork by 19.6% and cheese by 12.2%. Overall, the basket of goods was down 3.4%, a healthy decline from the 3.9% increase in 2014.

Lower commodity costs are expected to continue into 2016, with beef-centric concepts expected to get the greatest tailwind in 2016.

“Beef came down a lot in the last half of 2015, so all the burger concepts, all the high beef concepts in 2016 will hopefully show even bigger benefits from the reduction in beef,” said Minton.

Concepts that raised prices in the expensive 2014 commodity environment were well position for better margins or deeper discounts in 2016.

“One of the good things is that when they increased menu prices when commodity prices were way up, they’ve been able to keep their menu prices where they are,” said Minton. “So when they do take a discount they don’t take as big of a hit.”

Again, the biggest discussions where margins are concerned is labor. The labor line grew overall by just 100 basis points to 30.1%. Both pizza and fast-casual segments saw the labor line grow. The pizza segment hired to cover increased sales, adding .7% to the labor line, and Chipotle’s hiring blitz bumped the fast-casual segment up by 200 basis points. As the economy grows, concepts are spending more to retain high-value workers in lieu of hiring more low-skilled workers, which keeps things pretty even.

Last year was a notable year for health care, being first full year under the new Affordable Care Act rules, but a larger impact comes this year as new overtime exemption rules go into effect, likely in the third quarter of 2016.

“Certainly the big thing for 2016 will be the Department of Labor and the exempt employee regulation where restaurateurs need to pay exempt employees at least $50,000, so that will have a huge impact,” said Minton.