DALLAS--(BUSINESS WIRE)--CenseoHealth, a leading provider of in-home physician assessments, today announced the appointment of Kevin McNamara as chief executive officer. Kevin will work closely with CenseoHealth’s Co-founder and President, Bales Nelson, to drive strategic growth while further expanding the company’s suite of services to meet growing demand. In conjunction with this appointment, David Brailer will assume the role of chairman of the CenseoHealth board.

Founded in 2009, CenseoHealth’s in-home physician visits help improve the quality of care and reduce healthcare costs for Medicare Advantage, Commercial, and Medicaid plan members. CenseoHealth’s services fill a critical role in the healthcare delivery system as demand for primary care grows despite a shortage of primary care physicians, while best practices are sought to collect comprehensive health information such as medication compliance, risks and other factors that can drive appropriate follow-up care. CenseoHealth anticipates substantial growth in the market as risk-based managed care programs grow and Affordable Care Act exchanges expand with every open-enrollment period.

“It’s an exciting time to be working at CenseoHealth because the company is well positioned as the market leader in mobile physician network services,” McNamara said. “I believe we have a major opportunity to build a new form of healthcare delivery that enhances the health of our customers’ members while reducing the cost and improving health outcomes, all in the member’s home.”

“I’m pleased to work with Kevin, Bales and the whole CenseoHealth team as they continue to lead the market for mobile healthcare,” Brailer said. “I look forward to helping CenseoHealth pursue long-term growth initiatives while consistently driving value for its customers in healthcare’s evolving environment.”

“We will gain a lot from expanding the leadership team with two proven healthcare leaders who understand our business model and how best to leverage our current and future services for the benefit of our customers,” said Nelson. “David and Kevin have successful track records in providing advanced technology and services within the healthcare industry; their business acumen and leadership skills will add value for our company, our customers and investors.”

McNamara previously was CenseoHealth’s executive chairman. Prior to CenseoHealth, he served as executive vice president, chief financial officer, and treasurer at managed care organization HealthSpring, Inc., and held executive positions with other companies in the healthcare industry. Brailer, a CenseoHealth board member and managing partner of Health Evolution Partners, an investor in CenseoHealth, holds the distinction of being America’s first National Coordinator for Health Information Technology.

About CenseoHealth

CenseoHealth is a leading provider of prospective health risk assessments for health plans and healthcare delivery organizations. The company’s network of nearly 5,000 licensed physicians performs comprehensive, Annual Wellness Visit-compliant assessments with members in their homes, at network physician offices and in community settings. By capturing complete health and lifestyle assessments to drive better clinical outcomes through care management referrals and return-to-care recommendations, our insights help enhance member engagement, improve quality ratings and reduce overall healthcare costs.

About Health Evolution Partners

Health Evolution Partners (HEP) invests in rapidly growing middle market companies across the healthcare industry where technology is driving major changes in value and creating new market opportunities. HEP’s investments are led by an exceptional team of healthcare investment professionals and seasoned operators. HEP partners with talented management teams to create long-term value and in turn, drive attractive returns for our investors.