Statistics say that one-third of the world’s population is Christian, and about 70 percent of Americans identify themselves as believers in God. Thus, to a vast majority of us, issues regarding money and morality go hand in hand.

One of the most popular mischaracterizations of scripture is that “money is evil.” In fact, those who study scripture know that money is a provision of God, Himself – a blessing that God provides or allows as He sees fit. The relevant scripture so often misquoted actually reads that the “love of money is the root of all kinds of evil (1Timothy 6:10).” The Bible is very clear that any form of idolatry is sin, whether the object of affection is a person, a material item, a concrete statue, an inanimate symbol or bank. That does not make the item itself inherently evil. It is the love of that item over God that results in sin.

The statists enjoy twisting morality and scripture to fit their needs. They hone in on that scripture, and this one, “and again I say unto you, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God” (Matthew 19:24). This scripture (as I understand it) is less about God’s judgment of those whom He chooses to bless with prosperity, and more about warning of the burden (temptation) that comes with wealth and power.

Order Gina Loudon’s book “Ladies and Gentlemen: Why the Survival of Our Republic Depends on the Revival of Honor” — how atheism, liberalism and radical feminism have harmed the nation.

The radical, progressive, anti-capitalist, anti-free-market zealots know that to create their socialist utopia, God must first be taken out of the equation. This is because the Bible is inherently free market. God blessed Abraham, David, King Lemeul’s mother, Lydia and others with riches and prosperity. The Bible is clear that freedom and wealth are blessings of God and godly.

On my show, “Smart Life,” Chad Hovind, author of “Godonomics,” said, “Capitalism is not just a good idea; it is God’s idea. Jesus was the most tolerant man in history. He asked God to forgive those who were pounding nails into His hands and feet!”

He continued, “The nature of tolerance is not just what we believe, but how we treat people who disagree with us. We have a society today who is so co-dependent that they think the only way we can have tolerance is to force people to believe what we believe. Ironically, it seems the people who clamor for tolerance are the most intolerant.”

Rick Warren said, “Our culture has accepted two huge lies. The first is that if you disagree with someone’s lifestyle, you must fear or hate them. The second is that to love someone means you agree with everything they believe or do. Both are nonsense. You don’t have to compromise convictions to be compassionate.”

The statists’ stock in trades is their gospel of envy and class warfare. As Winston Churchill said, “Socialism is a philosophy of failure, the creed of ignorance, and of the gospel of envy; its inherent virtue is the equal sharing of misery.”

The socialists and redistributionists try to use pop culture to peddle politically correct group think, by using iconic figures to champion their socialist utopia. History proves them wrong again and again.

Robin Hood robbed from the rich. Really? He actually robbed the sheriff of Nottingham, who was the evil tax collector. Take the Beatles and the unfortunately named John Lennon (not Lenin). Paul McCartney said that people always try to paint the Beatles as anti-free market, anti-capitalist. He called that out for the lie saying, “John (Lennon) and I literally used to sit down and say, ‘Now, let’s write a swimming pool.”

Even today, the anti-freedom bigots are on the attack. Their latest target is the wildly successful surprise success of “Duck Dynasty.” I have never watched a full episode of “Duck Dynasty,” but one would have to live in a cave to have missed the popularity of this family on this previously lesser-known network.

It was only a matter of time before they became the new target of the statists.

With the epic fail of Obamacare, we have reconfirmed that we must think critically and take charge of our own medicine as opposed to leaving it in the hands of today’s illiterate medical system. So too must we own what we accept as fact in terms of pop culture. Much of what we are fed is rubbish, and we have to be able to reject the perpetual lies that are thrown our way. Christians refer to this as taking thoughts captive.

The “Duck Dynasty” nonstory-turned-national-controversy involves the patriarch Phil, founder of the duck call company he now co-owns with his son. His statements about his personal beliefs and the word of God were twisted by leftist radicals to start a firestorm. He expressed a belief, not a call to action or even a desire. He is literally being persecuted for expressing a personal belief, however inarticulate. The “Duck Dynasty” family isn’t running for office or setting policy. They are known for their forthright, sometimes coarse, manner of speaking. To the credit of the author of the article and editors at GQ magazine, they even left in Phil Robertson’s beautiful statement about his belief that Christians should love all sinners.

Not all radicals are gay, and not all gays are radical, but the noisy few manage to push a steady flow of stories blasting out an “us versus them” narrative way beyond their proportion of society. The reality is that whatever percentage of the LGBTQ population is radical leftist, it is a subset of maybe 2 percent of America. For that 2 percent of people, their lives are difficult enough. Why does the left see fit to exploit them for their anti-capitalist agenda?

Tell A&E to apologize to Duck Commander. Sign the petition here and WND will deliver it to A&E!

I don’t believe for a moment that most gay people want their freedoms and First Amendment rights to free speech – even freedom of religion – taken away. I can’t see how any minority would want to lose their rights and freedoms to speak against the grain. Let’s not forget that gays were sent to concentration camps and gas chambers by every leftist who successfully convinced his country to suppress free speech. Gays are more oppressed in the former Communist, now socialist, Russia than anywhere outside the Muslim world. Many gay people probably know that and realize that it is minorities who have the most to lose when free speech is controlled by big government, and big money, with a radical political agenda. I would venture to guess that if one could sit down one on one and discuss the Bill of Rights and how they relate to this very issue, 90 percent of gays would rather side with Phil Robertson’s rights to believe what he believes than GLAAD’s efforts to silence him.

A&E is wrong on this issue, and here’s why:

Apparently it can’t do the math to realize that even if the full 2 percent of gay people in this country are as outraged as the loudest zealots using them to make a fuss, it would still be just 2 percent of their viewers (assuming the show is as popular with the LGBTQ population as it is with the general population or even evangelicals) against the 70 percent of God-believing Americans (some of whom are undoubtedly gay). The irony is that A&E needs “Duck Dynasty” a lot more than “Duck Dynasty” needs A&E.

Like wild mustangs yearning to live free on the plains, Americans are different than most people in the world. We do not tolerate tyranny of minorities any more than they tolerate government tyranny. A new Gallup poll says that 72 percent of Americans think big government is a greater threat to the U.S. than Big Business, or even Big Labor. This is a 50-year all-time high. Chalk one up for America!

That poll is from Dec. 5, but Gallup has documented a steady increase in concern about Big Government since 2009. Obamacare, the radical takeover of 20 percent of the American economy, undoubtedly played a role in that.

Add to that the government/NSA spying on citizens, the IRS, SEC and others targeting those they don’t like, and this distrust for government has grown like kudzu.

But our free markets are full of miracles, and capitalism is beautifully and inherently creative, and a force against tyranny.

I wonder how many networks have already come to the Robertson family offering to carry their blockbuster show!

The irony alone is entertaining, even to someone who has never watched an episode of “Duck Dynasty.” Could it be that these bearded, successful hillbillies are the impetus to restore God to the center of the American economy, and heal this republic? That is almost as crazy-sounding as some Jewish carpenter born in a cattle stall coming to save the world.

God bless America, and His free market! Merry CHRISTmas to all!