The death of Michael Tyree at the Santa Clara County Jail has sparked outrage and rekindled both local and national conversations about the intersection of criminal justice and mental health treatment.

Thankfully, there has been swift official action toward bringing those responsible to justice. But beyond the inquiry into what exactly happened that night looms a larger question: Was a jail cell the right place for Michael Tyree in the first place?

There is a better way. We have a unique opportunity to create a more responsive system that serves those in need and, by extension, our whole community.

We've seen how our community has come together to fight the scourge of homelessness. Civic leaders have focused on creative ways of providing immediate housing as well as the social services necessary to keep the chronically homeless off the streets.

We can leverage many of those same resources to keep people out of jail. The very issues that often lead to homelessness -- substance use and mental illness -- may also land someone behind bars.

Just as a comprehensive approach is necessary to address homelessness, it is key to reducing unnecessary jail time for those whose real issue is drug addiction and/or mental illness. Fortunately, there are a number of forces moving in the right direction.

Advertisement

Two of the biggest impacts shaping policy in this area have been mental health parity and the Affordable Care Act.

Mental health parity requires insurance companies to treat mental health or substance-use disorders with the same level of resources with which they treat physical ailments. The Affordable Care Act extended those benefits by markedly increasing the number of Americans with health insurance.

Funding for mental health has also increased, thanks in part to the Mental Health Services Act, also known as Proposition 63, passed by California voters in 2004.

It's time to harness these forces to craft a safer, more effective safety net for people struggling at society's edge.

If you or a loved one has drug or mental health issues, the point of entry to get help shouldn't have to be the criminal justice system. By expanding capacity in the community -- inpatient care, outpatient services, residential treatment, and supportive housing -- those recovering from substance-use disorders or dealing with mental illness can get the help they need well before they find themselves in the county jail.

Expanding treatment options may serve another valuable purpose: easing the social stigma of these afflictions. Substance-use disorders and mental illness are not isolated maladies, and treatment for them should be part of a whole-person health process, reflecting the comprehensive, preventive and integrated approach mandated by the Affordable Care Act.

Indeed, petty criminal behavior -- loitering, improper public displays, minor drug possession -- is often just a symptom of a chronic condition that can be more effectively treated within the community than in the criminal justice system.

Crafting an effective safety net for those with substance use disorders or mental health issues is a complex problem that will require collaboration to solve. But we have the tools. Let's act now to develop a more thoughtful and humane approach that will produce better, more cost-effective results.

David Mineta had been president and CEO of Momentum for Mental Health for just 10 days when Michael Tyree's death became public. Tyree had been awaiting a treatment bed at Momentum. Mineta previously worked in the Obama administration as an expert in drug prevention, treatment and recovery support services. He wrote this for this newspaper.