Obamacare, also known as the Affordable Care Act, was sold to the American people based on the premise that it would provide desperately needed health care coverage to the nation’s estimated 20 million uninsured.

However, as Rush Limbaugh explained on his radio show Tuesday, one of the consequences of the law is that that number of uninsured now has almost doubled.

Limbaugh pointed out that “there are now 4.8 million policy holders who’ve had their insurance canceled, and the number climbs every day. Let’s round that up to 5 million.”

Meanwhile, he said, according to the Wall Street Journal, only about 100,000 people have signed up for Obamacare. Furthermore, of that number, only about half have successfully completed their online insurance policy purchase. The rest have merely placed a policy into their website “shopping cart” without buying it.

“So the real numbers are five million cancellations compared to 50,000 insurance plans bought,” said Limbaugh.

That would mean 100 policies have been canceled for each new purchase under Obamacare.

Then Limbaugh noted that most health insurance polices cover spouses and children along with the primary policyholder.

“So when they say that 4.8 million plans have been canceled,” Limbaugh said, “we may be talking about families of two all the way up to four. The number of people who’ve had their insurance canceled could be three times that number.”

According to the radio host, that means that the total number of uninsured Americans is now approximately 35 million, up from the 20 million uninsured before Obamacare was signed into law.

Limbaugh mocked former President Bill Clinton for calling on Obama to keep his repeated promise that every citizen who was satisfied with their existing healthcare plan could keep it even after the passage of the Affordable Healthcare Act.

“You see where Bill Clinton has said that Obama needs to keep his word about keeping our insurance plans if we like ’em? Can you imagine being lectured to about honesty and integrity from a convicted perjurer, Bill Clinton? Literally, how far has one fallen when that is the case?”

There’s another point, too, he said: Reality.

“That’s all very well for Slick Willy to say,” Limbaugh remarked, but “these plans that have been canceled are gone by virtue of the law. I don’t know how you turn back the hands of time. (…) They aren’t in a lock box waiting to reinstated.”

“That’s why the lie Obama told is so fraudulent,” he continued. “This was not just your average little political lie. This was a lie steeped in fraud with the specific intent of deceiving people into voting for Obama.”