By of the

Here's one of the quirks in how the Affordable Care Act has played out so far:

One of the law's key goals is to expand health insurance coverage. Yet community health centers, which are located in neighborhoods with the highest concentration of uninsured people, often are not included in the networks of health plans sold on the federal marketplace.

Only one of the health plans available in Milwaukee includes all of the community health centers. It is the most expensive plan, limiting its appeal to people with low incomes. And when a community health center is included in a plan's network, the hospital that the health center refers patients to often isn't.

For example, Molina Healthcare has contracted with Sixteenth Street Community Health Centers and Progressive Community Health Centers, but not with Columbia St. Mary's or Froedtert Hospital and the Medical College of Wisconsin.

The doctors and midwives at Sixteenth Street practice at Columbia St. Mary's Hospital-Milwaukee. Progressive has a close working relationship with Froedtert Hospital and the Medical College, whose specialists see the health center's patients.

Part of this stems from the efforts of health insurers to keep the cost of the health plans as low as possible.

The regulations imposed on health insurers — such as being required to cover a standard package of benefits and to cover people with pre-existing health conditions — were intended to increase price competition among health plans sold on the marketplace.

The limited or narrow networks, in theory, enable health insurers to negotiate better prices, enabling them to offer health plans that cost less.

The plans' networks of doctors and hospitals had to be deemed adequate by the federal government to be sold on the marketplace. But the networks have drawn criticism. The National Association for Community Health Centers reportedly has lobbied for two years to require insurers to include health centers in their networks.

Relationship problems

Nearly all of the health plans sold on the federal marketplace in Milwaukee have narrow networks.

Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield in Wisconsin, Arise Health Plan, an affiliate of WPS Health Insurance, and Common Ground Healthcare Cooperative all offer plans tied to Aurora Health Care's hospitals and doctors.

But at least three of the four community health centers, which provide care to almost 1 in 8 people in Milwaukee, almost all of them with low incomes, are affiliated with a specific health system.

"We have no relationship with the Aurora specialists," said John Bartkowski, president and chief executive of Sixteenth Street. "We have no relationship with the Aurora hospitals."

Sixteenth Street has ties to Columbia St. Mary's, Progressive to Froedtert Health and the Medical College, and Milwaukee Health Services to Aurora and Wheaton Franciscan Healthcare.

That could change.

Progressive is working to arrange for its doctor who specializes in obstetrics and gynecology and its midwife to get privileges to practice at Aurora Sinai Medical Center, said Jenni Sevenich, chief executive of the community health center.

The narrow networks will affect only adults eligible for subsidized coverage on the marketplace. They have household incomes above the federal poverty threshold, or $11,670 for an individual this year, and are not eligible for affordable insurance through an employer.

Adults with incomes below the threshold will be eligible for BadgerCare Plus, the state's largest Medicaid program. They will have access to all hospitals and to physicians who agree to accept them as patients.

Covering children

Children and pregnant women who live in households with incomes of up to 300% of the federal poverty level — $71,550 for a family of four — are eligible for BadgerCare Plus when affordable insurance is not available through an employer.

This may be why only two of the health insurers selling plans on the marketplace — Anthem and Arise — include Children's Hospital of Wisconsin and the physicians group that includes specialists from the Medical College of Wisconsin in their networks.

Molina and one of Common Ground’s two health plans do not have contracts with the hospital or physicians but said they will pay for the care of children who need to be hospitalized.

The narrow networks probably mean less to people who have been uninsured. The community health centers provide primary care to people without insurance, charging them fees tied to their income. But they have always had difficulty getting access to hospitals and specialists for care not deemed a medical emergency.

The narrow networks will affect adults now covered by BadgerCare Plus, those with incomes between 100% and 200% of the federal poverty level with children under 19. They now must get coverage through the subsidized plans sold on the marketplace.

How many of them are aware of the limited networks when picking a health plan is unknown.

"They are learning a whole lot in the beginning," said Sevenich of Progressive.