Sioux Falls, SD

Trey Heid passed for 330 yards and four touchdowns and ran for another leading Augustana University football to a 50-19 victory over Wayne State College in front of 4,415 fans at Kirkeby-Over Stadium on Saturday afternoon. The Viking Days victory improves Augustana's record to 5-2 on the season, 2-1 in the South Division. Wayne State drops to 3-4 (0-3 NSIC South).



Heid completed 19 of 26 passes to five different receivers, including Charlie Hayes, who hauled in nine passes for 111 yards and two touchdowns. The 100-yard receiving performance by Hayes is the second of the season.



Matt Heller caught three passes for 72 yards while CJ Ham caught three passes for 68 yards and a touchdown. Jason Greenway got in on the mix on the receiving end, hauling in two passes for 52 yards and a touchdown, including a 39-yard reception.



Ham also rushed 12 times for 91 yards and a score. Ham has rushed for nine touchdowns on the season.



Augustana finished the game with 531 yards of total offense, marking the fourth time this season of 500-plus yards of offense in a game.



Kirby Hora led the Vikings defensively with 11 tackles, including half a tackle for loss. Brandon Mohr and Bryson Hamilton each pitched in with nine tackles for Augustana. Zac Johnson recorded Augustana's lone sack in the game, while picking up five tackles and 1.5 tackles for loss.



The Vikings got off to a fast start on Saturday, scoring on its first two drives of the game to take a 14-0 lead just 10 minutes into the game. Ham opened the scoring with a 25-yard touchdown run, his ninth rushing score of the season, on the fifth play of the Vikings first drive.



On Augustana's next drive, Heid moved the offense into Wildcat territory with completions of 34 and 18 yards to Heller and Hayes before rushing 25 yards for a touchdown that gave Augustana a two-score lead.



On the very next possession by Wayne State, the Wildcats went on a clock-churning drive of nearly 10 minutes that ended on a two-yard touchdown run by Ryan Ludlow. Bryson Hamilton blocked the point-after attempt and the Vikings would lead 14-6 with 10:53 remaining in the first half.



Augustana would not take long to add to its lead, as Heid led the offense on an eight-play 70-yard scoring drive of just over two minutes. Early in the drive, the Vikings were faced with third down and nine from their own 31 when Heid found Jason Greenway for a 39-yard completion that got the Vikings deep into Wildcat territory. Five plays later, Heid hit Hayes in the corner of the end zone for his eighth touchdown catch of the season that gave Augustana a 21-6 lead.



The Wildcats responded with another long drive going 93 yards on 11 plays ending with a 39-yard touchdown run by Layne Sullivan that made the score 21-13 but the Vikings would not go away quietly getting the ball back with just over three minutes to play.



Heid led the Vikings on another scoring drive as the Vikings moved into WSC territory on an eight-yard reception by Hayes. After an incomplete pass, Ham picked up a first down on an 18-yard run before catching a pass and going for 19 yards and a first down to the Wildcat eight-yard line. After a false start penalty by the Vikings, Heid found Jason Greenway for his first career receiving touchdown that gave Augustana a 28-13 lead, which it would carry into the half.



Wayne State came out of the half and forced Augustana to punt on its first possession and went on to score on its first drive of the half on a 14-yard touchdown run by Layne Sullivan that made the score 28-19.



The Vikings answered less than two minutes later when Ham caught a swing pass from Heid and took it 44 yards to the house leading the Vikings to 22 unanswered points in the 20 minutes of the game.



Charlie Hayes made it a 41-19 game catching a 26-yard pass from Heid in the back of the end zone for his second score of the game and Jake Bartscher sealed the deal with a 21-yard touchdown catch from Chase Marso that gave Augustana a 48-19 lead.



With 4:45 remaining in the game, Wayne State snapped the ball over its punters head and the ball went out the back of the end zone for a safety that extended Augustana's lead to 50-19.



The 50 points scored by Augustana is a season-high. Augustana has scored 41 or more points in all four home games this season.



The Vikings will stay in Sioux Falls next weekend as they will head across town to take on USF in the "Key to the City" game. Kickoff is set for 2:34 p.m. Saturday, Oct. 24.



Tim Evans

Director of Athletic Communications



College {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. Material may not be redistributed.