Obama assist helps earn an Emmy

Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Brian Lane, left, director of photography and editor of "Between Two Ferns," and Sean Boyle, producer of "Two Ferns," at the Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards ceremony on Saturday, Aug. 16, 2014, at the Nokia Theatre in Los Angeles. less Brian Lane, left, director of photography and editor of "Between Two Ferns," and Sean Boyle, producer of "Two Ferns," at the Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards ceremony on Saturday, Aug. 16, 2014, at the Nokia ... more Obama assist helps earn an Emmy 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

When President Barack Obama wanted to reach a young audience to spark enrollment for the Affordable Care Act, he appeared on the Internet series, "Between Two Ferns with Zach Galifianakis."

The viral video resulted in a huge bump in registrations at the healthcare.gov website. It was a win for Obama.

It turns out the video also was a win —an Emmy win — for the show and its producers, including Capital Region native Sean Boyle.

Boyle, who was born in Schenectady and later graduated from Bethlehem High School, received an Emmy for outstanding short-format live-action entertainment program at the Creative Arts Emmy Show, held Aug. 16 in Los Angeles.

"It was a real honor to receive the win," Boyle said recently during a phone interview. "It was an issue that a lot of people can get behind and I think that was definitely part of it.

"But at the same time, the comedy was really remarkable in this video. You know the president was incredibly funny. It's something that did have a strong message, but I don't think it diluted the comedy in any way."

More Information See the video on the Funny or Die website at http://www.funnyordie.com/videos/18e820ec3f/between-two-ferns-with-zach-galifianakis-president-barack-obama

The video, part of a series on the Funny or Die website, has 23 million views, making it the No.1 viewed episode of "Between Two Ferns." (For the record, the No. 2 most-viewed episode features Justin Bieber.)

"Between Two Ferns" is a mock cable-access TV show, and Galifianakis plays a hostile host who knows little about his subjects.

"They are a lot of fun to do," Boyle said about producing the series.

For Obama, it was a chance to reach an audience that doesn't necessarily turn to television or other traditional media.

"For the past couple of years, we just sort of had a relationship with the White House where they had initiatives, and we wanted to be as helpful as we could," Boyle explained.

"And I think when it came to raising awareness about getting young people to sign up for health insurance, it was definitely time on both sides to bring our 'A' game. 'Ferns' seemed like the best thing for the president to do, and Scott (Aukerman, the show's executive producer) and Zach were very excited. It just made sense."

Soon after the show premiered, the White House credited "Between Two Ferns" as the No. 1 source of referrals to the website, driving up traffic by almost 40 percent.

For Boyle, who returns to the region to visit his family, the entire experience was a great one.

"It was a lot of fun and it was also very cool that it had some greater impact," he said.

gteichman@timesunion.com