Hepatitis C virus infections are skyrocketing among young people in rural areas where injection drug use is common. But resources for preventing the spread of the disease — from needle exchange programs to substance abuse treatment — are few and far between.

Among people younger than 30 in Kentucky, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia, rates of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection nearly quadrupled from 2006 to 2012, according to a May 2015 report by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC). Similar increases have been reported for the same time period in Massachusetts, Wisconsin, and upstate New York.

“What started out as a one-state problem has turned into a national epidemic of hepatitis C transmission,” says John Ward, MD, director of the CDC’s Division of Viral Hepatitis.

Prescription Opioid Abuse Fuels the Hepatitis C Epidemic

A long-simmering epidemic of prescription opioid abuse, and sharp increases in the number of people who inject these drugs, are behind the rise in hepatitis infections among young people, government health officials and health researchers agree.

Jennifer Havens, PhD, an associate professor at the University of Kentucky College of Medicine's Center on Drug and Alcohol Research, started a study in 2008 to follow a group of 500 injection drug users in rural Perry County. At the time, 43 percent tested positive for the hepatitis C virus in their blood. This came as a surprise to Dr. Havens, who expected the prevalence to be much lower. Now, five years later, 70 percent of the study participants are hepatitis C positive.

What worries Havens most is the potential for an HIV outbreak in Perry County, she says, as well as in other rural communities where injection drug use is widespread. Such an outbreak is occurring in Scott County, Indiana. There, more than 169 people have tested positive for HIV — and more than 80 percent also have hepatitis C.

Hepatitis C Tests for At-Risk Populations

A crucial first step in addressing the problem is to make sure people who are at risk get the simple blood test to check for hepatitis C infection, says Kraig Humbaugh, MD, MPH, director of the division of epidemiology and health planning at the Kentucky Department for Public Health and state epidemiologist.

When people are first infected with the virus — the “acute” stage — they have no symptoms and therefore have no idea they have contracted hepatitis C, Dr. Humbaugh says. But 85 percent of those with an acute infection will go on to develop a chronic infection, which can lead to liver cancer, liver failure, and other life-threatening illnesses.

“We need to get more people tested, and more people need to be aware of their status, especially those who have risk factors,” Humbaugh says. “They might change their behaviors and not put other people at risk if they know they're hepatitis C-positive.”

Steps to Check the Spread of Hepatitis C

The good news in Kentucky, Humbaugh points out, is that thanks to the Affordable Care Act (ACA), more people are eligible for Medicaid coverage —and the act requires Medicaid to provide mental health and substance-abuse services.

The state has offered HIV testing for decades at county health departments, he adds, and is exploring a similar approach to expanding HCV testing.

Kentucky's legislature also recently passed a law allowing local health programs to offer needle-exchange programs. Giving injection drug users access to sterile syringes helps slow the spread of blood-borne infections like hepatitis and HIV. Critics of these programs and similar harm-reduction efforts argue that they promote injection drug use, but Dr. Ward notes that studies have not borne out this claim.

“I have been working in this area for a long time. People are at their wits' end with substance abuse in general,” Havens says. “I think they will be more open to some of these harm-reduction ideas than they would have been five years ago.”

Getting clean needles to injection drug users is also important because it brings them into contact with the healthcare system, Havens adds. “The hallmark of any good syringe-exchange program is that it's a bridge to treatment,” she says.

Apathy is another major barrier to addressing the epidemic of hepatitis C for rural drug users, according to Havens. When people test positive for the virus, “most folks aren't surprised, and I don't think they really understand what the disease is about,” she says. “A lot of our new cases are in young injectors, [aged] 18 to 25. It really doesn't faze them at all. They obviously won't be sick for 10 to 20 years. We've had very few people who are upset when you tell them they're positive.”

And few people are aware of new medications that can cure HCV. Instead, Havens says, people probably are only aware of the older treatments that took many months to work and had nasty side effects. “I do feel like rural areas are way behind in terms of treatment, especially when we have these new fantastic regimens,” says Havens.

“It really looks like the 1980s, it looks like we have gone back... before HCV was discovered, in 1989, before we had done any work to make prevention programs possible,” Ward says.

The participants in her ongoing study would have to drive more than two hours from home to see an infectious-disease specialist qualified to prescribe the most up-to-date hepatitis treatment, Havens adds. And even then, they might not be able to get treatment because they are uninsured. Even when a person is insured, many insurers will not authorize HCV treatment until the person has been sober for a certain amount of time.

RELATED: The Rationing of Hepatitis C Care in America

Kentucky's new law “was really a big change for that state,” the CDC's Ward says. “Many communities are just waking up to the fact that they have a problem. It's very, very heartening to see states like Kentucky and Indiana go and respond to the problem and seek to promote an intervention like syringe services.”

“Our No. 1 health message is for people who are at risk of hepatitis C to be tested, and if they are found to be infected, to get the care and treatment that they need,” Ward says. “People should not be dying of hepatitis C any more in the United States.”