Cook County plans to drastically reduce the footprint of an aging south suburban campus anchored by the Oak Forest Health Center to cut operating expenses and avoid investing millions to maintain it.

The effort involves demolishing seven buildings in the coming year. Buildings now occupy about 1.1 million square feet. The long-term goal is to consolidate the campus to less than 300,000 square feet, according to a statement from Cook County President Toni Preckwinkle. The outpatient health center campus would shrink by about 23 percent.

“Cook County occupies too much space and has historically used it inefficiently,” Preckwinkle said in the statement. “I have repeatedly said we will do whatever we can do make government more efficient and fiscally responsible, and reducing our real estate footprint is a good example of that. These actions will save money and streamline County operations.”

A spokesman said the county is developing options for how to use the land.

The consolidation is expected to save about $1.3 million in operating expenses a year. The county estimates the campus would need about $130 million in capital investment over the next 20 years and would cost about $350 million during that time to operate it.

The county estimates about half of the site is underused or used as “inactive” storage areas. The health center and administrative space for the Cook County Health and Hospitals System are the main occupants.

The health center is one of several outpatient clinics and two hospitals that are part of the health system, one of the largest public health systems in the country and the safety net for the region.

The campus dates to 1910. It eventually became Oak Forest Hospital, which after a contentious battle with residents and advocates was downgraded from a 303-bed facility in 2011 to an outpatient center.

In August, Cook County Health CEO Dr. John Jay Shannon said the system would replace the health center and open a new regional clinic somewhere in the south suburbs. It's part of a plan to bulk up outpatient care for the system, such as offering more surgeries and imaging services like MRIs in community clinics rather than have patients trek to the hospital for their care.

Preckwinkle is looking to consolidate space elsewhere in Cook County. Three floors in the George W. Dunne Administration building in the Loop already are leased and generating an estimated $2 million a year. She plans to lease an additional 75,000 square feet there by 2018.