FLINT, MI -- Tight quarters at the Genesee Community Health Center will have some room to grow in the near future after a $1 million federal grant to expand the four-year old facility in downtown Flint.

Dr. Nicole Lurie, Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, and lead federal official for response and recovery support in Flint, went on a tour Thursday morning down the cramped hallways by officials with the center.

The $1 million grant for the Flint facility is a portion of $10 million coming from the Affordable Care Act's Community Health Center (CHC) Fund for health centers across the state to build and renovate to receive more patients.

Honor Potvin, interim director for Genesee County Health Center, was thankful for the funding toward the center that provides behavioral, oral health, and primary care services.

Since opening in 2012, the center has grown to provide services to 3,000 patients a year through community outreach.

Lurie noted President Obama stressed during his May 4 speech in Flint the importance of health care for residents and the availability with the expansion of Medicaid for those 21 years old and under and pregnant women serviced by Flint water from April 2014 up to a date specified by Gov. Rick Snyder.

The $1 million grant has to be utilized in three years' time will offer the center the opportunity to serve a greater number of people in the community.

It comes of top of $500,000 granted in February by the Health Resources and Services Administration help two health centers in Flint hire additional personnel and provide more lead testing, treatment, outreach, and education to meet the increased need for health services in the area.

E. Yvonne Lewis, chairwoman of Genesee County Health Center, said they focus on the homeless and public housing communities, with a site in one of the city's public housing complexes that provides access to people in need.

"This is a truly a commitment of love when it started," said Dan Russell, CEO of Genesee Health System, adding the center would stick by the side of the community to provide care during and beyond the water crisis.