In truly Orwellian fashion, “Air Claire” has begun investigations of drug companies for price-gouging.

Missouri senator Claire McCaskill, who carried the administration’s water on Obamacare and promised that health care costs would drop once implemented, is now running cover for the failure of the program about which she waxed so poetic.

According to USA Today:

“Amid cost complaints from patients and the medical community, the Senate Special Committee on Aging sent letters seeking information from Valeant Pharmaceuticals International (VRX), Turing Pharmaceuticals, Retrophin (RTRX) and Rodelis Therapeutics. The companies have been the subject of numerous media reports about drug pricing. The panel plans to examine price increases on recently acquired off-patent drugs, as well as pharmaceutical industry mergers and acquisitions that in some cases have affected the cost of such medications. The committee also will explore the Food and Drug Administration's role in the approval process for generic drugs and the agency's distribution protocols. [snip] Sen. Claire McCaskill, D-Mo., the committee's ranking minority member, said congressional action is needed because some recent drug price hikes "have looked like little more than price gouging."

Funny – just nine short months ago, the government was bragging that Obamacare was driving the price of prescription drugs down.

ObamaCare has led to substantial savings in prescription drug costs and a strong increase in the use of preventive services, administration officials announced Tuesday. “Our parents and grandparents on Medicare saved more than $15 billion on prescription drugs since President Obama signed the Affordable Care Act in 2010,” Health and Human Services (HHS) Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell [said.] Those savings amount to nearly $1,600 per person enrolled in Medicare — an increase from about $1,400 in average savings last year.

After insisting this was the greatest thing since sliced bread, Claire insulted Missouri voters, saying we should shut up and trust those brighter than we.

“I think there has been … a lot of noise about the mandate that people have gotten so focused on that they don’t realize that there’s going to be more access and affordability and more choices,” she said.

And now she has been proven spectacularly wrong.

Funny – Sen. McCaskill was upset that Republicans were misleading people back in 2013:

“I think we just want people to get the right information, instead of the misinformation that Republicans love to spread about this reform,” McCaskill said. “Scaring people, misleading people, this is a free market solution and we hope people take advantage of it.”

Who is it doing the misleading and scaring?

This attack was as predictable as the sunrise.

Read more from Tim and friends at The Aviary www.tbirdnow.mee.nu. Contact him at bgoccia@outlook.com.