Randy Reed Automotive is a family-run automotive group in Missouri that doesn’t want to comply with the Obamacare abortion mandate requiring it to pay for birth control and drugs that may cause abortions. The car dealership is now the latest to take on and defeat the Obama administration in court.

The Obama administration agreed today to a federal court order in Randy Reed Automotive v. Sebelius that stops enforcement of the administration’s abortion pill mandate against a Missouri family-run business:

Alliance Defending Freedom Senior Legal Counsel Dale Schowengerdt told LifeNews: “The government has no business forcing citizens to choose between making a living and living free. Today’s order means that this family will be free from that type of coercion while higher courts are considering the administration’s mandate. If the government can force family business owners and job creators like this one to act contrary to their deepest convictions under the threat of fining them out of business, it is a danger to everybody.”

The Supreme Court last week agreed to take a case from Christian-run business Hobby Lobby, which is suing the Obama administration over its mandate that it pay for birth control and abortion-causing drugs for its employees. But where do Americans stand on the issue of whether employers should be forced to comply with the mandate?

A new Rasmussen Reports poll shows they apparently agree.

“Half of voters now oppose a government requirement that employers provide health insurance with free contraceptives for their female employees,” Rasmussen reports.

CLICK LIKE IF YOU’RE PRO-LIFE!

The poll found: “The latest Rasmussen Reports national telephone survey finds that 38% of Likely U.S. Voters still believe businesses should be required by law to provide health insurance that covers all government-approved contraceptives for women without co-payments or other charges to the patient.

Fifty-one percent (51%) disagree and say employers should not be required to provide health insurance with this type of coverage. Eleven percent (11%) are not sure.”

Another poll last week found 59 percent of Americans disagree with the mandate.