ISTOCK

MANISHA THAKOR: During my first 15 years as a professional investor, I fully believed it was possible to identify individual securities through fundamental research that would outperform the market. That commitment to seeking alpha is the one investment decision I would most like to redo.

As the result of my choice to employ an active approach, the following events occurred early in my career:

I experienced incremental costs that, compounded over time, would take a substantial bite out of returns.

I generated results that, after fees, taxes and trading costs, were materially less than what I would have earned had I put my funds in low-cost, index-like vehicles.

I wasted time researching individual stocks and active mutual funds or managers. That was time I could have spent on more joy-producing activities.

Millions of investors around the world–retail and professional–have experienced the same sub-optimal results. In the quest to become above average, the vast majority of investors achieve results far below the mean. There are two reasons for this less-than-stellar performance.

The first–as my colleague Larry Swedroe, director of research at Buckingham and the BAM Alliance, highlights in his book, “The Incredibly Shrinking Alpha”–has to do with the changing nature of the competitive landscape.

A basic drive behind the zero-sum game of active management is the need to always find a greater fool. This, in theory, allows an investor to exploit the mispricing of an asset. The goal is to buy an investment, and subsequently to sell it down the road, at a price that gives you a return above what you would expect to receive for simply taking on the underlying risk of that security. Alas, this requires that there be enough fools out there from which to buy these mispriced assets. As Swedroe points out:

The pool of investment “fools” is shrinking: At the end of World War II, households held more than 90 percent of U.S. corporate equity. By 1980, that fraction had fallen to 48 percent. It fell again – by more than half – by 2008, dropping to about 20 percent.

The pool of investors hunting for those “fools” is growing: In less than 10 years, the amount of capital invested in hedge funds has increased from about $1 trillion to more than $2.5 trillion.

The second reason active strategies often underperform is that they are predicated on an investor doing the rational thing at all times. Alas, investors are also human. And humans have a remarkable propensity to act as contra-indicators, taking exactly the wrong action at the right time (think of buying high and selling low). So, even if you find one of those elusive mispriced assets, you must also possess enough emotional fortitude not to undermine yourself by buying or selling it at an inappropriate time.

Carl Richards, the author of “The One-Page Financial Plan” and another BAM Alliance colleague, captures this phenomenon beautifully in his iconic “Behavior Gap” drawing. The sketch demonstrates simply the difference between the return of the average investMENT and the average investOR.

2013 BEHAVIOR GAP

Unfortunately, most investors receive less than their fair share of market returns. During the years I was seeking alpha, this was absolutely the case. Today, I am an ardent proponent of evidence-based investing, which calls for harvesting market returns proportionate to the asset classes and sub-asset classes an investor chooses to own through low-cost index-like funds and ETFs.

Manisha Thakor (@ManishaThakor) is director of wealth strategies for women at Buckingham and The BAM Alliance, a community of independent registered investment advisers.

Read the latest Investing in Funds & ETFs Report.