Student debt and escalating college costs are a serious problem that presidential candidates must address. And Hillary Clinton’s solution, proposed last week, does include useful elements.

For example, she advocates an income-based loan repayment program — in other words, to cap loan payments to a certain percentage of discretionary income.

Such programs already exist, and Clinton would consolidate them. Nor are they the sole province of Democratic politicians. Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, a Republican presidential contender, is championing another income-based repayment plan with Virginia Sen. Mark Warner, a Democrat.

It’s important, though, that a repayment program not encourage people to choose lower-paying careers in order to gain earlier debt forgiveness, as an existing model does.

The remainder of Clinton’s plan, meanwhile, has serious flaws.

First, it would create the equivalent of another entitlement, in this case to free or more heavily subsidized college, that would cost $350 billion over the next decade. And that estimate would almost surely turn out to be low.

The U.S. still has a long-term debt problem that will begin to worsen again in the 2020s. The next president is likely to enjoy a first term when annual deficits seem relatively under control, but the Congressional Budget Office and other experts warn that this will only be the calm before the storm.

Given an aging population and the insipid economic growth of recent years, it doesn’t make sense to saddle the federal budget with another major burden.

Second, Clinton would increase federal control over — or at least interference into — state colleges and universities. She seeks to pressure states into boosting their own support for higher education by granting those that do $175 billion so students would not have to take out loans to cover tuition. The states would be expected to do a variety of things, such as slow the growth of tuition. And according to The New York Times, the plan would “impose penalties on colleges whose graduates cannot repay their loans.”

Meanwhile, in an echo of an idea offered by President Obama, Clinton would offer two years of free community college to all takers.

But that’s questionable policy as well. So long as college remains a path that some choose and some don’t, those who do go should be responsible for some of the cost — especially if they can afford it.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.