Topics: Books, Caitlin Moran, Editor's Picks, Feminism, Fiction, Sex, Women writers, Entertainment News

It’s nearly impossible to dislike Caitlin Moran’s first novel, “How to Build a Girl.” Moran herself is so relentlessly likable, cranking out a superhuman stream of columns and articles for British newspapers, as well as television appearances, interviews, tweets and the bestselling essay collection, “How to Be a Woman.” She’s witty, brassy, audacious, bawdy — a true daughter of Chaucer’s Wife of Bath — and generally seems to have her head screwed on right. Her thoughts on just about any topic are well worth hearing.

But truth be told, there’s not much reason for “How to Build a Girl” to exist. Its similarity to “How to Be a Woman” extends a good way beyond its title. “Woman” is a work of autobiographical nonfiction, not exactly a memoir or life story, but a series of pieces considering various issues of young womanhood: body image, the tyranny of contemporary grooming standards, workplace sexism, pornography, the wedding industrial complex, abortion, motherhood, etc. Moran considers herself a humorist, and she approaches all of these concerns with a brisk, upbeat, profane and often very funny voice. “How to Be a Woman” is less a self-help book than a series of rallying cries designed to help Moran’s readers prevent themselves from being driven nuts by the countless paradoxes and dilemmas that arise from living in a female body during the 21st century.

Moran is very, very good at this. For example, instead of meandering through such slippery, abstract concepts as “objectification,” her critique of both porn and strip clubs has more to do with what she (accurately) perceives as the near-absence of female desire and pleasure in both. In her opinion, what’s bad about a generation of children learning about sex from Internet porn is how seldom they will encounter “something that shows sex as something that two people do together, rather than a thing that just happens to a woman when she has to make rent. Something in which — to put it simply — everyone comes.” Because Moran writes so frankly about her own teenage masturbatory adventures, in which she scavenged turn-ons from such unlikely sources as “An American Werewolf in London” (or, really, any Jenny Agutter vehicle), she’s able to present a counterimage of positive sexuality that has some life to it.

But “How to Build a Girl” is not an essay or memoir but a novel, a work of fiction, albeit one that hews pretty closely to what Moran has revealed about her own life. Like Moran, Johanna Morrigan, the narrator of “Girl,” has grown up in a housing project in the decrepit West Midlands industrial town of Wolverhampton. She comes from a big family (four siblings to Moran’s seven), with a musician father on disability, an unsteady supply of food on the table and no full-length mirrors (because the whole family would rather not know). Moran has a surly-but-loyal younger sister who adores George Orwell; Johanna has a surly-but-loyal older brother who adores George Orwell. Both girls sleep in the beds their grandmothers died on. Both suffered through a fat and fairly clueless pubescence, seething with big but inchoate lusts and aspirations. Both leave school young and launch precocious careers as rock critics for one of England’s fierce, haughty pop-music papers.

Although “How to Build a Girl” comes with a disclaimer announcing that Johanna’s “family, colleagues, the people she meets and her experiences are not my family, the people I met or my experiences,” this is pretty hard to credit. No doubt much of “Girl” is invented, but given the dozens of obvious parallels between Moran’s life and Johanna’s, it’s impossible to tell which and this encourages the impression that the book is extensively autobiographical. This may not bother some of its readers, however. It’s a strange feature of contemporary literature that readers expect memoirs to be scrupulously factual while at the same time seem to want novels to be only barely fictional. (Just listen to most interviews with fiction writers and see how often the questions tack toward a version of “Did this really happen to you?”)

We’ve also got an unsung tradition of celebrity-written pseudo-novels. People like Nicole Richie (who published “The Truth About Diamonds,” about “a rock royalty princess and a card-carrying member of Hollywood’s inner circle”), Lauren Conrad (“Sweet Little Lies,” about “the average girl next door” who gets her own reality show) and Snookie (“The Shore Thing,” about Jersey party girl who “becomes a local celebrity overnight”) produce “novels” whose main attraction is not their deft storytelling but the dish they supposedly deliver on the lives of the inexplicably famous. Labeling these books as fiction provides the authors with plausible deniability, and presumably the people who buy them believe they’re getting the sort of quality dirt that no one would dare publish as nonfiction.