Kevin Boesen started the Medication Management Center at the University of Arizona in 2006 in response to the medication therapy management requirement of the Medicare Part D prescription drug benefit. What began as a project under the College of Pharmacy as an innovative way to provide patient management services for Medicare beneficiaries in a unique teaching environment for future pharmacists has now grown to the largest provider of medication therapy management services in the country.

“I think there were six or eight people when we first started, including pharmacists, interns and staff,” said Rose Martin, the current director of the Medication Management Center. “Today, we have (25) pharmacists, about 80 interns, 15-20 technicians and staff—about 120 employees in all.” (Ed. Note: While Martin was quoted accurately, after publication the UA College of Pharmacy corrected the number of pharmacists involved).

Martin says the center has been a tremendous learning ground for students in the College of Pharmacy because it’s given them the opportunity to better understand the importance of knowing how medications interact with one another, with different conditions, and what to look for to prevent conflicts that can be harmful to patients.

“We provide this oversight that is really important,” she adds. “Patients today may not be filling all of their prescriptions in one pharmacy because they shop around to find the best deal, they travel, or use mail order services …We are able to look at claims, engage with patients to review their prescriptions and make recommendations if necessary.”

Boesen agrees. “It takes a specialized skill to be able to track medications and their risks and interactions with one another against certain illnesses. Students are able to learn how to look beyond the basics of filling prescriptions to understanding what these medications are designed to treat and what can impact that outcome.”

Using a pharmacy-run call center model, pharmacists, faculty, staff and interns have worked over the years to develop MTM programs that have served more than 1 million Medicare beneficiaries nationwide. The American Pharmacists Association Foundation in 2013 awarded the program its Pinnacle Award for “helping patients achieve better outcomes.” According to the College of Pharmacy's website, in 2012, “as a result of recommendations made by the center, more than 100,000 medication changes were made resulting in a total savings to patients, health plan and Medicare of more than $50 million.”

The center grew to be so successful, in fact, that in December, the UA finalized a for-profit spin with the help of a local business investor. SinfoniaRx, a subsidiary of Sinfonia HealthCare Corp., now manages and markets a full line of MTM services. With an exclusive agreement between the UA College of Pharmacy and Sinfonia, the Medication Management Center serves as the primary clinical provider of MTM services to SinfoniaRx. Boesen left the UA and now serves as the CEO for SinfoniaRx.

“We’re now serving over 300 health plans, encompassing 6 million patients, nationally,” Boesen says. “That’s about 20 percent of the Medicare Part D population.”

Martin said the quality assurance requirement that was initially part of the Medicare Part D mandate can actually help support one of the key mandates of the Affordable Care Act.

“One of the key stipulations of Obamacare is to encourage the development of new patient care initiatives, and I believe that pharmacists can impact that area quite a bit,” Martin said.

Through MTM, she said patient readmission rates can be lowered, quality of the medication can be assured, side effects and understanding drug interactions can all play an important role in assuring quality outcomes in care.

“It will be important to incorporate the pharmacist as a patient advocate,” she added.

Market growth is virtually assured with the newly insured population coming online with the ACA, as well as with changes to Medicare.

“One thing we know for certain with the ACA is that the rules are going to change as it goes along but I know the one thing we know is that quality assurance that is now in place for Medicare Part D will definitely expand,” he said.

With capacity at the UA now at its maximum, Boesen says they have already sub contracted with Ohio State University to support their growing client base.

“But Tucson and the University of Arizona are home base,” he said. “We’ll have the University of Arizona be the exclusive trainer and operator for our MTM services for all other campuses we bring on board.”