Topics: Books, hospital, nursing, Life News

“Rapid response team” comes over the PA system and I wait, holding my breath, to find out where. “Medical Oncology.”

Shit! Our floor? Which room? “It’s here! It’s Mr. King!” I hear Nora. She’s in the pod next to mine.

I walk back to her, fast, and see Susie coming down the hall, fast, too, with Randy behind her. Nora has already pulled the crash cart into the room and I see, quickly, Mr. King, a patient most of us have known for over two years, lying in bed not moving with a thin stream of blood running from his mouth down his chin onto his chest.

My focus narrows to what’s right in front of me: the portable defibrillator is on the bed next to Mr. King. I grab the small plastic instrument we use to measure oxygen saturation and stick his finger into it.

“What’s his pulse-ox?” asks Nora.

“Waiting.” The machine registers a horizontal line as it calculates Mr. King’s oxygen level. “Seventy-five percent.”

“I’m cracking the cart, getting out a non-rebreather.” That’s Randy.

I hear Susie say, “What happened to him?” as I wrap the blood pressure cuff around his arm and start the machine so we can get his pressure.

Nora says, “I dunno. I walked in and found him like this. Here—you can record.” She shoves a clipboard at Susie. “Write down everything that happens on this form.”

Susie’s eyes widen, but she takes the clipboard and clicks her pen open.

Suddenly the room floods with people: an ICU doc, nurses from the ICU, a respiratory therapist, an anesthesiologist. The code team has arrived.

This intensivist, Matt, is a friend. Despite not being any older than I am he’s world-weary, but also whip smart with a well of compassion hidden beneath his hard edge. He stands by the opposite side of the bed, across from me, and our eyes briefly meet. Then he raises his voice above the loud buzz in the room. “What’s up with this patient? Who’s the nurse?”

Nora’s good in codes. She rolls the information out like she’d memorized it. “Day one hundred – plus of a mud transplant, patient has GVH of the lungs and a fungal pneumonia, with increasing needs for oxygen. Alert and oriented with occasional moments of confusion, bed-bound due to weakness. Walked in this morning and saw him . . . like that, non-responsive. O2 sats 75 percent, so we put him on a non-rebreather.” She points to the breathing apparatus now covering Mr. King’s nose and mouth.

“His sats now?”

“Eighty-eight percent on twelve liters.” Twelve liters is the maximum amount of oxygen that device can give and 88 percent is far below normal, which hovers between ninety-five and one hundred percent.

“Heart rate?”

“Fifty,” someone calls out as Matt flips through Mr. King’s chart.

“Pressure?”

“One hundred over eighty,” I say.

“Let’s get some blood gases,” he tells the respiratory therapist.

“What’s his pressure? And what’s his platelet count?”

“One hundred over eighty,” I say again, louder this time, but I’m not sure Matt hears me over the ICU nurse calling out, “We have a bed! He can go to A222.”

Nora also calls out at the same time, “Platelets are ten—he’s refractory. No HLAs available.” With a platelet count of ten, people can bleed spontaneously, and although we’ve been transfusing him regularly, his platelet count barely rises each time. (HLAs are platelets matched to Mr. King’s blood, but we don’t have any on hand. They can be hard to get.)

“Do I get to hear a blood pressure or not?” Matt demands.

I look at him and raise my voice. “It’s one hundred over eighty,” I say very loudly and he nods to himself. “OK, we’ll take that bed. Pack him up and move him out. He’s stable enough to transfer—we’ll intubate him downstairs if we need to.”