LITTLE ROCK — The state Ethics Commission on Friday dismissed a complaint against Attorney General Leslie Rutledge that alleged she violated state campaign finance laws by appearing in an outside group’s ad.

Attorney and liberal blogger Matt Campbell of Little Rock filed the complaint over Rutledge’s participation last year in a 30-second television ad by the Republican Attorneys General Association. In the ad, Rutledge, then a Republican candidate for attorney general, spoke into the camera and vowed to “stand up to Obama and fight for Arkansas values.”

The ad also featured a phone number for Rutledge and urged viewers to call her and “tell her to keep fighting Obamacare.”

Campbell alleged that the ad constituted an illegal campaign contribution because its value exceeded the $2,000 limit and that it was made by a political action committee that was prohibited from coordinating activities with candidates.

After a closed-door hearing, the commission on Friday decided 4-0 that there was no probable cause to find that Rutledge had violated state campaign finance laws.

A letter explaining the decision will be released in a few days, said Graham Sloan, the commission’s executive director.

Rutledge did not attend the hearing but was represented by attorneys Kevin Crass and Rex Terry. Rutledge said in a statement Friday, “I am pleased with today’s decision from the Ethics Commission. From day one, my campaign proactively sought guidance from the commission. This matter can now be put to rest.”

Campbell said he was curious to see what the commission’s letter would contain.

“If it’s just, ‘This wasn’t an improper contribution,’ then there’s a road map for however much money you want to get in outside ads,” he said.

Sloan said that in general terms, without specific reference to Rutledge’s case, an Arkansas candidate is not allowed to coordinate activities with an independent expenditure group if express advocacy of the candidate is involved, or the functional equivalent of express advocacy.

Campbell said he believed that although Rutledge did not say “vote for me” in the ad, the ad clearly advocated for her election.

“There is no point to ‘Call Leslie Rutledge and tell her to fight Washington’ other than the implied, ‘Support her campaign to be attorney general,’” he said.

Rutledge defeated Democrat Nate Steel and Libertarian Aaron Cash in November to with the attorney general’s office. She was sworn in last week.