Don't Duck From Aflac's Value in a Rising Market

The last 30 days have seen a lot of upside action, with the S&P 500 going up almost in a straight line. Since Feb. 11, the S&P 500 ETF has advanced 9.5%.

Such a move has shaken up my list of value-based dividend plays. As I look through my latest recommendations, several of them are no longer viable buys. For example, Cisco Systems (CSCO), Leggett & Platt (LEG) and W. P. Carey (WPC), which I've written about over the last couple months, are all up double-digits since my recommendations. Much of that timing, by the way, was luck, as a rising tide has lifted all boats. (Cisco is a holding in Jim Cramer's charitable trust, Action Alerts PLUS.)

In any case, it is indeed becoming more difficult to find value among dividend-paying stocks. But one that remains undervalued is Aflac (AFL).

Aflac, based in Columbus, Ga., provides casualty insurance and supplementary health care insurance in the U.S. and Japan the world's two largest insurance markets. And the company is on a path of solid revenue growth through steadily increasing demand for supplementary health care insurance in both countries.

In Japan, Aflac's cancer insurance programs offer extra coverage in addition to national health care coverage. In the U.S., the Affordable Care Act is bringing more demand for supplementary health insurance. Aflac expects sales growth of 5% in Japan in 2016, and 2%-3% in the U.S. Once buybacks are figured in, earnings per share are expected to rise between 3% and 7%, excluding any currency impact.

One concern for some investors is that very low interest rates in Japanese bonds could make it difficult for Aflac to achieve the necessary returns to meet its insurance claim obligations. Aflac plans on investing in the Japanese stock market in order to achieve the required internal return.

As far as valuation goes, Aflac remains a fairly cheap stock. According to data from FAST Graphs, Aflac has averaged a valuation of 11.6x earnings over the last 10 years. But even after the latest upward price movement, Aflac still trades at a very reasonable 10x earnings. That puts Aflac at a 13.7% discount to average levels.

There is one caveat, though: Aflac has been floating well below its 10-year average since 2008, so it's been cheap for quite some time. And there is not an immediate upward catalyst for the stock. However, one of the great things about dividend-paying stocks is there doesn't need to be an immediate upward catalyst. While waiting for Aflac to eventually hit its 10-year average valuation, you'll get paid a solid yield of about 2.65%.

I fully expect the dividend payment to increase by the same rate as EPS, and maybe a little higher. After all, Aflac has raised its dividend each year for the last 33 years.

To conclude, Aflac is a very secure business offering a steady dividend at a reasonable price. Although Aflac isn't as cheap as it used to be, I believe the shares have significant upside potential, and offers a meaningful and growing dividend.