EAST HARTFORD — Ken Raczewski has been a registered Democrat for years but the 60-year-old tool engineer from Columbia says he is ready to abandon the party.

"The Democrats have let the world get too liberal and that's the problem with a lot of things,'' Raczewski said before digging into a hot dog and a pile of onion rings at Augie & Ray's, a old-school eatery just outside Pratt & Whitney's main gate, one day last week.

Raczewski hasn't decided whom he will vote for but he likes what he's hearing from Republican front-runner Donald Trump. "He's new to the political scene ... he's straightforward and he has a good business sense," said Raczewski, who worked at Pratt for 32 years before his group was outsourced.

White male voters have propelled Trump to victory in Republican primaries across the U.S. But the renegade billionaire is also capturing the support of disaffected unaffiliated voters and even some blue-collar Democrats in Connecticut.

"He's crossed all kinds of party lines,'' said Jonathan Wharton, a political scientist at Southern Connecticut State University in New Haven. A national Quinnipiac University poll released last week found Trump essentially tied with Democrat Hillary Clinton in a hypothetical head-to-head match up among unaffiliated voters.

Trump Voter Talks Trump's Appeal Ken Raczewski, a registered Democrat, talks about why Donald Trump appeals to him. Ken Raczewski, a registered Democrat, talks about why Donald Trump appeals to him. See more videos

Trump's tough talk on trade and his hard line on illegal immigration are resonating with working class voters even in liberal blue states; he crushed the opposition in the Republican primary in Massachusetts and is poised to do the same in New York on April 19.

"He speaks to a certain segment of the population who feels left out because of the economy,'' Wharton said. "These are voters who want to see results, they want to see things shaken up.''

Connecticut's presidential primary will be held on April 26. Although registered Democrats cannot vote in the Republican primary and vice versa, unaffiliated and new voters have until noon on April 25 to enroll with a party if they want to participate in the primary.

Quinnipiac poll Director Doug Schwartz expects older, white, working class men to support Trump here, just as they have in other states.

"That's the core base of his support,'' Schwartz said. "He does well among independents because you can't fix a political ideology on him. On trade, on immigration, on military intervention, on entitlement reform, he's not a traditional conservative. He departs from the Republican leadership and that appeals to independents and Reagan Democrats.''

Count Ralph Mucherino among them. Like many Trump supporters, the 52-year-old small business owner from Ansonia can't shake the feeling that the U.S. has lost stature in the world, that we've become a nation of whiners and losers while other countries surge past.

"We seem to lose on everything we do, with China and everywhere else,'' said Mucherino, who owns a T-shirt screening company. "The jobs are going in a different direction and we're losing a lot of good opportunities."

While critics say Trump's rise is fueled by xenophobia and racism, Mucherino doesn't see it that way. "I like his views on the border,'' he said. "If we don't do anything about immigration, things are only going to get worse here."

Mucherino, a Democrat, voted for Obama in 2008 — "I gave him a shot." But he says he quickly grew disenchanted with the president and his agenda.

"We've had Obama for seven years and he didn't do a helluva lot,'' Mucherino said. "As far as I'm concerned, Obamacare's a mess."

If Democrats are worried that Trump's appeal to blue-collar independent voters in Connecticut is a harbinger of trouble, they aren't acknowledging it. "Obviously there are frustrations out there and Donald Trump has tapped into that,'' said Leigh Appleby, spokesman for Connecticut Democrats. "He's playing into people's worst fears and, while that might be something that's effective in a Republican primary, it isn't when it comes to leading the country."

Matthew Daly, a Republican from Glastonbury who made an unsuccessful run for Congress in 2010, said Trump appeals to voters from both parties who love their country but are driven by a powerful sense of political alienation. "People feel like they're losing their country,'' said Daly, a Trump supporter. "Trump's a guy who wakes up every morning and finds a way to kick the beehive. The establishment of both parties have a hard time understanding his appeal."

A new Quinnipiac national poll documents that disconnect. The survey, released Tuesday, found a whopping 91 percent of Trump backers say their "beliefs and values are under attack." About 85 percent of Trump supporters believe that America has lost its identity.

Trump's supporters are profoundly pessimistic about the nation's economy as well as their own personal finances. More than two-thirds of Trump backers said they agree with the statement that they are falling further behind economically. And 84 percent said they believe the America needs a leader who is willing to do or say anything to solve the nation's problems.

Trump's image as a blunt-talking disrupter who will shake up the system and restore the nation to greatness holds great appeal among these restless voters, many of whom are struggling in a turbulent economy.

"He's uncovering things and speaking the truth and saying what everyone's swept under the rug for years,'' said Brendan Howley, a 54-year-old commercial roofer from Glastonbury. "Trump is standing up for the middle class."

Howley is a Democrat but he says he has grown increasingly disenchanted with the party. "This country's done nothing but crash and burn under Democratic rule,'' he said. He's not completely sure whom he will vote for but he knows it won't be Hillary Clinton or Bernie Sanders. "I'm not voting Democrat this time," he declared.

Greg Steele, a 63-year-old retired golf pro from South Windsor, views Trump as a fighter who is unafraid to shake up the system. "I haven't made a decision yet but I'm thinking about Trump,'' said Steele, an unaffiliated voter who supported President Obama in 2012.

Standing at the counter at Augie & Ray's on a busy weekday afternoon, Steele conceded that Trump "hasn't been very presidential." But, he quickly added, "I like his style. I think it's exactly what we need."