It was their fifth game in four days and they did it all short-staffed, so the 4 Corners Club Sox were true to the trend and shortened Sunday's championship game.

The Sox, with nine players in uniform, pounded the Mitchell Kernels in a 10-0 mercy-rule shortened game to claim the 23rd annual Bubba's Bash.

The New Mexico squad touched Kernels pitcher 2015 graduate Jacob Cersosimo for three runs in the first inning, six in the second and another in the third.

In the team's four previous games, they scored 33 runs in 24 innings, so the output was a bit surprising.

"That's normal for us," 4 Corners coach Brett Alexander said. "We spend a lot of time — we have an indoor facility — we spend a lot of time in the cages.

"The couple guys we saw in the first two days were a lot of off-speed thumbers. We have guys who are playing upper level high school and junior college guys who see 90 consistently so for them to see that 70 with a 65 mph curveball, it's hard to sit back and adjust."

And it wasn't that Cersosimo threw bad, a few times he hit his spot perfectly but still got hammered. On an 0-2 pitch in the second inning, Cersosimo threw his best pitch, his changeup, and painted the outside corner at the lower edge of the strike zone. The Sox' right-handed hitter clobbered it to the left-center field gap and one-hopped the fence.

"He probably gave up four of five hits on really good pitches that were down in the strikezone," said Kernels coach Luke Norden, who is a 1999 graduate of Cañon City High School.

Advertisement

"I told the guys that if we see a team that swings it that well the rest of the year, I'll be surprised," Norden said. "We go to some pretty big tournaments up in Minneapolis and a couple other places and not many (teams) will have even a couple guys in the lineup who hit that well. Every one of their guys was right on target."

The New Mexico squad pulls players from multiple high schools, including powerhouse Piedra Vista High School. The team was missing seven players to the New Mexico High School All-Star Game, and two others were at the tournament earlier in the week but left to take the ACT tests.

The 4 Corners team will play at the popular Andenucio Tournament in Pueblo later this week, and Alexander said they'll be there in full strength.

The Sox finished the tournament 5-0, and Mitchell was 3-2. Other teams that made the semifinals were Pueblo West (2-2) and South Denver (2-2). Cañon City finished fifth, and Vista Ridge was sixth.

The two teams that were in the finals last year did the worst this year and played in the eighth-place game Saturday night. North Platte, Neb., beat Hays, Kan., 14-4.

Brandon Hopper: 719-276-7644, hopperb@canoncitydailyrecord.com