(Photo: special to the register)

A rose to the Linwood Cemetery in Dubuque for an effort to create a monument to a man who played a role in a monumental Iowa court decision. The first ruling of the Supreme Court of the Territory of Iowa in 1839 was titled, “In the Matter of Ralph (a colored man).” Ralph had been released from slavery in Missouri and was working in the lead mines in Dubuque when his former owner sought to reclaim him because of an unpaid bill. The Iowa Supreme Court ruled that a slave released to live on free soil could not be claimed as the property of another man, and ordered that Ralph be “permitted to go free.” Ralph Montgomery (the last name adopted from his former owner) is buried in the Linwood Cemetery, though his gravesite is unmarked. The cemetery board is raising money to put up a proper marker. The goal is $2,200, which would be sufficient for a black granite maker with the image of the “Shattering Silence” monument to the Ralph case that stands just outside the Judicial Branch Building in Des Moines. As of last week, the cemetery had raised just over $500. (For more information, go to linwoodlegacies.org.)

A rose to college athletic officials who suggested going back to the rule against freshmen eligibility. The Big Ten officials, including Big 12 Conference Commissioner (and former UI Athletic Director) Bob Bowlsby, recently pitched the idea of barring freshmen from playing football and men’s basketball. They say idea is to give student-athletes “a year of readiness,” but it is also seen as move to stop the “one-and-done” where star athletes head for the pros after playing at the college level for one year. To his credit, Iowa State University Athletic Director Jamie Pollard, told the Register’s Randy Peterson he thinks it’s a good idea. “If we want to send a message as an industry that we’re about higher education, the collegiate model, then that’s one of the ideas that need to be seriously considered.” What an amazing concept: It’s about education and not just serving as a farm team for the pros. Which means, of course, that it will never happen.

A thistle to professional baseball “fans” who are unable to endure an entire baseball game. Compared to the fast-paced worlds of professional basketball and football, baseball apparently strikes modern sports fans as, well, plodding. Although the leisurely pace is precisely what makes the game a joy for the true fan, Major League Baseball’s chieftains have decreed that The Game Shall Be Sped Up. A new rule goes into effect this spring that is designed to keep the batter in the box and the manager in the dugout. And in the minors this year, pitchers will be put on a time clock. This is sacrilege. Part of any respectable pitcher’s warm-up routine before the throw is to glove the ball, spit, adjust his jersey sleeve, glance at any runners on base, look for catchers’ hand signals, spit, etc. The new rules pander to television and to the dwindling attention spans of fans in the stadium who have been trained to expect theatrical distractions to erupt at any lull in the game. Heck, maybe they should just keep the hot-dog guns and the tot relays and forgo the game of baseball.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1ApWYn0