WASHINGTON — LOST in all the debate last week about whether or not the Affordable Care Act will hurt the economy is the fact that health care is already imposing a drag on growth.

The health care sector has repeatedly helped to pull the economy from recession in recent decades, but this time around it is lagging behind the recovery.

Health care spending grew more slowly than the economy in 2011 and 2012 and will probably be found to have done so again in 2013. Meanwhile, health care employment also expanded more slowly than overall employment last year — and the government estimates that in January employment actually shrank for only the second time since 1990.

The reasons for this slowdown are not well understood. The Great Recession is clearly part of the story. Experts also point to changes in technology and in the way care is delivered and paid for. It seems likely that the landmark 2010 legislation is playing at least a small part, but the magnitude of its impact is hotly disputed.

The consequences are easier to see, though: Lower health care spending isn’t helping the economy to heal.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Spending less on health care is a longstanding goal of pretty much everyone who doesn’t work in the health care industry. The United States spends much more on health care than do other countries, and it seems likely that some of the money could be put to better use elsewhere. Also, making the health care sector more efficient not only frees up people, money and office space in places like Boston’s hospital district, but it also cuts labor costs in other industries by cutting insurance premiums.

But in the nation’s current economic malaise, idled resources are not being put to better use. Workers, companies and the federal government are all paying down debt rather than spending and investing. Fewer homes are being bought; companies are building few factories. The government has been cutting back at a pace exceeded in modern times only during the military demobilizations after the Vietnam War and the Cold War.

In the past, the health care industry leaned against the wind during downturns. The industry added jobs in every month from January 1990 through December 2013, save for a month in the summer of 2003. In 2001, a recession year that saw total employment shrink 1.3 percent, health care jobs rose 3.5 percent.

But the expansion of health care employment has slowed sharply over the past five years. Last year industry payrolls grew just 1.4 percent — almost a percentage point below the average annual increase in the decade before the 2007-9 recession.

Health care prices are also rising more slowly. The 1.4 percent increase in 2013 was the slowest pace of health care inflation in at least half a century, and it was a key contributor to the sluggish 1.1 percent annual pace of overall inflation.

What Goes Up Finally Comes Down Percent of gross domestic product going to national health care spending: 18% 15 12 Health costs peaked in 2009 and 2010 at 17.4 percent. 9 6 They fell to 17.2 percent in 2012. 3 ’60 ’70 ’80 ’90 ’00 ’10

This seems good. Inflation is widely reviled. But there is evidence that moderate inflation can help to stimulate economic activity. Rising prices spur people to borrow and spend more quickly. Rising prices also tend to raise nominal wages, making it easier for borrowers to pay fixed debts like mortgage loans.

And sluggish inflation can be self-perpetuating. Inflation is rising slowly because the economy is weak, and slow inflation is restraining faster growth.

Some economists see the slowdown in health care spending as a straightforward consequence of our broader economic problems: We’re spending less on health care because we’re spending less on everything. The implication is that the trend is temporary.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But that does not explain why health care spending has been recovering more slowly than spending on everything else. The most recent data, for 2012, show that health care spending grew 3.7 percent while the economy grew 4.6 percent.

An analysis last year by David Cutler, a Harvard economist who was President Obama’s chief health care adviser during the 2008 presidential campaign, attributed 37 percent of the decline in health care spending from 2003 to 2012 to the recession and another 8 percent to specific changes in federal health care spending.

The rest, he said, is harder to explain — but also more likely to endure. Expensive innovations like new drugs are arriving at a slower pace. A new focus on efficiency appears to be reducing costs. And changes that require patients to pay for a larger share of the care they receive may be inducing more second thoughts.

The White House argued in a November analysis that the Affordable Care Act “is contributing to the recent slow growth in health care prices and spending.” And last week, the Congressional Budget Office agreed that specific cuts in spending on Medicare have “contributed to the overall slow rate of cost growth in health care since the law’s enactment.” Since that time, the budget office has reduced its estimate of Medicare spending in 2020 by 12 percent, or $109 billion.

The impact of these changes might have been less painful in good times. But Professor Cutler said it would have been ridiculous to argue for the preservation of the existing system, even temporarily, as a kind of economic stimulus program.

“If you take an industry that’s countercyclical and you make it grow slower, then that’s going to hurt you in a recession,” he said. “That’s absolutely true. But I’m not sure the right answer is to say, ‘Let’s take one sector that’s clearly bloated and imposing a horrible tax on the economy and make that sector stay bloated.’ ”

Katherine Baicker, a professor of health economics at the Harvard School of Public Health, said it was a mistake to focus on the pain caused to workers in the health care industry rather than the benefits to everyone else.

The cost of health care, she noted, is broadly distributed. Everyone pays for the industry’s prosperity, either directly or in the form of insurance premiums.

“Do you really want to pay for surgeons’ salaries by having low-income people not be able to afford health insurance?” she said. “It’s like the world’s least efficient jobs program. No one is suggesting that spending money on health care is bad. It’s just that for a given outcome, if you could get it with fewer resources, that would be better for everyone. You could get more health. You could get more other stuff.”