During a late fall when Denver has been ranked as the hottest housing market in the entire nation, KB Home has a grand opening in Castle Rock today that shows something lots of people will be clamoring for next spring – attractive single-family homes and ranch designs that have starting prices in the $300s – not the $400s or $500s.

KB Home’s Siena has two models opening today – one a 1,747 square foot ranch, the other a family-sized 2-story, three bedrooms plus a loft and a main-floor study, 2,397 square feet. Both homes show off abundant possibilities for decks and daylight walkout basements –including options for finishing the basement now as attractive entertaining and guest-bedroom space — available from Siena’s west-sloping site, south of Founders Parkway on Woodlands Boulevard.

A finished walkout makes a particularly attractive match-up with a ranch plan. Among the 11 floor plans that KB Home will build here, no less than six are ranches. That includes two designs — the Box Elder and the Cottonwood – that’ll have finished basement space included at the base price.Even coming into this weekend’s formal opening, KB Home’s Lori Emch and Kathy Hamlin have seen non-stop visits from home shoppers – many from the local Woodlands area who have been watching this site for years — walking distance both to Renaissance Expeditionary School, Douglas County High School, and Castle Rock’s Community Rec Center.

Put that together with the mountain views you get looking west from here and you can see why KB Home has already been logging reservations in advance. And much of that activity is centered on ranches.

“We’re continuously focusing on what Colorado buyers want, and increasingly they’re telling us that they prefer ranches,” says Randy Carpenter, Vice President of Sales and Marketing at KB Home Colorado.

Although the decorated models are ready and waiting, what you won’t see at Siena today are lots of homes ready to deliver, Carpenter notes. “This is a chance to order a home for delivery late next spring, with plenty of time available to sell your current home, and to buy a new home at prices that could be only a memory by then.” Ordering now, he adds, maximizes the opportunity to use KB Home’s ‘Built-to-Order’ choices – including those enticing finished basement options.

Emch and Hamlin will show you numbers of sites where KB Home can deliver a home under $400,000 – and other ones where a lot premium translates into an advantageous situation for a walkout or other advantage. All of these sites, says Carpenter, are getting attention now because of their ease of access to I-25 – something that Castle Rock area buyers want.

There’s another affordable aspect to Siena, Carpenter notes: the tax rate — 0.589, leading to lower monthly payments. To reach the grand opening, take I-25 south to Castle Rock’s first exit, Meadows/Founders Pkwy, turn left on Founders, a mile to Woodlands Boulevard, then turn right to Tippen Place.

Grand opening, Siena at Castle Rock by KB Home, 2 beautiful models including spacious ranch; Energy Star 3 Certified; close to trails, walk to Douglas County High School; refreshments today & Sunday. 3389 Belltop Court, Castle Rock; take I-25 south to Castle Rock’s first exit, Meadows/Founders Pkwy, turn left on Founders, continue 1 mi. to Woodlands Blvd, turn right 0.7 mi to Tippen Place

From high $300s

Today, 10 a.m. until 6 p.m.

303-323-1176

Mark Samuelson writes on real estate and business; you can email him at mark@samuelsonassoc.com. You can see all of Mark Samuelson’s columns online at DenverPostHomes.com