TMA draws focus in Senate race attacks

Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Susan King campaign Susan King campaign TMA draws focus in Senate race attacks 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

AUSTIN -- In the particularly nasty GOP Texas Senate runoff for the seat being vacated by Sen. Troy Fraser, one thing seemed to be agreed to by both sides: The powerful Texas Medical Association -- and to a large extent health care issues – would not be included in lines of attack.

That's because one candidate, Rep. Susan King, is married to a past president of the group and the other, Dr. Dawn Buckingham, is a doctor and prominent member. With election day drawing near, it would seem that unspoken agreement is now broken.

Buckingham's campaign is now blasting Rep. King for supporting a bill in 2013 that would have allowed then-HHSC Commissioner Kyle Janek to negotiate with the feds to try to come up with an alternative to the sweeping health care reform passed under President Obama.

There was no comment about this from the Texas Medical Association on Thursday. The group has endorsed both candidates in this race.

In mail pieces and in television advertising, Buckingham's campaign claims Rep. King "did Obama's bidding to expand Obamacare" when she voted for HB 3791 by Rep. John Zerwas, R-Simonton, Rep. J.D. Sheffield, R-Gatesville, and others.

The bill was described as the "'Texas solution' to reforming and addressing issues related to the Medicaid program, including the creation of an alternative program designed to ensure health benefit plan coverage to certain low-income individuals through the private marketplace."

The Texas Medical Association supported the bill, offered testimony in favor of it, and distributed materials in support of it like this video and this one.

As TMA and other groups were pushing the idea – which eventually died during that legislative session – Dr. Buckingham was serving on the association's Council on Legislation. She was also promoted to the chair of that panel that year.

Typically, the council helps the association figure out legislative tactics after TMA has established its policy position.

Matthew Langston, Buckingham's campaign spokesman, was asked by Quorum Report whether the candidate had any objection to the bill in 2013 when she served on that council as its chair. "Dr. Buckingham has opposed Obamacare from day one, unlike Susan King who voted to expand it," Langston said.

"This is not an expansion of Medicaid — this is the creation of a new program that leverages our private sector," Zerwas said in 2013.

Health care policy analysts told QR the bill would have allowed the state to seek a block grant and tailor Medicaid recipients' benefits, implementing "personal responsibility" cost-sharing measures such as co-pays and deductibles, and prioritizing premium assistance for private market health plans.

In that sense, it was not dissimilar to proposals supported by the Texas Public Policy Foundation, a self-proclaimed conservative think tank.