Whether you fell asleep early, stayed out too late, or simply want to watch it again, we realize it's not always possible to get your entire "Piers Morgan Live" fix from television. As an answer to this, we offer the below labor of love – "Piers Morgan Live, Rewind" – dedicated and designed to getting you caught up and connected to the conversation.

Piers Morgan and the three-year-old that questioned Chris Christie

When Chris Christie took questions from a crowd during one of his Thursday town hall meetings, one tiny person, with a big question, stole the show as she directly asked the New Jersey Governor when he planned on fixing her house.

Several hours later, three-year-old Nicole Mariano again stole hearts, joining "Piers Morgan Live" to discuss her family's home, which remains damaged following Hurricane Sandy.

Seated on her mother's lap, Mariano smiled coyly at the camera as Piers Morgan sought specifics about her living situation.

“We were approved for REM in the first rounds of approvals and our house is still unchanged from November 2012. It's exactly the same,” said Nicole's mother, Kelly Brier. “It's incredibly frustrating. The process is definitely flawed and it's broken and there's a lot of finger pointing as to who's responsible for it but the reality, they're all responsible for it.”

Also in studio on Thursday night, Nicole's grandmother suggested that the three-year-old is truly counting on Christie:

“How could you look at that face and not say something?,” said Joyce Brier. “You know, and she [Nicole] believes it. She sees a fan of his. She sees him on television.”

Before he did "Dirty Jobs," Mike Rowe sang opera and it was beautiful

For the first time in his adult life, the man that preaches a good day’s work, is unemployed.

“You know, it's odd,” said Mike Rowe, joining "Piers Morgan Live" Thursday evening. “But I mean seriously it forces you to step back and go, 'okay. I've been really, really lucky – I know that.'"

After ten years on Discovery Channel’s "Dirty Jobs" and serving as a commercial spokesman for Ford, Rowe has currently been under social media scrutiny for his narration in a recent Walmart commercial. He is the founder of the mikeroweWORKS Foundation, which provides scholarships in partnership with Scholarship America to fund those interested in jobs specific to a skilled trade.

But in addition to all of this, Rowe actually got his start with his voice, as opposed to his hands:

“Years ago in Baltimore I couldn't get into any of the unions that oversee our industry,” said Rowe. “Basically, it was getting into the opera. If I could fake my way to the opera, I would automatically become a part of the club and then I could sort of work my way into the industry.”

On Morgan's prodding, Rowe proudly belted out a sampling, with his deep vice pulsating through the "Piers Morgan Live" studio. Click the above video to enjoy Rowe's vocal aptitude.

The co-writers and co-directors of "The LEGO Movie": We just try to make each other laugh

Longtime pals and collaborators, Christopher Miller and Phil Lord joined forces to write and direct the smash-hit movie that sees the world through the eyes of what Fortune Magazine dubbed “the toy of the century”: Legos.

One of the highest-grossing February releases in history, "The Lego Movie" is an animated family film with a cast chock full of celebrities voicing characters that range from original to true-to-the-box-set familiar:

“I don't know that we ever thought it was going to be this crazy popular but what we thought was, you know, it could be kind of fun,” said Miller, joining Piers Morgan on Thursday.

Friends since their college days at Dartmouth, Miller and Lord said they approached making "The Lego Movie" the same way they worked on former hits, including "21 Jump Street".

“We tried to do things that we think are fun and interesting. We try to find something interesting to say,” said Miller. “And we don't try to talk down to kids or to make it for this focused group or this group or not. We just think it for each other and just so happens that our sense of humor is so juvenile that kids can go like it too.”

"The Lego Movie" took hundreds of people four years to make and was, said Lord, “insanely difficult.” Lord and Miller worked with teams across the world to achieve the authentic feel of Lego pieces:

“It was really complicated,” Lord said. “The biggest trick was trying to digitally figure out how to make really tactile, homemade looking Lego bricks with scratches and dandruff and fingerprints and stuff like that, because we wanted it to feel like a movie that a kid made in his basement, a really expensive basement.”

Had the movie been made with actual Lego pieces, estimates place the total cost at millions of dollars worth of the plastic building bricks. But the mass success of the film may have less to do with computers, and more to do with comedy:

“We just try to make each other laugh,” Miller said.

For the next edition of "Piers Morgan Live," watch CNN every night at 9.

-

» Follow "Piers Morgan Live" on Twitter

» Follow "Piers Morgan Live" on Instagram