The new survey from the Kaiser Family Foundation finds there were 11 million newly insured adults as of mid-December. Many of the remaining uninsured say they didn’t seek coverage or considered it too expensive.

About 11 million adults had become newly insured under the Affordable Care Act by mid-December 2014, according to a new national survey of more than 10,000 adults by the Kaiser Family Foundation. Nearly half of the approximately 30 million adults who remained uninsured were eligible for assistance under the law, based on their survey responses, but many said that they had not sought coverage, the foundation reports. And among those who did seek coverage, many believed they had been found ineligible or considered the coverage offered too expensive.

The new survey report, Adults Who Remained Uninsured at the End of 2014, is the first in a series of analyses that will draw upon the findings of the comprehensive Kaiser survey, which focuses on low- and moderate-income adults and was conducted between Sept. 2 and Dec. 15, 2014.

Based on their answers to the new survey, 48 percent of the roughly 30 million adults remaining uninsured at the end of 2014 were eligible for assistance under the law, including 30 percent who were eligible for marketplace tax credits and 18 percent who were eligible for Medicaid. And yet they did not get coverage. Among the key reasons why, according to responses from the eligible-but-uninsured group:

Cost, or the perception of it, was a big barrier. Fifty-three percent of the uninsured who are eligible for help under the Affordable Care Act perceived the cost of health insurance in general as prohibitive, citing cost as the main reason they don’t have coverage.

Many did not explore the new coverage options and financial assistance available under the Affordable Care Act, perhaps reflecting a lack of awareness or perceptions about cost. A majority (59 percent) of the eligible but still uninsured say that they did not try to get health insurance from either their state marketplace, HealthCare.gov, or their state Medicaid agency in 2014.

Confusion about eligibility played a role. Among the uninsured who were eligible and who sought coverage, 37 percent say they were told they were ineligible for it. While it is possible that they were ineligible at the time they applied, it is likely that these people received incorrect information or misinterpreted information they were given.

“The findings show how important it is to come up with more effective strategies, in person, online and elsewhere, for educating people about their eligibility for coverage and financial assistance under the law,” said Rachel Garfield, a senior researcher for the foundation who is leading the survey project and is the lead author of the report.

Of the uninsured adults who are eligible for help under the Affordable Care Act, about half indicate that they plan to get health insurance from some source in 2015. The open enrollment period for coverage in the ACA marketplaces closes on Feb. 15, 2015 for most people.