Through two games, the Avalanche’s best line has probably been its fourth line.

“I have a lot of confidence in these guys, I’m telling you,” Avs coach Patrick Roy said of center John Mitchell and wingers Cody McLeod and Jack Skille. “Mitchy is playing really well with Cody and Jack.”

Mitchell has two goals and he and his hard-working wingers have often dominated when it comes to sustained offensive pressure. They have played more minutes than most fourth-liners because Roy is slowly introducing young third-line wingers Mikko Rantanen, an 18-year-old rookie, and Borna Rendulic, 23, who is in his second year in North America.

Mitchell scored the game-winning goal in Saturday night’s 6-3 victory over the visiting Dallas Stars. McLeod and Skille got the assists after producing a strong forecheck. The goal gave Colorado a 4-3 lead 8:11 into the third period and led to its first win.

“They were mucking it up behind the net and found a way to give it to me in the slot. We can score goals,” Mitchell said. “We have some big bodies and we like to get on the forecheck and hang on to the puck. I’m really happy with how the two wingers are playing with me.”

So is Roy, who has used them in key defensive situations. “I even matched them against (the Stars’) top line,” Roy said. “They’re playing so well. They’re physical. They finish their checks, blocked shots. They play smart hockey (and) don’t over-handle the puck and get it deep. Good game management for these guys.”

Mitchell is one of the few fourth-line forwards to see time on the power play and he and McLeod were used in the last minute of Thursday’s opener against Minnesota, when goalie Semyon Varlamov was pulled for an extra attacker.

Footnotes. Avalanche captain Gabe Landeskog, who has had surgery on each of his wrists after the last two seasons, had a career-high four points (two goals) on Saturday. His is the first Colorado player to have a four-point game since Paul Stastny on Dec. 16, 2013, against Dallas. … The Avs had Sunday off. They will practice Monday and Tuesday before concluding their three-game homestand Wednesday against the Boston Bruins, who are 0-2 entering Monday’s game against Tampa Bay. … Colorado’s 10 goals are their most through the first two games of the season. The previous high was nine in 2013-14. … The Avs’ 66.7 percent power play (4-of-6) leads the NHL.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or @mikechambers