Is school necessarily better than home for learning the ABCs?

A Head Start class in Woodbourne, N.Y., last year. (Photo: Tom Bushey, AP) Story Highlights Evidence from a national sample of 14,000 children suggests preschool suppresses social development.

Research on all types of day care shows aggression and tantrums escalate.

Do we really want lawmakers deciding how every toddler should prepare for school?

A woman in my moms group anxiously posed this question: "My son just turned 4. I don't want to send him to school yet, but everyone says preschool is really important. Am I making a mistake?"

It's easy to see why she's worried. Even the president of the United States has declared that preschool is one of the best investments we can make in a child's life. But is school necessarily better than home for learning the ABCs?

OUR VIEW: Expand preschool, not federal role

The push for preschool began in the 1960s. When an experiment showed that early intervention could help severely disadvantaged children, benefits were assumed for all. That was a mistake.

For preschool to benefit children, the new environment must be better than the home environment. Most American children are not needy, and leaving their homes can be a costly trade-off.

Evidence from a national sample of 14,000 children suggests preschool suppresses social development. Research on all types of day care shows aggression and tantrums escalate. Cognitive gains fade out.

Preschool has also failed children in poverty. A Department of Health and Human Services' report found that Head Start bombed on every measure studied, from cognition to social skills. Preschool for disadvantaged kids serves, at best, as a temporary salve.

As a foster mom, I work firsthand with children from families destroyed by drugs and abuse. The problems are vast, and real solutions are needed.

One answer is access to the best K-12 schools in the country through school choice. One inner-city program in Washington, D.C., increased high school graduation rates by 21%. Similar programs in New York and Florida have boosted college attendance. That's progress.

The world of early learning is diverse. One friend praises full-time preschool. Another uses language-immersion a few mornings a week. Still another home-schools. I don't know any families with exactly the same arrangements, which makes sense. No two families are the same. Do we really want lawmakers deciding how every toddler should prepare for school?

I replied to the mom in my group: "If you want to stay home, go for it! You know what's best for your family."

Darcy Olsen is CEO of the Goldwater Institute, a conservative policy group.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1lSikbI