Dr. Ron Paulus, CEO of the Mission Health System, talks about the challenges of leadership in tumultuous times at the Lead Through Change event Wednesday simulcast nationwide and globally from Biltmore Baptist Church. (Photo: Dale Neal / dneal@citizen-times.com)

What's changed in the four years since Dr. Ron Paulus took over the helm of Mission Health System?

"In 2014, more than 550 patients will go home that would have died in 2010," Paulus said. "That's a big change. That's more than a graph on the screen, that's a mother or father, sister or aunt who went home."

Paulus was part of a lineup of experts, tackling the dramatic changes underway in the health care industry at the Lead Through Change seminar Wednesday at Biltmore Baptist Church.

About 750 people signed up to hear the speakers in the mega-church's high-tech sanctuary, while a simulcast carried the event to 112 sites and an audience of thousands across the nation and worldwide, including China and Dubai.

Speakers included Tom Daschle, the former Democratic Senate Majority Leader, and Dr. William Frist, the former Republican Senate Majority Leader.

Change is threatening to many in an organization and hard to manage, Paulus admitted. While Mission has gained top national honors, the system has also seen reorganization and even announced layoffs.

Serious leaders can't afford to fall back on the adage "if it ain't broke, don't fix it," according to Colin Powell.

"That's the slogan of the complacent, the arrogant or the scared," Paulus quoted the former Secretary of State. That's only a mindset that hopes that today's realities will continue tomorrow in tidy, linear fashion, Paulus said.

The controversial Affordable Care Act is driving much of the changes underway in the industry. But love Obamacare, or hate it, speakers throughout the day agreed the law isn't likely to be repealed by a Republican-led Congress next year.

The American Medical Association, which actually supported the law even over objections of a vocal minority of its members, saw more benefits than downsides. "We knew that at least 18,000 people die each year without health care insurance. It was a moral imperative to expand that coverage," said Dr. Jeremy Lazarus, former president of the AMA.

Meanwhile, states like North Carolina which declined to expand the Medicare program are seeing adverse affects on hospitals like Mission, Paulus said.

David King, a former Buncombe County commissioner who attended the event, was impressed with the consensus of the speakers on the politics.

"There's no way they can repeal Obamacare, but they have to find a way to fix it. Change is inevitable, You can either try to hold it back or try to mold it going forward."

Leadership is hard in tumultuous times, said Bill Murdock, of Eblen Charities. We all have to deal with change, and none of us are immune, whether it's government, business or the medical industry. But we wanted people to realize they're not alone in this."

Murdock served as an adviser to the seminar, the first of its kind staged in Asheville Luminary Leadership Network. Murdock hopes to make it an annual event here.

At the event's conclusion, Murdock was shocked to be awarded the Mother Teresa Prize for Global Leadership and Peace.

Luminary Leadership officials also awarded the prize to best-selling motivational speaker John Maxwell

"What an honor for the work of Eblen Charities to be recognized with a global award," Murdock said afterward. "When I accepted it, I accepted on behalf of the people who work at Eblen and those who we serve, the people who are going to hungry and cold tonight. That's who it really belongs to."

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1qEoREM