Every now and then a freshman comes along that doesn't necessarily play like a freshman.

West Henderson guard Jaia Wilson fits that bill. Ask coach Robbie Lowrance or any of the West assistants about Wilson and the immediate response is a big smile stretching slowly across their cheeks.

“I see a kid that knows the game and wants to learn more,” Lowrance said.

Wilson's addition was big for the Lady Falcons after finding out just days before the season began that guard Shar'e Harrison had to transfer to A.C. Reynolds. Harrison is staring for Reynolds this season averaging 7.5 points per game.

“We were worried about filling that spot,” Lowrance said. “Jaia's done a great job doing that.”

Wilson has stepped into that role nicely. The freshman is averaging 13.6 points per game to lead the Lady Falcons in scoring.

Here season highs have been 25 against Madison, 22 against Owen and 19 against Brevard.

Wilson expected to have an immediate role with the Lady Falcons and she wanted to prove herself.

“I had to show them that I was capable of doing it,” Wilson said.

The guard, who's been playing basketball since she was 5 years old, understands that every game is different and often she has to “adapt.”

And while that is true, the core of basketball remains the same, she said. The scoring is nice, but everything starts on the other end.

“I have to make sure I'm playing defense,” she said.

So far this season, she's averaging 2.5 assists. That's a piece of the brutal West press that often disrupts opposing offenses. Taylor Houck is averaging 4.2 steals per game and Savannah Smith is chipping in 2.7 per game.

Wilson has been accepted by those older players, she said, and added that this team is solidly bonded.

She hopes that leads to success.

“I think if we play as a team, we will make it pretty far,” Wilson said.

As for Wilson, the big smiles on the Lowrance's face and the other coaches are understandable. They know what they on the floor and at this point it's just about growing, Lowrance said.

“We see her potential and we want to push her a little further each game,” the coach said.

That next opportunity for growth will be on the road at Franklin on Friday at 6:30 p.m.