Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

PORTLAND, Ore. (AP) — The competition on the pitch has yet to start, but the fight over World Cup consumers is already intense — and no more so than between the athletic companies that are jockeying for their once-every-four-years shot at the ever-growing worldwide soccer market.

The players, their boots and kits will be on display for billions across the globe over a monthlong window starting next week. Nike wants to make sure fans notice the swoosh. Adidas? Those three stripes. For Puma it’s that leaping cat.

“It’s the World Cup. It’s do or die. Win or go home,” said adidas merchandise manager Peter Hong, alluding to more than the on-field competition in Brazil.

The result is going to be an all-out blitz of advertising, social media, personalities and product that goes far beyond simply selling jerseys and cleats.

Nike is betting on its stable of stars and a good showing by Brazil. Adidas has the tradition, and they are the official World Cup sponsor through 2030. Puma wants you to remember the boots themselves, putting players on the pitch with different colors on each foot.

Nike is the world’s top athletic footwear, apparel and equipment company, but second-ranked adidas has always held tightly to the overall soccer market.

In recent years Oregon-based Nike has unabashedly challenged its German rival in the sector and hit nearly $2 billion in soccer-related sales last year. Adidas’ sales last year were estimated at about $2.4 billion, but the company is already experiencing a World Cup bump that the company hopes will push it to a record $2.8 billion.

Soccer has always been adidas’ baby: Founder Adi Dassler made the company’s first pair of soccer boots in 1925.

As World Cup sponsors, adidas has designed the ball for each one of the tournaments since 1970. This year’s multicolored edition is called Brazuca — which, according to adidas, has already well surpassed sales of the Jabulani ball from the last World Cup by 30 percent.

“This is where we put our stake in the ground and prove our domination in the market,” said Ernesto Bruce, director of soccer for adidas America.

Nike only entered the soccer market in 1994. The company has become increasingly adept at getting its name out there without being an official sponsor. Its latest campaign focuses on stars — most notably Cristiano Ronaldo — without ever mentioning the words “World Cup.”

“Although we’re not a sponsor of the World Cup itself, we connect where it matters — by partnering with clubs, federations, and elite and everyday players,” said Nike’s Dermott Clearly, global vice president and general manager for soccer. “Ten teams at the tournament will wear Nike on the pitch in Brazil, including the hosts, along with hundreds of the players who will wear Nike boots. We’re confident we will stand out on and off pitch better than any other brand.”