Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Lawmakers who oppose the expansion will be allowed to argue against it to a Maricopa County Superior Court judge.

AZ Talk: Our readers panel debates how Doug Ducey should handle something he opposes.

Doug Ducey (Photo: David Wallace/The Republic)

AZ Talk brings you a cross-section of opinion from your fellow Arizonans, young and old, male and female, working class and white collar.

LAST WEEK: What should be Ducey's priority?

THIS WEEK: Should Gov. Doug Ducey, though personally opposed, defend Medicaid expansion?

MORE: Ducey hires Medicaid critic

ROBB: Doug Ducey's Medicaid pickle

--------------------

Dave Wells (Photo: handout)

YES. Lest we forget, going backward on Medicaid will actually cost the state about $120 million more in fiscal 2016 than keeping current policy. Going backward means the state would forgo the federal match on adults under the poverty line who do not have dependent children. Plus, fewer people will have health insurance. Last I looked, the state was looking to close a spending gap, not make it wider. Medicaid expansion is the right choice for the budget, for saving lives and for helping the economy.

— Dave Wells, college faculty, Mesa

--------------------

Darell Tap (Photo: handout)

NO. Governor Ducey should not be forced to go against his platform stand against "Obamacare." He has inherited a huge deficit. Arizona's constitution requires lawmakers to pass a balanced budget, and Ducey's first budget must be presented on Jan. 16. He has a lot of hard choices to make. This is an overreach and an unacceptable expansion of government. He said, "People are not taxed too little; it is their government that is spending unwisely. Just raising taxes, you haven't solved anything." If he decides in favor of the expansion, I'm sure he's got his own plan.

— Darell Tapp, architectural representative and blogger, Gilbert

--------------------

Barry Kluger (Photo: The Republic)

YES. A Frenchman allegedly said, "I may not agree with what you say, but I will defend to the death your right to say it." As our elected governor, Doug Ducey must make decisions on what is best for the state, though they may go against his personal beliefs. A lot of tax dollars go to the federal government, and expanding Medicaid gets that money sent back to the state. This is a just a matter of good dollars and sense. Medicaid is a federal program with state oversight, and bringing those monies back home helps our health and our economy.

— Barry Kluger,ad agency executive, Scottsdale

--------------------

Mary Westheimer (Photo: handout)

ABSOLUTELY. If Governor Ducey is serious about serving all Arizona citizens, this is an easy decision, especially because it has only a beneficial impact on our dire economic situation. He can help our most needy without any financial cost. Even former Gov. Jan Brewer could see the benefits, and I applaud her and many legislators who took the high road in the initial fight. If Governor Ducey chooses instead to play to his conservative supporters, we will get an answer about whether he is truly committed to doing what is best for our state and citizens.

— Mary Westheimer, sculptor's assistant, Phoenix

--------------------

Greg Paske (Photo: handout )

DEFINITELY YES. Opponents of Medicaid expansion incorrectly believe that people are poor because they're lazy and irresponsible. In their fantasy world, there is no structural racism, and equal opportunity exists for everyone. In the real world, many honorable, hard-working citizens need assistance to survive. Even with full-time jobs they can't possibly pay their essential bills because they don't earn a living wage. Income inequality in this country already resembles 19th-century Russia, and it's only getting worse. Until America joins the rest of the world and implements a Canadian-style single-payer health-care system, a continuation of the Medicaid expansion is essential.

— Greg Paske, substitute teacher, Scottsdale

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1IBzK2q