Syracuse, N.Y. - Terry McAuliffe returns to Syracuse at least twice a year, for Mother's Day and for his mother Millie's birthday.

Today was no exception for the governor-elect of Virginia. He flew into Syracuse for a two-hour stop at Twin Trees Too restaurant to wish his mother a happy 92nd, see family and visit with friends he's known since kindergarten.

McAuliffe is a Democrat from Syracuse's West Side who has became a close friend of Bill and Hillary Clinton, a top party fundraiser, and a former leader of the national party. In January, he'll become governor of the country's 12th most populous state.

"I couldn't have predicted that," Millie McAuliffe said of her son's win earlier this month over Virginia's Republican Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli. "I really couldn't have. I think it's wonderful."

McAuliffe is the fourth child of Jack and Millie, who spent part of her celebratory day re-telling the story of how Terry, the youngest, was nearly lost at birth.

About six weeks before her due date, Millie was riding in the passenger seat of a car that stopped short to avoid an accident. She slammed into the dashboard but didn't think much of it until that evening. "And then, all of a sudden, I woke up to a great realization that something was happening," she said.

An ambulance was called, the trip to the hospital made, and a doctor who'd become more than grumpy at the end of a long day took over. "He was mean all evening," said Millie, who remembered the doctor telling her the baby would be born dead. Millie took the situation into her own hands and began praying to Mary.

After the birth, she took a look at her fourth child. "And I said, 'What a beautiful baby," she remembered, then paused a split-second to ready listeners for a punch line that many in the room could have delivered. "Too bad he's dead," she deadpanned. "And well, guess what? Terry cried.

"We always called him our miracle baby," she said. "From then on, he's been a miracle, in many ways."

McAuliffe, dressed in an orange button-down and blue blazer for his brief Syracuse homecoming, took over his mother's heartwarming press conference to talk briefly about Virginia politics, Obamacare, Hillary Clinton's aspirations and how to keep friends for five decades:

On how the rollout of Obamacare affected the final days of the campaign

Some pundits and pollsters have said McAuliffe's 2.5-percentage point win over Cuccinelli would have been larger without the troubled rollout of the Affordable Care Act. McAuliffe said his internal polling numbers stayed steady throughout the campaign season. "Our numbers did not move at all," he said of potential voters' reaction to the healthcare rollout. "I was consistently up since early summer, never was down. But it was the same margin, between 2 and 4 percent, McAuliffe said.

On convincing a Republican-led legislature to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act

Half the states, including Virginia, have not opted in to a part of the ACA that would expand eligibility for some uninsured through Medicaid, the government's healthcare program for the poor and disabled. In Virginia, it would mean 400,000 more people would get healthcare, McAuliffe says.

"All the last week and a half I've reached out to the leadership of the Republican Party, and, listen, there's got to be common ground," he said. "What's in the best interest of Virginians?"

Under the ACA, the federal government picks up the costs of these extra enrollees for three years. Understandably, McAuliffe said, some Republicans are worried about the costs in the outlying years. "We've got to make sure we're not affecting ourselves on the back side and taking on a financial burden that we can't handle," he said.

On Hillary Clinton and 2016

McAuliffe received congratulatory calls from the Clintons, President Barack Obama, Vice President Joe Biden and Republican Virginia Gov. Bob McDonnell on Election Night. He said he believes the former first lady and secretary of state has not decided whether she'll run for president in 2016.

"The honest answer is I don't think she knows," said McAuliffe. "And I don't think she has to make that decision for another year." McAuliffe said she's been clear that she wants to take some time off, and that's what she is doing. "Anyone who tells you she's running doesn't know what they're talking about. She doesn't know...I say, let her have a break. And she's earned it."

On keeping friends from kindergarten

About 50 years ago, McAuliffe was a student in Mrs. Hamilton's kindergarten class at J.T. Roberts Elementary School in Syracuse. So was John "Duke" Kinney, Leo Murray, Marty Salanger and Steve Snyder - who were all at Twin Trees on Sunday. All but Murray were able to take time off work to go down to Virginia in the campaign's final days to work phone banks and go door-to-door. Some of those same people held a fundraiser for McAuliffe in Syracuse last March.

"I think the key to it is you've got to stay in touch," the governor-elect said of keeping lifelong friends. "I call everybody on their birthdays. I'm well known for that....And like this. As soon as I said I'm coming up I put an email out to everybody. Spread the word. I'm coming in town. I make an active effort to stay in touch with folks. That's how you do it. And the five first folks who walked in this room today were friends from kindergarten, believe it or not."

Contact Teri Weaver at tweaver@syracuse.com, 315-470-2274 or on Twitter at @TeriKWeaver.