Hey Bob, put down the donut. My kid needs new soccer shoes.

Thousands of Kaiser Permanente employees in Colorado could benefit from cash bonuses up to $500 each by getting fit. The twist in the new health challenge is that it’s a group exercise: The top cash bonus gets handed out only when enough individual workers in a Kaiser region achieve the new fitness goals.

Kaiser’s unions across the nation pushed for the plan, arguing to the nonprofit health company’s managers that a group exercise was the best way to lower health care costs with massive improvements. On top of 5,000 eligible Kaiser employees in Colorado, the new bonus plan covers another 120,000 Kaiser workers from strongholds like California, Hawaii and elsewhere.

The bonuses come in three stages. Workers can get a $150 payout if 75 percent of them take a “total health assessment” by the end of 2014. The second bonus of $150 comes if 85 percent of the employees in that Kaiser region are up to date on their “biometric screenings,” which are measurements of important health factors like body mass index, cholesterol, blood pressure and smoking/nonsmoking status.

If that group of employees gets through those two “gates,” they have a shot at another $200 each for the toughest task: They must see improvements averaging 1.7 percent in the riskiest population by the end of 2014, and they must not get worse in any one category of measurement.

Translated through examples: The pact with company managers assumes that about 8,667 Kaiser employees nationally are smokers. A 1.7 percent reduction would require about 147 employees to quit. About a third of Kaiser employees, or 37,000, have high cholesterol, above 200. The pact would require about 631 employees nationwide to get below that 200 number. And so on, in the blood pressure and body mass categories.

Health insurance rewards and penalties have become more common as insurance companies and employers see value in improving the health of their employees and cutting sickness claims. Often, though, the rewards come in the form of a reduction in premium, or money put into a restricted health savings account. And they are usually aimed at individual effort. The Kaiser plan raises eyebrows for paying straight up cash directly to workers, and for putting the onus on the group to look out for each other and make change.

A spokesman for one of the unions key in negotiating the health pact said it’s not about yelling at Bob about his donut intake.

“We think the program creates positive change. We all want to get healthy together. My example can influence you, which can influence the person down the hall. It’s a positive reinforcement, not a negative one,” said Sean Wherley of SEIU-UnitedHealthcare Workers West. “We’re in this together, we’re not going to call out an individual on what they had for lunch.”

As for privacy concerns that often come up with health reward and bonus programs, Wherley said the great majority of Kaiser employees get their health care through Kaiser offices — logically. Their health information is already with doctors and nurses, in-house, and all the protections they have on medical records will remain. The measurements of group success will not single out results from any employees, but take an aggregate approach, he said.

“It’s not necessary for the employer to know that Bob Jones smokes or has high cholesterol; Bob Jones’ information is thrown into the aggregate, and from that they can see how did the overall workers of Colorado perform, not just Bob. So it removes the need for an individual supervisor making an individual decision about a bonus at the end of the year,” he said.

Union workers, Wherley said, see the overall effort to slow the growth in health costs as one way to help guarantee they keep important benefits in the future.