Terrorism is a crime whose principal goal is to incite fear in its victims, and then through that fear to change how people live their lives. It is as simple as that. To attribute any more to acts of terrorism is to ennoble the most common of criminals, to raise street thugs to the level of freedom-fighters.

Make no mistake about it, the dead among the bombs and bullets are collateral to the real goal: to leave the living terrified. That is why Sens. Cory Gardner and Michael Bennett as well as Gov. John Hickenlooper are wrong to oppose the transfer of Guantanamo Bay detainees to prisons in Colorado.

The existence of the detention facility at Guantanamo Bay is the most significant victory by extremist terrorism against the U.S. in the 15 years since Sept. 11, because the existence of such a prison flies in the face of some of America’s most precious values: the rule of law and the humanitarian treatment of the accused. Closing that facility and transferring those who remain there to prisons inside the United States goes a long way toward erasing that defeat.

Colorado has an opportunity to be part of that victory, and our leaders should not shrink from it.

Two prisons in Fremont County — the Florence Correctional Center and Colorado State Penitentiary II — have been reviewed by the Pentagon as possible transfer locations. Current inmates of Fremont County include those serving sentences in connection with terrorism. Among them are Zacarias Moussaoui (serving six life sentences for his role in planning Sept. 11); Dzhokhar Tsarnaev (the Boston Marathon bomber); and four conspirators from the 1994 bombing of the World Trade Center.

Of course, that doesn’t mean some of the other inmates there are necessarily people you would like to have to dinner. The leaders of the Mexican Mafia and Aryan Brotherhood would seem to be less than ideal neighbors.

So what newly created risk is being referenced when Hickenlooper tells reporters that “the people are fairly united — they don’t want to take that risk”? Clearly the people of Fremont County and Colorado are already living in reasonably close quarters with very dangerous men. And yet this is tolerated, because we trust the ability of the prison to keep them inside and, one would hope, believe firmly enough in the rule of law to suppose that even the most dangerous of criminals can be detained humanely within our borders. (There is also the matter of the huge economic benefits of the prisons, which should not go unmentioned.)

With these existing realties in mind, the only real explanation for rejecting new inmates from that small American outpost in Cuba is that the often-mentioned risk is nothing more than unfounded fear, the very fear that those who plot political attacks against civilians are aiming to create.

Courage is a clinging to the right in the face of fear, founded or unfounded. Cowardice is the abandonment of principle at any hint of risk. Leadership is choosing courage every time. When the people of Colorado allow fear to supersede a belief in the rule of law, we become cowards. When our highest statewide elected officials choose to cater to the demands of irrational fear, they cease to be leaders.

We have an opportunity to send a message to anyone who would use violence to make us afraid that they cannot succeed. We can show the world who we are and what we believe. Shame on anymore for missing that golden opportunity.

Katherine Kelaidis is a writer and academic from Aurora.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.