The candidates for state Supreme Court are largely mum about their views on key cases, but they have given clear signs showing incumbent Rebecca Bradley (left) lines up with conservatives and challenger JoAnne Kloppenburg with liberals. Credit: Michael McLoone / for the Journal Sentinel

SHARE Election 2016

Visit our election section for complete coverage of the 2016 spring and fall local, state and national elections.

By of the

Madison — The candidates for state Supreme Court are largely mum about their views on key cases, but they have given clear signs showing incumbent Rebecca Bradley lines up with conservatives and challenger JoAnne Kloppenburg with liberals.

Bradley has repeatedly praised recently deceased conservative U.S. Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia and his commitment to interpreting constitutional provisions as they were intended by the founders.

Kloppenburg has praised liberal U.S. Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, criticized Scalia's approach in at least one case and questioned the state high court's ruling last year upholding Wisconsin's voter ID law.

Republicans have embraced Bradley and Democrats Kloppenburg as the April 5 election heats up. The one public poll, from last month, has shown an extremely close race with nearly a quarter of voters undecided.

GOP Gov. Scott Walker appointed Bradley to the high court in the fall after Justice N. Patrick Crooks died. A judge on the Madison-based District 4 Court of Appeals, Kloppenburg is making her second run for the state Supreme Court, after losing to conservative Justice David Prosser in 2011.

The winner will get a 10-year term on the court.

A victory by Bradley would maintain conservatives' strong control of the court. A win by Kloppenburg would narrow the conservatives' majority to 4-3, giving liberals a chance to claim victories in cases where they could get one of the conservatives to side with them.

Bradley and Kloppenburg have offered contrasting approaches to interpreting laws. Bradley has emphasized the importance of setting aside personal viewpoints and reading the law as written.

"I think that it can be tempting for some judges and justices to introduce their personal feelings and their life experiences into their judicial decision making....I do not and I will never do that," Bradley said in a March 18 debate.

Kloppenburg said she has been fair, impartial and committed to applying the law to the facts of a case, but added the personal experiences of judges inform how they do their work.

"Your life experiences enable you to hear more clearly what the parties are trying to tell you and to ensure that you are approaching every case with an open mind," she said during that debate. "And my life experiences have shown the people of Wisconsin that I will stand up to partisan politics and special interests and make sure they have no place on our court."

Another sign of their views comes from the U.S. Supreme Court justices they say they are aligned with.

At a Tuesday forum at the Dane County Bar Association, Kloppenburg said she admires Ginsburg and U.S. Supreme Court Justice Sonia Sotomayor "because they are trailblazers for women who want to follow in their footsteps as lawyers and as judges and because they do appear to share my view of the Constitution as protecting individual rights and promoting a more equal society."

At the March 18 debate, Bradley said Kloppenburg's admiration for those two justices shows she has a philosophy "that will allow her to introduce her personal policy preferences and the type of outcome that she wants to achieve into her judicial decision making."

Kloppenburg disputed that, noting Bradley has not cited any specific case that shows her overstepping her role as a judge.

Bradley has said Scalia is the justice she is most in line with.

She noted Scalia had signed onto a free-speech case allowing flag burning, even though he personally opposed that sort of political protest.

In an interview with WisPolitics.com in October, Bradley named two other conservative U.S. Supreme Court justices as those she admired — Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito. But she did not name Chief Justice John Roberts, who has frustrated conservatives by voting to uphold key provisions of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare.

In many instances, the two candidates have declined to state outright what they believe about specific cases, but have signaled their views:

Voter ID. Republicans in 2011 approved a law requiring voters to show photo ID at the polls, but the measure was stalled for years by court rulings. The state Supreme Court in 2014 issued a pair of decisions that upheld the law, which it tweaked to make sure no one has to pay to get a state-issued ID card.

The law took effect after the U.S. Supreme Court declined to review challenges in a separate pair of cases.

The candidates have declined to say if they agree with those rulings, but Kloppenburg at the March 18 debate said by tweaking the voter ID law the state Supreme Court had engaged in "legislating from the bench instead of sending it back to the Legislature to do their job."

Gay marriage. The candidates have been mostly mum on whether they supported last year's U.S. Supreme Court decision finding a constitutional right for same-sex couples to marry, but Kloppenburg has said it was an "exhilarating week" when the decision was handed down.

Kloppenburg has performed gay marriages. Bradley has not, but has said she would if asked.

Bradley has taken criticism for columns she wrote as a college student 24 years ago calling gays "queers" and AIDS patients "degenerates" who had chosen to kill themselves. She has said her views changed soon afterward and apologized for those writings.

Guns. In August, Kloppenburg and two other appeals judges unanimously upheld a rule by the Madison Transit and Parking Commission banning weapons on its buses.

Gun rights group Wisconsin Carry Inc. sued over the rule, arguing it was invalid because the state's 2011 concealed weapons law barred local ordinances and resolutions restricting weapons. Kloppenburg and her colleagues found the ban on local regulations applied to municipalities, but not separate government entities such as transit commissions.

The case is now before the state Supreme Court.

Best and worst cases. In her application for her judicial appointment, Bradley wrote that one of the most important U.S. Supreme Court decisions in recent decades was Good News Club vs. Milford Central School, a 6-3 ruling written by Thomas in 2001 that found a Christian club could use school facilities after hours.

Asked to cite one of the worst high court rulings in recent years in her application, Bradley chose Kelo vs. New London. That 5-4 decision, written by liberal Justice John Paul Stevens, found a city in Connecticut could force property owners to sell their real estate in an effort to help boost the economy through private development.

Bradley called the 2005 decision an "abusive attack on a constitutional right."

Asked what she thought of those two cases, Kloppenburg said in a statement: "I'm not going to comment on the cases Rebecca Bradley chose as the best and worst. She can explain why she choose them."

As for what she considers some of the best decisions, Kloppenburg mentioned the week last year when the U.S. Supreme Court issued decisions allowing same-sex marriage, upholding the Affordable Care Act and keeping in place a fair housing law.

She named as one of the worst a 5-4 decision Roberts wrote in 2013 that invalidated key portions of the Voting Rights Act. That ruling ended a requirement that states with histories of racial discrimination get approval from the federal government before changing their voting laws.