Bruce Siegel, Margaret Murray, and Dan Hawkins

April 14, 2015

The Medicaid Program is the foundation of the health care safety net in the US. As the largest health insurance program in the country, it provides coverage for critical services to more than 70 million people. With total expenditures of over $430 billion in fiscal year 2012, it is also a key player in our nation’s economy. Yet, despite its vital importance and nearly 50 years in existence, there is currently no comprehensive, standardized framework for measuring the quality of care provided to Medicaid patients.

The Medicaid Program is unique in that it is federally mandated and partially funded by the federal government, but it is implemented and designed on a state-by-state basis. Without a standardized measurement framework, states have few ways to compare their program with others. This lack of comparison undermines the state-level innovation that is a strength of the Medicaid structure and prevents states from sharing best practices with each other. It also limits federal and state policymakers’ understanding of their investment in the Medicaid Program and ways it can be strengthened.

As the co-chairs of The Partnership for Medicaid—a nonpartisan, nationwide coalition representing doctors, health care providers, safety net health plans, counties, and labor—we are proposing just such a framework. It will allow for true state-to-state comparisons, enable states to learn from each other, and ultimately, provide policymakers the tools to improve quality for Medicaid recipients and reduce costs for taxpayers, states, and the federal government. It will also provide a powerful information source for health services researchers. And finally, the very act of measuring and publicly reporting quality information often leads to quality improvement. This is evident in the fact that providers and health plans currently use the data they do collect to make improvements in their own operations.

We are familiar with the substantial amount of quality reporting already occurring in health care (we’ve compiled an overview of the current Medicaid quality reporting requirements). And we know that these efforts are incredibly important, but they are often state- or provider-based and are not focused solely on Medicaid.

This is not a new challenge: Congress took the first steps in recognizing the lack of consistency and infrastructure in Medicaid quality measurement and mandated the development of a core set of pediatric measures in the Children’s Health Insurance Program Reauthorization Act in 2009. As part of the Affordable Care Act, Congress then established the Medicaid Quality Measurement Program, which includes a comparable set of measures for adult health care.

While these measure sets are a strong foundation, state reporting is voluntary. This has led to great variability in the extent of state reporting. Additionally, quality measurement is often not uniform across all regions, populations, delivery systems, or care settings, resulting in uncoordinated and non-comparable results. Furthermore, existing quality measures are not necessarily valid for all subpopulations of Medicaid beneficiaries or all settings in which these beneficiaries receive care. Ultimately, the existing quality measurement patchwork does not adequately account for the rich diversity within the Medicaid Program.

A New Framework For Medicaid Quality Reporting

Building on current Medicaid quality measurement efforts, The Partnership proposes a four-step quality reporting framework:

Develop a succinct, common reporting set of quality measures. Reporting would be phased in, beginning with a limited number of measures to guarantee reporting is manageable for providers, plans, and states.

Complete the federal reporting infrastructure, much of which the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) has already developed.

Implement federal incentives for states to report.

Require mandatory, meaningful reporting by all states soon thereafter.

Principles For Developing The Reporting Set

While this proposal does not prescribe particular quality measures to be used in the reporting set, it does outline a number of principles that should guide how specific measures are chosen and designed:

Measures selected for the reporting set should focus on three areas: quality of care, access to care, and patient experience. We recognize that the initial reporting set will fall short of this ambitious, long-term goal.

Measures should ultimately provide a full picture of quality for all Medicaid recipients, recognizing the need to address the various sub-populations served by the program, delivery systems, and care settings.

Measures should be appropriately risk adjusted to account for both socio-demographic and clinical factors specific to the Medicaid population (for example, the transportation and language barriers that many low-income individuals face).

There should be an appropriate balance between measurement and the cost and burden of measurement and reporting on providers and states. This balance can be achieved by including stakeholder feedback and input at all stages of program development and implementation.

The Partnership also recommends that a Medicaid quality measurement committee be established to determine the appropriate number and nature of the measures to be included. This committee, perhaps under the aegis of the National Quality Forum, should include all relevant stakeholders, including providers, patient advocates, researchers, Medicaid managed care plans, states, and CMS.

Cost

While the Partnership believes that investing in such a program will have a high return on investment, it also recognizes the upfront costs associated with this work. The Partnership therefore calls for time- and scope-limited full federal financing to ensure states, plans, and providers have the start-up resources necessary to report required data. This would be most efficiently accomplished through a 100 percent federal medical assistance percentage (FMAP) for the new state-level tasks. Over time, funding could return to the state’s standard FMAP or be made eligible for the 75 percent match rate currently available for activities such as ongoing systems and skilled medical professional work.

Next Steps

The Partnership for Medicaid has already met with more than 100 stakeholders, including federal and state government officials and associations, congressional staff, disability advocates, quality measurement experts, academic researchers, providers, and health plans to understand how to best design the program so that it achieves its goals without overtaxing valuable resources at the state and provider levels. And we will continue to have these conversations.

We believe that both legislative and agency-level action will be necessary to make a comprehensive, standardized, and mandatory Medicaid quality reporting program a reality. And we are in the process of drafting a legislative framework for this proposal. We look forward to continuing to work with leaders in Congress and key stakeholders to develop and implement this national quality reporting program.