Hillary Rodham Clinton’s nomination for the Oval Office has championed the support of prostitutes at Moonlite Bunny Ranch. This world-famous brothel, located in Carson City, Nevada, is owned by Dennis Hof. These “Bunnies” recently started a new campaign in support of Clinton titled, Hookers For Hillary.

Following Clinton’s formal announcement, the women joined together to declare their support for their candidate of choice. As most do, Clinton kicked off her campaign in the heartland. She met with a small group of Iowan business owners to discuss her intentions for America’s health-care policy. The former first lady said she wanted to be a champion for everyday Americans. The Hookers For Hillary made a decision Clinton would be their champion.

After listening to the challenges and concerns of the Iowans, with particular regard to health care, Clinton said she would continue efforts to improve health care and consider having insurance companies compete across state lines. One Hookers for Hillary supporter and prostitute, Krissy Summers, said they are grateful for the Affordable Care Act. This initiative, for the first time ever has afforded over 500 people in her line of work which includes independent contractors, or legalized prostitutes as some call them, to even acquire health care. She added:

Whether people agree with legal prostitution or not, it is not right to take health care away from us. We pay taxes too.

Hof supports the endorsement from his Bunnies and promises that at least it will get more people to join the discussion about the upcoming election. The Bunny Ranch owner said people should expect to see crazy things such as the Bunnies showing up at rallies in bikinis and really push the issue. The Hookers for Hillary campaign plans to stir rallies up in order to get the attention of the people.

Air Force Amy, another of the “Bunnies for Hillary,” said it really is the woman behind the man who makes him, so they intend to just cut out the middle man and get a woman into office. She added:

The girls have great respect for any woman who can take powerful men from oppressive cultures and make them bend to her will.

Most were not surprised when Clinton announced her bid for the 2016 United States presidency, but many were surprised at her earliest supporters. The Hookers have drafted a four-point platform explaining their endorsement for their newly established initiative:

Health Care Reform: As part of for President Bill Clinton’s administration, long before President Obama was able to sign it into law, Hillary envisioned health care reform. For the first time ever, the Affordable Health Care Act made health insurance available for the independent contractors who are employed by Hof. The Bunnies want to protect the health coverage they now have and avoid jeopardizing it with any of Clinton’s opponents.

Foreign Policy: The Hookers for Hillary believe she gained invaluable experience as Secretary of State negotiating with foreign leaders. They entertain customers from around the world, so they understand the benefit of being able to communicate effectively through a language barrier. The Bunnies are also confident that Clinton, who has her eye on the international landscape, would make sure her detail “buys American” and therefore avoid the risk of duplicating the Secret Service’s Colombian prostitution scandal.

Support for Agencies Seeking to Protect the Public’s Health: Hookers for Hillary believe a successful example of effective government regulation is Nevada’s mandatory testing of legal prostitutes for STDs. The Bunnies applaud Clinton’s recognition of the fact that responsible government oversight is a key to protecting the public’s health from widespread disease.

Prevention of a return to supply side economics: The most prosperous time in the history of the Bunny Ranch occurred during Bill Clinton’s presidency where he supported the theory that economies are built from the bottom upward. The Bunnies recognize that this is indeed that way to experience thriving economies and is where the vast majority of their clients originate. To return to the trickle-down theory of economics would serve as an exclusion of the majority of hard-working clients of the Bunny Ranch. They believe this would negatively affect client’s ability to come and support their favorite Bunny.

Presidential hopeful Hillary Rodham Clinton has gained support from the Hookers for Hillary Campaign. Their goal is to stir up the conversation enough to make the campaign a success. The Bunnies anticipate a lot of prostitution-bashing comments from the many Clinton supporters and those who oppose her candidacy.

by Cherese Jackson (Virginia)

Sources:

Daily Beast

Hookers For Hillary

People

Photo Credits:

Top Image Courtesy of Steve Jurvetson – Creativecommons Flickr License

Featured Image Courtesy of Hookers for Hillary

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr