Some of the hottest jobs in the nation this year aren’t your typical “job of the future.”

Sure, there’s a high demand for nurses as baby boomers age and increasingly require medical assistance, as well as for software developers as the tech boom continues.

Related: Jobs Report Confirms Economy Is on the Mend

But in some major local markets, jobs that are in high demand are more surprising, according to a report from ZipRecruiter released Monday. Here are a few:

Accountant/Financial Analyst: Although the accounting industry went through a significant round of layoffs after the financial crisis, accounting firms are hiring again. In Chicago and in Dallas, the hottest job for the first part of the year was accountant/financial analyst, a job that has a 2.8 percent projected growth rate in the Windy City and 4.3 percent in Dallas for the next six months. Demand for accountants is also expected to rise in Atlanta (5.2 percent), Baltimore (2.7 percent), St. Louis (2.5 percent), Houston (1.3 percent), Washington, D.C. (0.7 percent) and Philadelphia (0.2 percent).





Although the accounting industry went through a significant round of layoffs after the financial crisis, accounting firms are hiring again. In Chicago and in Dallas, the hottest job for the first part of the year was accountant/financial analyst, a job that has a 2.8 percent projected growth rate in the Windy City and 4.3 percent in Dallas for the next six months. Demand for accountants is also expected to rise in Atlanta (5.2 percent), Baltimore (2.7 percent), St. Louis (2.5 percent), Houston (1.3 percent), Washington, D.C. (0.7 percent) and Philadelphia (0.2 percent). Restaurant Manager: The Department of Labor barely sees growth in this field for the next eight years – but in Miami, at least, restaurant manager is the hottest job so far this year, with a projected growth rate of 7.8 percent for the rest of 2014. Restaurant manager also has high growth potential in New York (5.7 percent), Boston (3.6 percent) and Dallas (3.2 percent).





The Department of Labor barely sees growth in this field for the next eight years – but in Miami, at least, restaurant manager is the hottest job so far this year, with a projected growth rate of 7.8 percent for the rest of 2014. Restaurant manager also has high growth potential in New York (5.7 percent), Boston (3.6 percent) and Dallas (3.2 percent). Machinist: Although the importance of manufacturing to the economy is declining in the U.S., machinist is the top job in the Minneapolis market; demand for machinists is projected to grow 3 percent there. Other markets where this demand will supposedly grow include Seattle (6.5 percent) and Tampa (1.5 percent).





Although the importance of manufacturing to the economy is declining in the U.S., machinist is the top job in the Minneapolis market; demand for machinists is projected to grow 3 percent there. Other markets where this demand will supposedly grow include Seattle (6.5 percent) and Tampa (1.5 percent). Customer Service Representative: If you think customer service is now handled by computers or workers in India – think again. While it isn’t yet the top job in any major U.S. market, demand for customer service rep is expected to rise throughout the country: in New York (4.2 percent), Chicago (3.8 percent), Los Angeles (1.9 percent), Houston (1.9 percent), Miami (1.7 percent), Detroit (0.6 percent) and Philadelphia (0.3 percent).





If you think customer service is now handled by computers or workers in India – think again. While it isn’t yet the top job in any major U.S. market, demand for customer service rep is expected to rise throughout the country: in New York (4.2 percent), Chicago (3.8 percent), Los Angeles (1.9 percent), Houston (1.9 percent), Miami (1.7 percent), Detroit (0.6 percent) and Philadelphia (0.3 percent). Account Executive: This hot job also has growth prospects across the country for the next six months: Chicago (4.2 percent), Baltimore (3.4 percent), Boston (3.2 percent), Miami (2.2 percent), St. Louis (2.2 percent), Houston (0.8 percent) and Philadelphia (0.3 percent).





Related: Jobs Market Reaches Another Meaningless Milestone

ZipRecruiter studied job postings at more than 50 job networks to find the hottest jobs so far this year and their rate of growth for the rest of the year.

Top Reads from The Fiscal Times: