Our 159,000 combined followers on Twitter ( click here for that ) and on Facebook ( then click here to subscribe to that )

know that on weekday afternoons we regularly share a selection of that

evening’s late-night jokes before broadcast. Usually, we publish a

collection of these and other jokes early each week.

Fallon: A California woman gave birth to a 15-pound baby. The Mom is resting comfortably. The baby drove himself home.

Fallon: More than half of all ObamaCare enrollees are over age 45. No big deal, until you realize they were 25 when they first tried to log onto the website.

Letterman: All these snowstorms make driving nightmarish. So be very careful while texting.

Fallon: Michelle Obama’s celebrity birthday party went all the way until 2 a.m. Which explains why the next day Barack expanded ObamaCare to include Gatorade and Tylenol.

Leno: Obama is getting tough on the NSA scandal. Says the secret agency will never be used to suppress critics or dissenters. He said he has the IRS for that job.

Conan: Justin Bieber was arrested in Florida for DUI. Police reports said Bieber’s blood contained large amounts of alcohol, pot and Flintstone’s Chewables.

Leno: Justin Bieber asked his arresting officer if he knew who he was? The cop said, “Miley Cyrus?”

Leno: TMZ is reporting that Justin Bieber dropped $75,000 at a strip club. That’s still less than he spent on eggs last week.

Letterman: Bad news for Bronco fans. Peyton Manning will not be playing in the Super Bowl this weekend. He’s got to film a Papa John’s commercial

Fallon: Kanye West and Kim Kardashian may marry at Versailles Palace. They may want to read up on what happened to the last couple who lived there.

Conan: Have you seen that viral photo from the Sochi Olympics showing a bathroom stall with two toilets. Those two-man luge teams do everything together.

Leno: These snowstorms are so bad across the country that Southwest pilots can’t even find the wrong airport to land.

Leno: Anthony Weiner reportedly makes about $400,000 a year as a political consultant. How bad must you be doing to have to ask this guy for advice?

Letterman: New data says 70% of Americans believe we should not sacrifice privacy for security. That’s according to numbers intercepted by the NSA.

Conan: Sesame Street’s Cookie Monster taped a segment urging children to eat healthy. The segment ends with Cookie Monster looking off camera nervously and asking, “NOW you let Cookie Monster’s wife and kids go?”

Fallon: Big business news: Reports that AOL and Yahoo might merge. They’ve been trying to connect for years, but someone at AOL was always on the phone.

RELATED:

Say what? Now, Obama trash-talks al Qaida

Obama loses many U.S. allies, but ties with Canada too close to fail

Obama’s addiction to speeches: The more he talks, the less we listen