Technician James Horsfall, left, and engineer Austin Hsiao work on a project at Twist Bioscience in San Francisco, Calif., on Friday, June 19, 2015. Twist receives emails from scientists seeking of a specific genetic sequence. Then they make the gene, using silicon engineering and chemical techniques, and mail it back. (JOHN GREEN)

Mother Nature has always been life's master architect, working off genetic blueprints that are fine-tuned from one generation to the next.

Until now.

Scientists increasingly are designing life from scratch, using inexpensive, fast and accurate tools to create and assemble strands of DNA like tinkertoys -- and instructing cells to do things that nature never imagined.

In industrial clusters in the Bay Area, La Jolla and Boston, the competitive gene-building field is doing for biology what Johannes Gutenberg did for printing -- turning what was once a laborious and uneven artisan effort into affordable and accurate mass production. With the potential to create an industry that could lead to products worth hundreds of billions of dollars, the fast-moving field is not only prompting investor funding but also sparking calls for oversight.

The goal is to build improved medicines, better biofuels and new chemicals -- and perhaps someday splice new genes into sick people, fixing inherited diseases. But the cutting-edge technique also could be used to build dangerous pathogens for warfare.

"We're accelerating genetics," said biochemist Emily Leproust, cofounder and CEO of Twist Bioscience, a 2-year-old San Francisco company with $82 million in venture-capital funding. The firm aims to use new silicon-chip-based gene-building tools to build DNA 100 times more efficiently than existing methods.

"The longer and less expensive the DNA you can make, the more complex the outcome can be," she said.

Advertisement

The advancements in gene synthesis "create both exciting and alarming possibilities," said Eleonore Pauwels, a scholar with the Washington, D.C.-based Woodrow Wilson Center's Synthetic Biology Project, created to foster informed public policy regarding the fledgling field.

For instance, she said, gene building could create personalized therapies -- say, for example, a tailor-made virus that attacks specific cancers. But it also could manufacture dangerous germs or microbes that don't exist in nature, she added.

Organic chemist Emily Leproust, PhD, is the chief executive officer of Twist Bioscience. Since its founding two years ago, Twist has raised a total of $82.1 million. The company mass produces synthetic DNA using silicon wafer manufacturing techniques. Leproust was photographed at Twist in San Francisco, Calif., on Friday, June 19, 2015. (JOHN GREEN)

Today, the smallpox virus is safely locked up in a high-security lab. But what if an unscrupulous laboratory obtains its genetic sequence and sends a vial of the genetic material to anyone who will pay for it?

"This growing ability to engineer life at the molecular level carries with it the risk of allowing for the development of new biological weapons," Pauwels said.

Gene synthesis is possible because of this simple fact: Life is just code.

Four molecules -- each called a "base," the most irreducible unit of life, represented by the letters A (adenine), T (thymine), G (guanine) and C (cytosine) -- write the words for the dictionary of creation.

Four chemicals, called bases, are the essential building blocks of life, photographed here at Twist in San Francisco, Calif., on Friday, June 19, 2015. They are fed into a machine, called a DNA synthesizer, which dispenses fragments of genetic material onto a tiny silicon chip, which are stitched together into genes. Then these synthetic genes are inserted into cells and used to build products never found in nature. (John Green/Bay Area News Group) ( JOHN GREEN )

The chemical components of genes and their arrangement dictates whether you spell out the makings of a lowly flea or the first violinist for the Vienna Symphony Orchestra.

While the promise of "gene editing" has received a lot of attention of late, gene building could be a potentially more efficient technology, said Hank Greely, director of Stanford University's Center for Law and the Biosciences.

"Instead of starting with the sequence of a chromosome and slowly making 100 changes in it," he said, "you make a whole new chromosome with the changes you want."

The chemistry for gene synthesis was perfected in 1982, but the field wasn't launched until 1999 with engineering innovations by the companies Blue Heron of Washington state and GeneArt of New York. Since then, the pace of development has accelerated rapidly.

Fifteen years ago, a "letter" cost about $10, according to Robert Carlson of Seattle-based Bioeconomy Capital. At that price, a 3,000-letter-long gene would have cost more than a luxury car.

Traditional gene-building techniques were reminiscent of the old electronics approach to building circuits -- wiring together transistors one by one.

But advances over the past decade in the miniaturization of fluids, automation and silicon-based technologies have increased efficiency. Just as Fairchild Semiconductor changed chip technology by layering and etching metals within silicon wafers, gene engineers are learning to build millions of DNA fragments at one time using high-density silicon chips.

Costs have plummeted to 15 to 20 cents per letter. And companies such as Twist Bioscience and Boston's Gen9, vying for market share, soon will drive it down to a penny or two.

This makes it possible to inexpensively string together a gene -- or combination of genes -- that are millions of letters long. And gene building that once took weeks now takes days. Furthermore, the biological code is more accurate, with far fewer typos.

"It's no longer Rube Goldberg-type construction," said Sean Stevens of Synthetic Genomics in La Jolla, who is leading a project to alter the genes of pigs so that they can be used to grow human organs for transplant.

"We have locked down the commercial side -- with size, precision and control -- and now it is time to do something with it," he said.

Already, there are startling innovations. In 2010, legendary geneticist and entrepreneur J. Craig Venter synthesized a 580,076-letter genetic blueprint, then inserted it into a living cell, where it reproduced. In 2014, New York University's Jef Boeke built a yeast chromosome that was 273,871 letters long, then put it into a living yeast.

Amyris, a synthetic biology company in Emeryville, has inserted genes into bacteria to create a potent anti-malarial drug. And the Emeryville startup Industrial Microbes plans to engineer microbes to convert natural gas into industrial chemicals.

What other applications are possible?

"Gene synthesis facilitates how we learn and apply lessons from the natural world to improve our own," said Nancy J. Kelley, the founding executive director of the New York Genome Center.

For example, she said, researchers are trying to design genes that could create new fabrics that are stronger than steel but softer than the finest wool; create renewable fuels that dramatically reduce greenhouse gas emissions; and produce meat and milk that don't require animals.

It is even possible to dream of the day when doctors can save lives by replacing a deadly defect in a single gene, or suite of genes.

We're still 10 to 20 years away from building, from scratch, the full chromosomes of organisms more complicated than microbes, said Stanford's Greely.

Even more distant is the prospect of writing and building the entire human genome, made up of billions of letters.

Meanwhile, large societal questions loom. Who will fund, control and coordinate the research and its applications? Might synthetic creatures escape into the wild, wreaking environmental havoc? Could our enemies create and spread deadly diseases?

"We are putting the cart before the horse -- gene synthesis still needs to be greatly vetted before anything comes to the market," said Dana Perls of Berkeley-based Friends of the Earth. "There is so much we don't know. Before we rubber-stamp this as sustainable, natural and helpful, we need information and national regulations. The question is not, 'Can we do this?' but, 'Should we do this?' "

The field now essentially is self-regulated, with companies screening each client's mail-in order of gene synthesis for biosafety. But Congress is seeking to catch up. Introduced this session by Rep. Eddie Bernice Johnson, D-Texas, H.R. 591, the bipartisan Engineering Biology Research and Development Act of 2015, would establish a new national program to advance and oversee synthetic biology.

"Just because we are able to personalize DNA at will," the Woodrow Wilson Center's Pauwels said, "does not necessarily mean we know how to live with this power."

Contact Lisa M. Krieger at 650-492-4098. Follow her at Twitter.com/LisaMKrieger.