Ducks, geese and other migratory birds are the world’s great travellers, but until John Thomas ‘Jack’ Miner began capturing and banding birds little was know about their habits.

Origination of 6,000 duck and goose bands recovered in Tennessee. (Photo: Ducks Unlimited data ) Story Highlights Jack Miner turned love of hunting into protecting migratory birds.

Banded birds with biblican scripture and fostered a conservation movement.

Illiterate until he was 33, began a successful author and speaker

On April 10, 1865, the news began spreading about Gen. Robert E. Lee’s surrender at Appomattox Courthouse, Va., the day before. In Dover Center, Ohio, the Miner family was more concerned about their newest and fifth addition, a son, John Thomas.

Though he never received a formal education, and was illiterate until he was 33, Jack Miner launched one of North America’s most comprehensive and successful conservation efforts when he began capturing, banding and releasing wild ducks and geese to track and understand their habits.

Miner’s family moved to Kingsfield, Ontario, in Canada, where they were offered a free homestead; the farming was poor because of the heavy clay soil but the family improvised by farming the clay and starting a tile and brick company.

To supplement the family income, Jack hunted, trapped and became an expert on the habits of local wildlife.

Unlike many hunters of his era, Miner began to find ways to conserve, manage and enhance the wildlife he hunted. His first conservation efforts focused on the bobwhite quail on the family farm; he built brush shelters to help the small birds survive winters, and planted areas specifically to supplement their feed.

To take hunting pressure off the “delicate” bobwhite, Miner began raising Ring-necked pheasant.

The clay harvesting created several ponds on the farm, which began attracting Canada geese during the spring. Miner had found another bird to capture his attention.

In 1904, he expanded one of his ponds, and stocked it with seven geese whose wings he had clipped in hopes of attracting more to his land. Within four years, he had an established population.

In August 1909, Miner built a duck trap; he began banding, affixing a small aluminum band around a bird’s lower leg, with his name, address, a unique number, and a biblical inscription. A hunter in Anderson, S.C., wrote in December than he had recovered the band. It was the first complete record of a migratory bird.

Miner was hooked. He expanded the number of ponds and converted his homestead into a bird sanctuary. The former illiterate began writing about his efforts and making extensive lecture tours to educate hunters and the burgeoning conservation movement.

He kept working on his duck trap and began successfully trapping and banding geese in 1915.

The inclusion of scripture on the bands proved to be a catalyst for hunters, poachers and law officers to return tags.

By 1916, the returned tags began revealing the migration patterns of ducks and geese, both north to the nesting grounds, along the eastern shore of James Bay, Hudson Bay, and as far away as Baffin Island; and south to winter homes in North and South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama and the gulf coasts of Florida.

The information learned from Miner’s tags helped establish the first international treaty governing migratory birds, the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918.

His homestead became the Jack Miner Bird Sanctuary, one the first migratory sanctuaries in North America. It is 10 miles away from the well-known birding destination Point Pelee National Park, which Miner helped to designate as a national park in 1918.

Reach Frank Daniels III: 615-881-7039 and on Twitter @fdanielsiii.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/PTvcjF