Less than half of the Colorado residents who lost their medical insurance when Colorado HealthOp folded have found new policies through the state health exchange.

The numbers suggest that tens of thousands of people have decided to risk going without insurance this year instead of paying much higher prices for health coverage — although some are likely to have found policies outside the exchange.

Overall, Connect for Health Colorado reported success in getting more people to sign up for health insurance this year. During the registration period from Nov. 1 through Dec. 31, the exchange reported 169,563 enrollees — 132,263 who bought private insurance, 35,269 eligible for Medicaid and 2,031 in the Child Health Plan Plus program. Of those, about 47,000 are new to the exchange, officials said. In 2014 the exchange signed up about 150,000.

Under the Affordable Care Act, obtaining health insurance avoids federal tax penalties, and enrolling through the state exchange qualifies the buyer for possible federal tax credits.

But while the state exchange welcomed newly insured residents, many people who enjoyed the cheapest insurance policies last year haven’t returned.

Those policies were offered by Colorado HealthOp, a co-operative shut down by the state Division of Insurance at the end of 2015 after its reserves were depleted by an unexpectedly small reimbursement from a federal program.

That cost about 82,000 people their health insurance, and 64,000 of them were insured through the state exchange, officials said.

Connect for Health Colorado spokesman Luke Clarke said 25,000 former co-op members have found replacement policies through the exchange to date.

He said he could not pinpoint how many co-op members remain uninsured today because some could have bought policies outside the exchange.

But “it looks like there is a significant population out there without coverage,” he said.

Richard Backe, a former co-op member who lives in Glenwood Springs, called a broker to help him find a new policy on the exchange.

“I loved the co-op,” he said. “They covered everything they said they would. Their rates were $500 lower than what we’re paying now.”

He now pays $1,509 a month for a high-deductible policy for him and his wife, a 50 percent increase. And when he went to pick up prescription drugs the co-op had provided at no additional charge, he said, it cost him $160.

Last fall, Connect for Health Colorado chief Kevin Patterson estimated that 75 percent of co-op members would find new policies through the exchange.

Clarke said that because co-op members lost insurance Dec. 31, they will have two more months to sign up for 2016 coverage.

“We hope to get them all,” he said.

David Olinger: 303-954-1498, dolinger@denverpost.com or @dolingerdp