Topics: Arne Duncan, Charter schools, Common Core, Diane Ravitch, Editor's Picks, Education, Michelle Rhee, Politico, Tea Party, Teachers, News, Politics News

This story has been corrected to attribute a quotation to the New York Times, and not to Whiteboard

For years, education policy in the United States has been driven by a Washington consensus that found comfort in believing public schools are effectively broken and only a “reform” agenda of austerity mixed with the stern hand of managerial oversight from the Beltway and state capitals could save them.

This made it possible for Democratic candidates to mostly “copy” Republicans on education policy and crow about how much “everyone is for the kids” – especially the poor ones in “failed” schools.

Writing in Jacobin, Micah Uetricht observed that when the subject is education policy, “Democrats have swallowed the Right’s free market orthodoxy whole,” including the whole “reform” menu of “high-stakes standardized testing, merit pay for teachers, school closures, privatization and union-busting through charter school expansion.”

Even Democratic candidates and office-holders calling themselves “progressives” have been all “bipartisan” and move-to-the-middle-ish on education while they chose to fight tooth-and-nail with conservative Republicans on other issues – like healthcare, the deficit, Social Security and the economy – that drew bigger numbers to the polls.

For sure, education has never been an issue that’s gotten much attention in the media. So when the subject of the economy and jobs would come up, politicians and policymakers on all sides could repeat bromides like “we need to educate our way to a better economy” and no one – at least among the pundit class – would give this nonsense the least bit of scrutiny. (Japan had one of the most educated workforces in the world during all those years the country’s economy was in the toilet. In the U.S., college attendance has increased dramatically while personal income has stagnated for years.)

This lack of attention gave politicians a break, so other than espousing conventional pap about how much they “respected teachers” and wanted to “make sure every kid has a shot,” what they could mostly do is neglect education while lobbyists and think tanks funded by big business and private foundations continued to press an agenda for more and more standardization and harsh punishments for “failure.”

But it’s beginning to look like 2014 may be an election year when some politicians pay for that neglect. How many will be Democrats?

According to the latest midterm poll, “Republicans have a slight edge over Democrats going into this year’s midterm elections,” and Democratic candidates may need to take their campaigns to new ground to find the votes they need to win.

An Education Election?

It’s hard, for sure, to see education rising above the economy, Obamacare and immigration. And polling data on the public’s motivation to vote based on education issues is scarce – most surveys don’t even bother to ask about voter interest in the topic.

Nevertheless, one of the few surveys of voter interest in education, conducted by the College Board in 2012, found that voters believed education was a “top-tier issue” in that year’s election. This held true for Democrats, Republicans and Independents.

Reporting from Education Week, Andrew Ujifusa contends that a number of education topics will most likely get time in the spotlight and on the stump in election 2014. He mentions “the Common Core State Standards, school choice, collective bargaining, and early education,” only one of which – early education programs – seems a sure deal to pitch to voters.

Ujifusa notes that the last midterm elections, in 2010, gave Republicans dominance in most state governments nationwide and lots of leeway to move aggressively on a lot of education policies, including “school accountability, teacher evaluation, and school employment” – all hallmarks of the education reform agenda. So if Democratic candidates have a prayer of taking these seats back, don’t they have to take these issues on?

In an anonymous survey of a “small group of key education influentials,” Whiteboard Advisors, a “policy-oriented consulting practice,” found that these “influentials” – mostly Beltway operatives with some top-level state leadership – believe education will be an important issue in a number of gubernatorial races, most importantly in Florida, New York, Texas, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Michigan and Georgia.

Whiteboard’s email newsletter quoted from a New York Times story which observed that for education policy, “the differences between the parties are not always so stark,” with very few if any Democratic candidates distinguishing themselves on the issues so far.

Further, 2014 is a midterm, with state and local contests hogging the limelight – including three dozen governorships and more than 6,000 legislative seats up for grabs. So local issues, including education, will be more prominent in voters’ minds.

Another factor at work is the decision by each party to rally its base. For Democrats, according to The Wall Street Journal, President Obama’s decision to keep Social Security cuts – the “chained CPI” – off the table is just “the latest signal” that the White House is intent on unifying the party base ahead of the November elections. The strategy, according to The Washington Post, is “to maximize the enthusiasm of the party stalwarts who are most likely to show up at the polls.”

But if Democratic candidates intend to make education reform part of their campaigns, they are likely to find the “base” for it just isn’t there.

Where’s the ‘Base’?

In reality, politicians and policymakers from both parties have never really brought the mass of American opinion on board with the “education reform” agenda.

A plethora of surveys have found a growing disillusionment among Americans with the education policy agenda that has been in place for nearly 20 years.

When Stephanie Simon at Politico reviewed some of those surveys, she found a “mixed report card for education reforms,” with parents giving confusing signals on where they stand on reform faves, such as standardized testing, school choice and teacher accountability.