Denver Catholic Archbishop Samuel J. Aquila urged the 1,500 people crowded around the state Capitol on Saturday afternoon to be unafraid of spreading the message of life in a political and door-to-door campaign.

“Fear is always the work of the emissaries of death, … of the evil one,” Aquila told a cheering crowd waving pro-life posters.

The demonstration began with a morning Mass at the Cathedral Basilica of the Immaculate Conception on East Colfax Avenue. Following the service, more than 1,300 people — including dozens of priests from New Mexico, Utah and Colorado — marched to the west side of the Capitol to hear speeches.

The growing crowd of marchers then circled Civic Center park.

Participants waved signs over their heads, including one that simply said, “Life,” with two tiny feet forming the dot over the I. Another said, “Yo soy la Generation Pro-Vida,” or “I am the Pro-Life Generation.”

“Thank you for standing up for life and the dignity of the humanity,” Aquila told the crowd.

He asked the crowd to become politically active, to knock on doors of neighbors and stand up for the right to life.

“The cause of life deserves excellence,” the archbishop said.

Ron Rooney and his wife, Trish, both 56, of Littleton, attended the Mass and participated in the march and rally.

“I think people’s voices are getting lost in America and people aren’t speaking out,” Rooney said. “That’s why America is going into the toilet.”

He said he hopes that his four children will never be pressured by the government to consider abortion.

Pastor Biff Gore, the president of Colorado Right to Life, asked attendees to “help a brother out” and put money in buckets passed around the crowd, promising that every dollar would be used to fight abortion in Colorado.

“In Denver, the abortion industry covers nearly an entire block,” said Gore,

referring to a Planned Parenthood building in the Park Hill neighborhood.

“Today, we mourn 42 years of abortion since the Roe vs. Wade decision in the Supreme Court,” Gore said. “Since then, they’ve been killing children in Colorado.”

Gore said battling slavery and the Holocaust were causes past generations fought.

“Protecting life is the fight of our lives,” he said.

Kirk Mitchell: 303-954-1206, kmitchell@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kirkmitchell, denverpost.com/coldcases