Minnesota Human Services Commissioner Lucinda Jesson’s job is tough — but so is she

Minnesota Human Services Commissioner Lucinda Jesson’s job is tough — but so is she

Minnesota Human Services Commissioner Lucinda Jesson’s job is tough — but so is she

As head of the state’s largest agency, Jesson is in charge of administering services for the sickest of the sick, the poorest of the poor, abandoned and abused children, the frail elderly and disabled, drug and alcohol abusers, sex offenders and mentally ill and dangerous people.

She oversees programs that serve more than a million Minnesotans, or about one in five state residents.

So does Jesson think she has the toughest job? “Not next to the nurse at the Anoka Regional Treatment Center,” she told a state Senate committee during a confirmation hearing in March.

Like most state agency heads, Jesson is not well-known outside of government. But her fingerprints are all over programs that are on newspaper front pages and radio and TV newscasts almost daily.

She’s in charge of the Minnesota Sex Offender Program that is embroiled in a high-stakes court battle.

She’s responsible for the Minnesota Security Hospital in St. Peter, where workers have been assaulted by some of the state’s most mentally disturbed and dangerous people.

When social workers fail to prevent the death of an abused child, Dayton turns to Jesson to beef up the state’s child-protection system.

As a member of MNsure’s governing board, she has been criticized for her role in what is widely regarded as a “disastrous rollout” of the state health insurance exchange.

But Jesson also can claim credit for getting important stuff done on her watch.

At the top of her list: “I feel really good about what we’ve done for children,” she said in an interview last week.

In response to reports of child maltreatment, she co-chaired a governor’s task force on child protection that produced 93 recommendations for improving child safety. The Legislature enacted many of those proposals into law earlier this year, while state and county child services implemented other recommended policy changes.

Former Minnesota Supreme Court Chief Justice Kathleen Blatz, a task force member, said Jesson assembled a panel of child-protection system critics and proponents and built a consensus for reforms that addressed flaws in the system.

“I thought Cindy had the vision and leadership skills to form a very good task force that could produce first-rate results. I was not disappointed,” Blatz said.

Jesson also spearheaded an effort to make it faster and easier for families to adopt children in foster care.

In addition, her department improved access for parents to quality child care, in part by paying higher rates for care providers that boost school-readiness.

“I’m most passionate about improving the lives of poor children,” Jesson said.

She’s also fervent about making state government a “much smarter purchaser of health care.” At the direction of the Legislature and Dayton, the Department of Human Services, or DHS, has saved taxpayers more than $1 billion by seeking competitive bids for public health plans, such as Medical Assistance for the poor and MinnesotaCare for the working poor.

In addition to saving money, she said, her agency has also created incentives for public health providers to deliver better care.

Jesson said she’s most proud of Minnesota’s recent expansions of mental health services for children and adults. The state has increased the number of psychiatric hospital beds available and stepped up its prevention and intervention services, especially for kids.

She also oversaw a massive expansion of Medical Assistance, or MA, under the federal Affordable Care Act. That program now serves more than 1 million low-income Minnesotans, up from 750,000 in 2013.

To root out fraud, she created an Office of Inspector General in DHS to detect and prevent waste and abuse in public benefits.

Although a recent audit found the department has failed to adequately verify the eligibility of people who enroll in public health plans through MNsure, the department reported that the inspector general’s office has produced an eight-fold increase in the amount of money recovered from ineligible MA payments, boosted criminal prosecutions for child care assistance fraud and has increased background checks for people caring for children and vulnerable adults.

Overall, Dayton said, Jesson has “turned the agency around.”

Jesson, 57, was born in Fort Smith, Ark. She was the oldest of four daughters; her father was a prominent lawyer, and her mother was a teacher.

“Growing up in the South during the civil rights movement made a big impression on me,” Jesson said. Her high school wasn’t racially integrated until she was a sophomore or junior, and the community was dealing with tensions over who would be admitted to the local country club or permitted to swim in the public pool.

“With my parents, I had a very clear sense of what was right and wrong and that these (racial) injustices were wrong,” she said.

Her father, Bradley Jesson, took on those injustices as a lawyer and community leader and helped produce “a lot of changes for the good,” she said.

He’s her hero, she says. He has been a business leader, chairman of the Arkansas Democratic Party, chief justice of the Arkansas Supreme Court and a chairman of the University of Arkansas board of trustees. “And he’s a great family person,” she added.

A Presbyterian who has taught Sunday school on and off for 25 years, Jesson said the religious faith she was immersed in as a child also shaped who she is today.

“It taught me the importance of caring for the least among us. That’s fundamental to what we do here,” she said during the interview in her top-floor office in the Elmer L. Andersen building in downtown St. Paul.

After earning a bachelor’s degree from the University of Arkansas and a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania in 1983, Jesson, her husband and their new baby moved to Minneapolis, where the couple launched their law careers.

Ten years later, continuing her family’s tradition of public service, she landed a job in the Minnesota attorney general’s office, where among other things she litigated high-profile health and human service cases.

After Amy Klobuchar was first elected Hennepin County attorney in 1998, she sought to hire a lawyer from outside the office with management experience to lead the civil law division. She interviewed Jesson, “we really hit it off” and Klobuchar hired her.

Klobuchar, now a U.S. senator, said Jesson “was a change maker. She combines street smarts with a calm, positive mood. ... She likes management, and she likes the law.”

Jesson remains one of the senator’s most trusted advisers and closest personal friends. But Jesson never campaigned for Klobuchar. She has made a few, small contributions to candidates but hasn’t been politically active.

In other words, she’s a policy wonk, not a political hack.

Jesson established her own law firm with a partner in St. Paul in 2001. She left in 2006 to join the Hamline University School of Law faculty and founded the school’s Health Law Institute.

After Dayton was first elected governor in 2010, he accepted a friend’s recommendation to ask Jesson to help screen candidates for posts in his Cabinet, even though he hadn’t met her before.

Each day after he interviewed an applicant, he said Jesson would show up in his office with a folder packed with background information on the job seeker. “I had never seen anybody as super organized as she was,” he said.

He interviewed other candidates for DHS commissioner, “but no one impressed me like Cindy,” he said. He offered her the job, and she accepted.

‘ALWAYS UNDER FIRE’

Dayton says he thinks Jesson has the toughest job in his administration, in part because “she’s always under fire” — from people who blame her for problems in DHS programs to legislators wielding budget knives.

She landed on the hot seat the day she started her new job. Dayton inherited a projected $6 billion budget deficit when he took office in 2011, and he directed her to cut $1 billion from the DHS budget.

With little lobbying experience, Jesson went to work with the leaders of the new Senate and House Republican majorities, as well as Dayton’s fellow Democrats, getting both sides to collaborate on a budget solution.

“We righted the financial ship without throwing people off programs or dramatically reducing benefits,” she said.

Jesson made a lot of legislative friends in the process. “You’d be hard-pressed to find someone here who doesn’t like her personally,” said Republican Rep. Matt Dean of Dellwood.

But Dean, the chairman of the House committee that oversees the DHS budget, faults Jesson for some policy decisions.

“With the governor, she was in charge of the most disastrous rollout of any program that I’ve seen since I’ve been here,” he said, referring to MNsure. “They launched a rocket that was not ready for flight.”

Dean’s counterpart in the Senate, DFLer Tony Lourey of Kerrick, said Jesson isn’t responsible for MNsure’s technological problems. But if she shares blame for a premature launch, he said, she should also get credit for helping to cut the number of uninsured Minnesotans by nearly half.

Dean also criticized Jesson for not doing more to stop the rash of attacks by patients on the staff at the state security hospital. “It’s gotten worse in the past several years,” he said.

Jesson disputed that charge. While DHS has a “long way to go on worker safety,” she said the staff has made improvements in using fewer restraints and less seclusion to handle patients.

While Dean disparaged some of her decisions, he also praised her work in other areas, especially implementing a “fine piece of Republican legislation” that requires competitive bidding for public health insurance programs, saving taxpayers more than $1 billion.

Another Republican, Sen. Julie Rosen of Vernon Center, said Jesson is “not at all partisan.” While the two of them “agree to disagree” on issues, Rosen said the commissioner is just as responsive to GOP lawmakers as she is to DFLers.

“She brings a creative flair to the job, she doesn’t back away from tough issues ... and she manages (DHS) with a heavy velvet glove,” Rosen said. “I think she’s a breath of fresh air.”

Outside the Capitol, many of the programs DHS administers — such as MNsure, the state version of Obamacare, and cash and food benefits for individuals — are unpopular with many Minnesotans.

“It’s an easy department to pick on,” said Senate Majority Leader Tom Bakk, DFL-Cook. As a result, Jesson has “taken a lot of heat unfairly.”

He attributes much of the criticism to misunderstandings of what DHS does and where it spends money. Many people don’t realize that three-fourths of its budget goes for basic health care and long-term care for elderly and disabled people. Only 10 percent is used for economic assistance or what traditionally is considered “welfare.”

The turnover rate for DHS commissioners is one of the highest in state government. But Jesson has served longer than any head of that agency in at least 20 years. She’s held the job for four years and nine months, while the average tenure for commissioners during that period is three years and seven months, according to DHS records.

Jesson said she has stuck with it because “it’s the best job I’ve ever had.”

How does she do it?

“An important part of who she is is that Southern steel magnolia that she brings to everything she does,” said her husband, William Mitchell College of Law professor Peter Knapp. “She is affable and polite with everyone, but she is at her core tough as nails and always has been.”