Only weeks after Obamacare survived a Supreme Court challenge, Medicare and Medicaid mark a significant milestone: July 30 will be the 50th anniversary of the law that created them.

Four health-care experts connected with Princeton University and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (and other institutions) take this moment to produce what amounts to a written roundtable discussion: “Medicare and Medicaid at 50: America’s Entitlement Programs in the Age of Affordable Care.”

The 16 essays in this collection include histories of how the programs were conceived, developed and legislated; analysis of how they were reshaped and transformed in the 1970s and ’80s; discussion of how over the years they have remade political agendas and the health-care industry; and predictions about their future.

The essays are scholarly, supported by extensive bibliographies. In one small part of “The Social Transformation of American Elders,” Mark Schlesinger — Yale professor and former editor of the Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law — reminds the reader how “politically disconnected” American elders were in the mid-20th century, before the Medicare debate mobilized them into a bloc of “uber-citizens” who could not be ignored.

Citing four separate studies, Schlesinger then points out the error of those who assumed the elderly would wield their clout to promote their own interests: “Compared to younger Americans, elders have always been less supportive of expanded benefits for their age group and more concerned about the burden those benefits might place on younger taxpayers.”

(Michael McCloskey/iStock)

In “The Era of Big Government: Why It Never Ended,” Princeton professor Keith A. Wailoo looks at the passage of children’s health-care reform under President Bill Clinton and expansion of Medicare drug benefits under President George W. Bush.

Other essays include Sara Rosenbaum of George Washington University on “How the Courts Created the Medicaid Entitlement” and Mark A. Peterson of UCLA on “Third Rail of Politics — the Rise and Fall of Medicare’s Untouchability.”