Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump at a rally in Terre Haute, Ind., on May 1. (Associated Press/Seth Perlman)

The Trumpkins put their faith in a charlatan, and now they are discovering that, well, he’s a charlatan. In the last 48 hours or so we learn:

He might just raise taxes, after all. The supply-siders who swooned over his $10T-debt-creating tax plan and didn’t bother with his trade and entitlement policies (straight liberal) may have been snookered. (Oh, and he’s flip-flopped on raising the minimum wage.)

Like an owner of a cheesy casino haggling with the banks, he thinks he can negotiate down the sovereign debt of the United States. No, really. (Question: If we aren’t going to pay off all our debt do we have enough pennies in the couch to keep NATO running?)

The Republican presidential front-runner reversed course on a whole load of issues – all on May 4. (Peter Stevenson/The Washington Post)

The populists who believed he was going to self-fund and avoid corrupting influences? Not only is that not happening but his finance director is mainly a Democratic money man. And he worked for Goldman Sachs. And he skipped out just before a bankruptcy sunk a film company in which he invested clients’ money. (“With Relativity’s Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing last week, those high hopes have been dashed, and Mnuchin has been left in a particularly uncomfortable position. The money-man and fellow investors in a Dune Capital fund are said to have lost as much as $80 million — equity that is almost certain to be lost for good, said two sources familiar with the situation. And disgruntled Relativity investors privately are questioning how a bank Mnuchin once headed –OneWest Bank of Pasadena – was allowed by Relativity to drain $50 million from the studio just weeks prior to the July 30 insolvency filing.”) Birds of a feather, I guess. Well, joke’s on the populists I suppose.

And the week is not yet over!

Some keen observers — really just those possessing common sense — are hardly surprised. David McIntosh, president of Club for Growth, won’t support Trump, although a spokesman clarifies he is not part of the #NeverTrump movement. The spokesman says, “For months we’ve said that Trump is a liberal who will raise taxes. The so-called policies on his website will be proven to be nothing more than false advertising.” Score one for CFG.

This would be terribly funny if it were not so terribly predictable and ruinous for the GOP and the country. Just as Trump University students allege, voters believed what Trump told them (at least what he told them at one particular moment). Being honest folk, they took him at his word. And within hours, he’s reversed on a major selling point (self-funding) and a handful of not-insignificant debt. We suspect this is only the beginning. None of his “positions” other than trade protectionism and expelling illegal immigrants seem heartfelt, so wait for changes on abortion, guns, Obamacare and more.

Like those of most feeders at the trough of crony capitalism, Trump’s political instincts — to the extent he has them — run in the direction of bigger government. His greatest failing is not that he is a garden-variety liberal (what policy differences will he wind up having with Hillary Clinton?), it is that he is unstable and unreliable — or as Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) put it, “a pathological liar.”

I don’t think RNC delegates can sue for fraud like Trump University students did, but at this rate they might be in favor of changing some convention rules. If Trump is going to change his entire persona, it seems only fair the RNC should change its convention rules to allow delegates to consider if they are bound by votes cast for fraudulent positions and empty promises.