The Mendocino Community Health Clinic group, which provides medical, dental and behavioral health care opportunities to more than 550 patients a day at three locations,Ukiah, Willits and Lakeport, said Wednesday it fears the government may be cutting its Federal Qualified Health Center funding.

At least $11 billion was allocated nationally from the federal Health Center Fund, which was part of an Obamacare allocation, that commenced in 2010 and is scheduled to end before the 2016 fiscal year, the National Association of Community Health Centers says.

In response, U.S. House leaders from both parties introduced a bill on Tuesday, which would include a two-year extension of funding for FQHCs, the National Health Center Corps and the Teaching Health Centers program, the National Association of Community Health Centers noted. The proposed extension passed late Thursday afternoon, but still has to go on to the U.S. Senate for its approval.

MCHC said if federal funding isn’t approved soon, clinics that depend on the monies as FQHCs, could be severely affected as early as Sept. 30.

“It depends on the health center, but closures are a possibility,” said MCHC spokeswoman Jendi Coursey.

MCHC and other local FQHC clinics mostly provide care to those who don’t have health insurance or can’t afford health care, Coursey said, who also pointed out the last time that significant funding cuts were made was in 2009, which led to the eventual closure of the Potter Valley Community Health Center.

Additionally, FQHC clinics qualify for reimbursement related to Medicare and Medi-Cal, including other benefits, for providing services to underserved populations, according to Coursey.

“MCHC is relatively large, as FQHCs go, but we worry about smaller FQHCs like the Anderson Valley Health Clinic or Mendocino Coast Clinics,” said MCHC Chief Operating Officer Carole Press in a statement. “They depend on this funding to keep their doors open.”

Some doctors also directly benefit from FQHCs as part of the National Health Service Corps initiative to hire medical professionals while forgiving some medical school debt in return for working in underserved locations, Coursey said.

MCHC Chief Executive Officer Linnea Hunter said besides providing health care for patients, regardless of their ability to pay, clinic providers funded as FQHCs also provide education on how to manage chronic conditions.

Advertisement

“Let’s say you have diabetes,” Hunter stated. “We provide nutritional education and encourage patients to get regular blood tests to keep the diabetes under control, because our reimbursement from the federal government depends, in part, on our patients staying healthy.”

Although Thursday’s approval by the House was a step forward in securing funding, FQHC providers across the nation are anxiously awaiting a final decision as the calendar continues its push to Sept. 30.

“This particular decision in Washington D.C. could have a very direct impact locally,” Press stated.