Failure to adjust with times ignores the progress we have made in so many areas.

Training camp in May. (Photo: Rafael Suanes, USA TODAY Sports) Story Highlights Our history is riddled with evidence of abuse and disgusting treatment of American Indians.

King told us to 'judge people by the content of their character, not the color of their skin.'

A football team that name in the year 2013 fails that test.

The body of Scarlet Crow is buried in a far corner of a cemetery, about a mile from the U.S. Capitol. He was a tribal leader from the Wahpeton Sisseton Tribe in the Dakota Territory who left his wife and eight children to travel to Washington, D.C., in 1867 to negotiate a treaty with the federal government.

Scarlet Crow never again returned to his tribal lands. His death certificate says he committed suicide. But he was murdered.

On Feb. 24, 1867, Scarlet Crow disappeared from the barracks where he was staying. Days later, his dead body was found, lying on the grass under what is now the Key Bridge near Georgetown.

The police report discloses that the investigators who showed up to investigate that morning thought he had been murdered. But the coroner had a different idea. Against all evidence to the contrary, he simply wrote "suicide" on Scarlet Crow's death certificate and had his body transported to be buried in the Congressional Cemetery.

In those days, the death of an Indian in Washington didn't prompt much of an investigation. Indians were dismissed by some as "savages" or "redskins," who lived on the frontier causing trouble for those who were trying to steal their land.

The story of Scarlet Crow's death is shameful. It's just one story. Our history is riddled with evidence of abuse and disgusting treatment of American Indians. Broken treaties, promises ignored, trust funds looted. The list is long.

Despite the fact that they were here first, Indians weren't even recognized as American citizens for the first half of our nation's history. They were the last group given the right to vote in the U.S. in the 1920s.

There is a history here that we can't ignore. And that sad history is what prompts the current controversy about the name of Washington's football team.

Martin Luther King Jr. implored us to "judge people by the content of their character, not the color of their skin."

A football team that is named "Redskins" in the year 2013 fails that test.

Over many decades, words that had been commonly used as racial slurs against others have been discredited. Most citizens now shame those who use the slurs while exhibiting their own prejudice and ignorance.

I don't believe the owner of the Redskins, the players or the fans intend to offend by using the term Redskin. But what might have been seen as acceptable many decades ago is no longer acceptable. Times change, and the failure to change with it ignores the progress we have made in so many areas.

This month, my organization will host five young American Indians who will be coming to Washington, D.C., as part of our Champions for Change program. They are remarkable young men and women, young leaders who are making a difference on their Indian Reservations.

They are proud of their heritage and their culture. But even at their young age, they know about prejudice. They know the words that are used to demonstrate that prejudice and they know how those words hurt. They wouldn't expect to be called "Redskins" when they visit our city. And, if called that, they would surly feel it was a slur.

Washington is a city full of complicated and controversial issues. This should not be one of them.

Things have changed over the decades. The ignorance of the era when Scarlet Crow came to Washington has given way to more understanding and tolerance. Most words that once were used to hurt and to reflect intolerance have been now recognized as unacceptable. That should be the case with the name Washington Redskins. The name should be changed.

Byron Dorgan is a former U.S. senator who was chairman of the Senate Indian Affairs Committee. He is also the founder of the Center for Native American Youth that works on issues of teen suicide prevention, education opportunity and more.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter @USATopinion or Facebook.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/IbsKkG