Decision of Their Lives: Families Struggle With Whether to Allow Resuscitation

LAKELAND | For decades, Arlene Hendricks' life has revolved around that of her younger brother, Edward, a 53-year-old man whose Down syndrome gives him the mental capacity of a kindergartner.

Until January, Hendricks concerned herself with such matters as choosing which of Edward's cherished country-and-western albums to play and which of his favorite foods to serve at meals. Within days of a fall at their shared home Jan. 18 that left Eddie with a fractured neck, Hendricks had to confront a question of a different magnitude: As Eddie's guardian, would she want medical teams to resuscitate her brother in the event his heart or lungs failed?

"It was coming at me so quickly it was just overwhelming," Hendricks recalled. "It was like, 'I don't know if I can do all this.' Naturally they came to that question none of us ever wants to hear about: 'Do you want your brother to be resuscitated?'?"

After a few days of anguished consideration while her brother was treated at Lakeland Regional Health Medical Center, Hendricks felt certain her brother would not benefit from aggressive rescue measures that might leave him dependent on a ventilator or other life-support devices.

"That would not be what he would want," Hendricks said. "He would be so afraid and frightened. I just know that."

Even so, Hendricks said signing a Do Not Resuscitate order for her brother was one of the most wrenching things she has ever done.

Six months later, though, as her brother remains alive under hospice care at their Lakeland mobile home, Hendricks said having the yellow form among Edward's medical papers provides comfort. She knows her brother won't endure painful and almost certainly futile cardiopulmonary resuscitation if he stops breathing or his heart stops beating.

With Americans living extended lives often prolonged through medical technology, the ailing and elderly and their families commonly face questions of how far to go in delaying death.

For a patient with end-stage disease or the extreme frailty of advanced age, a Do Not Resuscitate order can seem a merciful option.

Such an order simply means the patient will not receive CPR in the event of cardiac or respiratory arrest.

In a hospital, the directive against resuscitation is recorded on a patient's medical chart, said Dr. Ronald Schonwetter, chief medical officer for Chapters Health System, which operates hospice programs in Central Florida. Patients in a nursing home, assisted-living facility or under hospice care at home require a yellow form issued by the Florida Department of Health. That Do Not Resuscitate order must be signed by a doctor and by the patient or a surrogate or guardian.

The yellow form is usually displayed in a conspicuous place, such as on a refrigerator door, so that emergency crews, if called, will see the form and know not to commence CPR.

FALSE EXPECTATIONS

The medical system is slowly accepting the idea that keeping a patient alive at all costs is not always the best approach, Schonwetter said.

"In our society, 30 years ago, 40 years ago, when technology from the health care perspective really started to expand, we kept moving in that direction and people would try to grab onto any type of technologic advancement to the point of offering resuscitative treatments, very aggressive interventions, even close to a patient's end of their life," Schonwetter said. "But we are realizing now that is not great quality of life for patients near the end of life."

Jeri Thomas, an advanced-practice nurse for palliative care at LRHMC, said TV shows create false expectations of doctors and nurses retrieving patients from the verge of death.

"On TV, 75 percent of people get better and leave the hospital," Thomas said, "but that's not the way it really is with CPR on a patient who's really sick."

Dr. Francisco Chebly, director of palliative care at Lakeland Regional Health Medical Center, said he encourages patients with end-stage illnesses to consider DNR orders. He said the conversation often involves clearing up misconceptions about what the directive means.

"I think one of the major hurdles with a DNR is people think if you sign a DNR they're not going to receive any more treatment, that the medical system is going to let go of them," said Chebly, also a hospitalist for Watson Clinic. "No, a DNR just means do not resuscitate in case of cardiopulmonary arrest. We treat aggressively; we treat everything. It doesn't involve not treating pneumonia. It doesn't involve not feeding patients. It's not a death chamber."

Schonwetter said Chapters' hospices, including Good Shepherd Hospice, which operates in Hardee, Highlands and Polk counties, address possible health care directives, including DNR orders, with all incoming patients and their families. Patients are eligible for hospice care if a doctor has given a prognosis of less than six months to live.

About 60 percent of patients entering Chapters' hospice programs already have some form of advance health care directive, Schonwetter said, such as a living will or a health care surrogate designation. He estimated that 99 percent of hospice patients choose to have DNR orders.

"Generally, resuscitative efforts in those patients are futile because the chance of success in a patient with a very end-stage illness, a very limited prognosis, is really nonexistent and likely would cause more discomfort and pain for a patient than the possibility of having a successful resuscitative effort," Schonwetter said.

Hendricks made the decision on her brother's behalf before he entered the Good Shepherd Hospice program. Edward spent about 10 days at the Lakeland hospital after his fall, and Hendricks carefully pondered her options before signing the DNR order the day Edward was released from the hospital.

Hendricks worked in nursing for 38 years, the bulk of it in home health care. Though she had often discussed advance directives with patients, she said that didn't prepare her for the emotions she faced when having to decide about Edward's future.

"A lot of people have not had even as much time as I had to make that decision," Hendricks said.

"I hope somewhere they would have as much peace as I have had about making this decision of signing the DNR."

PREPARING EARLY

Not everyone with a DNR order is in the late stages of a terminal illness.

Bob and Pat Fling of Winter Haven signed orders for themselves long before Bob, 80, was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease 2½ years ago.

The couple also created advance health directives, which can offer detailed instructions on which medical interventions one chooses or rejects.

Pat Fling, 76, worked for 35 years as a nurse in a Tennessee hospital before retiring two decades ago. The work often brought her in contact with patients in the late stages of life.

"I know about those things," she said. "There are things worse than death. ... I saw families that did not believe in it (ending medical intervention), and it's agonizing sometimes."

Bob Fling, a retired Air Force navigator and accountant, remains lucid and personable, though he said Alzheimer's has limited his range of activities.

He gave up golf but still rides his bicycle. He continues to play bridge with friends twice a week.

Fling said he deferred to his wife's medical expertise years ago when she suggested creating advance medical directives, also called living wills.

"I realized the importance of it, so as a consequence I do accept advice from women, and particularly my lovely wife," he said, sitting on the couch with the couple's white toy poodle, Ruffy.

Pat Fling said that during her career medical authorities often failed to broach such uncomfortable issues as Do Not Resuscitate orders with patients and their families.

"Sometimes they wait too late," she said. "I do think that doctors in particular — because I think nurses are a little hesitant — doctors should be more involved early on. ... They would (mention DNRs), but once they had started extensive procedures then the families didn't want to disconnect it. I think they probably felt like they might feel guilty if they did that."

Marianne Craft of Lakeland was diagnosed with Alzheimer's four years ago, and she and her husband, Greg Craft, both have created DNR orders.

Like Pat Fling, Marianne Craft, 63, has a background in nursing. Recalling attempted resuscitations of dying patients she witnessed in a nursing home where she worked, Craft said she wouldn't want to put her husband through the trauma of seeing a futile intervention performed on her.

"She's seen it — people lie there for years like a vegetable," said Greg Craft, 51. "I don't want that."

Marianne Craft said the nursing home where she worked abounded with patients who had the yellow DNR orders displayed on the back of the doors to their rooms. Even so, she recalled one case of an employee forgetting to check for the order and beginning CPR on a patient who had gone into cardiac arrest.

Craft cited examples of patients in vegetative states with no hope of recovery whose families would not sign DNR orders or have life-support systems withdrawn. She said it would have been better for everyone if they had.

QUALITY OF LIFE

Chebly, the palliative care specialist, said DNR orders are created for hospital patients with conditions including cancer, cardiac disease, lung disease, neurological ailments, ALS and multiple sclerosis, as well as stroke victims. He said he encourages all of his patients to specify their wishes for late-term care while they are able.

"My first question is to ask the patient, 'What is your purpose?'?" Chebly said. "?'What do you expect from your life?'?"

Although such discussions are normal in palliative care, Thomas, the LRH nurse, said many doctors are uncomfortable talking about the approach of death.

"It's mostly nurses who start (the conversation) and families are usually very, very receptive," Thomas said. "They're kind of waiting for that approach, and you'd be surprised how you get an answer or response like, 'Wow.' It's like they've been waiting."

But even when a patient is ready for death and wants to forgo aggressive measures, Thomas said, family members often cannot accept the idea.

"I see it all the time where a patient is just tired and they understand and they are ready to just be kept comfortable," Thomas said, "... but the family, either they just can't let go, they don't understand, or you have children that maybe live out of state and maybe aren't aware of how sick the parents are or maybe they have guilt about not being around to help or unresolved issues of some sort, and so they want everything done, which is not what the patient wants."

Decisions about end-of-life issues are more confusing and emotionally fraught when undertaken during a medical crisis.

Chebly said it's best to explore all the options for emergency intervention well before the crisis arises.

To that end, Schonwetter of Chapters Health said he's encouraged by a recent federal proposal to pay doctors for meeting with Medicare patients to discuss end-of-life options.

If approved, the policy would take effect next year.

Such doctor payments were part of the original proposal for the Affordable Care Act but were removed amid criticism by conservative politicians who raised the spectre of "death panels."

Having an appointment devoted to discussing end-of-life issues would make it easier for harried doctors to explain advance directives and DNR orders to patients, Schonwetter said.

"It can take time when you have these conversations with the patient and the families because it can be a sensitive area to discuss," Schonwetter said. "Anything that will help move forward those conversations is a very good thing."

[ Gary White can be reached at gary.white@theledger.com or 863-802-7518. He blogs about tourism at http://tourism.blogs.theledger.com. Follow on Twitter @garywhite13. ]