J.J. Hardy returns to Miller Park for the first time since he was traded by the Brewers to the Minnesota Twins in exchange for Carlos Gomez in the 2009 offseason. Credit: Reuters

Brewers Blog The Journal Sentinel sports staff brings fans the latest news and inside information on the Brewers SHARE

By of the

The Milwaukee Brewers return from their longest road trip of the season – 10 games – to open a three-game interleague series on this Memorial Day afternoon against the Baltimore Orioles at Miller Park.

This is Baltimore's first trip to Milwaukee since 2008, and there are some familiar faces on both sides. Orioles shortstop J.J. Hardy returns to Miller Park for the first time since he was traded by the Brewers to the Minnesota Twins in exchange for Carlos Gomez in the 2009 offseason.

Brewers third baseman Mark Reynolds and closer Francisco Rodriguez also played for the Orioles, while Baltimore outfielder Nelson Cruz had a cup of coffee with Milwaukee in 2005.

Kyle Lohse takes the mound for Milwaukee, while Chris Tillman goes for Baltimore.

In addition to the game blog, you can also follow along with a live box score and our Twitter feed.

FIRST INNING



Orioles – Adam Jones singles with two outs, but that's it.

Brewers – Jean Segura continues to flourish in the leadoff spot, rifling a triple into the corner in right. Then on the next pitch, Ryan Braun doubles to right to drive him in for the early 1-0 lead. Braun moves to third on a fly ball to center by Jonathan Lucroy and Carlos Gomez walks, but Mark Reynolds strikes out and Scooter Gennett flies out to center.

SECOND INNING



Orioles – J.J. Hardy is welcomed warmly, and he responds with a one-out double into the gap in left-center. Lohse recovers to record the next two outs, though, and keeps Baltimore off the board.

Brewers – Khris Davis stays hot with a double to right-center. He moves to third on a flyout to right by Lyle Overbay but Lohse strikes out and Jones tracks down a Segura drive into the gap in right-center and the score remains 1-0.

THIRD INNING



Orioles – After striking out Tillman, Lohse is hit hard. Two singles are turned into a pair of runs when Adam Jones triples into the gap in right-center, then a hustle double by Nelson Cruz drives in Jones. Hardy also singles, but it's in between a pair of weird 6-5 putouts as Lohse finally gets out of it trailing, 3-1.

Brewers – Lucroy draws a one-out walk, moves to third on a Gomez single and scores on a flyout to deep center by Reynolds, who just missed a homer there. Gomez is then thrown out trying to steal second, and the Brewers settle for a 3-2 deficit.

FOURTH INNING



Orioles – Jonathan Schoop singles to lead off, but Tillman strikes out and Nick Markakis grounds into a 6-3 double play.

Brewers – In between Gennett and Lohse strikeouts, Davis and Overbay walk. Segura then drives them both in with a double into the corner in left to put Milwaukee in front once again, 4-3.

FIFTH INNING

Orioles – Baltimore goes down in order...

Brewers – ...and so does Milwaukee.

SIXTH INNING



Orioles – Lohse records his second straight 1-2-3 inning.

Brewers – After Gennett leads off with a lineout, Davis smashes a long homer to right-center. Overbay follows up with one of his own into the second deck in right. Lohse strikes out. Ryan Webb replaces Tillman, and Segura flies out to left. Milwaukee now has a 6-3 cushion.

SEVENTH INNING



Orioles – Schoop homers to left. Pinch-hitter Steve Clevenger grounds out and Markakis flies out. Lohse is done and Brandon Kintzler comes in and gets Machado to ground out to Segura to end it.

Brewers – Brad Brach now pitching for Baltimore. Braun taps out to him, Lucroy grounds out and Gomez flies out to left.

EIGHTH INNING



Orioles – Kintzler retires the side, thanks to a 5-4-3 double play that ends the frame. Reynolds is having himself a day over at third.

Brewers – Gennett doubles, Davis singles to reach base for the fourth time and Overbay walks, but Rickie Weeks strikes out as a pinch-hitter and Segura grounds out 6-4 to end the threat.

NINTH INNING



Orioles – Francisco Rodriguez now on. He gets the first two outs before Schoop homers to left to pull Baltimore to within 6-5. Pinch-hitter Delmon Young singles to left on the first pitch he sees to bring up Markakis. Machado walks, then Jones flies out to deep center. The Brewers rallied in a similar situation two weeks ago against the Yankees. Let's see if they can do it again.

Brewers – Darren O'Day now on. Braun lines out to center. Lucroy bloops a single into left to breathe some life into things. Gomez drops down a bunt in front of the plate and Hundley fields it only to throw the ball into right field. The runners move into scoring position, and manager Ron Roenicke replaces Lucroy at third with Elian Herrera. The very next pitch, Reynolds hits a soft liner to shortstop and Herrera is caught about halfway down the line. Easy double play, and the air is out of the balloon here.

10TH INNING



Orioles – Rob Wooten comes on and gets the first two outs before J.J. Hardy doubles to left. The ball was in Davis' glove but popped out. Hundley then atones for his earlier miscue by blooping a single to left to score Hardy. Orioles take the lead at 7-6.

Brewers – Zach Britton now on. With one out, Davis singles to center. Overbay walks. Pinch-hitter Irving Falu, fresh up from Class AAA Nashville, grounds into a 4-3 double play to end it. A deflating loss, to say the least.