Advertisement - story continues below

One member of the political Romney family makes it very clear that she understands the importance of following the will of the people.

Ronna Romney McDaniel, niece of former Republican presidential candidate and lead Trump-basher Mitt Romney, announced Friday that she has pledged to support Donald Trump at the Republican National Convention.

McDaniel is also chair of the Michigan Republican Party.

Advertisement – story continues below

“We want those voters engaged in the process. So as an RNC delegate, I chose to bind myself to the majority vote of Michigan. I remain neutral as chair, but I will be a Trump delegate in Cleveland,” she said.

She did not, however, tell her uncle directly.

“I left that up to my dad to tell my uncle,” she said. “That was not a phone call I wanted to make. I’m pretty sure I’m out of the will at this point.”

Advertisement – story continues below

Watch the latest video at video.foxnews.com

As all political eyes look at Trump’s path to the Republican convention in Cleveland, The Minneapolis Star-Tribune analyzed Trump’s chances of locking up the nomination.

“To all the political junkies yearning for a contested Republican convention this summer: not so fast,” the paper reported. “It’s still possible for Donald Trump to clinch the nomination by the end of the primaries on June 7. His path is narrow and perilous. But it’s plausible and starts with a big victory Tuesday in his home state New York primary.”

Because New York rules give a candidate who wins more than 50 percent of the vote in any congressional district all the delegates from that district, Trump could sweep well beyond a bare majority of delegates in his home state.

The paper then noted that on April 26, another 172 delegates are at stake in Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Delaware, Maryland and Rhode Island. Although the paper suggested Trump may have problems in Pennsylvania, he could offset that in Connecticut, Delaware and Maryland.

Advertisement – story continues below

In May, 199 delegates at stake in Indiana, Nebraska, West Virginia, Oregon and Washington. West Virginia and Indiana offer Trump the possibility for putting more deletes under his belt, the paper reported.

The primaries end June 7, with 303 delegates at stake in California, New Jersey, South Dakota, Montana and New Mexico. Trump’s best chances are in California and in New Jersey, where — as Western Journalism reported — Gov. Chris Christie can rally his troops for Trump.

h/t: Fox News