Topics: 2014 elections, Conservatives, Conservativism, Governors, Kansas, paul davis, Republican Party, Republicans, Sam Brownback, Strippers, Politics News

The Kansas gubernatorial race has become a rare bright spot for Democrats in an election cycle full of foreboding darkness. Republican Gov. Sam Brownback has been a fixture in Kansas politics for almost 20 years and has won every statewide election he’s participated in by double-digit margins, including his 31-point landslide in the 2010 gubernatorial race. But right now he’s trailing Democratic challenger Paul Davis in the poll averages and doing all the things last losing candidates typically do, like releasing mediocre internal polls to push back against horrendous public polling.

Mother Jones’ Patrick Caldwell has a great examination of why Brownback is on the skids politically: He came into office with a radical agenda to turn Kansas into a laboratory of ultraconservative economic policy, and it’s been a complete disaster. But Brownback isn’t out of it yet. In the last week, a thin ray of hope emerged in the form of an inopportune lap dance.

“In the late 1990s the Democratic candidate for governor of Kansas was getting a lap dance at a strip club when cops raided it in search of drugs,” Politico reported on Sept. 20. Davis was, at the time, unmarried and working as an attorney for the owner of the club. The cops raided the place acting on a tip that drugs were being sold there, and Davis was found by the cops “alone with a topless stripper who was wearing only a G-string,” as Politico put it. Davis responded to the story by saying, “I was never accused of having done anything wrong, but rather was in the wrong place at the wrong time.”

Reading this story, it seemed to me to be fairly silly and in every possible way disconnected from the current race for governor, save for the fact that it involved Paul Davis. But that’s not what the Kansas Republican Party thinks. “Now the question becomes, as an individual, is he fit to govern?” asked Kansas GOP executive director Clayton Barker. It’s an intriguing question, as it forces us to consider whether a man’s career in public service to date is overmatched by the fact that he was in the presence of semi-nude woman 16 years ago.