WASHINGTON, Feb. 18, 2015 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- On April 18, 2015, a one-day free health clinic will be held in Kanas City, Missouri which will provide much needed health care to the area's uninsured and medically underserved. The clinic, sponsored by the National Association of Free & Charitable Clinics (NAFC) in conjunction with the Kansas City CARE Clinic, highlights the continued need for increased access to medical care as the Affordable Care Act (ACA) is implemented and as many states, including Missouri, continue to debate over Medicaid expansion.



"Even in the face of the ACA implementation, access to affordable health care is still a major issue for so many in this country," said Nicole Lamoureux, NAFC CEO. "In fact, many are surprised to hear that even after full implementation of the ACA, according to the Congressional Budget Office, there may be as many as 29 million people who are still without access to health insurance. As our nation continues to debate the future of the ACA and health care in general, Free and Charitable Clinics remain an important part of the safety-net and continue to provide affordable care to those who need it most."



The details for the clinic are as follows:



NAFC C.A.R.E Clinic

Saturday, April 18, 2015 from 8 a.m. to 7 p.m.

Bartle Hall Kansas City Convention Center

Kansas City, Missouri



"Today, there are approximately 816,000 people who are uninsured in the state of Missouri and after full ACA implementation there will still be 539,000 uninsured Missourians as Medicaid was not expanded in our state," said Sheri Wood, CEO of the Kansas City CARE Clinic. "As one of the National Association of Free & Charitable Clinics' largest clinic members, we are excited that the C.A.R.E. Clinic will be returning to our city. The Kansas City CARE Clinic is looking forward to collaborating with our community partners and volunteers to enable patients who attend the one-day clinic event to be connected to safety net clinics to establish a health home as well as other local resources for continued access to health care."



The NAFC recognizes that many people continue to have little to no access to affordable health care and need help now. This will be the 15th in a series of large C.A.R.E. (Communities Are Responding Everyday) Clinics held around the country to bring together physicians and other health care professionals, as well as non-medical volunteers, to serve the needs of thousands of people who might otherwise go without medical care. Since September 2009, more than 16,500 uninsured patients have received medical care at the NAFC's C.A.R.E. Clinics with the help of about 15,000 volunteers. In addition to the first Kansas City C.A.R.E. Clinic, which was held in December 2009, clinics have been held in: Houston; New Orleans; Little Rock; Kansas City; Hartford; Atlanta; Washington, D.C.; Charlotte; Tacoma; Dallas and Madison.



Both medical and non-medical volunteers are needed to participate in the free clinic event in Kansas City. Information on the event and how to register is available online at: www.NAFC2015KCCARE.com. Information on how to donate to support this and future clinics is also available at www.nafcclinics.org, by clicking on the "Donate Now" button.



About the National Association of Free and Charitable Clinics (NAFC): The National Association of Free & Charitable Clinics (NAFC) is the only nonprofit 501c(3) organization whose mission is solely focused on the issues and needs of the more than 1,200 Free and Charitable Clinics and the people they serve in the United States. Founded in 2001 and headquartered in Washington, D.C., the NAFC is an effective advocate for the issues and concerns of Free and Charitable Clinics, their volunteer workforce of doctors, dentists, nurses, therapists, pharmacists, nurse practitioners, technicians and other health care professionals, and the patients served by Free and Charitable Clinics in communities throughout the nation.

Noah Zachary 646-381-9093 Kerry Thompson National Association of Free & Charitable Clinics 703-647-7427