The new jobs report sank without a trace. Didn't the party learn anything from 2012 and 2014?

Hillary Clinton talks about jobs in Detroit, March 4, 2016. (Photo: Jeff Kowalsky, epa)

It’s an axiom of the TV news business that if it bleeds, it leads, so it’s no surprise that the bloodletting within the Republican Party is at the top of the charts these days. It’s also true that good news is hardly considered news at all, even when it affects millions of people and undermines a core argument in a presidential race.

That is the case with the new Bureau of Labor Statistics report on February employment: 242,000 new jobs, 555,000 more people joining the labor force, upward revisions in previous job statistics, and an unemployment rate steady at 4.9%. Investors Business Daily called those “blowout numbers.” Other news outlets used words like “hefty,” “surprisingly strong,” and “a sign of the nation’s economic durability.”

It may not always be apparent given the outsized role of size – of hands and other body parts – in the presidential campaign, but the Republican candidates routinely claim that President Obama’s “job-killing” policies are destroying the country.

The Friday jobs report is the latest data to cast doubt on this premise, at least from an economic standpoint. But except for financial publications, it was not featured on print front pages and by Saturday morning had disappeared from home pages online. Even more significant, there were no celebratory tweets about the jobs numbers from Democratic presidential candidates Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders. Clinton’s theme of the day, while glancingly acknowledging progress, was the need for more jobs and higher wages. Sanders similarly said that despite gains, “the American middle class has been declining” for 40 years and railed against "disastrous trade agreements."

In other words, the glass is half-empty. That’s not all that far from Ted Cruz’s declaration in Thursday’s debate that people are “struggling through seven years of Barack Obama.”

There is no question that wage stagnation and income inequality remain major problems and major drivers of support for the Sanders and Trump candidacies. The new jobs report reminded us of that with data that showed a 3-cent-per-hour drop in hourly wages. Still, that drop came after several months of increases and may be a blip rather than a trend.

Obama, making his own case into what turned out to be a vacuum, said the U.S. economy is “the envy of the world” and offered Democrats the talking points they should be using: “There seems to be an alternative reality out there from some of the political folks that America is down in the dumps. It’s not. America is pretty darn great right now, and making strides right now.”

Republicans are running on the notion that America is on the ropes and it’s Obama’s fault. They blame him and his policies, particularly the Affordable Care Act or Obamacare, for a range of domestic ills including flat wages, high student debt, small businesses unable to survive and people forced into part-time work. Much of this has been debunked, but that’s been the GOP narrative for years and it is unshakeable.

The evidence to fight these arguments is right in front of Democrats, but they seem loath to engage. In the case of the latest jobs report, the problem may be timing, with primaries coming up in Michigan and other states afflicted by the long-term manufacturing downturn (even as the new report showed an uptick). But the larger pattern is one we saw in 2012 and 2014.

POLICING THE USA: A look at race, justice, media

In 2012, right before their convention began, Democrats could not bring themselves to say the country was better off than it had been four years earlier when Obama took office — even though he was sworn in when America was in the grip of the Great Recession, losing hundreds of thousands of jobs a month and headed to 10% unemployment, and the auto industry was in free fall. Democratic strategists had decided it was best to play down progress so as not to offend what veteran operative Chris Lehane called “angry-bird voters” upset over the direction of their lives and the country.

Economic conditions continued to improve, but Democratic candidates in 2014 moved even further from the president. Handed a blank canvas, Republicans painted a bleak picture of a nation on the brink.

Then, like now, that was largely at odds with objective reality. But it didn’t matter – when the returns came in, Republicans had picked up eight Senate seats and control of the Senate, and added another 13 seats to their already comfortable House majority. They also added two more governors for a total of 31, nearly twice the Democrats’ 17.

Republicans have had control of the discourse for months now, suggesting Democrats have not fully absorbed the lessons of the past. If they don’t want a repeat performance of 2014 in a year when the presidency is at stake, it’s long past time to start offering their own sweeping narrative of pride, patriotism and success.

Jill Lawrence is the commentary editor of USA TODAY. Follow her on Twitter @JillDLawrence.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1p0fnZU