Topics: AFP, Americans for Prosperity, Koch Brothers, Montana, Politics News

In every red state where they’ve spent big, the Koch brothers have defeated Medicaid expansion, the piece of the Affordable Care Act that is optional for states and gives relief to the working poor. But in Montana — by some measurements the reddest state in the country — the Kochs are hitting the skids. Their monster political group, Americans for Prosperity, or AFP, has laid an egg. And Medicaid expansion now has a real chance of happening.

What’s gone wrong?

A few things. First, the Kochs underestimated the local population and made a fundamental misreading of the terrain, as have many outside groups that have botched Montana campaigns (starting with Custer and his troops). They sent in a crew of young D.C. hotshots with little understanding of the state’s politics, to run a negative campaign against moderate Republican legislators who support expanding Medicaid. This campaign did nothing but piss off the legislators and their constituents.

Part of this campaign involved organizing a disastrous series of “town meetings” in the legislators’ districts, at which AFP staffers lectured the locals about the dangers of “Obamacare expansion.” Please take a moment to savor the image of a young man from D.C., showing up in a small Montana town, wearing a tailored suit and dress shirt but no tie, and pointy shoes, looking like he’s expecting bottle service at a nightclub, to address an audience of burly men wearing flannel shirts and overalls and likely carrying concealed weapons.

Worse yet, the GOP legislators being targeted by these meetings began crashing them. The AFP organizers would refuse to recognize them or even let them speak. The audiences didn’t like this (everyone gets to speak at public meetings in Montana — it’s in our Constitution). At one meeting, someone in the audience asked the AFP organizer, “How can we possibly have a town meeting on this issue but not hear from our legislator?” There was no answer. Many in the crowd walked out. Several of these fiascoes were caught on video. The town hall debacles were front-page news across the state.

Next, it was revealed that the Kochs own a 200,000 acre cattle ranch in Montana that has received more than $12 million of state and federal subsidies since it was founded. Two-thirds of the cattle operation is on public land, which means the Kochs pay grazing fees that are far below market rates while taxpayers make up the difference. (In 2011, the state of Montana proposed raising these fees to get them closer to market, and a guy from the Kochs’ ranch showed up to the hearing to protest this increase.)