The Eye

Mya Responds To Rumors That She Is Jay Z's Mistress, Says She 'Never Did, Never Was, Never Will'

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Getty Images: Jason Merritt)

Mya is reportedly denying rumors that she and Jay Z had a fling with one another amid speculation that Beyoncé's husband cheated on her.



Earlier today, the Internet was running rampant with reports that the rapper had been having a long-term affair with Mya, however, the 34-year old singer took to Instagram to quickly put the rumors to rest, E! Online reports.



In response to a user asking Mya if she was Jay's mistress, she wrote, "Never did, never was, never will. Illegitimate, thirsty sources with no facts and that's the 'media' for you - especially today. I play second to no one, pay my own bills, have my own label, own management company, rely on God only and respect myself & marriage too much for nonsense."



The singer continued, "False rumors are crafted for ratings & numbers. And miserable, unhappy people need someone to judge to deter the attention away from their own misery and feel better about their miserable lives. If they did it to Jesus, they'll do it to anyone. God bless."







The rumors began from a blind item posted online claiming that the 44-year-old rapper had a longtime relationship with a "very short named R&B star who hasn't had a hit in awhile and doesn't really even act or record any longer."



"She basically lives off the generosity of Jay-Z and a couple of other guys," the post claimed.



The rumors of infidelity began after the Met Gala brawl Jay had with Beyoncé's sister, Solange Knowles. Beyoncé added fuel to the rumors earlier this week when she changed the lyrics to her 2006 song "Resentment", ironically about infidelity, during her "On the Run" tour to reflect the number of years her and her hubby had been married.



Despite heated rumors that the couple are headed for splitsville, Beyoncé has taken to Instagram and her personal website to post adorable photos of the family relaxing and enjoying one another's company.











SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.