Students were released hours after the school was locked down on Feb. 12. (Source: KPHO/KTVK)

Police cordoned off the school on the day of the shooting. (Source: KPHO/KTVK)

The bodies of Dorothy Dutiel, left, and May Kieu, right, were found Feb. 12. Each suffered a single gunshot wound, police said. (Source: Facebook)

A female student showed off a black handgun in a hallway at Independence High School one day before the murder-suicide on campus, according to an interview in a newly released police report.

A 14-year-old freshman told police she spotted a girl take a handgun out of a lime green backpack Feb. 11 and show it to a male student during 6th period in the basement of the main administration building, saying, “Look at what I got.”

[READ MORE: Murder-suicide leaves 2 teenage girls dead at Independence HS]

The witness did not report the incident to teachers or staff. The 14-year-old, apparently unsure of what she saw at the time, told a detective she did not want to file a false accusation if the object wasn’t really a gun, and said she was also worried about “being retaliated against for telling on the female” student, according to a report by the officer who conducted the interview.

The following day, investigators say 15-year-old Dorothy Dutiel shot and killed a 15-year-old classmate with a handgun, identified by family members and friends as May Kieu, before turning the gun on herself. Glendale police announced Friday the department is recommending a class 6 felony charge against the 15-year-old boy who supplied the handgun to Dutiel.

[RELATED: PD: Teen suspect in murder-suicide got gun from classmate]

Despite the striking similarities between the incidents at Independence High School just one day apart, it’s unclear if the two are connected.

According to the police report, the 14-year-old witness told the detective she knew the two female students killed in the murder-suicide, but insisted the girl with the gun the previous day was not one of them. She said the girl was African-American and in 9th grade; Dutiel is white, Kieu is of Asian descent, and both were in 10th grade.

[Slideshow: 2 teens shot dead at Independence High]

It’s hard to tell what investigators make of the interview, but it’s included in the 87-page preliminary report released Friday. Included with the report were dozens of pictures, including images of a backpack left inside Dorothy Dutiel’s room on the day of the shooting with a loaded magazine inside it. The backpack is covered in lime green spots.

“Before I left their home, I advised [the 14-year-old witness] that if she ever saw a person with a gun on campus she should tell a teacher, administrator, or school resource officer immediately,” Det. Joe Dziawura wrote in the report.

[RELATED: Gun charge recommended in Independence High School murder-suicide]

[Click here for GoFundMe account for Dorothy Dutiel]

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.