Last week we learned that former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton appears to "again" be delaying her timeline for officially announcing a presidential run. Last fall, she signaled that she would announce after the first of the year, then more recently, we were told it would likely be April, and now, it seems, she's looking to wait until July. I wonder if in June, we'll hear that she plans to follow in her husband's shoes and wait to until early October.

For those who understand the political perceptions attending the quarterly financial reports of presidential candidates during the "invisible primary," her campaign's three-months-at-a-time delays (as opposed to one month or two) make sense. Most presidential aspirants announce their candidacies around the reporting deadlines (March 30, June 30, September 30, December 31), so as to maximize their fundraising haul in the next reporting period – the one that will be scrutinized as a portent of the candidate's electoral viability.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

But Clinton's timing issue isn't likely about money.

It's about oxygen – energy, interest and media coverage.

For even though the tone of these news stories about the timing of Clinton's entry were positive – focusing mainly on the lack of any serious Democratic competition and how her her favorability ratings remain higher as long as stays outside the political fray – as the Washington Post's Chris Cillizza suggested, delay does not mean it's all a bed of roses.

Risks come with decisions – and waiting is a decision to not act.

The longer she stays quiet, the more likely it is that her progressive critics will grow louder, arguing that Clinton's expecting a royal coronation, rather than a Democratic nomination contest. They may well end up undermining her legitimacy as President Barack Obama's pseudo-heir apparent, along with party unity about the benefits of her candidacy.

[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Democratic Party]

Not declaring may also unintentionally signal to voters that she really doesn't want to be president or that she doesn't believe that campaigning is important. Actions speak louder than words – especially politicians' words – and she may lose some of the people's trust by not taking to the stump to show that she'll fight tirelessly for them. Front porch campaigns haven't been popular (or effective) in over a century.

If these risks are real, then why would Clinton take them, when she could prevent them by jumping in this spring? Because the bigger risk for her and her team is that she declares her candidacy in late March and then no one takes much notice of her campaign for a year.

Not the Democrats who expect her to win.

Not the Republicans who will be busy arguing among themselves.

[SEE: 2014: The Year in Cartoons]

And most significantly, not the media who will likely do a couple of stories on her each week because they will be forced to cover her campaign, but who will be mostly focused on which Republican candidate will face her in November 2016. In essence, she'll be treated like an incumbent, but she can't even make governing news (run a "Rose Garden" strategy) because she no longer holds political office and her work is largely paid speechmaking.

Aside from this, the sooner she jumps in, the more surround sound "fire" she is likely to take from the many Republicans who are likely to be running. For when they are not battling each other, they're surely going to be going after her. In short, the Republicans know she's "it" and that turns her into a bigger target for all of them.

And, of course, in the end, it also comes down to money. Financially sustaining a campaign that is running a non-competitive race is harder than you might think. Donors tend to think that a safe candidate doesn't need their support; they wait to write their checks.