He may not know it yet but, according to senior congressional staffers with ties to the Budget Committee and the House leadership, Doug Elmendorf is out as director of the Congressional Budget Committee.

It may not yet be officially official, but Georgia Republican Rep. Tom Price, the incoming chairman of the House Budget Committee, wants somebody new running the agency that, by statute, is charged with determining how much proposed legislation will add to or subtract from the federal treasury.

The position of CBO director was established in 1974 by the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act, one of the first in a series of Watergate-era reforms that fundamentally changed the relationship between the legislative and executive branches of government.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Economy]

According to the non-partisan Congressional Research Service, the mission of the CBO is to “support the House and Senate in the federal budget process by providing budgetary analysis and information” and to prepare “annual reports on the economic and budget outlook and on the President’s budget proposals.” It also, and this is a key point for those who are apparently winning the argument over the need for change at the top, “provides cost estimates of legislation, scorekeeping reports, assessments of unfunded mandates” and other materials essential to discussions of taxing and spending.

Elmendorf has been caught with his hand in the statistical cookie jar on more than one occasion. As reported by The New York Times, The Washington Post, and other outlets, under his leadership the CBO determined more than once that the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act – which most of us know as Obamacare – would lead to reductions in the federal deficit. Using the same data, however, the Republican staff of the Senate Budget Committee calculated the act would produce a $131 billion increase in the deficit over the same 10-year period measured by Elmendorf’s analysts.

With so much on its plate for the beginning of the year – including but not limited to consideration of a fiscal year 2016 budget resolution, budget reconciliation and the Keystone XL pipeline legislation – Congress will be extremely reliant on the CBO to provide accurate scores. There is a developing consensus among congressional spending hawks on and off Capitol Hill that this will be impossible with Elmendorf in charge. It is almost certain that Price believes this, according to people who are familiar with the unfolding situation.



[MORE: Editorial Cartoons on the Deficit and Budget]