Wisconsin Republican Gov. Scott Walker, left, and his Democratic challenger, Mary Burke, at a debate in Eau Claire, Wis. Credit: Marisa Wojcik

By of the

With Wisconsin's race for governor in a virtual dead heat, Republican Gov. Scott Walker and Democratic challenger Mary Burke welcomed political stars from their respective parties on Monday, each of them trying to get out the vote 36 days before the election.

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie — like Walker, a possible presidential candidate in 2016 — made two stops with the governor in Hudson early Monday. Later in the day, first lady Michelle Obama rallied an enthusiastic crowd for Burke in downtown Milwaukee.

"This is the work that gets it done," Obama told hundreds gathered at the Wisconsin Center. "Getting everyone you know out to vote for Mary Burke."

The first lady's speech hit high points of the Democratic Party platform: raising the minimum wage, maintaining women's rights to make their own health care choices, supporting families by improving schools. She stressed the economy was improving under her husband's leadership, with more jobs created under his tenure and the passage of the Affordable Care Act reducing the number of people without health insurance.

But the bigger message was how critical the midterm elections are, in Wisconsin and elsewhere, to continue that work. At least on the Democrats' terms.

Obama said her husband's election in 2008 and re-election in 2012 were the result of people showing up to vote who hadn't before, such as women and minorities and young people.

"But then when midterms come along, too many of our people just tuned out," she said. "And that's what folks on the other side are counting on this year. Because when we stay home, they win. They're assuming we won't be organized and energized. And only we can prove them wrong."

He made 'hard decisions'

In his appearances, Christie held Walker up as someone who brought honesty and integrity to the job. He contrasted that with Burke, who is being criticized by Walker and Republicans for having language and ideas in her jobs plan that were also used by other Democratic candidates for governor.

Burke has blamed a consultant who worked for all of the campaigns and cut ties with him. But Christie needled her on the subject.

"If you can't trust her honesty and her integrity when she tells you this is her plan, why would you trust her on anything else she tells you about what she'll do for Wisconsin or Scott's record?" Christie said at a local Republican Party headquarters.

Christie brought up Burke's credentials as a Harvard Business School graduate. Walker does not have a college degree.

"I didn't go to Harvard Business School, but I don't think they were teaching plagiarism," Christie said.

Walker and Christie also toured a heavy equipment manufacturing plant that was used as a backdrop to talk about Wisconsin's job recovery. The state has added more than 100,000 private-sector jobs under Walker.

Christie and Walker downplayed their potential 2016 rivalry.

Christie, who campaigned for Walker during his 2012 recall that was launched after Walker took on public-sector unions, said this campaign was personal to him.

"Scott has done the things that a good governor needs to do," Christie said. "He's made the hard decisions. He deserves to be re-elected."

'We need a change'

At the Burke event, a number of people in the crowd were upset about a lack of seating. Several people, including a woman using two canes, complained that she had nowhere to sit.

Reporters and photographers were cordoned off in a central area with chairs and tables. Several people in the crowd asked if they could have extra chairs reserved for the media — but reporters were initially forbidden from handing them over. Eventually, some of the Burke staff gave the extra chairs to attendees.

Burke and White House staff also told reporters not to talk to people in the crowd before the event.

Burke supporters interviewed after the event said they were focused on the message of the day.

Rose Dotson, 59, of Mequon said she was impressed by Burke's track record in creating jobs. "We need a change," she said.

Burke helped contribute to the growth of Trek Bicycle Corp., her family's company.

Dotson's sister, Karen Dotson, 57, of Milwaukee, said she would work to encourage others to vote.

Lisa Conley, 51, of Fox Point said she thought the issue of raising the minimum wage would inspire voters to get to the polls on Nov. 4.

"Some people say they don't think their vote matters," said Conley. "That issue should rally them."

Victoria Bond, 56, a retired social studies teacher from Milwaukee, said Wisconsin needs a change from Walker's economics policy that she said was based on trickle-down economics.

"We're not getting any trickle," she said.

This surely won't be the last visit for either candidate from party luminaries.

The Democratic National Committee has confirmed that President Barack Obama will also visit Wisconsin to support Burke's campaign before the Nov. 4 election.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.