The Death of Coe Holbrook, a Conservative Republican, Is Lamented in Liberal WeHo

Tue, Feb 16, 2016 By 5 Comments By Staff

The death last week of Coe Holbrook, a conservative Republican in an overwhelmingly liberal and Democratic town, prompted the West Hollywood City Council tonight to adjourn in his memory and spurred dozens of his friends and acquaintances to offer warm thoughts about him.

Holbrook, a 17-year resident of Mediterranean Village, the apartment complex at 840 N. Larrabee St., was found dead at his apartment last Thursday, an apparent victim of suicide.

Councilmember John D’Amico asked for the adjournment in Holbrook’s honor. D’Amico, who, like Holbrook, works at UCLA, joked that Holbrook “used to say that he thought of himself as being to the right of Attila the Hun.”

Holbrook was a computer programmer at UCLA who in recent years has shown up to offer comments at City Council meetings. He also published a blog sharing his opinions on subjects such as Obamacare (“The Obscenity That Is Obamacare”) and a complaint to the City Council about Go Go Appreciation Day. Rhyss Leary, who worked with Holbrook for three years, said he was a “very intelligent” man known for “having his own take on things.” Holbrook also was a proud memory of the recovery community. ” Coe was an active member of West Hollywood’s recovery community for many years,” said Councilmember John Duran. “We will all miss him terribly. It’s a reminder to all of us in the recovery community to watch over one another.”

Holbrook was known for walking his dog, Walt, along Santa Monica Boulevard in the city’s Boystown area and for hanging out at Yogurt Stop. However, Leary said, “Coe’s world is composed of his apartment and his (work) cubicle. If Liberace had an apartment in West Hollywood that would be it. Every nook and cranny was filled.”

The stuff Holbrook kept in his apartment was the subject of a major disagreement between him and his landlord, which tried to have him evicted, alleging that he was hoarding and had had an altercation with the building manager. Steve Martin, who represented Holbrook in his fight with the landlord, complained that the landlord had been difficult to deal with, at one point filing a restraining order against Holbrook using “completely concocted allegations.” The landlord refused to accept direct deposits of Holbrook’s rent checks, and the building manager also refused to accept a package containing the ashes of Holbrook’s deceased brother that was mailed to him in December after his mother died, Martin said.

A court hearing on Mediterranean Village’s suit to evict Holbrook had been set for Feb. 8 but was postponed. Leary said he had seen his co-worker that night. But “he didn’t come in on Tuesday,” Leary said. “My boss called and said ‘where’s Coe?’ His not being there was not normal.”

“Wednesday we sent the Sheriff to do a wellness check,” Leary said. He said they were told that Holbrook was okay and then learned of is death on Thursday.

Perhaps Holbrook’s most valued possession was Walt, his dog. Holbrook posted a number of videos on YouTube focused on Walt, including one showing his dog walking him. Walt is being taken care of by a friend, Jeff Owen.

The dozens of commenters on Holbrook’s Facebook page expressed their sadness at his loss. But several couldn’t resist making comments that reflected his charming eccentricity.

“I can just imagine the funny s–t your whispering in God’s ear, that brings a small smile to me, and some comfort,” wrote one.

Tagged coe holbrook, mediterranean village