Please enable Javascript to watch this video

DES MOINES, Iowa -- Monday marked the start of the first full week of Iowa’s privatized managed Medicaid system. The roll out began Friday, April 1.

For months, Democrats said Gov. Terry Branstad tried to rush his Medicaid privatization plan through. The federal government agreed and forced him to wait.

Instead of switching everything in January, it was delayed until April 1 when Branstad turned over the public’s healthcare for the poor and disabled to private providers. The Iowa Department of Public Health said 3,000 people called its offices Friday for the first day of the switch.

Prior to the switch, Democrats at the Statehouse held hearings, and Iowans vented frustrations and fears.

Now, nearly one in five Iowans are part of the massive Medicaid overhaul.

The roll out of the system has seen some of the same road bumps that came with the launch of the Affordable Care Act like patients losing appointments and other technical issues.

Gov. Terry Branstad called the launch a success on Monday and urged patients to be patient with the system.

"Nothing of this magnitude is going to be totally glitch-free, but the reports I’ve been getting is it’s been relatively smooth. There’s all kinds of opportunities to call if they have a glitch or a problem. We don't expect anything to be glitch-free, but we it as seamless and as smooth as possible,” Branstad said. "We don't need to hire an army of 130 people and drive up the costs. We want to provide the very best, quality care and make sure it’s coordinated and there’s adequate oversight.”

At a conference Monday, the governor lined up the three companies charged with the new system to assure everyone the change is working. One by one, they sold Iowans on how managed care is better care.

The three companies say they have about 584,000 Iowans signed up, and they have about 31,000 doctors and providers ready to deliver. The companies say they will provide more wellness than the state plan did.

“The ultimate goal is better health outcomes,” Lt. Gov. Kim Reynolds said.

It’s also to save taxpayers’ money. The governor is banking the budget on it, his reputation, too.

“The benefits that were there before are there but there are new services that are also being provided,” Branstad said.

The transition includes shifting to three separate managed care organizations, or MCOs. Members can choose between Ameri-Health, Ameri-Group or United Health Care.

Amy McCoy, spokesperson for the Iowa Department of Human Services, said the DHS website has helpful information including videos to help make things clear. The number for the DHS Contact Center is 1-855-889-7985.