If Justin Bieber and Selena Gomez aren’t telling the world they have reunited, we’re not sure we know what color the sky is.

On Friday, the 19-year-old posted a romantically-toned, black and white photograph of the twosome to his Instagram account.

In the picture, a smiling Selena gazes warmly at the “All That Matters” star, who looks to-camera with an unreadable expression.

Luckily, there’s a caption to explain the heartthrob’s mood. “Love the way you look at me,” the Canadian wrote.

The Instagram comes two days after the pair were spotted riding Segways around Bieber’s plush, gated Calabasas, California neighborhood on Thursday, after months of not being seen together.

The ex-sweethearts, who dated for two years before first splitting up in November 2012, were snapped by a bystander, Nick Sanitsky, who tweeted photos of the pop stars’ surprise joyride.

“Bieber and Selena segwaying in the Oaks. She was so nice, so he yelled at us,” he wrote.

(Photo: Instagram)

The passerby went on to add the former couple’s scooter jaunt held up traffic and claimed the teen idol “ruined” his celebrity-voyeur moment by being “rude” to him. It’s worth noting no-one has heard Justin’s side of that alleged exchange. It’s possible he was provoked, and maybe not.

Rewinding the ballad of Bieber and Gomez, he posted a memorably steamy Instagram of himself and the “Come and Get Me” starlet during her April visit to see him in Europe while he performed Believe tour dates.

At the time it sparked reunion rumors, more Instagrams and more sightings. But it all seemed to fizzle out as the year wore on.

Perhaps it’s different this time.

Bieber has just spent three months releasing a run of 10 songs in his Music Mondays series ahead of the release of his latest Journals album. So far, he has revealed at least two of the songs in the set — “Heartbreaker” and “All That Matters” — are about the Latina.

Has his very public musical declaration of affection finally thawed the recent radio silence between the pair now that the actress-singer is back in California?

Image via Twitter

Gomez recently canceled the Australian and Asia legs of her Stars Dance World Tour, citing a need to focus on herself amid reports she suffers from the auto-immune disease Lupus.

In addition to Journals, in a December interview with Los Angeles’ Power 106 radio station, Bieber openly admitted he still loved his ex-girlfriend.

“It affected us, especially when we are in front of so many people,” he told the host Big Boy while describing one of their breakups. “It’s such a public thing. It’s just hard for the both of us. But you know, she’s a great woman. I love her till this day. I think we’re going to be the greatest of friends.”

At the time, Justin added, “Right now we’re taking a little time and not talking.”

Looks like they’re talking just fine now.

Wonder how long it will be before critical and highly dubious sources have their say?