DOWNERS GROVE, Illinois – Oak Trace announces Mark Longenecker as its new executive director. In his new position, Longenecker is responsible for overseeing day-to-day operations of the entire senior living community, including dining, marketing, health services and activities. Longenecker brings nearly 20 years in senior living leadership to Oak Trace.

Before joining Oak Trace, Longenecker worked as the senior vice president of operations for three years at Christian Homes Inc., a senior living organization based in the Midwest. He also previously held senior leadership positions at Extendicare Health Services and Golden Living Senior Care.

“Just because residents are happy with where we are now, doesn’t mean we should stop improving,” Longenecker said. “We’re going to continue upgrading our services across the board, since we want Oak Trace to be the best community it can be for all our residents and colleagues.”

Longenecker’s first major project at Oak Trace was for the community’s Health Center to join a Post-Acute Network and become an Accountable Care Organization (ACO). Because Oak Trace is a continuing care retirement community, residents who first live in independent living have priority access to on-site health care, if they ever need it. The ACO designation ensures residents would receive high-quality care on site, with the convenient option of not having to leave the community for preventive treatment and regular physician appointments. As an ACO, Oak Trace will also reduce rehospitalization rates, collaborate with local specialists and improve care standards.

“With the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act in place, it’s very important for senior living communities to embrace ACOs,” said Longenecker. “Not only is it a fiscally responsible move, but it also provides residents higher-quality care, and that’s a top priority for us at Oak Trace.”

About Oak Trace

Oak Trace, located at 200 Village Drive in Downers Grove, is a community that provides seniors a unique lifestyle experience and a variety of residential options, including maintenance-free independent living apartment homes, catered living, memory support, skilled nursing care and rehabilitation. Residents enjoy a full range of services and amenities, such as a fitness center, hair salon, on-campus walking trail, library, and variety of dining options with chef-prepared meals. More information about Oak Trace is available by calling (630) 769-6565 or by visiting www.OakTraceDG.com.

About Lifespace Communities, Inc.

Oak Trace is owned and operated by Lifespace Communities, Inc. Founded in 1976, Lifespace Communities, based in Des Moines, Iowa, is a not-for-profit corporation that has grown to operate

12 continuing care retirement communities in seven states, serving more than 5,000 residents and employing 2,700 team members. Communities are located in Iowa, Minnesota, Kansas, Illinois, Nebraska, Pennsylvania and Florida. The organization is recognized by the LeadingAge Ziegler

Top 100 as the seventh largest not-for-profit senior living provider system in the country. For more information about Lifespace and its communities, visit www.LifespaceCommunities.com.