President Obama has been referred to as the most arrogant president in U.S. history, and there are many examples to back that allegation.

American Overlook collected the top five most arrogant moments seen in the Obama administration in 2013. BizPac Review covered each of these events.

1. Obama on Syria, with or without Congress

Obama spoke in the Rose Garden saying he would seek approval from Congress before taking any action, but a senior State Department official said that Obama felt he had the authority to act without them. Read: Senior at State Dept.: If Congress says ‘no’ to Syria, Obama will strike anyway

2. IRS scandal official changes jobs

The IRS official who was in charge of the unfair targeting of conservative organizations left her job. The problem was, she was promoted to running the IRS’ enforcement of the individual mandate in the Obamacare program. Read: Chief of IRS’s scandal-ridden tax-exempt unit will run Obamacare

3. Obama’s inappropriate selfie

Last month Obama traveled to South Africa to attend the memorial service for former President Nelson Mandela. During what should have been a somber moment, Obama was seen snapping a “selfie” along with Danish Prime Minister Helle Thorning-Schmidt and British Prime Minister David Cameron. Read: Obama’s giddy selfie; Michelle’s dirty looks dominate Mandela memorial coverage

4. John Kerry ignores Egyptian crisis

You can’t talk about the arrogance of the Obama administration without mentioning John Kerry. The Secretary of State was enjoying his summer vacation on his yacht in Nantucket while Egypt exploded. Read: Drama follows claims of John Kerry yachting during Egypt’s coup

5. Hillary Clinton’s Benghazi testimony

In January 2013, then Secretary of State Hillary Clinton testified before Congress on the administration’s debacle that was Benghazi. Should she run for president in 2016, her infamous, “what difference does it make,” words will come back to haunt her. Read: Clinton’s wrath unleashed during Benghazi testimony

What else should be added? Leave your suggestions below.

H/T: American Overlook