Project 'is really about dreaming big'

Centaurus High School sophomore Nora Cuthbertson, left, and freshman Abby Schreiber experiment with design patters for their school on Thursday while working on design ideas for renovating Centaurus High School in Lafayette. ( Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer )

Centaurus High freshman Abby Schreiber wasn't thrilled with her new building when she started school this fall, so she was happy to share ideas with a design team on improving the school when it's remodeled.

"This place desperately needs a new coat of paint," she said. "Most of our classrooms are too small. This whole place feels like a maze. And we need a better commons area. It's way too small for all the students. There's a lot of room for improvement."

Abby was one of the participants at a design workshop last week that was led by Fielding Nair International, a Minneapolis-based architectural firm.

Boulder Valley contracted with the firm to work with schools this fall on innovative design as they start planning for projects in the district's $576.5 million construction package. The projects will be paid for through a bond issue approved in November.

Fielding Nair will work directly with local architects on designs for five of the biggest projects — a new K-8 campus in Erie, rebuilding Creekside, Douglass and Emerald elementary schools, and remodeling Centaurus.

Projects could include elements such as non-traditional furniture, small performance spaces for presentations, labs to support project-based learning, and 3D printer or video production labs.

Advertisement

Centaurus, built in 1973, is getting a $23 million remodel that includes renovating music classrooms, more special education space, renovating the library, renovating the kitchen and cafeteria, modernizing the weight room, repairing tennis courts, adding a fitness room and renovating the stadium.

A main goal, school officials said, is creating spaces that allow more student-led and project-based learning.

"We want to have a better facility," said senior Arthur Caio Gajdys.

For the workshop, students, teachers and parents first looked at examples of other schools with innovative designs. Then they worked in small groups, prioritizing different design elements, such as outdoor classrooms, quiet "cave spaces" and activity labs.

"Today is really about dreaming big," said Tracee Worley, an education consultant at Fielding Nair.

Junior Moniphon Xiong said a new design for classrooms is "really important." She liked more windows and more openness between rooms, both for classrooms and the "claustrophobic" main and secondary gyms.

"Just sitting in rows in a classroom gets boring," she said. "I feel like I'm in jail in the classrooms. It feels better when you can see something."

She also was a fan of quiet cave spaces and smaller eating areas scattered around the school.

"I have to go to Starbucks to feel like I can relax," she said.

Senior Taylor Rhodes added that he likes the idea of more outdoor classroom spaces, plus maybe smaller cave spaces in classrooms.

"We need more of an open feeling," he said.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa