Surprise pick: Blaine Boekhorst

Carlton pulled the surprise of the national draft, ignoring the best under-age talent with their first pick and taking a mature-aged player from the WAFL on Thursday night.

The Blues chose 21-year-old midfielder Blaine Boekhorst from Swan Districts with their first selection, pick 19. He was the only mature-aged player selected in the draft.

"I think all clubs would have been tracking him all year, it's just where we picked him. I suppose where you find good players you pick them, it doesn't matter what order they come in," Carlton recruiting manager Shane Rogers said.

"He is a pretty good player. It's a funny one, I have had people internally ask the same question [about why take him that early] and wherever they are, good players, I don't care what age they are, what colour they are, what race they are, I will pick them and he is one of the good players we thought was right up on our list, so that is why we picked him where we did.

Advertisement

"There was a little bit of interest from other clubs but that didn't sway me from picking him. It's a bold pick, [Troy] Menzel was a bold pick, we have had a few bold picks, let's hope it works out. He has played state WAFL footy, he should be able to walk in and have a bit of an impact for us."

The Blues had slid in the draft from pick 7 to 19 after trading with the Giants for Kristian Jaksch and Mark Whiley then made the surprise move to take the mature-aged player at a pick earlier than most clubs thought he would go.

And the Giants swung a surprise of their own by taking Australian under-19 cricket team captain Patrick McKenna with pick 23. "We tracked him late in the season. We spoke to him late in the year and he was undecided on what he would do, he toured Sri Lanka so he was going to make his decision after that tour and when he came back he said he wanted to play AFL footy so we obviously tracked him and we feel as though we have a fairly good prospect on our hands," GWS recruiter Stephen Silvagni said.

It was a draft in which tall players were prominent, with the Saints choosing key forward Paddy McCartin with pick one ahead of dynamic midfielder Christian Petracca and four of the top 10 picks in the draft all tall players.

Three of the top 10 picks were also indigenous players – Jarrod Pickett at GWS with pick 4, Paul Ahern a Giant at pick 7 and the Cats selecting a draft bolter with Nakia Cockatoo at pick 10.

Cockatoo, who missed most of the year with a broken foot, starred in the final games of the season to soar into the top 10. He was the player several clubs said might prove to be the one to surprise and be considered the steal of the draft.

In other moves Melbourne chose Oscar McDonald, brother of key defender Tom McDonald, while Ed Langdon, the brother of Collingwood's Tom, was taken by Fremantle.

Adelaide chose ruckman forward Harry Dear with pick 58 after Hawthorn decided against nominating the son of former Norm Smith medallist Paul as a father-son selection. Jayden Foster, son of Peter, has gone to Carlton with pick 63 after the Bulldogs chose not to take him as a father-son selection.

The Hawks took another son of a former player – Teia Miles, the son of Geoff Miles who played for Collingwood, West Coast and Geelong.

Another Goddard has joined St Kilda with former Saint – and now Bomber – Brendon Goddard's cousin Hugh joining the Saints after being taken with pick 21.

St Kilda ignored any niggling concerns raised by McCartin's diabetes by taking the power forward. The Saints kept their decision so confidential they did not even inform the player until his name was read out.

"I didn't know, I just found out now like everyone. It's been a bit daunting, a big couple of days, but I'm absolutely stoked to get the opportunity," McCartin said. "But it's just a number and I'll be the same as everyone at the club."

The McCartin decision meant Melbourne was free to take the best two midfielders in the country, selecting Petracca with pick two and Angus Brayshaw with three. After the selections of Dom Tyson, Christian Salem, Jack Viney and Jimmy Toumpas in recent drafts or trade periods, the Demons have rapidly stockpiled an impressive and deep young midfield of elite talent.

The Giants took the super quick outside midfielder and forward Pickett with pick four, while Collingwood selected the aggressive midfielder Jordan DeGoey.