The Republican Party’s war within just opened a new front: Senate committees.

As the party takes control of the Senate, establishment Republicans like Thad Cochran, Orrin Hatch, Chuck Grassley and John McCain are about to pick up the chairman’s gavel, setting up a classic conflict between governing and campaigning with the party’s White House-aspiring young guns like Ted Cruz, Rand Paul and Marco Rubio. On everything from foreign aid and military funding to how to undermine Obamacare, Republicans are just as likely to clash with each other as with President Barack Obama.

Story Continued Below

Here, then, is POLITICO’s guide to how it will play out as the Senate’s committees change hands.

( Also on POLITICO: The war over Obama's new war in Iraq)

Our survey looks at the 16 legislative committees, identifying the likely chairmen and interviewing many of them and their top aides. The story that emerges is one of ideological divide and tactical debate, with an inherent tension in the committees — between the gavel holders and the 2016 stars — making hearing rooms worth watching as Republicans try to prove they aren’t just a party of no.

Younger conservatives hope to pass bold conservative blueprints on core issues like health care and taxes, even if they’re doomed to face a presidential veto. Committee chairmen believe that governing requires sometimes putting the possible ahead of the ideal.

“When you look at who’s coming up with the ideas in the Senate, they tend to come from people like Paul and Cruz and Rubio,” said Dan Holler, a spokesman for Heritage Action for America. “Even within the leadership of the Senate, they know the ideas that are going to excite and energize the party are going to come from those … guys.”

Paul, for example, is trying to steer the Republican Party to become more skeptical of military action and foreign aid. He’ll have McCain on his tail — because the new Armed Services chairman is sure to keep warning that Paul’s ideas would weaken America’s position of leadership in the world.

( Also on POLITICO: In politics, 40 is the new 50)

And then there’s Cruz, who wants to keep throwing red meat to the base by picking fights with Obama on everything, but especially Obamacare. A lot of conservative activists will side with Cruz, and committee chairmen like Hatch could find themselves in trouble if they don’t sign on to an agenda of repealing the entire health care law through the budget reconciliation process, rather than just the most unpopular parts — a strategy that would guarantee a veto from Obama.

That prospect has GOP strategists worried about the implications for the party, since a closely divided Senate would give a lot of power to a single senator — like Cruz — to hold things up if they don’t get their way.

“The tension is going to be, do they want to reach agreements — and does President Obama want to reach agreements — and if the answer is yes, are they able to do that, or does a presidential candidate who’s running to the right stop any agreements from taking place?” said Ari Fleischer, a former White House press secretary who has also served as a top Senate GOP aide.

Still, some GOP strategists hope to find a third option between compromising with Democrats on divisive issues and imposing a hard-right agenda: finding issues on which the Republican base is comfortable — such as promoting international trade, approving the Keystone XL pipeline and repealing the medical-device tax — and trying to peel off enough Democratic support to make them law. “I think the hope is that things move forward,” said the veteran Republican pollster David Winston. “For a whole lot of reasons, there’s going to be a focus on jobs and the economy, and then after that there will be an assessment of what’s achievable and what’s not.”

Getty

Then again, the ranks of the new committee chairmen will include enough hard-line conservatives to ensure regular clashes with the White House. Jim Inhofe of Oklahoma, the likely new chairman of Environment and Public Works, a climate change skeptic, is prepared to challenge Environmental Protection Agency rules across the board, especially the greenhouse gas emissions rule. And Jeff Sessions, who’s set to become the new Budget Committee chairman, opposed last year’s bipartisan deal to put sequestration on hold for two years — not a good sign given that the cuts are about to hit again.

Even the most combative chairmen, however, may not be on the same page as the 2016-ers, who will want to set up fights big enough to define the future of the country. “I think the tension is going to be present for the next two years,” said Fleischer.

Intro by David Nather, senior policy reporter

***

The Committee: Agriculture, Nutrition & Forestry

The Chair: Pat Roberts (Kansas)

The Lowdown: Roberts could throw a major wrinkle into what has been so far a smooth implementation by the Obama administration of the five-year, $500 billion farm bill signed in February. The self-styled champion of Midwest farmers cast an emphatic “no” vote on the bill because it failed to rein in spending on food stamps, tied crop insurance to conservation restrictions and brought back crop subsidies based on “target prices” — something Roberts says will encourage farmers to ignore market demand and plant for government checks.

Roberts could also tackle the Environmental Protection Agency’s proposed “Waters of the U.S.” rule. Democrats had given the lead to the Environment and Public Works Committee on the proposal, which the farm lobby says will bury them under permit requirements and red tape by expanding the types of bodies of water the agency protects. Roberts, though, is expected to use the Agriculture Committee gavel to broaden the GOP fight against the proposal. The Kansas Farm Bureau — one of the strongest sources of support for Roberts during his latest election battle — has made withdrawal or revision of the rule a priority, and so will Roberts.

Roberts’ Top Bills:

• Amend the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act: Roberts and Sen. Mike Johanns’ proposal would do away with permit requirements for registered pesticides.

• Improve Nutrition Program Integrity and Deficit Reduction Act of 2013: This bill would cut billions from food stamps by doing away with state eligibility and killing a loophole that allows states to distribute additional food stamps by sending families heating assistance checks even though they do not have heating bills.

Pro Take: Roberts, with his long background in championing issues like a stronger crop insurance program, is one of only a few lawmakers who could get away with reopening the 2014 farm bill — and GOP leaders in the House expect him to — to make significant cuts to food stamps.

Bipartisan Moment: EPA’s efforts to expand its regulatory authority over farming activity near rivers, streams and even ditches has become an issue that many Democratic farm-state legislators also have embraced, pushing back on the Obama administration.

The Troublemaker: Sen. Thad Cochran. Democrats are not the only lawmakers who want to prevent deeper cuts to food stamps. The Mississippi Republican and expected chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee has stood with the panel’s Democratic chair, Michigan Sen. Debbie Stabenow, and others to foil previous efforts by Roberts to chop tens of billions of dollars in spending from the food stamp program.

Cochran told POLITICO that he did not see any reason to reopen the farm bill, including making cuts to food stamps. “We worked real hard to put together that farm bill,” he said. “It is very evenly balanced between a lot of interests. … I think we ought to be open to any suggestions for reconsidering any things that are problematic, but I don’t know of any that are.”

Pain for Obama: Roberts is expected to call in a long list of Agriculture Department officials and throw under the microscope all of their efforts to implement the 2014 farm bill.

Signature Moment: In 2000, Congress approved a major boost to the government-subsidized crop insurance program, pushing premium subsidies higher and encouraging farmers to purchase higher coverage levels. Roberts wrote the bill with Sen. Bob Kerrey (D-Nebraska).

Compiled by Bill Tomson, senior agriculture reporter

***

The Committee: Appropriations

The Chair: Thad Cochran (Mississippi)

The Lowdown: Cochran can and will use the committee to aid individual senators. During his previous turn as panel chair he made sure the appropriations panel sent billions home to Mississippi for recovery from Hurricane Katrina.

Cochran’s Top Bills:

• Funding the government through the end of fiscal ’15. To avoid another partial shutdown, something’s got to happen by Dec. 11 — or else a new deadline must be set if the upcoming lame-duck session with Democrats still in charge punts.

• Emergency money for Ebola, ISIL and other fast-unfolding world events. Obama already asked right after Election Day for $6.2 billion to deal with Ebola in West Africa and to protect the U.S. against the virus’ spread.

• The fiscal ’16 spending bills — Congress’ most fundamental job — remains one of its most challenging, and even with a GOP majority, there’s no guarantee things will change.

Pro Take: There’s only so much Cochran will be able to do to make the appropriations process work. Everything from the order of spending bills moving to the floor to the length of a continuing resolution, to a large degree, will be decided at the leadership level. And anything Cochran manages to pass with 60 votes on the floor — never an easy lift — can’t be pulled too far to the right by House Republicans; otherwise, Obama might not sign it.

Bipartisan Moment: Cochran is in a great spot to help the new Republican majority demonstrate Congress isn’t broken. That means he’ll want to find common ground with Democrats on a couple of big spending bills and figure out a way to handle controversial amendments. While he’ll bring a softer tone to the panel compared with its current chair, Democratic Sen. Barbara Mikulski, he’s also no pushover. “Thad Cochran’s gentility should not be confused with his desire to move legislation,” said Jim Dyer, former House GOP Appropriations staff director.

The Chairmen Agriculture Committee — Pat Roberts of Kansas

Top industry: Pharmaceuticals and health products Top three donors:

• Burns & McDonnell: $116,500

• Koch Industries: $78,450

• Blue Cross/Blue Shield: $60,750

Appropriations Committee — Thad Cochran of Mississippi

Top industry: Crop production and basic processing Top three donors:

• Telapex Inc: $71,350

• Northrop Grumman: $65,300

• Raytheon Co: $60,000

Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee — Richard Shelby of Alabama

Top industry: Finance, insurance and real estate Top three donors:

• Travelers Companies: $92,500

• Drummond Co: $89,500

• Lockheed Martin: $88,800

Budget Committee — Jeff Sessions of Alabama

Top industry: Defense Aerospace Top three donors:

• International Paper: $47,500

• American Dental Association: $41,500

• Norfolk Southern: $41,000

Compiled by Patrick Temple-West, financial services reporter Source: Center for Responsive Politics

The Troublemaker: His fellow Senate and House Republicans will be looking to use must-pass spending bills to insert riders hindering Obama administration priorities on health care and the environment. But those are the same kind of poison pills likely to draw Obama veto threats and raise the stakes for another partial government shutdown.

Pain for Obama: Obama’s domestic priorities have been strangled for years by budget cuts from sequestration, and there’s no sense that anything will change now that he faces GOP majorities holding the purse strings and a very different policy agenda.

Signature moment: Cochran’s Senate career nearly ended earlier this year after he ran a sleepy primary campaign against tea party rival Chris McDaniel. Forced into a runoff, Cochran held on by a narrow 7,700-vote margin.

Compiled by Darren Samuelsohn, senior policy reporter

***

The Committee: Senate Banking Committee

The Chair: Richard Shelby (Alabama) is the favorite to be chairman, but the job could fall to Mike Crapo (Idaho), who has been the top Republican on Senate Banking since 2013.

The Lowdown: Shelby is poised to retake the committee’s gavel after serving as chairman from 2003 to 2007. The Alabama Republican can be counted on to push for a rollback of rules included in the 2010 Dodd-Frank law, but he is also no ally of Wall Street and big banks. Both regulators and big financial firms will likely be under scrutiny by Shelby.

Shelby’s Top Bills:

• Economic impact — Shelby has pushed legislation that would require regulators to perform an economic impact analysis on the rules they write. In addition, Shelby introduced a bill that would direct banking regulators to report to Congress on the impact of proposed capital rules.

• CFPB: Shelby and Republicans have long supported legislation that would require the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau to be run by a board rather than a single director and to have its funding approved annually by Congress.

• Dodd-Frank cleanup: Shelby introduced a bill that he says makes “purely technical” and nonsubstantive corrections to drafting errors in the 2010 regulatory overhaul.

Pro Take: Shelby can be expected to ramp up the committee’s oversight of Dodd-Frank and financial regulators, in particular the CFPB and the Financial Stability Oversight Council. While any attempts to scale back President Obama’s signature Wall Street reform law will meet stiff resistance from Senate Democrats and the White House, Shelby may be able to find common ground with liberals when it comes to the largest banks. They both favor, for instance, tougher funding, or capital, rules for Wall Street giants.

Bipartisan Moments: At a September committee hearing, Shelby joined Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.) in charging that recent multibillion-dollar settlements between the Justice Department and large banks were inadequate because they did not include charges against any executives. Shelby said DOJ “seems bent on money rather than justice.”

The Troublemaker: During the drafting of Dodd-Frank, Shelby was the top Republican on Banking, but it was Sen. Bob Corker (R-Tenn.) who worked most closely with Democrats — Shelby did not end up voting for the bill. Corker’s independent streak could cause headaches for Shelby this time around as well, particularly when it comes to what to do with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Corker worked closely with Democrats to produce a housing finance bill this year that Shelby opposes.

Pain for Obama: Shelby has shown little reluctance to block Obama’s nominees that he considers too liberal. This could make it more difficult for the president to fill vacancies on the Federal Reserve Board and any other regulatory slots that open. In 2011, Massachusetts Institute of Technology professor Peter Diamond, a Nobel Prize winner, withdrew as a Fed nominee when it became clear the Shelby-led opposition would not relent. Shelby said Diamond lacked the necessary monetary policy experience. Obama’s first nominee to be Fannie and Freddie’s regulator, North Carolina Banking Commissioner Joseph Smith, was also blocked by Senate Republicans, with Shelby leading the charge.

Signature Moment: In 2008, Shelby was one of 15 Republicans who voted against the creation of the $700 billion Troubled Asset Relief Program, which allowed the government to bail out banks during the financial crisis.

Compiled by Zachary Warmbrodt, financial services reporter

***

The Committee: Budget

The Chairman: Likely: Jeff Sessions (Alabama). (Sessions could be bumped by Sen. Mike Enzi, who outranks him on the panel. An Enzi spokesman said the Wyoming Republican is considering his options.)

The Lowdown: If Sessions takes the gavel, it would give one of the Senate’s most conservative members the power to change budgeting rules to make it easier to enact Republicans’ agenda.

The Docket:

• Passing a budget: After pounding Senate Democrats for years for failing to pass a budget, Republicans will be under pressure to show they can agree on a plan to put the government’s books in order.

• Reconciliation: Republicans could use the arcane parliamentary maneuver to pass legislation with a simple majority.

• Choosing a Congressional Budget Office director: Republicans will have to decide whether to replace Doug Elmendorf, whose term ends in January.

• Sequestration: After a two-year respite, sequestration will be back, with $109 billion in automatic spending cuts set to hit in the fiscal year that begins Oct. 1, 2015.

• Dynamic scoring: Republicans may overhaul the way the budgetary costs of legislation are estimated.

Pro take: The Budget Committee would likely be a hyperpartisan panel with Sessions at the helm, especially if Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) becomes its ranking member. Sessions could use reconciliation, dynamic scoring and his power to name a new CBO director to strong-arm Democrats. But that could poison the well with the other side, making the days when Budget Committee members like Sens. Judd Gregg (R-N.H.) and Kent Conrad (D-N.D.) worked together to reduce the deficit a distant memory.

Bipartisan moment: Though bipartisanship will likely be hard to come by on the panel, lawmakers will have to address sequestration, and Sessions could use his perch, as his predecessor, Democratic Sen. Patty Murray, did, to broker a bipartisan deal to head off the looming cuts.

The Troublemaker: Sanders, a Budget Committee veteran who is not only at the opposite end of the political spectrum but is also considering a 2016 presidential run. It’s hard to think of many things on which he and Sessions would not vehemently disagree.

Pain for Obama: Reconciliation can be used to sideline congressional Democrats and confront Obama with up-or-down decisions on a host of Republican priorities.

Signature moment: A 2013 bipartisan deal to head off sequestration was a signature achievement of the Budget Committee, endorsed by House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan, his ranking Democrat Chris Van Hollen and Senate Budget Committee Chairman Patty Murray. The only budget panel chieftain who opposed it? Sessions, who said it didn’t cut enough spending.

Compiled by Brian Faler, senior tax reporter