WHITE PLAINS, N.Y.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Marsh & McLennan Agency LLC (MMA), the middle market agency subsidiary of Marsh, announced today the addition of new wellness promotion and engagement tools to its MarketLink Benefits Administration & Private Exchange.

The new wellness platform brings together an online community of MarketLink users from around the country focused on being healthier. MarketLink enables participants to design programs around their personal wellness goals, connect with support groups, find health partners, join challenges, and earn rewards. This wellness platform is integrated into a full suite of employee benefit tools and resources offered via the MarketLink Exchange to empower employees to take control of their wellbeing.

The wellness platform is the latest enhancement to MMA’s MarketLink Exchange, which was launched in 2014 to help midsize employers address Affordable Care Act (ACA) requirements and manage rising health care costs. Through an integrated platform, MarketLink users can:

Offer and administer core and voluntary benefits;

Simplify ACA reporting;

Streamline spending account and COBRA administration;

Engage employees and encourage consumerism; and

Transition from online benefits administration to a private exchange seamlessly.

“The rising cost of health care combined with stringent regulations under the Affordable Care Act is causing many employers to redefine their approach to health benefits,” said Sally Prather, MMA’s National Employee Benefits Business Leader. “With the new enhanced MMA MarketLink, employers can engage employees for long term health management success without adding additional cost or burden to their human resource team and at the same time potentially reduce medical costs trends.”

About Marsh & McLennan Agency

Marsh & McLennan Agency LLC is a subsidiary of Marsh established in 2008 to serve as a platform for the middle market. In 2015, it expanded its national footprint into Canada. MMA offers commercial property, casualty, personal lines, and employee benefits to midsize businesses and individuals across North America.

About Marsh

Marsh is a global leader in insurance broking and risk management. Marsh helps clients succeed by defining, designing, and delivering innovative industry-specific solutions that help them effectively manage risk. Marsh’s approximately 30,000 colleagues work together to serve clients in more than 130 countries. Marsh is a wholly owned subsidiary of Marsh & McLennan Companies (NYSE:MMC), a global professional services firm offering clients advice and solutions in the areas of risk, strategy, and people. With annual revenue of US$13 billion and approximately 60,000 colleagues worldwide, Marsh & McLennan Companies is also the parent company of Guy Carpenter, a leader in providing risk and reinsurance intermediary services; Mercer, a leader in talent, health, retirement, and investment consulting; and Oliver Wyman, a leader in management consulting. Follow Marsh on Twitter, @MarshGlobal; LinkedIn; Facebook; and YouTube.