SPRINGFIELD ‒ Looking to shore up support for his Republican presidential run in the final push towards "Super Tuesday," Ohio Gov. John Kasich painted himself as a pragmatic problem-solver as his campaign stopped in Springfield Sunday.

Speaking to hundreds of supporters who crowded a meeting room at the MassMutual Center, the Ohio governor highlighted his political experience, as well as emphasized the differences between himself and other Republican candidates vying for the White House.

Kasich, who characterized himself as a candidate that "gets things done," told voters he won't promise things he doesn't believe he can deliver on if elected president and took aim at members of his party who do.

He, for example, chastised Republicans in Congress for pledging to repeal the Affordable Care Act -- known as "Obamacare" -- while President Barack Obama is still in office and has the power to veto such efforts.

"It was a phony promise. I try not to promise anything that I don't have a good shot of delivering," he said, pointing to his record of job creation and economic growth in Ohio.

If sent to the White House, Kasich said he would focus on policies he can follow through on, like bringing down the corporate tax, saving Social Security and ensuring all combat veterans have access to health care wherever they want it.

Despite taking aim at Congressional lawmakers on the ACA, Kasich shied from leveling any direct critiques on his GOP rivals. He blasted the race's focus on shouting and personal attacks.

"I have never seen a leader -- or anybody who's attempting to be a leader -- who has to raise their voice and yell and scream," he said. "I think about some of the ones who I have most admired in my lifetime...I never heard Ronald Reagan raise his voice or personally attack anybody that he was engaged with."

Kasich compared American politics to a NASCAR race, calling the media's focus on the negative disgraceful.

"We go to those races and want to see something happen that ain't great on turn three in Talladega," he said. "But when we go to the races we don't want to see a crackup every time they go around the track. And that's what we're getting today in American politics."

The Ohio governor contended that the American people are tired of the political mudslinging and want to focus on the issues -- despite the success more controversial candidates like GOP front-runner Donald Trump have seen.

Russell Hubley, of Longmeadow, said he's among those voters tired of the shouting. He praised Kasich's record, as well as the candidate's decision to "not allow himself to get down into the muck."

"We don't need one of those leading this country," Hubley said in an interview. "He's there to get a job done and not point fingers and he's proved, not only in Ohio, he's been in Washington before, and now no one else can say that."

Liane Pueschel, of South Hadley, who also attended the town hall event, meanwhile, said she sees Kasich as being "more presidential."

"He's a very faith-held man, he's a very capable man and he really does have the heart of the people in his heart," she said. "I just feel he would make a very good president."

Kasich's Springfield town hall came as part of a campaign swing through the Bay State before voters in Massachusetts and several other states cast ballots in the presidential primaries. He will take his campaign to Plymouth Monday.

Despite Kasich's focus on Massachusetts, a Suffolk University Poll released Sunday placed the governor third among like GOP primary voters in the state. Kasich received just 17 percent of support in the survey compared to Trump's 43 percent and U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio's, R-Fla., 20 percent.

While Kasich acknowledged that he is unlikely to see any major victories on Super Tuesday, he stressed that Massachusetts is an important state to his campaign.

"We think we're have a pretty fair showing up here, maybe a good showing. We'll see, it's hard to say," he said in an interview. "Massachusetts is great and it's a place where we decided wanted to put some time in."