Posted on August 1, 2014

O'Reilly: Do Republicans Really "Hate" President Obama?

Watch the latest video at video.foxnews.com

BILL O'REILLY: Viewer warning. Some of you will not like this memo, but I have to tell you the truth and will do so. There is no question relations between the Republican controlled House and President Obama are at their lowest point ever. Yesterday, the House voted 225 to 201 to sue the president in federal court for failing to implement the provisions of Obamacare because the president has changed or delayed some of the law without congressional approval. The vote was down party lines. No Democrat supported the lawsuit.



Fox News analyst Judge Andrew Napolitano, no Barack Obama fan, says the suit will be thrown out and is essentially a waste of taxpayer money because it has no hope of success. Republicans argue that it's a constitutional play. The president should be held accountable for overstepping his authority and he does not have the right to make law or enforce law selectively. A new Fox News poll says 58 percent of Americans believe Mr. Obama has exceeded his authority under the Constitution. 37 percent say he has not. Nearly four in ten Democrats say he has overreached. The very high number of dissent in that party. From the beginning, conservative Americans were suspect to President Obama who is the most liberal president the country has ever had. His philosophy of social justice and income redistribution puts him in a position where detente is difficult with the right. Those are core issues. And the fact that the American economy has not prospered under Mr. Obama has increased partisan bitterness.



Then there is his personal style. The president is not a schmoozer. He does not like the political game. And he doesn't even try to win over his opposition. Therefore, it's easy for his political opponents to go after him as there is little goodwill. For his part, the president understands that Republicans don't trust him and with the country presently disenchanted with White House leadership, it would be political suicide for any GOP Congress person to support the president.



But that staunch opposition means Mr. Obama can blame failures on Congress as he has done with the border situation and things in general.



OBAMA: We can do so much more if Congress would just come on and help out a little bit... Just come on. Come on and help out a little bit. Stop being mad all the time... Stop just hating all the time... Come on. Let's get some work done together.



O'REILLY: That's not going to happen. As Republican Party will delay any cooperation hoping the State of the Union will anger voters enough to swing the Senate to the Republican side this coming November. Party politics will intrude on the public good as vital problems like the border will go unsolved. If President Obama's policies were succeeding, the GOP could not block him effectively. He could appeal directly to you, the people. But Mr. Obama's vision has failed. At home and abroad. So now, he has only his core supporters left. And the House of Representatives that will defy him on almost everything.