Sajjan also opined that things would have been much better had ISIS been dealt with “diplomatically” early on. Despite being a former Vancouver police officer and a decorated reservist who served multiple tours in Afghanistan, it is easy to see why PM Justin Trudeau appointed him. He is a total joke although the situation is far from funny.

And Canada, under its new Liberal government, is just as bad if not worse. On what should be the infamous November 12, an interview with Canada’s new Minister of Parkas Defence , Harjit Sajjan, appeared on CBC . The new minister told the unwashed masses in Canada they have nothing to fear from ISIS whose members would, hours later, slaughter 129 innocent people in Paris and wound hundreds more.

No, Mr. President. They are systematically marching across Europe so they can kill as many innocent infidels as they can in restaurants, theatres and shopping centres. But the fact they are not expanding their large caliphate in Iraq and Syria is a victory for the alleged leader of the free world.

While November 13, 2015 (11/13) will always be remembered just as 9/11 and 7/7 are, the day before should also go down as being significant. On that day, Barack Obama was interviewed by fellow Democrat George Stephanopoulos, who pretends to be a journalist on ABC. Of ISIS, the president said , “I don’t think they’re gaining strength. What is true is that from the start our goal has been first to contain them and we have contained them. They have not gained ground in Iraq, and in Syria they’ll come in, they’ll leave but you don’t see a systemic march by ISIL across the terrain.” Apparently if they’re a’coming and a’going, there is nothing to worry about.

This craziness is not being caused by ISIS. Although the Islamic State is exceptionally barbaric (Sorry Justin for using that word), there have always been countries and groups throughout history determined to eradicate their enemies for a plethora of reasons and have carried out atrocious acts against other groups of people. What is different this time is not what ISIS is doing but the reactions and thinking of other governments and people.

Although Trudeau is now in Turkey, where he will meet with grown-up leaders of the G20, he is unlikely to change his decision in light of the Paris attacks, to withdraw from the coalition of countries bombing ISIS targets.

If all this isn’t crazy enough, look at France. France, of course is the country that despite having an able military during World War II, surrendered to Hitler in June, 1940. Current president, François Hollande, was quick to name ISIS as responsible for the attacks on his country. If that wasn’t enough, he described the terrorist attacks as an act of war. Something other Western leaders are loathe to do.

How times have changed! Who are the surrender monkeys now, Justin?

While Trudeau and Obama referred to what happened in Paris as terrorism (it was impossible to classify the carnage as mere crime or workplace violence), neither “leader” would name the enemy as Islamic fundamentalism. If Hollande is willing to engage in an actual war, he will likely go it alone. It is impossible to fight a war when it is too politically incorrect to name the enemy.

Like some of the leaders, the media has also gone crazy. MSNBC is really upset about the Paris attacks because right wing politicians will take advantage of the situation and this will adversely affect the poor Muslims who are the left’s real victims of such attacks. To hell with the victims and their families.

And then there is Lyin’ Brian Williams, who should have been permanently banished from NBC for his inability to distinguish reality from fiction. Williams was concerned about how the terrorist attacks in Paris will affect the climate change conference scheduled to be held soon in that city. At least that is in view of Obama’s position that the real enemy of the United States is climate change, not Islamic fundamentalists.

If all this isn’t enough, there is Black Lives Matters and what is currently happening at the University of Missouri. “Safe spaces” have been created for students so they don’t have to deal with words and ideas that may offend them. Students who hear offensive statements are encouraged to call the police.

Safe spaces have also been set up for black students who presumably now have their own washrooms. That school is going back to the segregated 1950s, although the washrooms will probably accommodate the transgendered.

As someone noted, any parent who is upset their child is growing up too quickly can fork over $50,000 a year, send them to Mizzou, and have them turned back into a baby. It really is unreal.

These pampered little brats were really upset about what happened in Paris. Not because people, many of them young like them, were killed and maimed. No these “people” were upset that the terrorist attacks took over the media and prevented them from getting their message out. What happened in France had nothing to do with these future leaders of America.

There have been substantial changes to the US and Canada recently. And these changes are not for the better. If we continue in this way, ISIS may one day realize their worldwide caliphate. It is crazy.