A Charleston law firm hopes a reward will help lead police to the driver responsible for a deadly Wednesday night hit and run in Ladson.

North Charleston Police say 28-year-old Richard Martin was killed while riding his motorcycle on Highway 78 at the entrance to Plantation Acres Mobile Home Park.

J. Kirk Fisher, a firm that represents motorcyclists, put up a $2,500 reward for information that leads to the arrest of the driver of a white Ford or Chevrolet work van that hit Martin. Authorities say the van may have damage to the front right fender.

Martin's family has been searching for answers, too.

"I'm going to tell you I'm not giving up until I find this guy, I'm just not," says Brian Martin, the brother of the victim.

Police say Martin was riding his motorcycle when a white work van attempting to enter the mobile home park near the KOA Kampground turned left in front of his motorcycle.

"I told him I don't want to bury you from a bike," Brian Marin said.

Their family has been driving around the area looking for the truck that hit and killed his brother.

"It seems to be the impact is from the passenger door more back towards the middle of the van...got a lot of rocker panel damage," Martin said. "His body probably should have hit the side of the van."

They've also been trying to gather more surveillance footage in hopes of finding the driver.

"I never knew how much help you could get from people or how many friends.... he had until this happened," Martin said.

Witnesses said there was damage to the right front fender of the van and it had black or purple paint transfer from the impact. Witnesses also said a ladder was on the roof of the van with a red cloth tied to the end. There was also possibly a red and yellow reflective caution decal across the rear bumper.

"There's ways to hide these things, you can go in there and beat it out, wipe it off clean it off, get paint and paint the thing and try to hide it," Martin, who has experience in collision repair, said.

The family has started a Go Fund Me Page to assist with funeral costs.

"People that don't ride bikes really need to pay more attention to these people on these bikes because they have families to go home to too," Martin said.

Officials ask that anyone with information regarding this hit and run incident, call the North Charleston Police Department at (843) 554-5700. The family says they will be offering an award if someone comes forward with information.

You can find Richard Martin's Go Fund Me here: https://www.gofundme.com/82kuhxk4

Copyright 2016 WCSC. All rights reserved.