Reyniko Abram had been strict about letting her 13-year-old son go to house parties this summer, knowing they sometimes turn violent. But she reluctantly let him go to a friend’s house in Montbello on Friday night, and saw her worst fears realized.

“My son was killed because he was hanging out at a party like other kids do,” Abram said Tuesday as she and scores of other family and friends of her son, Reysean, gathered to mourn his death on what would have been his 14th birthday.

“He wasn’t an angel. He experimented in a lot of things. But I don’t think it should have cost him his life.”

Tuesday night, police announced that they had arrested two juveniles and an adult in connection with the Friday night shooting, which happened as Reysean rode his bike in the 4700 block of North Enid Way,.

The adult was identified as 20-year-old Marquise Lewis.

Denver police have said little about what led up to the shooting, but witnesses said that at least one shooter opened fire from a passing vehicle. Officers found Reysean suffering a gunshot wound when they arrived.

“Don’t let these people get away with this, whoever killed my baby,” she said, adding that she learned about her son’s death from friends on Facebook.

“If you can get the message out on Facebook, then you can get the message out about who killed my baby.”

Police offered no new details about their investigation on Tuesday, nor would a spokesman say whether detectives believe the shooting was gang-related. But stories about the night abounded among Reysean’s friends, who said he was not in a gang but did associate with gang members.

People who were at the party said rival gangs exchanged words before shots were fired.

His mother said Reysean “jumped in” but his involvement did not go further than that. She said she had become concerned by what looked like mounting tensions in some of her son’s Facebook postings. Reysean himself appears to be flashing signs in some of his photos.

“He wasn’t a gang member. He was from the east side of Denver and that’s all that he represented,” said another cousin, Rahshay Abram, 15.

But those close to the teenager, who had just finished the first week of his freshman year at Montbello High School, found it hard to believe he would be a target. They wondered if the gunfire was meant for someone else.

“Sean never really had enemies like that. … so that I can grieve, so that I can have closure, I’m going to say it was an accident,” said his cousin Quna’Shanay Jones, 15, who saw him a few hours before the party, which she opted not to attend.

“He got hit by a bullet that didn’t have his name on it.”

Sadie Gurman: 303-954-1661, sgurman@denverpost.com or twitter.com/sgurman