The weekend isn’t even here yet, but at PolitiFact Oregon, we are already anticipating the Sunday news talk shows. Claims and statements cascade past at a rate of about 25 per hour, meaning it’s always hog heaven for fact-checkers.

But first, we’ve tossed together Friday’s PolitiFact Oregon Roundup, which doesn’t want for much, either. Let’s get going.

1. Michael Reagan loses one for the geyser

Reagan, older son of President Ronald Reagan, recently doled out some advice to the current president on how to one-up the Russians. The Gipper, Reagan said, “…did it without firing a shot…but he had a super weapon – oil.”

PolitiFact National checked Reagan’s follow-up claim that his father eroded the former Soviet Union’s cash flow by persuading the Saudis to flood the market with cheap oil. “There might be an element of truth in the claim,” the story found, “but the public record strongly points the other way. We rate the statement Mostly False.”

2. If you like your bureaucrat, well, you can’t keep your bureaucrat

Georgia Congressman Paul Broun, a Republican, recently said his alternative to Obamacare is the only one that removes “federal bureaucrats” from the medical decision-making arena.

PolitiFact Georgia looked into the claim and said this: “Broun’s bill would make Obamacare disappear. But so would other GOP proposals. And Broun’s paln does not make the bureaucracy go away.” Broun limped off with a Mostly False.

3. Climate change heats up in Rhode Island

U.S. Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse, according to PolitiFact Rhode Island, has made more than 60 Senate speeches on climate change, warning of its potential effects.

Our East Coast affiliate has been tracking Whitehouse’s claims and spent time compiling most of its recent findings. Click the link above to check their great work.

4. Swatting medical marijuana in the Sunshine State



In Florida, outspoken attorney John Morgan used a debate over the medicinal use of marijuana to say that a woman in the audience, Cathy Jordan, was arrested by a “SWAT team of hooligans” last year.

Jordan smokes the drug to combat the effects of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, also known as Lou Gehrig’s disease. PolitiFact Florida’s check showed that Jordan was arrested at her home, but that the “police reaction was not nearly as drastic as Morgan described. We rate the statement Mostly False.”

5. Why Alex Sink got sunk

A hotly-contested race for Congress in Florida ended with Republican David Jolly besting his Democratic opponent, Alex Sink. Almost as soon as the results were in, Democrats sent out a funding raising letter, claiming Sink “got outspent in a Republican district.”

PolitiFact Florida found agreement among nonpartisan analysts that the district is more accurately labeled “toss-up” than “Republican” in its partisan leanings. “On balance, we rate the claim Mostly False.”

So there you have it, five quick checks of claims from around the PolitiFact world. Now get ready to grab a second cup of coffee and park yourself for a little television viewing Sunday. A real cascade of checkable claims, after all, is about to get underway.

-- Dana Tims