US Airways employees approved new labor agreements earlier this year that secured higher annual contributions to the IAM National Pension Fund, the MEP fund for the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers. Photo: AP A greater number of multiemployer retirement plans may be at risk of falling into insolvency than previously thought, raising the specter of benefit cuts and fueling fears of a possible taxpayer bailout unless Congress acts. The Center for Retirement Research at Boston College, having reviewed the state of MEPs after the one-two punch of the dot-com crash and the 2008-09 financial meltdown, estimates that about 35 percent of MEPs will exhaust their assets over the next 30 years.



That’s a considerably higher estimate than the 25-percent figure put out by the Government Accountability Office. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

According to a new CRR paper, in 2008, “data for a sample of one-quarter of multiemployer plans show that 80 percent of plans were in the green zone, 11 percent in the yellow zone, and 9 percent in the red zone.” However, once the financial crisis hit, the number of plans in the red and yellow zones zoomed up, while those in the green zone shrank alarmingly. At present, said the paper, “roughly 60 percent of plans are in the green zone, 14 percent in the yellow zone and 27 percent in the red zone.”