You know how countless millions of Americans string colored lights around their home in December to celebrate Christ’s birth and the family holidays?

Well, Obama’s Consumer Product Safety Commission has decided that those lights are dangerous, hazardous and need substantial new federal regulations to protect you from yourself.

Seriously.

You probably were not aware of how dangerously you’ve been living at those happy holiday times without these new protection rules that Washington has decided we all need.

As you may have noticed, this is a thing with the Obama administration, which still has 624 days left to levy new rules. Its officials have promulgated thousands upon thousands of pages of new regulations since Jan. 20, 2009, from ObamaCare rules to how you shower.

In March, we learned Obama’s Environmental Protection Agency is designing new shower heads capable of wirelessly reporting your shower water usage to a central database. Because although Americans pay for their water, they waste too much of it, in the opinion of Washington bureaucrats.

Now, about those obnoxious holiday lights. First of all, they use electricity. Here’s how the Safety Commission explained its mission this week in the Federal Register:

“The Consumer Product Safety Commission is issuing a final rule to specify that seasonal and decorative lighting products that do not contain any one of three readily observable characteristics (minimum wire size, sufficient strain relief or overcurrent protection), as addressed in a voluntary standard, are deemed a substantial product hazard under the Consumer Product Safety Act.”

Got that?

Here’s the problem, according to the “final rule,” in something more closely resembling English:

“A lighting string provided with decorative covers over the lamps is a decorative outfit. If not constructed properly, lighting powered by 120 volts can be damaged easily and can pose a risk of electrical shock or fire.”

That’s true. But then damaged wiring of any kind can be a fire hazard, right? Hair dryers. Radios. Televisions. And watch out of those hot, hot plates.

The commission warns that at least 258 deaths have been associated with holiday lights. Which sounds pretty serious. Until you realize the commission’s fatality figures came over a span of 33 years, from 1980 to 2013. That works out to less than one death a year out of a U.S. population now approaching 320 million.

As the Washington Free Beacon acidly pointed out, more people than that die from alcohol poisoning alone just in California every single year.

Still, you can never be too safe when it comes to writing regulations, right?

Oh, there’s one more thing. The commission calls its new Christmas light regulations a “voluntary standard,” if by “voluntary” you mean you will face civil and “possibly criminal penalties” for not reporting products that fail to meet the new regulation.

Andrew Malcolm is IBD’s national politics columnist. Follow him here on this website or on Twitter @AHMalcolm.