Nancy Pelosi has never been known as a faithful Catholic and her latest gaffe will help cement that reputation even further.

Pelosi condemned the most recent vote in the House of Representatives to de-fund Planned Parenthood and she said the pro-life advocates behind yanking taxpayer funding for the nation’s abortion business ought to compromise on that pursuit. After all, Pelosi says, “That’s what Pope Franci told us to do.”

Here are Pelosi’s unbelievable remarks, courtesy of CNS News:

Pelosi told reporters in her Thursday press briefing that “it doesn’t have to be this way,” saying that there could be legislative compromise, which was “what Pope Francis told us to do.” Then she cited remarks in the Pope’s September speech to Congress. “Republicans are moving forward with a GOP reconciliation package that once again lays the groundwork for another Republican government shutdown. It’s a waste of time. It will go nowhere in the Senate,” Pelosi said. “It will be their 61st vote to repeal the Affordable Care Act, and they will of course be wanting to defund Planned Parenthood, destroy the Affordable Care Act, dismantle newfound health security for millions of Americans,” she continued. “It doesn’t have to be this way,” Pelosi emphasized. “Instead we could be working together recognizing a Republican Congress, a Democratic president, the ability for Democrats to use their leverage legislatively to have compromise for the good of the American people. That’s what Pope Francis told us to do. “He said leaders should have transparency. That would be wonderful – openness, he said. He used the word openness and pragmatism, and he said we have to move forward for the good of the people. Let’s in the spirit of Francis do that,” she added.

CLICK LIKE IF YOU’RE PRO-LIFE!

Actually, Pope Francis brought a consistent pro-life message to the nation’s leaders in September and admonished members of Congress in a speech today to “defend life at every stage of development.”

Also in September, the pontiff wrote in a letter that the tragedy of abortion devastates women and their families, which is why he believes the Church needs to continue offering God’s forgiveness.

He said, “I think in particular of all the women who have resorted to abortion. I am well aware of the pressure that has led them to this decision. I know that it is an existential and moral ordeal. I have met so many women who bear in their heart the scar of this agonizing and painful decision.”

He added, “What has happened is profoundly unjust; yet only understanding the truth of it can enable one not to lose hope. The forgiveness of God cannot be denied to one who has repented, especially when that person approaches the Sacrament of Confession with a sincere heart in order to obtain reconciliation with the Father.”

Although some pro-abortion Catholics have argued that Pope Francis’ gesture is a sign that the Church is becoming more “progressive” on abortion, recent statements he’s made in Cuba and in the United States prove this couldn’t be further from the truth. In fact, yesterday Pope Francis said his primary reason for his visit to America was for the cause of life.

Pope Francis said, “I appreciate the unfailing commitment of the Church in America to the cause of life and that of the family, which is the primary reason for my present visit.” At the Cathedral of St. Matthew the Apostle, he encouraged Catholics to remain vigilant in their opposition to abortion and listed unborn children among innocent people who the bishops must keep at the top of the priority list of people who deserve protection.

He lists, “the innocent victim of abortion, children who die of hunger or from bombings, immigrants who drown in the search for a better tomorrow, the elderly or the sick who are considered a burden, the victims of terrorism, wars, violence and drug trafficking, the environment devastated by man’s predatory relationship with nature – at stake in all of this is the gift of God, of which we are noble stewards but not masters.”

“It is wrong, then, to look the other way or to remain silent. Ever present within each of them is life as gift and responsibility. The future freedom and dignity of our societies depends on how we face these challenges,” he concluded.

Additionally, on September 20th, Pope Francis told a group of Cuban nuns, priests, bishops and seminarians to protect their “smallest” and most vulnerable members, including unborn children. CNN reports that he also said Jesus shines in the lives of hidden and ignored people, referring to those who suffer from degenerative diseases.

Later that evening, he said, “Children aren’t loved, they’re killed before being born. The elderly are thrown away, because they don’t produce. Some countries have euthanasia. But in some others there a hidden euthanasia. The youth is thrown away because they have no job opportunities.”