What will be the biggest challenge to capitalism in the next two decades—and what should be done about it?

ROBERT HOWELL: Without question, the biggest challenge to capitalism in the next two decades will be the continued expansion of government entitlement programs and the insidious encroachment on the underlying premises of capitalism by the federal government.

Capitalism is founded on entrepreneurial risk-taking and reward. Taking risks means some failure. Not everything will work out. There will be winners and losers. To think that the government can impose regulations on business that will assure that everything will go right and that no one will be hurt is the antithesis of the capitalistic thesis. Central governments cannot manage a total economy such that everything works perfectly for everyone.

However, as the federal government both expands its entitlement programs–Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, the Affordable Care Act, food stamps and the like–to the point where more than 50% of the (voting) population depends upon them and, at the same time, heightens regulations on the private sector such that it becomes more difficult to take risks, be incredibly successful, and, even, to fail, the American dream that everyone even wants the opportunity to be successful will be a thing of the past.

The solutions are to reign in the many entitlement programs such that they are safety nets, not cushy hammocks. They must be fiscally sound over the long term. As demographics, such as life expectancies, change, so must these programs. Good policy has to trump good politics. Then, many of the regulations directed toward the business sector that have been put into place over the past few years need to be revisited in the context of their impact on the overall economy, jobs, salaries, and standards of living.

If the U.S. is going to remain a world leader, it must maintain economic leadership. Emphasis has to be restored to the importance of economic strength and growth’s impact on global leadership.

Robert A. Howell is the David T. McLaughlin, D’54, T’55, distinguished visiting professor of Business Administration, Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth, and senior partner at Howell Group LLC.

Read the latest Leadership Report.