After The Associated Press revealed this week that a 2005 deposition had been found where Bill Cosby admitted to obtaining Quaaludes with the intent of giving the drugs to women he wanted to have sex with, many women alleging rape against Cosby have come forward with similar stories of being drugged.

In a video posted by CNN, nine of Cosby’s many alleged victims revealed what had happened to them in their encounters with the former Mr. Huxtable. In all nine cases, the story sounds almost identical. The woman had been lured into a friendship with Cosby as he began “prepping” them with promises of being on The Cosby Show. In a meeting with Cosby, usually over drinks, the women claimed, Cosby would either place a pill within the drink, or ask the woman directly if she wanted to take a pill. Once the pill had been ingested, immediately, these women reported feeling very dizzy and knowing something was not right. Several of them reported coming to find themselves in different stages of undress, with Cosby over them unclothed himself, in the midst of some form of sex act, while others said they awoke after with strong evidence rape had taken place.

Chloe Goins, who came forward and said Cosby assaulted her in 2008, is the most recent allegation against Cosby and one of the few within the statute of limitation. Her story, unsurprisingly, was also very similar.

"She was drugged. She doesn't know what happened. She blacked out and woke up finding Mr. Cosby over her as she was in a state of complete undress," said her attorney Spencer Kuvin.

The common denominator, though, with all these testimonies, seems to be the inclusion of these drugs that Cosby admitted to buying. This begs the question: Why were all these situations taking the form of date rape? Were drugs necessary to getting these women to have sex with him, or were the drugs a part of the appeal for Cosby?

Many, like Fox News, are beginning to question whether or not Cosby has somnophilia, and with the consistency of the allegations, it seems highly likely. According to Psychology Today, somnophilia, otherwise known as “Sleeping Beauty Syndrome” is used to describe a person who derives sexual pleasure from engaging in sexual acts with someone who is asleep. Often, the person that the somnophiliac is attracted to will be a stranger and acts can range from sexual fondling to actual intercourse.

Spotted: Bill Cosby and Sleeping Beauty. #GoldenGIobes pic.twitter.com/0RXLCJktPf — Ryan Brockington (@RyBrockington) January 12, 2015

Psychology Today also notes that somnophiliacs tend to engage in non-violent sexual acts with sleeping individuals, but that is not to say those acts are consensual. Sometimes, somnophilia can extend to an attraction to those who are unconscious, meaning the somnophiliac will administer date rape drugs. Most often, somnophilia is just a fantasy, but little is known empirically about how many somnophiliacs exist and whether they are inclined to act on their impulses.

Although we cannot fully diagnose Cosby with somnophilia, the definition does seem to be in line with the many testimonies of his alleged victims. Dr. Judy Kuriansky, a clinical psychologist and sex therapist, told Fox News that if what these women claim is true, Cosby being a somnophiliac is very likely. What’s more, this perversion comes from a need to dominate other people.

“Basically, this is an inability to have a normal, sexually intimate, and respectful exchange with a partner,” Kuriansky said. “Therefore, that partner needs to be drugged and semi-conscious in order for [one] to interact. It is not a matter of the sexual pleasure as it is of the dominance or control.”

Other professionals, like Dr. Mark Griffiths of Nottingham Trent University, told Fox News that somnophilia is rare, and Cosby is most likely using date rape drugs to exert a similar form of control Kuriansky describes.

Whatever the case, if the testimonies against him are true, Bill Cosby’s actions are highly inexcusable, and cannot be explained away with pleas of sexual deviation.