Abbott: A business approach

Photo: Edward A. Ornelas / San Antonio Express-News Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott, with wife Cecilia, speaking to supporters in McAllen. Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott, with wife Cecilia, speaking to supporters in McAllen. Photo: Edward A. Ornelas / San Antonio Express-News Abbott: A business approach 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

We asked each of the gubernatorial candidates to fill out a comprehensive questionnaire. We hope this helps in your decision-making.

Business climate

1. Between 2004 and 2013, the Texas Enterprise Fund distributed some $487 million for state economic development. Has this money been well spent? What plans do you have for the Fund? Any changes?

As governor, my priority will be on implementing economic policies that benefit the entire state and benefit Texas-based companies while attracting even more businesses to relocate here. Government should not be in the business of picking economic winners and losers, but should, instead, focus on those policies that improve job prospects, get the unemployed back to work, and maintain Texas’ position as the best place to do business in America.

As governor, I will study the Texas Enterprise Fund and other economic development incentives and independently evaluate the success of each. Those that work should be retained; those that need modification should be altered; those that are failing should be ended.

2. Much has been said or written about Texas’ “economic miracle.” The state is indeed a job growth leader in the nation, but also a national leader in the number of minimum-wage jobs. Has this growth, in your estimation, been equitably distributed so as many Texans as possible benefit?

Recent research from the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas reveals that Texas creates jobs at all levels of the economy, which provides real economic opportunities for all residents of the state:

“Critics of the Texas economic model often contend that Texas’ exceptional job growth has not produced a high standard of living for its residents due to the low quality of the new positions. However, Texas’ job growth since 2000 has been much more proportional than in the rest of the nation, where net new jobs have been concentrated at the bottom and top of the wage distribution and the middle has shrunk further. Job growth trends in Texas break with the national pattern. Texas has succeeded in producing broad-based job growth in the context of job and wage polarization nationally,” the FederalReserve Bank of Dallas said in its 2014 report, “Texas Leads Nation in Creation of Jobs at All Pay Levels.”

3. Texas’ minimum wage is tied to the federal wage of $7.25. Would you favor Congress raising the minimum wage? In the absence of congressional action, would you favor the state raising the minimum wage on its own? And if the state doesn’t act, should Texas cities do so?

Raising the minimum wage would cause thousands of Texans to lose jobs. I want to create jobs not kill them. Under my leadership I will create more high paying jobs rather than imposing government mandates that destroy jobs.

I believe the Texas model shows that raising the minimum wage is nothing more than a government mandate. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), about 93.6% of Texas’ hourly workforce in 2013 was paid more than the federal minimum wage.

The average wage for hourly workers in Texas is almost $12.00 per hour - far above the minimum wage hike proposal. Government imposed mandates could threaten the hourly wages many Texans are currently receiving.

Raising the minimum wage would reduce employment and raise prices. According to the American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC), a ten percent increase in the minimum wage decreases minority employment by 3.9 percent, with the majority of the burden falling on minority youth whose employment levels will decrease by 6.6 percent. Research by the Institute for the Study of Labor predicted that a ten percent increase in the minimum wage would result in a four percent increase in food prices and a 0.4 percent increase in prices overall.

Nor is raising the minimum wage a poverty-reduction tool: the CBO estimates that 29 percent of the benefit would go to families making at least three times the federal poverty level. According to the BLS, only approximately 6.4 percent of Texas’ hourly workforce in 2013 was paid at or below federal minimum wage. Among adults 25 and older earning minimum wage, 75 percent live well above the poverty line of $22,350 for a family of four, with an average annual income of $42,500. This is possible because more than half of older minimum wage earners work part-time, and many are not the sole earners in their households. In fact, 83.5 percent of employees whose wages would be increased by a minimum wage hike either live with parents or another relative, live alone, or are part of a dual-earner couple.

4. Texas’ drought is an economic issue. Does Texas have enough water to sustain the kind of growth we’ve seen well into the future? If not, how would you, beyond last year’s ballot initiative, have the state tackle this issue?

Our growing population means that we need to constantly find ways to expand access to water as well as apply innovative solutions to address our water needs.

Texas can meet the state’s long-term water needs through a combination of conservation, investment in water infrastructure, working to reduce regulations that impair water development, speeding up the water permitting process, and working at the regional level to find the right solutions.

5. What role does business and personal taxation play in the economy? What changes, if any, would you make? For instance, is business paying its fair share? Paying too much? There is no personal income tax. Should there be?

I will never allow Texas to have a personal income tax, and as governor I will work to lower the business tax. I believe that tax reduction is the best economic development program. The Tax Foundation currently ranks Texas’ corporate tax environment as the 38th least friendly in the U.S., and our property tax rank is 32nd. I will work to improve those rankings to spur the creation of new jobs, higher wages, and high returns to investors.

6. How would you continue Texas’ job growth and economic performance?

The first thing is to get government off the backs of businesses and allow employers to create jobs. Texas is home to the best and brightest entrepreneurs and innovators. As governor I will help them succeed by reducing regulations, speeding up the permitting process and lowering taxes.

I will also improve our economy and jobs by investing in quality schools, roads and abundant water.

As governor, I will also work with the Texas Legislature to remove senseless licensing barriers that slow job growth and to waive licensing exams and fees for military veterans who have the required education, training and experience gained during their years of service.

Limiting the size and scope of government, controlling spending, reducing debt and removing barriers to business growth will unleash the power of entrepreneurs and innovators and secure Texans’ freedom to aspire - that is the model of success for Texas, for the nation.

Health care

1. If your stance is that Texas should not expand Medicaid as part of the Affordable Care Act, what is your plan to help Texans who are uninsured get coverage? As you know Texas is a national leader in the number of uninsured. If your stance is that Texas should expand Medicaid, why should Texas have confidence that the federal government pledge of funding is immutable and what would you do to cover those who would not be covered under Medicaid expansion?

We need fewer federal mandates from Washington D.C. and more state control to improve our Medicaid system. Texas should receive Medicaid funding in the form of block grants that will allow us to provide for the unique healthcare needs of our fellow Texans.

Expanding Medicaid through the Affordable Care Act — also known as Obamacare — is a bad option for patients, doctors and taxpayers. Studies indicate that expanding Medicaid coverage generates no significant improvements in measured physical health. I believe that if the Affordable Care Act remains in effect, it will gradually look more like the inadequate care we’ve seen from the Veterans Administration. Also, doctors are leaving the profession and dropping Medicaid cases, meaning that Medicaid provides less access to real healthcare.

The state of Texas provides an extraordinary network of access points through Medicaid, CHIP and the Women’s Health Program. In the past decade, total Texas Health and Human Services Commission spending — which includes Medicaid and CHIP, among other programs — has increased from about $39.8 billion in the 2004-05 budget to over $56.2 billion in All Funds in the 2014-15 budget, and now constitutes more than three-quarters of HHS appropriations. On top of that, I propose strategic funding increases for the Women’s Health Program, for veterans, the disabled and for mental health needs.

There are also local hospital districts, federally-qualified health clinics and convenient-care clinics that provide access to care in Texas, not to mention the entire private network of hospitals and physicians. A number of ideas worth exploring include individual tax deductions to buy insurance, allowing insurance purchase across state lines, and reforming medical lawsuits at the national level.

2. Should the state have set up its own exchange under the ACA?

I oppose establishing a state insurance exchange as called for by Obamacare, and support the Legislature's decision to reject this provision of Obamacare. Texas must not allow the federal government to commandeer state resources to impose restrictions on the healthcare choices of Texans.

Some state-level exchanges, including those in Oregon and Massachusetts have recently decided to shut down at least some functions in favor of federally-run exchanges, due to cost and other problems. This is evidence that expanding ObamaCare by creating a state-run exchange is wrong for Texas.

3. Texas has the nation’s fifth-highest birth rate among teenagers, behind Arkansas, Mississippi, Oklahoma and New Mexico. Though the rate of teen births has dropped in Texas, it has dropped less here than elsewhere, including less than the national average. Why is that? What is the state role in addressing teen pregnancy? What role does sexual education play in this? What would effective sexual education for Texas youth look like?

I support current Texas policy. It is important that parents be empowered to engage in their children’s schooling, as in other areas; my Educating Texans plan includes parental involvement as a major focus.

4. Women’s health funding took a hit in the 2011 legislative session and this funding was substantially restored two years later. The defunding happened as the state ousted Planned Parenthood as a major provider in the Women’s Health Program. This led to loss of federal funds and to a state-run only program. In hindsight, was ousting Planned Parenthood a good thing to do given that the organization was not providing abortions as part of its participation? Is the state-run effort doing as good a job for low-income Texas women as the previous program?

I am proud of the work of the Texas Legislature to provide more resources for women’s health without sacrificing our principles. In 2013, the Legislature authorized $240 million last session to fund women's health — an increase of $113 million over the previous biennium that will connect an estimated 170,000 more women to cancer screenings, wellness exams, family planning and other health services.

Women’s health in Texas is funded at an all time high, with more providers than before, and we have the capacity to serve more women than ever before. In addition to the Texas Women’s Health Program (TWHP), low-income women and families have access to health care through the Texas Medicaid Program and the Texas Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP).

My Healthy Texans plan would expand women’s health coverage by adding optional screening and treatment for postpartum depression to the types of services covered by CHIP Perinatal and Medicaid for low-income pregnant women. Additionally, I have called for the Legislature to increase funding for Texas women’s health programs by $50 million and direct that HHSC use the increased appropriation to expand TWHP’s services to cover follow-up screenings for women with abnormal breast or cervical cancer test results or cervical dysplasia treatment, and offer individualized case management.

Immigration and border security

1. Immigration law is generally thought to be a federal function. However, it seems to be a matter of discussion in state campaigns. What is the proper state role, if any, on immigration and border security?

Because the federal government has failed to do its job, Texas has done the right thing by providing resources for border security including a surge that involves the DPS and the National Guard.

For the long-term, I have proposed a detailed plan called “Securing Texans” that includes increasing border security spending for the Department of Public Safety, funding the hiring, training, and deployment of 500 new troopers, 20 Texas Rangers, and 20 new Criminal Investigations Division agents. It also provides additional resources to tackle transnational gangs and drug cartels.

I have also called for stronger human smuggling laws to crack down on organized criminal networks that threaten the safety of Texas’ communities.

While ensuring the safety of all Texans is a priority of the utmost importance, our state must embrace our immigrant heritage by welcoming those who are here legally.

2. They have been called sanctuary city laws, though they might also be called anti-sanctuary city laws. They allow Texas peace officers to inquire about the immigration status of any person arrested or legally detained. Similar laws would allow police to ask for papers indicating immigration status. Texas attempted to pass such legislation in 2011. Do you favor such laws?

I support current Texas law, which requires that all elected or appointed office holders in the state of Texas are required to uphold state, federal, and local laws. Article XVI, Section 1(a) of the Texas Constitution requires all elected and appointed officers in the state to take an oath swearing that they will “(p)reserve, protect, and defend the Constitution and laws of the United States and of this State.”

3. Currently, Texas allows undocumented immigrants to pay in-state tuition to state universities. Do you favor retaining this law? If you’d change it, how precisely?

I believe that the objective of the program is noble, but it must be reformed. Currently, there is no determination of whether or not the students fulfill their obligation to apply for legal residency as required by the law. This loophole could be closed by requiring the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board to develop a mechanism for application verification.

4. The governor recently dispatched the Texas National Guard to the border. Was this the right thing to do? If so, why? If not, why not?

I fully support the National Guard deployment. Because the federal government has failed to do its job to secure the border the state had to step up and get the job done.

5. Not in the governor portfolio, but comprehensive immigration reform has been on the congressional plate for awhile now. The Senate has acted. The House has not. Do you believe Congress should pass comprehensive immigration reform? If so, what should be in it? If not, why not?

This is fundamentally a federal issue that Congress must address. However, the one clear fact is that U.S. immigration policy is broken. This is a direct responsibility of the federal government, yet the president and Congress have failed to lead on this issue. I call on the president and Congress to work together toward solutions, but in the meantime, Texas must secure the border, which the federal government is inadequately securing.

Environment

1. We’ve asked this of your campaigns before, but looking to see if minds have changed or whether some other nuance has occurred. Do you believe that climate change or global warming is occurring and is human activity substantively responsible?

As a matter of historical fact, the climate changes. Long before fossil fuel was ever discovered and used on a large-scale industrial basis, the earth’s climate changed substantially on numerous occasions. However, many scientists believe that certain human activities impact the climate. Others dispute the extent to which any activity has a particular level of influence on the climate, which is why this matter needs to continue to be investigated. Indeed, there is increasing evidence that the global climate has not noticeably warmed since the late 1990s at the earliest. One study indicates that the period of warming that preceded the year 2000 lasted about 20 years and was preceded by 30 years of slight cooling after 1940.

Physicist Dr. Steven E. Koonin — who served as the U.S. Department of Energy’s Under Secretary for Science in the Obama Administration — wrote in September 2014 in the Wall Street Journal that climate science is far from settled and noted many oft-ignored factors. For example:

While the level of Arctic sea ice has shrunk over the past two decades, Antarctic sea ice has grown and is now at a record high.

Although the human influence on climate was much smaller in the past, the rate of global sea-level rise 70 years ago was as large as what we observe today — about one foot per century.

We must be good guardians of our Earth, but we must base our decisions on peer-reviewed scientific inquiry, free from political demagogues using climate change as an excuse to remake the American economy.

2. Are you satisfied with the level of regulation of the oil and gas industry by the Texas Railroad Commission and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality? For instance, flaring — burning natural gas into the atmosphere instead of collecting and piping it — is an issue both in lost revenue for state coffers and for the environment. What changes, if any, in how these agencies regulate the oil and gas industry and the air quality issues the industry presents would you make? Should Railroad Commissioners be elected or appointed?

I always believe we can do better. Nevertheless, I am proud that the Railroad Commission and Texas Commission on Environmental Quality have rededicated their efforts to reduce flaring.

Texas has also been improving its environmental record. Between 2000 and 2012, nitric oxide (NOx) emissions in Texas decreased by 63 percent. Of the 20 states with the highest fossil-fuel fired power plant NOx emissions, Texas ranks 4th lowest in emissions per capita. Similarly, Texas had the greatest absolute decline in carbon dioxide emissions.

The current governance structure of the RRC has served the state well for decades. The members of the Commission should remain elected, keeping the governance of this essential industry accountable to the people. Voters in Texas should be able to hire and fire these members at election time.

3. Tell readers your level of commitment to non-fossil fuel alternatives in energy. Should the state have a substantial role in being a catalyst for solar and wind energy? How so?

— Texas is a national leader in energy — including renewable energy sources like wind and, increasingly, solar. I want Texas to retain its preeminent role in energy production from all sources. Importantly, advances in both wind and solar are placing them on a trajectory where they will be able to compete in the marketplace without government subsidies.

4. The state Attorney General’s Office has sued the federal government over what it views as intrusive regulation. Among these are suits challenging federal regulation and permitting of greenhouse gases and new cross-state air pollution standards that place harsher caps on certain emissions. Why do you view these regulations as intrusive and burdensome or why don’t you? Would you, as governor, want this level of legal challenge against federal regulation to continue?

I have consistently fought against overreaching federal government policies — including President Obama’s job-killing EPA regulations — all the way to the Supreme Court. Yet the Obama administration is doubling down on its job-killing agenda with its continuing attempts to crush the energy industry through executive action unapproved by Congress.

Notably, the EPA’s July 7, 2011, Cross State Air Pollution Rule (CSAPR) jeopardizes the reliability of Texas’ electrical grid, threatens hard-working Texans’ jobs, and will burden Texas families with higher electricity prices. Because of the lawless approach advanced by unelected bureaucrats at the EPA, the state’s ability to prepare for dramatically reduced power generation was severely undermined — which is why Texas’ electrical grid operator projects that these regulations could lead to rolling blackouts.

I hope that the Texas Railroad Commission, as well as my successor as Attorney General, will remain vigilant against this overreaching federal regulation that challenges Texas’ independence and continuing economic prosperity.

Education

1. A state court has recently ruled that Texas public school financing is unconstitutional. First, do you believe state public school financing to be sufficient? And tell readers specifically how you, as governor, would want the Legislature to fund public schools?

We need to stop fighting the fights of the past. We’re not going to double-down on an education system that was constructed in the last century and throw more money at the problem hoping it works — that’s the way they govern in Washington, D.C., not Texas.

My wife is a former teacher and principal. We’ve seen firsthand how education can transform the lives of children to achieve things their parents couldn’t even dream of. That’s why as governor, I’ll spend money effectively in ways that improve our children’s education. I will provide more resources to early education by targeting pre-K through 3rd grade — ensuring that all children are reading and doing math at grade level by the time they finish 3rd grade. I want to provide all students will access to the latest technologies for them to develop the skills needed for world-class jobs.

We must place our trust in parents, teachers and principals, and return genuine local control to schools by reducing one-size-fits-all mandates from Austin.

2. Should the state provide parents with vouchers to send their children to private schools of their choosing? Should the state enact more legislation to create more charter schools in the state?

My education platform does not include vouchers or any other financing for a private school education.

I believe that high-performing charter schools are a critical component of Texas’ public education system. High-performing charter schools like KIPP and IDEA have done an exceptional job of educating the next generation. These schools have open-enrollment policies and do not charge tuition. I support expanding the number of high-performing charters in Texas.

3. Your stand, please, on pre-K education. Should it be universal for all Texas children?

As part of my Educating Texans plan, I called for additional funding for districts that opt to implement high-quality pre-kindergarten programs with the goal of demonstrating long-term pre-kindergarten success. Pre-kindergarten providers that receive state funding will have the flexibility to construct the most effective pre-K education program. That could include full day pre-K or other approaches that may prove more effective. We should leave it to local control to see which solution proves most effective. The goal is to improve curriculum, teacher quality, academic performance, and parental involvement.

Until a very high quality, statewide half-day pre-kindergarten is achieved, the Legislature should not mandate full-day pre-kindergarten education. Instead lawmakers should allow schools to make that decision based on the needs of their community while still rewarding schools that manage a quality program.

4. State funding for higher education has increased in total dollars but is still a diminished share of university or university system budgets. Meanwhile, student debt is increasing and tuition has increased as well. Is state funding for higher education sufficient? If not, how would you fix this?

I am in favor of increased state funding for higher education. According to the 2015 “Best Colleges” rankings of public universities by U.S. News and World Report, five of the top ten universities are located in California. The University of Texas at Austin is Texas’ highest ranked public university at number seventeen.

My goal is ensure that Texas four-year public universities hold five of the top ten spots in future rankings, and will appoint regents to work toward this goal. My “Educating Texans” plan will put another $400 million toward higher education. I also want to increase state support for research and emerging research universities by increasing appropriations to the Texas Competitive Knowledge Fund by $40 million for the 2016-17 biennium.

Transportation

1. The $1.7 billion that the November ballot’s Prop. 1 says will, at least initially, be set aside to fund state transportation needs, the experts tell us, is not sufficient to take care of all the state’s needs. How would you properly and permanently fund state transportation projects? How would you pay for this, specifying funding sources? Raising the gas tax? Added taxes related to car sales or registration fees?

Our roads are too crowded and inadequately maintained. As governor, I will allocate more than $4 billion annually to transportation projects without new debt, taxes, fees, or tolls. Funds are currently being diverted from the State Highway Fund to pay for other government agencies. That practice must stop. Instead, money dedicated to roads should be spent on roads. Additionally, part of the current motor vehicle sales and use tax should be spent on roads. These are in addition to the funds that may be raised from the transportation proposition, Prop 1 on the ballot this November.

2. Prop. 1 money will be for roads and highways only. What should the state role be in helping local entities fund alternatives, light-rail and other mass transit, for instance?

The state should be involved in funding transportation projects only when they are transparent, The Public Transportation Division of the Texas Department of Transportation provides financial, technical and coordination assistance to the state’s public transit providers. The division also represents public transit in the planning and programming process and prepares funding-needs projections. This includes both monies from federal grant programs, as well as state dollars appropriated for transit projects. However, public transit is, and should remain, primarily an issue for local authorities.

3. The Lone Star Rail project has long been around. And gone virtually nowhere. The idea is to connect San Antonio and Austin by moving some rail freight traffic out of urban cores and creating a new, faster line. It has faltered for lack of funding and, perhaps, commitment. Would you support this project as governor, advocating from all sources, including the state, funding to get it going?

There is no indication that the Lone Star Rail project has “faltered for lack of funding.” In just the last few months, the cities of Austin, San Marcos, Kyle and Buda have all taken steps to initiate funding agreements for this project. Currently, the Lone Star Rail Project anticipates in 2016 or 2017 the completion and federal approval of engineering and environmental studies and receipt of a notice-to-proceed allowing Lone Star Rail to begin final design and construction.

The Texas Legislature has participated in funding for this project in the past, appropriating $182 million in the 2010-11 biennial budget for both the Rail Relocation and Improvement Fund to expedite the process.