Topics: 2016 GOP primary, 2016 Republican primary, Donald Trump, Elections 2016, Healthcare Reform, Hillary Clinton, Obamacare, Paul Ryan, Republican obstructionism, Republican Party, Politics News

The Republican Party is going through a leadership crisis. That’s to be expected, given that its two leading presidential candidates are an orange fascist nightmare and a smugly unlikable ideologue. But, as much as party elites might hate it, one of those two candidates is going to be the face of the Republican Party in the November elections, and at this point the most likely outcome is that the GOP will nominate Donald Trump to take on Hillary Clinton. Trump has spent the past few months ripping wide the various fissures within the Republican Party, and should he lose on Election Day, whoever is left in the GOP will face the herculean task of rebuilding the party in the post-Trump apocalypse.

That brings us to Paul Ryan, the speaker of the House and the only Republican with a national profile who seems to enjoy cross-party appeal. Ryan gave a big speech Wednesday that he and his office teased as an address on “the state of American politics,” and it was widely expected that he would discuss Trumpism and try to strike some balance between embracing the likely nominee and rejecting the violence and extremism that have attended the Trump campaign.

But Ryan didn’t do that. He didn’t mention Trump at all. Instead he commented generally on the poor state of discourse in the country and bemoaned the lack of trust in governing institutions. That provided the jumping off point for a treatise on “what politics can be” in America, in which Ryan spoke with optimism about how government should function:

We don’t resort to scaring you, we dare to inspire you. We don’t just oppose someone or something. We propose a clear and compelling alternative. And when we do that, we don’t just win the argument. We don’t just win your support. We win your enthusiasm. We win hearts and minds. We win a mandate to do what needs to be done to protect the American Idea.

It was perversely appropriate for Paul Ryan to deliver this speech, with those lines, on March 23: the six-year anniversary of President Obama signing the Affordable Care Act into law. The Republican response to the ACA’s passage has been to scare people – you’ll lose your coverage and then probably be murdered by the death panel – and to oppose it without offering an alternative. There have been God knows how many votes to repeal or weaken the ACA in Paul Ryan’s House of Representatives over that six-year time period, but the number of legislative alternatives to Obamacare put forth by the GOP can be counted on zero fingers. The Republican policy during the Obama administration, on healthcare reform and pretty much every other issue area, has been to stoke fears and wring political benefit from unyielding opposition.