Investing in success is not a crime.

James Hogan is president and CEO of Etihad Airways. (Photo: Kamran Jebreili, AP)

Last Sunday, Etihad Airways' new Boeing 787 Dreamliner landed in Washington, D.C., bringing 226 travelers into the United States. It was a flight that provided a good symbol for the real arguments around open skies agreements.

Every one of those travelers will have an impact on the U.S. For most, that impact will be economic — business travelers delivering trade dollars or holiday-makers delivering tourism spend.

OUR VIEW: Don't undermine open skies

For some, the impact will be softer but no less important — parents visiting children who have made America their new home, students coming to the USA to learn from your fantastic education system, and so on.

Those 226 travelers came from 27 cities, including Abu Dhabi, served by Etihad and its partners.

Nine of them transferred onto U.S. airlines' flights. They were just a few of the 50,000 a month we are feeding onto the U.S. domestic airline network.

The Dreamliner is the second to arrive in our fleet. We will eventually become the largest Dreamliner operator in the world, with 71 of these wonderful aircraft.

We've ordered 120 aircraft in total from Boeing, which is just one of the great American companies with which we spend money. A lot of money.

We have major contracts with GE, Sabre, Panasonic, Atlas and scores of others in the U.S. supply chain.

Those contracts support American jobs across the country, more than 200,000 by our estimates.

So it was something of a surprise to be told by the three largest, highly profitable U.S. airlines that we were damaging their business and threatening American jobs.

Of the 27 cities those passengers traveled in from, only eight are served by a U.S. carrier. That's right: eight.

Etihad Airways offers new competitive choice. We serve routes the U.S. carriers choose not to. And along the way, we deliver a clear positive economic impact to the United States.

The USA is built on the principle of the benefits of competition. Open skies is a great example of that.

Our shareholder has invested in a successful airline. Investing in success is not a crime. Blocking competition would be.

James Hogan is president and CEO of Etihad Airways.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1Hm2tZe