The Veteran's Administration is the focus of both Congress and the president, as the House of Representatives works on a bill that would allow for speedy dismissal of VA officials and White House invites VA Secretary Shinseki to a "come to Obama meeting."

Most Americans favor medical marijuana laws, but draw the line at recreational use of weed, a new NPR-Truven poll found.

An oft-stated argument put forth by supporters of the Affordable Care Act is that mandating health insurance coverage would decrease emergency department visits, but the Wall Street Journal reports that so far that has not been the case (subscription required).

The White House said that the CIA will stop using fake vaccination programs as a front for its spy operations.

Public Citizen renewed its attack on the SUPPORT trial, now demanding an investigation into the involvement of senior HHS officials in an internal review.

Paul Raeburn discusses why the Wall Street Journal should not have run its story on saturated fat and heart disease.

America's Health Insurance Plans (AHIP) -- a trade group -- joined the chorus in calling out Gilead's hepatitis C drug sofosbuvir (Sovaldi) for being too expensive.

Over on MedPage Today's KevinMD, one anesthesiologist describes the ups and downs of a mission trip to Kenya to provide medical care, while another claims that lethal injection perverts the ethics of practicing medicine.

Some members of Congress are considering granting waivers to certain schools to provide a temporary reprieve from new healthy lunch rules.

The Atlantic asks whether it's reasonable to continue creating new, incurable diseases in laboratories to learn more about them.

Some doctors are apparently starting to get the hang of online reviews.

The FDA said that Sun Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd., a generic drug manufacturer in India, did not do enough in response to an import ban on one of its plants.

Morning Break is a daily guide to what's new and interesting on the Web for healthcare professionals, powered by the MedPage Today community. Got a tip? Send it to us: MPT_editorial@everydayhealthinc.com.