SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump stated, “As far as single-payer and all — there’s so many different things you could have” and “we’re going to have something great. We’re going to repeal and replace Obamacare, which is a total disaster” in response to an ad by fellow candidate former Florida Governor Jeb Bush criticizing Trump’s position on healthcare among other issues on Tuesday’s “Sean Hannity Show.”

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Trump stated that he “got along with all politicians” and that he had an “obligation” to his company as a businessman to get along with all politicians. He continued, “Supposing, for instance, you didn’t get along with the Clintons and they’re in high positions of power, and I need things done over the years, you know, you go back to them two, three years later, and they don’t like you because you were never nice to them, or you fought them. Again, I wasn’t a politician until three months ago, Sean, I just turned politician three months ago.”

He further dismissed the ad as “very old hat.” He also said that he changed his position on abortion after knowing people who chose not to abort their child. He also pointed out that New York is heavily Democratic and “if you’re not a Democrat, you’re like — what are you doing? Again, I was a businessperson. It was important that I get along with everybody. I got all — everything I ever wanted.”

After host Sean Hannity said, “you said to me you don’t support a single-payer system, you said after you did some research, you support healthcare savings accounts,” Trump concluded by saying, “But the other thing — and two things,” before discussing his past tax positions. Once he got to healthcare, he stated, “As far as single-payer and all — there’s so many different things you could have. Honestly, Sean, to do, to have great health insurance. The one thing I do tell people, we’re going to have something great. We’re going to repeal and replace Obamacare, which is a total disaster. Well, Sean, look at what’s happening with the premiums, okay. Look at what’s happening to deductibles, I mean you can die and never even see your health insurance because you didn’t spend enough money trying to save yourself.”

Follow Ian Hanchett on Twitter @IanHanchett