The Pursuit Of Improved Physical And Mental Health

Medical advances, improved nutrition, and reductions in smoking have extended life expectancy and reduced the prevalence of diseases that stalk modern society. Paradoxically, though, for every success, an equally difficult challenge remains. As people age, they are less likely to suffer through a single disease but rather experience multiple maladies related to living longer. In this issue of Health Affairs we explore this paradox and many other subjects while conceding that humankind will never exhaust the quest for reducing mortality and relieving pain.

One example of the paradox is summarized in this key article’s title: “More Americans Living Longer with Cardiovascular Disease Will Increase Costs While Lowering Quality of Life.” Anjur Pandya, Thomas Gaziano, Milton Weinstein, and David Cutler urge that “prevention efforts should be intensified” to complement the disease model that is the focus of research.

Are there other approaches to prolonging healthy living that could accompany these ongoing efforts? Dana Goldman, David Cutler, John Rowe, Pierre-Carl Michaud, Jeffrey Sullivan, Desi Peneva, and Jay Olshansky have developed a hypothetical alternative called “delayed aging.” Their article reports that studies with animal models have shown real potential and concludes that greater investment in research on delaying aging appears to be an efficient way to forestall disease, extend healthy life, and improve public health.

Next Section Focus On Mental Health Medical research focuses on the leading killers but has historically avoided unraveling the mysteries of mental illness. Society is implicated in this shortcoming because it has not demanded that mental illness rank higher on the list of research priorities or insurance benefit designs. Time and again over the past decade, troubled individuals with mental illnesses have wreaked havoc through shooting rampages of innocent victims in public places, schools, and workplaces, most recently at the Washington (D.C.) Navy Yard. In an article that discusses access and cost barriers to mental health care, Kathleen Rowan, Donna McAlpine, and Lynn Blewett find that people with mental health problems are more likely than others to be uninsured. (The Navy Yard shooter had coverage through the Department of Veterans Affairs, but his mental illness was never fully diagnosed or treated.)

Previous Section Next Section Quality And Nursing The Affordable Care Act (ACA) provokes unrelenting controversy between the political parties and, as it focuses greater attention on quality, also penalizes hospitals based on excess readmission rates among Medicare beneficiaries. One early finding, reported by Matthew McHugh, Julie Berez, and Dylan Small, indicates that hospitals with higher nurse staffing levels had 25 percent lower odds of being penalized compared to similar hospitals with poor staffing. The authors conclude that having more robust nurse-to-patient ratios is a potential system-level intervention that could reduce readmissions and improve the quality of hospital care. Quality-of-care differences by insurance type are identified by Christine Spencer, Darrell Gaskin, and Eric Roberts, while Mark Chassin and Michael Millenson, in separate views, question why quality improvement has taken so long.

Previous Section Next Section Economics And Health Reform In an article projecting national health spending, which appeared first on our website in September, lead author Gigi Cuckler and a team of researchers at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services Office of the Actuary report on their projections of slow health spending growth in 2012. They estimate that national health spending will consume about 20 percent of the US gross domestic product by 2022, even factoring in the effects of the ACA. Other Health Affairs articles address the challenges that patients, payers, and providers face as the ACA’s exchanges and expanded Medicaid plans begins enrolling people while Republicans continue efforts to kill the measure. John Graves and Katherine Swartz determine that the number and types of people who enroll will depend in part on factors that cause people to become uninsured. And James Kirby and Toshiko Kaneda propose a new way of conceptualizing racial and ethnic disadvantages of uninsurance over a lifetime.