Buy Photo At a Monmouth County Library program, Freya Munger, 3, of Fair Haven hand-colors a card to thank the troops overseas. (Photo: Frank Galipo/Correspondent )Buy Photo

Bridget Cause wants her 4-year-old grandson to understand the significance of honoring veterans.

As the pair colored a picture of soldiers in camouflage uniforms on Saturday, Cause discussed her family's strong support of the armed forces.

"I took this as an opportunity to tell him that he has cousins that have gone through basic training," said Cause, of Asbury Park.

Buy Photo The Monmouth County Library Easter Branch on Route 35 in Shrewsbury hosted a "Thank You Veterans" card making session for children and their families. Nicolette Bivona (7) of Eatontown hand colored a card to thank the troops overseas. (Photo: Frank Galipo/ Special to the Press)

Buy Photo Dante Tortorello (3) of Ocean uses stickers to decorate his thank you card for the troops overseas. (Photo: Frank Galipo/ Special to the Press)

Cause was among the small group of families who stopped in the Monmouth County Library Eastern Branch in Shrewsbury for a special event that allowed children to design thank-you letters to veterans.

The letters included patriotic stars, flags and short messages such as "home of the free because of the brave."

Children's librarian Dawna McClendon said she plans to deliver the letters to the VFW Post 1333 in Asbury Park for Veterans Day, which is Tuesday.

McClendon, who grew up an "Army brat," said she explained to the youth that the letters were meant to thank people who fought for the country.

She said veterans are often forgotten about.

"They only know what's going on now," McClendon said. "They may not know we have veterans from other time periods."

McClendon said this was the library's first time hosting the event. The children who participated were as young as 2 years old.

Cause said she particularly wanted her grandson to learn that there was diversity in the military.

"Just to let him know that there are people who look like us in the military," said Cause, who is black. "We do join and we do serve."

Nicquel Terry: nterry@app.com; 732-643-4023

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1ubUuu3