Cañon City Police Department Junior Law Enforcement Academy participants perform a team building exercise Wednesday at Cañon City High School. (Sarah Rose/ Daily Record)

Twenty teens answered Cañon City Police Chief Paul Schultz's questions in unison.

It was followed by a round of applause.

The participants, ages 13-17, recited what they learned about the history of law enforcement during the Cañon City Police Department Junior Law Enforcement Academy Graduation at Cañon City High School auditorium.

The graduates received certificates Friday after the four-day event that included team building, a seat belt convincer, meeting the drug dog, learning about crime scene investigation, medical triage and other activities.

Last year, Cañon City Police Officer Robyn Vidmar started the event after reading about a Junior Law Enforcement Academy program in a school safety journal. She said she thought it would be a great way to build character in the community.

She said this year's Junior Law Enforcement Academy slogan is commitment through teamwork.

"I hope they learned that they can do anything they set their mind to and that they have a new found passion for teamwork — that you can do things together," she said. "I think the generation now is a lot about me,me,me or I, I, I, and they don't understand that team is important."

She said one of the lessons she is teaching the teens is that it takes different types of people to make a team work.

"I enjoy watching kids encourage each other. ...Kids in the school system pick on kids for being different or just having different hobbies or different likes," she said.

Advertisement

Vidmar said the participants enjoy meeting new people at the academy.

"If you have a kid who isn't really able to make friends or really, really shy or new to the area, this is a good way to make a connection prior to the school year starting," she said.

Eighth-grade participant Joe Carochi said he enjoyed learning about law enforcement.

"I like how we know how policemen and women operate," he said.

Alex Worley, a 10th grader, said his favorite part of the academy is the team building.

Cañon City Police Chief Paul Schultz gives an award to eighth-grader Joe Carochi Friday for graduating Cañon City Police Department's Junior Law Enforcement Academy program. (Sarah Rose / Daily Record)

"You don't get far with one person. With a team, you're gonna do well," he said.

Vidmar said she is planning on another Junior Law Enforcement Academy next year.

"I'll run it each year if I can," she said.