Hand circling ad in newspaper (Photo: Creatas Images, Getty Images/Creatas RF)

Jobless Rate Falls

The unemployment rate in the Tulare County was 13.4 percent in April 2014, down from a revised 15.6 percent in March 2014, and below the year-ago estimate of 13.6 percent. The rate would be lower if not for 3500 fewer farm jobs in April 2014 compared to April 2013, likely due to drought.

Mortgage rates at new 2014 lows

Mortgage rates fell this week as the European Central Bank appears to be wanting a new round of easing in June. Mortgage Daily explains “more accommodative monetary policy in Europe makes European government debt more attractive. Germany is the benchmark for EU government debt and when demand rises, U.S. Treasuries benefit as well. When demand for U.S. Treasuries rises, the bonds that underlie the mortgage market also improve, resulting in lower rates. In short, there's a domino effect leading from anticipated easy money policies in Europe all the way to mortgage rates in the US.”

The US 10-year note hit a 6-month low and mortgage rates fell to 4.17 percent in the past few days. Predictions had suggested as the U.S. economy improved,mortgage rates would get back to the 5 percent level. That has not happened which is bullish for home buyers and those who want to refinance.

Gas prices keep falling

Gas prices have fallen over 10 cents since May 1 says Gas Buddy. Porterville’s Eagle Feather Trading Post continues to have among the lower prices in the state at $3.79 per gallon Thursday. Helping to drive prices lower is the increase in drilling for oil in the US, particularly in Texas. The Permian Basin, a long-time oil and natural gas-producing region in West Texas and southeastern New Mexico, has seen a significant increase in horizontal oil-directed drilling activity over the past five months accounting for 50% of the total increase in the United States says the EIA. That same agency also points to high profitability of U.S. refiners. “North American refiners' earnings per barrel processed were more than $7 per barrel higher than their European competitors in 2013, based on an analysis of 26 energy companies who file reports with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.”

Orosi to get AutoZone store

Bidding to construct a new 7000 square foot AutoZone store in Orosi was finalized earlier this month with building moving forward this summer.

Tulare hospital bond oversight committee member stays

Tulare Regional Medical Center’s Bond Oversight Committee member Alberto Aguilar, who has been a critic of spending at the district, will remain on the committee despite efforts to oust him. Aguilar will stay but not participate in closed sessions discussing Harris Construction which is at odds with the hospital over the tower project. Aguilar had communicated with Harris in the past. Other members said he should support the hospital but Aguilar said he was just doing his job overseeing a dwindling bond fund to build the tower. The latest district report shows all $85 million bond monies voted by the public has been expended on the unfinished project with about $1.8 million left in interest income as of April 30. 2014.

Drought plan

If money talks, then Southern California consumers should hear a louder call for water conservation with increased financial incentives being offered by the Metropolitan Water District this week that doubles the incentive for turf removal from $1 to $2 per square foot, as well as extended rebates for rain barrels and high-efficiency toilets. The district serves 19 million people. The City of Visalia is likely to ban water gulping turf varieties like fescue on new residential units say several council members.

Ag News

Tulare County Milk Production Rebounds: CDFA reports Tulare County milk production in March was up 3.1% from March 2013 and Kings Co was up 4.2% as milk prices have improved. Statewide, nearly half the dry milk made here is being exported to the Far East and 63% of the dry whey. Some 36% of our cheese is also exported to the Far East.

China may reopen market for citrus in June after Chinese inspectors visit Tulare County groves. The USDA has announced that a supplementary agreement has been reached with China’s phytosanitary regulatory agency to reopen the Chinese market that has been closed to California citrus exports since April 2013. There will be a two-year pilot program that stipulates that the California industry should implement certain measures. An inspection team from China will come here in June with the market likely to reopen after that. Growers agreed to certain procedures to fight plant destroying Phytophthora with sprays and other precautions. U.S. orange exports to China and Hong Kong combined have been valued at over $100 million in the past.

Tule River’s ow flow: Watermaster Richard Schafer says that the Tule River is going to have an April/July runoff of about 8,000 acre feet. In an average year it produces around 70,000 acre feet. The expected 8000 acre feet runoff is lower than 1977 drought yield says Schafer.

Despite drought big table grape year predicted: The California Table Grape Commission estimates the 2014-15 crop at 116.5 million, 19-pound boxes compared to last season’s record crop of 117.4 million boxes. Final estimates will be ready in June. Like a number of California crops this year table grapes will arrive early. The Commission says efficiencies will offset lower volume due to the dry conditions. There are nearly 500 table grape farming operations in the state who produces 99% of the table grapes grown in the United States.

Biz briefs

Affordable Care Act has new enrollees in Tulare County where 9,832 signed up through March 31 of which 9,374 were eligible to get a subsidy. Fresno County signed up 23,164 and Kern County numbers were 18,083. Some 2,160 from Kings County signed on. Statewide almost 1.4 million enrolled in the California version of Obamacare.

More visitors to Sequoia, according to National Parks Service.Total recreation visits jumped 30% in April from the same month a year before.

Kings County’s population as of January 2014 was 150,181.Of that almost 14,000 were prison inmates and nearly 7000 lived at NAS Lemoore.

Visalia to get $330,000 from the California Energy Commission to upgrade its CNG fueling station in town.

Exeter came in number 8 in Cities Journal Top 15 Small Cities In California list. It says Exeter enjoys “unofficial status as the citrus capital of the whole world.”

Read or Share this story: http://www.visaliatimesdelta.com/story/news/local/2014/05/19/john-lindt-column-jobless-rate-mortgage-rates-gas-prices-head-lower/9289329/