SANTA, Clara, Calif. — Peyton Manning approaches practice with a shark’s purpose. There is no wasted movement, no lost focus. This week offers a changeup to heighten senses as the Broncos will work out with the Houston Texans for three days at Dove Valley.

The teams have agreed not to tackle to the ground, but having somebody else to face should increase intensity. Manning believes much can be gained, potentially affecting Saturday’s game.

“Depending on how practice goes, that could alter the playing time (Saturday). We should get a lot of game-like scenarios this week, especially going against their defense,” Manning said. “It will be a great test.”

One play that probably will become a ghost this week? The quarterback draw. Manning took off against the 49ers on Sunday with a mind of optimism and feet of clay.

“That was a tendency breaker. It was probably not high alert on their game plan sheet: Watch for the quarterback run,” Manning said. “I thought I was going to score, and I got 1 yard. It was humbling.”

Robinson, Barrow receive good news. Considering how serious their injuries looked as they were helped off the Levi’s Stadium field Sunday, Broncos reserves Lamin Barrow and Gerrell Robinson will take the results of their follow-up reports Monday.

Robinson, a tight end who spent the past two seasons on practice squads with Arizona and the Broncos, has a sprained knee and will be out two weeks. Barrow, a rookie linebacker, has a bruised leg and might be able to practice on a limited basis Tuesday.

The players suffered their injuries in the third quarter of the Broncos’ 34-0 preseason victory against the San Francisco 49ers. Barrow was hurt while making a tackle, Robinson while making a catch. Both were able to gingerly walk off the field but needed assistance from the trainer’s staff.

Self-awareness of Oz. Brock Osweiler has long looked the part of an NFL quarterback. He played the role well Sunday, completing 10-of-13 for 105 yards and a touchdown. He resides in an odd place, knowing he’s unlikely to play in the regular season. But coordinator Adam Gase has challenged him to improve, and Osweiler has responded.

“If you look back to my rookie year to last year and now, I think that’s happening. I think every single week I am getting better,” Osweiler said. “Did I like that product I put out on the field as a rookie? No. Did I like it last year? No. I think we are getting closer and closer to that point, but we still have a long ways to go.”

Footnotes. The Broncos’ shutout of the 49ers told only part of the story. The margin, even in a fake game, was impressive. It was the Broncos’ third-most lopsided preseason victory, behind only a 45-point victory over the Seahawks in 1976 and a 38-point victory over the Packers in 1980. … San Francisco coach Jim Harbaugh, on his team’s ugly showing: “We’re off. That’s football. It punishes mistakes. It rewards execution and precision.”