The long-in-coming financial collapse of New York City’s public hospitals has finally become critical enough to force Mayor de Blasio to do . . . something.

But, after avoiding a politically explosive crisis for most of his tenure, the mayor on Tuesday did little more than commit the taxpayers to subsidizing a hemorrhaging system with a half-billion dollars — plus vow dramatic and vague action.

DE BLASIO PROPOSES $82.2B BUDGET, WARNS OF FINANCIAL THREATS

To this point in his tenure, budgeting has been a relative breeze for de Blasio. Soaring tax revenue enabled him to boost spending on popular programs well beyond the rate of inflation, while he also prudently put funds aside for rainier days that are sure to come.

Meanwhile, as this page has warned for a year, radical changes in the health care industry were steadily driving the 11 municipal hospitals toward bankruptcy. The forces at work included Obamacare, which enabled newly insured patients to seek treatment in New York’s top-of-the-line medical institutions.

Offered little assistance from City Hall, Dr. Ram Raju, president of Health+Hospitals, the rebranded Health and Hospitals Corp., set out on a futile mission to compete with the big players and to enroll patients in his own health insurance plan. No surprise, that went nowhere.

So, at last, at a budget presentation de Blasio addressed the inevitability of a major restructuring. This was a major step forward for a politician who had ridden into office promising to save Brooklyn’s Long Island College Hospital from closure — only to be defeated by the many of the same factors that are sapping Health+Hospitals.

He said he will be looking for help from Washington and Albany, which is dreamily far from a sure thing.

On the operating table (James Keivom/New York Daily News)

DE BLASIO'S $82B BUDGET TO ADD GRAB BAG OF NEW INITIATIVES

He will try to leverage real estate owned by Health+Hospitals for money, waters Raju has already begun testing and which the mayor conceded will not generate much.

And then what? De Blasio was most specific about what he will not do.

The mayor said that he would not close a building, which is very different from vowing not to close a hospital.

The sure translation is that some big brick structures containing emergency rooms, operating theaters and floor upon floor of vacant patient rooms will be repurposed for other health-related uses. Bye-bye, hospital.

The mayor also said that he would not lay off hospital workers but would instead rely on attrition and retraining to shrink the workforce. He dared not venture a guess as to how many jobs will inescapably be lost.

For the moment, de Blasio has fallen back on dispatching a “blue-ribbon” group to complete a “road map.” Better deliver something bold, right quick, because remaking — no doubt shrinking — the country’s largest public hospital system so that it fulfills its mission while regaining financial viability will surely be one of the most serious challenges de Blasio is called on to meet as mayor.