The costs of long-term care for the elderly can be volatile and unexpected.

As Americans age and longevity improves nationwide, long-term care insurance has become a growing segment of the insurance industry, said Steve Fisher, president of the Pennsylvania Association of Health Underwriters.

Fewer than 8 percent of Americans have long-term care insurance, according to the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.

The costs can be staggering and generally rise as the consumer ages, Fisher said.

If you're considering insurance for your long-term care needs or someone else's, such as a parent's, chances are you have a lot of questions.

We asked Fisher to provide answers for some of the more common questions that come from people who are in the long-term care insurance market.

Fisher said people who are considering buying long-term care insurance should have a conversation with their children to discuss any concerns you or they might have.

Here's a Q&A with Fisher:

Do I need to buy long-term care (LTC) insurance?

The best way to answer this question is by asking the following question: "If I don't have long-term care insurance, how will my care be paid for if I need long-term care at home or in a facility?" Some people feel they have significant funds in a savings account or financial investments, but the cost of long-term care can quickly deplete those funds. Others feel that their children will be able to take care of them, but that isn't always possible and can still be very expensive for those providing the care. It is also important to understand that the need for long-term care can go on for years with illnesses such as Alzheimer's disease.

When should I buy LTC insurance?

The best time to buy LTC insurance is when you are young and healthy. Unfortunately, many people seem to wait as they don't feel they will need the coverage until they get older. The problem is that premium rates generally increase with age, and health issues may develop that could make a person uninsurable at a later age. And, approximately 40 percent of all long-term care patients are under age 65.

What is the cost of waiting to buy?

The graphic at left provides an example for a 52-year-old female Pennsylvania resident looking at a policy offering a 4 percent inflation rider on $200 daily benefit with a 90-day elimination period and 3-year benefit.

If she waits until age 62 to buy the policy, and assuming that she will remain healthy, the cost of waiting is significant. The annual premium for comparable coverage will have increased from $3,487.64 at age 52 up to $7,636.83 at age 62. If the policy premiums are paid through age 85, this delay would ultimately cost her an additional $60,554.97 in premiums.

How much LTC coverage do I need to buy? and Do I need to include an inflation rider on my LTC policy?

The answers to these questions depend on many factors such as the type of long-term care facility you would want to live in and where it is located. Costs increase every year, so an inflation rider is recommended.

To get a better understanding of how rates can vary by area, visit the following website: www.genworth.com/costofcare.

Additional information can also be found in the NAIC Shopper's Guide to Long Term Care (http://naic.org/store_pub_consumer.htm). It is recommended that you work with an insurance agent/broker who is certified to market long-term care insurance as they can help address your specific concerns.

Steve Fisher, an agent with The DJB Group Insurance Agency in Meadville, Pa., is president of the Pennsylvania Association of Health Underwriters.