Topics: Catholic Church, colleen mccullough, Editor's Picks, Life stories, the thorn birds, Life News

I felt a small tug of personal loss when author Colleen McCullough passed away last week. She was the author of a book that, in some ways, read like the story of my life. I fell in love with my priest and later married him — the same torrid forbidden love story that fuels McCullough’s classic novel. But in other ways, my story was nothing like that romance. It was more like a nightmare.

I was in the middle of a breakup from an abusive, drug-addicted boyfriend when I first went to Father W — for counseling. He was the most caring, compassionate man in the world. He was so tender, so concerned, and our intimate nightly telephone talks quickly became the highlight of my day. I was in the process of joining the church through the adult conversion program, and in my weekly class, I saw how beloved he was by the community. How powerful. I prayed daily my thanksgiving for such a wonderful priest.

In our evening calls, he revealed to me that he cared for me more than I could ever know. After the abuse and horror of my recent relationship, such kindness was irresistible. We went for dinner one night and ended up in the rectory, passionately making out. We continued to speak or see each other often, pushing boundaries further, until the very night I was welcomed into the church at Easter. After giving me my First Communion, he took me into his private rooms in the rectory and we made love.

Then the full-fledged affair began. He came over every night, staying later each time, until he was creeping away at dawn. When I wondered about the future of the relationship, and how guilty I felt, he made me promise to love only him, and to recite the wedding vows with him one night to bind us. He told me afterward that we were both technically excommunicated by that private act – but that our love was bigger than the church or any rules of mankind. It was something God had given us. It was, as if by McCullough’s own pen, our own “Thorn Birds” story.

Of course, we were discovered. The bishop heard rumors, confronted Father W —. He was moved from my parish to another church in another town but continued to drive back to my apartment to stay all night anyway. He eventually took a leave of absence and looked for a job in the private sector. As soon as he found it, he left the priesthood.

The bishop thundered. My priest’s mother freaked out. The diocese and the brotherhood of priests burned with gossip. My parents remained philosophical — because even a fallen priest was better than a drug-addled bully. We married almost immediately, with a secret wedding license so it wouldn’t appear in the newspaper. And we went to a different church — still Catholic, but we sat at the back, hoping not to be recognized.

My new mother-in-law didn’t make eye contact with me for well over a year. I had ruined her chances at the honor and glory that the mother of a priest enjoys. She was shamed by our selfishness. And she did not hesitate to shake her finger in my face, hissing, “I knew it was a woman!” Priest friends came to visit our little apartment and told us how hard our lives would be. And, not for the first time, they called our love “The Thorn Birds.” All the drama was bearable because our love was the greatest story ever told.