One of the key leaders who signed a recent “Citizens’ Mandate” says Congress’ responsibility right now is “to put sand in the gears’ of the president’s plans for further “transformation” of America.

“We’ve seen a president who has been abusing his authority for six years. He’s gone so far as to have the DOJ attack reporters, the IRS has attacked conservative groups, the EPA has attempted to destroy the coal industry,” said Rick Manning, who is president of Americans for Limited Government.

“We’ve seen a wholesale assault on our country. … We’re demanding that Congress put sand in the gears of this system.”

Manning and a long list of other leaders recently announced their “Citizens’ Mandate” calling on Congress to take action. The group said the 2014 election was a “repudiation of the complicity of the United States Congress in President Obama’s dramatic and unconstitutional expansion of government,” and their document tells lawmakers they need to:

Stop the president’s promised “Fundamental Transformation” of the country,

End executive branch overreach,

Restore constitutional balance of power among the three branches of government,

Bring an end to the perennially unpopular Affordable Care Act,

Hold the executive branch accountable for its myriad abuses of power and its national security failures both foreign and domestic, and

Put the interests of the United States of America first among nations.

Manning pointed out that Obama has two more years in office, but the American message from the 2014 midterms was clear.

“We didn’t elect this Congress to enable Obama,” Manning said.

JOIN THE DON’T BE YELLOW, DUMP BOEHNER NOW CAMPAIGN.

He said one example of Obama’s outrageous actions was that the administration wrote Federal Election Commission “net neutrality” rules, and when they were thrown out by a court, simply rewrote them and announced them again.

If Congress won’t do its job, then in America, “The only thing that matters is what the president says,” he warned.

“This is a unique time in history. We’ve never had a time when the president said, ‘I don’t care what the Constitution says, I’m going to do what I want do to.'”

Another headache would be Congress giving Obama more power, such as through a plan to fast-track a international trade treaty.

He said unless Congress gets to work now, America will be looking in two years at a nation where the Internet is run by the government, the First Amendment is in jeopardy and other problems will appear that people don’t expect.

Preventing that, he said, is “our job.”

“We want our kids to have a future better than the one we have.”

The Citizen’s Mandate has been endorsed by more than 50 national conservative leaders, including Richard Viguerie, Phyllis Schlafly, Frank Gaffney, Tim Wildmon, James Dobson, Joseph Farah and others.

It is the result of a collaboration over the holidays to identify the concerns of voters and to craft their message to Congress and the Republican leadership, in particular.

And it dovetails with a new JOIN THE DON’T BE YELLOW, DUMP BOEHNER NOW campaign.

It’s a campaign to allow constituents to reach out to all 246 GOP members of the U.S. House, telling them to look for a new speaker, to replace John Boehner.

It’s because Boehner, shortly before Christmas, agreed to Obama’s demands to continue funding for Obamacare and for amnesty – even though the GOP expanded its House majority and took control of the U.S. Senate as a result of the 2014 elections.

Calls accompanying the campaign to lawmakers opposing Boehner rattled the House leadership, reported the Washington Examiner.

“There were hundreds of them, jamming the phone lines of the district and Capitol offices of dozens of House GOP lawmakers,” the report said. “The callers were not angry about legislation. Nor were they asking for help with a local matter. They were demanding their representative vote against Boehner … in his bid to win election to a third term as speaker.”

“We’ve never been lobbied quite like that,” House Rules Committee Chairman Pete Sessions, R-Texas, told the Examiner.

The Examiner, citing people in the room at the time, said Boehner was so agitated by the phone calls that he raised the issue to his rank and file in a private meeting. Boehner was defensive, according to witnesses, telling GOP lawmakers he has long espoused the tea party principles that the callers accused him of abandoning.

The Dump Boehner campaign already has generated 565,000 letters to the GOP members of the U.S. House – a stack closing in on 20 stories tall.

Joseph Farah, WND founder and campaign organizer, said the opposition is largely because of two issues – Obamacare and amnesty. Republicans in the U.S. House before Christmas, under Boehner’s leadership, allowed funding for both programs to continue into 2015.

The campaign has earned the support of the founder of Tea Party Nation, one of the organizations that helped rouse the American electorate in 2010 and give the GOP control of the U.S. House.

“Absolutely,” Judson Phillips told WND. “I want people storming the halls of Congress. Melting the phone lines and anything else.

The Citizens’ Mandate campaign has the potential to rattle the Capitol again, focusing as it does on the GOP’s legislative agenda and not just its leadership.

Supporters said the 2014 election message was clear: Stop President Obama and his leftist/socialist/anti-Constitution/big government philosophy in its tracks.