SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Former spokesperson for Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee Hogan Gidley joined Breitbart News Sunday on SiriusXM with guest host Matthew Boyle, Breitbart News’ Washington political editor, and slammed 2012 Republican nominee Mitt Romney for claiming the presumptive 2016 GOP nominee Donald Trump isn’t conservative.

“He claimed to be severely conservative, whatever in the world that is,” Gidley said of Romney.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

This is the guy who created Romneycare, who was the template for Obamacare. Mitt Romney marched in gay pride parades. He did the first same sex wedding in America, put homosexuals in the Supreme Court in Massachusetts. He boasted, remember in that famous clip of him and Ted Kennedy, that he was more pro-choice than anyone and then hosted a Planned Parenthood event and then contributed to them. He puffed up and said the folks that didn’t vote for Reagan, he didn’t identify with those Republicans who liked Reagan.

“If this were anybody but Donald Trump they would be telling everybody to get on board,” Gidley said of Romney and the establishment wing of the Republican Party. “Their guy didn’t win and they don’t know what to do. They don’t want to get behind us.”

Gidley addressed Cruz supporters, and ‘Never Trump’ people, saying, “Cruz is telling the truth. This is a generational election of the Supreme Court. Hillary Clinton is a horrible choice for national security. She’s a horrible choice for the economy. If that is true, it’s true regardless of who is at the top of the ticket.”

“Donald Trump is at the top, so it still applies. Hillary is still the worse option for this country,” Gidley charged. “These folks who are the hold out… what has their brand of conservative orthodoxy done for us?”

The debt is larger. The deficit is enormous. We still have job killing trade. There’s an open border immigration policy. It’s killed our middle class. The tax system is still a mess. We’re no closer to ending abortion. Obamacare is still funded. The Iran nuclear deal went through. What have they given us as Republicans?

Breitbart News Sunday airs from 7 p.m. to 10 p.m. on SiriusXM Patriot Channel 125 every Sunday.