Vince Kellen, the CIO of the University of Kentucky, accesses email from his iPhone using a “fabulous” Microsoft application which he says performs better than the version of Outlook he used on his previous Windows smartphone.

The app, Outlook for iOS, also integrates with his Google and Dropbox Inc. applications. Mr. Kellen couldn’t imagine such software coming from Microsoft a year ago, before it began its strategy developing for rival operating systems. But since Satya Nadella was named CEO in 2014, the company has prioritized mobile and cloud software with an emphasis on cross-platform support. It has publically embraced Linux for Azure and developed a number of applications for various mobile platforms, including an Office productivity suite for the iPad.

Simon Dawson/Bloomberg A logo sits on display outside the Microsoft Corp. pavilion at the Mobile World Congress in Barcelona, Spain, on Wednesday, March 4, 2015.

CIOs say Microsoft’s actions are restoring their confidence in a company they had come to view as proprietary, technologically stagnant, and tone deaf to their requirements. “They aren’t assuming that Windows is the center for everything anymore,” Mr. Kellen said.

The philosophy is trickling down to Microsoft’s sales representatives who are no longer simply pitching the monolithic twin towers of Office and Windows, which comprised roughly $40 billion of the company’s $86.83 billion in revenue for fiscal year 2014, ended June 30.

Michael Sajor, CIO of Apollo Education Group, stopped meeting with Microsoft sales executives a few years ago because they tried to sell him software without bothering to learn about it would help him run his business. “They were, all-around, just a pretty ugly company to deal with,” Mr. Sajor said.

But Mr. Sajor said the company is showing “signs of life” improving its focus under Mr. Nadella. Now Microsoft representatives ask how they can better support the 250,000 University of Phoenix students for whom Mr. Sajor provides technology. Two months ago, Apollo converted from the on-premises Office software to Microsoft’s Office 365 productivity software, which includes the version of Office for iPad. He said the company still has some work to do to solidify customers’ trust in the company, but he’s optimistic in his experience with the company under Mr. Nadella. “If they stay on track, they’ll win our hearts and minds like other companies have done by becoming real partners,” Mr. Sajor said.

Over the past few years, Chico’s FAS Inc. had shifted spending from Microsoft to Google and iOS applications and development tools, says CIO Eric Singleton. He said Mr. Nadella’s “engineering focus” has him rethinking his position as software licenses come up for renewal and the company explores new technology areas. “The desire to invite Microsoft into our tent a little bit further is more pronounced at our company than it would have been three years ago,” Mr. Singleton said.

Analysts have also noticed a shift. Customers think Microsoft has “turned around and is heading in the right direction,” said David Smith, a Gartner Inc. analyst who spoke to about three dozen clients about Microsoft over the past year. Although it’s too early to say whether CIOs are increasing their spending with Microsoft, customers are generally receiving Microsoft’s cross-platform support well, he said.

At the University of Kentucky, Mr. Kellen plans to boost his spend with Microsoft, which currently runs between $1 million and $2 million a year. He says he’s moving to Office 365 by the end of the year. He plans also to increase his use of Microsoft’s.NET development software and broaden use of Microsoft’s Azure cloud software from testing to production as he shift’s more of the school’s resources to the cloud.

“For the first time in 15 years, I feel like they’re innovative again,” Mr. Kellen said. “Microsoft is getting its groove back.”