The U.S. government shutdown has affected war memorials on foreign soil. The D-Day memorial in France, a long way from Washington, has been closed, upsetting tourists and veterans. Photo/Video: Stacy Meichtry

OMAHA BEACH, France—Jim Kosinski sensed something was wrong when he noticed the American flag wasn't flying here on this windswept shoreline, the final resting ground of thousands of U.S. troops who died during World War II's D-Day invasion.

Moments later, the 71-year-old military veteran—who traveled from Ventura, Calif., with his wife to pay homage to the fallen soldiers—saw the sign affixed to the cemetery gate: "Due to the U.S. Government shutdown this site is closed to the public.

"How embarrassing," he said. "Our flag wasn't flying over our soldiers who gave their lives."

ENLARGE Signs affixed to the gates of the Normandy American Cemetery and Memorial, which commemorates World War II's D-Day invasion, inform tourists the site is closed due to the shutdown. Stacy Meichtry

ENLARGE Though many memorials remained closed because of the shutdown, including the American cemeteries on France's Normandy coast, the Grand Canyon was reopened Saturday by Arizona Gov. Jan Brewer, in yellow. National Park Service / Associated Press

The shutdown of the federal government and the subsequent closure of national parks and monuments across the U.S. have forced people to cancel vacations and reschedule weddings. But few visitors to the blustery coastline of northwestern France—where more than 3,000 allied troops died in the first day of the battle to free Europe from the clutches of Nazi occupation—expected to feel the repercussions.

U.S. war memorials on foreign soil, however, answer to the federal government back in Washington. So when the shutdown took effect earlier this month, the Normandy cemeteries closed their gates as well.

Back home, some parks and monuments reopened, at least temporarily, after state and local governments agreed to put up their own money to work around the shutdown. Tourists hoping to visit the Statue of Liberty or the Grand Canyon were in luck: Those attractions were back in business over the weekend.

Government Shuts Down Chairs and cubicles were empty at the U.S. Army Garrison Fort Lee Management Services budget office in Petersburg, Va. AP

But visitors to Normandy were met by disappointment. For many, the journey marks the pilgrimage of a lifetime. Pricey plane tickets are purchased and hotel bookings are made months, if not years, in advance in order to visit the graves of fallen family members and friends.

"I had groups come to the cemetery who have been planning their trips for a year and half and spending thousands of dollars," said Alan Amelinckx. On a typical day Mr. Amelinckx heads the visitor center at the Normandy American Cemetery. But on Friday—a week and half into the shutdown—Mr. Amelinckx was manning the gates, checking email, and apologizing over and over again as he turned visitors away.

Tracy Jones, 51, and her husband Ken, 55, from Atlanta were aboard a Normandy-bound train from Paris on Friday, worried the shutdown might affect their plans. The couple had thought about calling off their trip to Europe, particularly after Ms. Jones's mother died this month after a long bout with dementia.

But Ms. Jones's 91-year-old father, a World War II veteran who landed on beaches of Normandy, insisted the couple make the trip, delaying funeral plans until they got back. "It was now or never," Mr. Jones said.

The closure is also cutting into the cottage industry of hotels and tour guides who count on the American cemetery to draw tourists. Ever since the shutdown began, the number of tourists visiting the area has begun to ebb.

Michel Mickael, who operates tours out of his black Peugeot van, said he usually shepherds about a dozen tourists a day. On Friday, he had just one. "Everything is blocked," he said.

Lionel Poulard, a 61-year-old driver who was greeting a group of French tourists at the local train station, was more blunt: "The memorial is closed. The Americans are out of money!"

ENLARGE A billboard near the local train station advertises tours of the beaches or Normandy, including the American cemetery, one of the area's major draws. Stacy Meichtry

Some drivers are bucking the shutdown, bringing tourists to the memorial gates so that they can scale the walls and roam about the cemetery until they are caught by French groundskeepers.

Peggy Hoffman, 61, and her husband Ted, 65, from Boston, did just that. "There are ways to get around it," Ms. Hoffman said, explaining they climbed over an unmanned fence and toured the cemetery.

Mr. and Ms. Kosinski, the couple from Ventura, didn't have a guide, and reached the cemetery after a long trek from the sandy beach that lies at its foot. Amid rain and wind, the elderly couple took a moment to process the closure. Then they joined another group of Americans in scaling the cemetery's stone walls. "We had strength in numbers," Mr. Kosinski said.

Back in the U.S., the Statue of Liberty reopened Sunday after New York state said it would pay for at least six days of operations. At a news conference in front of the landmark, Gov. Andrew Cuomo, a Democrat, pledged that he would keep the statue open as long as the federal government was shut. "When you close down the Statue of Liberty, you close down a good portion of the tourism that comes to New York City," Mr. Cuomo said.

New York will spend about $61,600 a day to keep Liberty Island open, according to a spokesman for the governor.

The Grand Canyon welcomed visitors over the weekend after Arizona Gov. Jan Brewer, a Republican, reached a deal with Washington on Friday. The state will pay the National Park Service $651,000 to open the Grand Canyon and fund park operations for up to seven days, state officials said.

Utah is paying $1.6 million to open all eight of its national parks and monuments for 10 days starting Friday; South Dakota agreed to pay $152,000 to reopen Mount Rushmore for 10 days beginning on Monday; Colorado will pay $362,700 to open Rocky Mountain National Park through Oct. 20.

Not all states were jumping at the chance to reopen their parks and monuments. In Montana, Gov. Steve Bullock, a Democrat, told the Helena Independent Record that he wanted to see the entire government opened, not just national parks. He says his state won't pick up the costs.

It isn't clear if states will get all their money back when the shutdown is over, as Congress must approve any reimbursements.

In Washington, crowds gathered Sunday at the World War II Memorial and the Lincoln Memorial, pushing through barriers to protest their closure. The war-memorial protest drew Sen. Mike Lee (R., Utah), Sen. Ted Cruz (R., Texas) and former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin. The National Park Service said it is allowing "First Amendment-type activities" at such locations.

—Craig Karmin, Joshua Dawsey, Tamara Audi and Thomas M. Burton contributed to this article.

Corrections & Amplifications

Jim Kosinski is a U.S. military veteran who was trying to visit a closed cemetery at Normandy Beach. An earlier version of this article said his first name was Tim.

Write to Stacy Meichtry at stacy.meichtry@wsj.com