Wausau is set to increase the property tax burden by 4.2 percent. That’s too much to stomach. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto )

The budget recommended to the Wausau City Council by Mayor Jim Tipple and approved last month by the Finance Committee would increase taxes by $942,000 — an average increase of about $50 on residents’ already high property tax bills.

It’s too much, and City Council members should cut back the proposal significantly.

The city’s budget hearing is at 6 p.m. Tuesday; members of the public should let leaders know that this budget won’t fly.

Tax rates are a constant topic of ideological debate, but Wausau has a very specific problem and it does not require any particular ideological lens to see it. Its 2013-2014 municipal tax rate of $9.35 per $1,000 in assessed value, according to the Wisconsin Taxpayers Alliance, is higher than in comparably sized cities such as Eau Claire ($8.77) and Fond du Lac ($8.48), and it is much higher than rates in Wausau’s surrounding communities. Tax rates are a factor when seeking to attract businesses, and the disparity that exists is certainly a factor in driving growth to the suburbs rather than the city of Wausau.

Wausau’s population growth has been sluggish for a decade or more, and it has become an article of faith among Realtors and many local residents that the smart move is to buy a house outside of city limits. This is a huge problem of perception and substance for Wausau, and it begins and ends with the city’s property tax rate. We might think it’s unfair — and it might be unfair — but the fact is that Wausau is competing with a ring of surrounding communities that can offer access to all Wausau has to offer at dramatically lower tax rates.

We don’t endorse the view that no one should buy a house in Wausau. We love Wausau. But city leaders should take this challenge seriously.

And besides that, they should take the view of residents seriously. In a May 2013 city survey, Wausau residents were asked to select the “three top concerns that prevent others from buying homes in Wausau.” Nearly three-quarters of respondents said “taxes” — and with 72 percent, that answer was far and away the top choice.

City Hall’s credibility problem

There is, of course, another problem Wausau faces, and it is one of simple credibility when City Hall makes this sort of budget request. We know there are a lot of smart, hard-working people at City Hall, and that city workers provide a lot of essential services that we residents often take for granted. But given the laundry list of management problems and the dearth of leadership at 407 Grant St., it is all but impossible to have confidence that Wausau as a whole is really looking at ways of delivering service efficiently, finding policy innovations that serve taxpayers and working hard to keep costs down.

And there’s the rub, again. After we’ve seen one wasteful project after another and one management failure after the next for years now, a proposed 4.2 percent tax hike is hard to swallow.

Governments need revenue to exist and the city provides services we all value. Proposed new funds for The 400 Block, for example, might be an area where new spending makes sense, given the civic and economic value of the downtown square. It is not out of an opposition to new taxes in any absolute sense that we say: This budget increase is too much.

Wausau is losing out on business and growth because of its high local taxes. We know this is true; residents overwhelmingly told City Council it was a major concern. It is time the city made it a priority.

Reject the 4.2 percent tax hike.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1qwKOWh