Buy Photo A personal watercraft skims across the Barnegat Bay off Seaside Park. (Photo: Press File Photo )Buy Photo

As New Jersey's recreational boating industry fights to recover from superstorm Sandy and the preceding economic downturn, industry advocates say clean water is critical to restoring the industry's long-term prospects.

Fear for Barnegat Bay — can it be saved?

"It's been a challenging couple of years for us," said Melissa Danko, executive director of the Marine Trades Association of New Jersey, which represents all sectors of the industry from marina operators to boat dealers.

Love Barnegat Bay? Share your photos with us

"The state did an amazing job" removing Sandy debris from the bay, Danko said. "Our industry, we are still in recovery mode from the storm, so seeing people actually getting back out on the water is actually something we look to and hope for."

New Jersey's boating community has seen long-term decline, after the fleet grew rapidly in the 1980s through 1990s. Boat registrations show about 91,000 fewer recreational boats on New Jersey waters — down from the peak of 243,281 vessels in 2000 to 151,787 early this year, Danko said.

"Boaters love to be on the water, but obviously everybody wants to boat on clean water," Danko said. Association members have been major partners with the state Department of Environmental Protection, joining forces to create a network of pump-out stations to properly dispose of boat sewage, and building new boat wash facilities to catch and recover residues like bottom paint.

"We are certainly doing everything in our power to make sure we can do what we can," she said. "We care very much about the environment."

Ed Harrison, vice president of Baywood Marina in Brick, said the bay shoreline looks a lot better after the Sandy cleanup. The mainland Brick shoreline was hit hard by storm debris pushed up Barnegat Bay and across from the ocean washovers at Mantoloking.

But the business is recovering. "This year we've seen a big improvement," Harrison said, as many customers have repaired their storm-damaged homes and are getting back into boating.

"Boat sales have been excellent this year," he said. The business sells mostly smaller bay boats, less than 25 feet long.

"As far as the quality of the water, I don't know if I see any changes there," said Harrison, 46. He's hoped the stinging sea nettle jellyfish would be gone, but "they're still out there."

The animals have put a damper on what used to be a thriving water ski scene on the Metedeconk River as some people change how they use their boats.

Harrison said a lot of people who go tubing — riding inflatables towed behind a boat — now use a tube inside a tube to avoid the jellyfish.

To his knowledge, he said, the jellyfish have not affected how fishermen are using their boats. And while commercial crabbers complain about algae fouling in the central bay, he says recreational crabbing has actually been pretty good lately at the north end.

Slip use and fuel sales are up considerably, he said. But, like the statewide numbers cited by Danko, business is about 75 percent of the heyday in the late 1980s, he said.

"Obviously, it's our livelihood, so we try to do everything we can to minimize our impact" on the bay, he said. "We kind of hope that the towns will come through and do what they have to do because right now we capture everything we do as far as power washing and all that but we have many storm drains from the town going into our basin that just runs off people's property and into the road and right into the bay or into the lagoon, which is far worse than anything we could ever put in the water."

John Durrua, 48, owner of the Jersey Paddler in Brick, which sells kayaks, canoes, standup paddleboards, and fishing kayaks, said the bay has been "nice and clean" the times he's been out on it near the Mantoloking Bridge and Gunners Ditch.

But he's seen "plenty" of sea nettles, "too many to count," he said. "It seems like there's no shortage of 'em."

As for business, "it doesn't seem to have an (impact) on the paddlers just because they're on top and not in the water," he said.

Standup paddleboarding is growing and there are lots of kayak fishermen and they aren't complaining, he said.

"I see more standup paddleboards out there," he said. "I see more kayak fishermen than I've ever before, and I think some of that may be post-recession, people made a shift to something that was healthier on their pocketbooks and healthier on themselves."

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1shw2Yi