Note: This post originally appeared on LinkedIn.

June 2015 will be recognized as a month in which equality in the United States prevailed.

Recently, our federal court system made significant strides in achieving equality for U.S. citizens. The rulings to legalize same-sex marriage in all 50 states and to uphold the Affordable Care Act (ACA) mark a monumental moment in our nation's history.

Acknowledging equality of marital rights and access to affordable health insurance will not only affect the lives of adult men and women, but will also send a message to the youth of our nation -- that everyone, man or woman, has the right to lead a happy, healthy and full life.

These landmark rulings are living proof that, given the proper moral compass and support from governing bodies, we can achieve equality. Although we still have a long way to go, a celebration is in order. America has made history -- but it shouldn't stop there!

Women's Rights -- Achieving Equal Gender Pay, Career Opportunities



For years, same-sex couples have fought for the same rights as heterosexual couples--basic privileges so many of us take for granted on a daily basis. Marriage equality is an issue that goes far beyond marital rights, and includes medical and durable power of attorney, estate and tax privileges, and the freedom to visit your loved one in a hospital. Now, these basic privileges are a reality for everyone.

The federal government has also given citizens the opportunity to lead healthier lives. With "Obamacare" here to stay, costs will continue to level out, making healthcare more affordable for the masses. Tax credits will be given to individuals who are between 100% and 400% of the poverty line, assuring that every American is guaranteed insurance coverage and access to more affordable healthcare options.

Although the legalization of same-sex marriage and the ruling to uphold the ACA are monumental, our nation must continue to ask, "What else can we do to support equality in our country?"

To me, the obvious next step is ensuring equal pay and opportunities for women in the workforce. How can anyone debate whether or not an intelligent, competent and driven woman is any less qualified than her male counterpart? Furthermore, how can we ethically limit the maternity leave and opportunities that are provided to mothers who also want to pursue a career?

Why should a woman make seventy-seven cents for every dollar a man makes? Women make up nearly half of our workforce, yet they bring home fewer earnings to provide for their families.

In addition to unfair pay grades, women are also less likely to assume executive leadership positions. According to Fortune.com, "Only 25 of the Fortune 500 companies are run by women." A report created by Pew Research concluded that 80% of individuals believe that both men and women make equally good leaders. So why isn't this demonstrated in society?

Lastly, the U.S. is the only industrialized nation in the world that does not mandate paid leave for mothers of newborns. Our country does not truly support mothers who want to have children as well as a career. If you haven't read it, I suggest Facebook COO Sheryl Sanberg's book, Lean In: Women, Work, and the Will to Lead. This book frames the perfect picture of today's ambitious, career- and family-oriented women, and explores the many challenges they face.

Public policies and culture shifts that support new moms are vital to help raise healthy babies and children (i.e., breastfeeding, mother-to-infant bonding), and to make it possible for women to leave the workforce for a minimum of one year and return to the same job with the same pay--thereby allowing for future success.

I employ women. I am a colleague to women. I do business with women. I am a grandson, son, son-in-law, brother with two younger sisters, brother-in-law and husband. All of the women in my life are nothing short of remarkable, and they influence the decisions I make in my personal and professional life.

I am also the father of a very special baby girl who will one day select a career and pave her own road to success and happiness. I want my daughter to grow up in a country that enables her to succeed and encourages her to strive for the same accomplishments as men.

I want her to believe in her ability to achieve her goals, no matter her gender or profession. I want her to believe that it's possible -- and most of all, I want to see those dreams come to fruition.

I am also the father of a four-year-old son, and my dreams for the future extend to him as well. It is my hope that he will respect and defend gender equality, and that he will use his voice to defend those who are marginalized or treated unfairly.

As a father, a citizen, and a human being, I hope that all people will be treated with equal respect and will be able to live with equal rights and freedoms.

Our nation has once again proven it is capable of turning the idealization of equality into a reality, but there is much work left to be done. Our work will not be complete until all minorities--the underprivileged, underrepresented and underserved--can realize their full potential.

Please help me see this vision become a reality.

Follow Parker Beauchamp on Twitter: www.twitter.com/INGUARD