“Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the law.”

– Aleister Crowley, Satanic priest and paragon to Alfred Kinsey, father of modern sex education

Order and anarchy. Good and evil. Truth and lies. Natural sexuality (within marriage) and homosexuality (of any kind).

The contrast is bright as day is to night. While Christ repeatedly condemned all “sexual immorality” as defined in the Old Testament Jewish moral code (which includes homosexual behavior), God’s Word, throughout both the Old and New Testaments, specifically denounces as evil rising to the level of “a detestable sin” all same-sex sexual conduct – be it “loving, monogamous and committed,” or otherwise.

Leviticus 18:22, for instance, admonishes, in no uncertain terms: “Do not practice homosexuality, having sex with another man as with a woman. It is a detestable sin.”

1 Corinthians 6:9 warns: “Or do you not know that the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived: neither the sexually immoral, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor men who practice homosexuality.”

Yet deceived they are, and without the Kingdom of God they remain.

Indeed, today there persists a burgeoning racket of apostate biblical revisionists who rationalize sexual sin. Notwithstanding a level of deception rooted in a deeply heartfelt and genuinely emotional variety of wishful thinking, the Holy Bible, thousands of years of history and uncompromising human biology nonetheless remain incontrovertible: Unrepentant homosexual behavior is, always has been and always will be 100 percent and irredeemably wrong.

Still, few people realize that there is a “Bible” that not only affirms homosexuality (all forms of sexual immorality, in fact), but that goes so far as to make sin the centerpiece of its doctrine – its “golden rule,” if you will.

In his fantastic new book, “Gay Awareness: Discovering the Heart of the Father and the Mind of Christ On Sexuality,” author and minister Landon Schott devotes an entire chapter to this “gay”-affirming “Bible.” “[O]ut of the 31,102 verses in the Bible,” he writes, “not one supports a homosexual lifestyle in any way – not one. If you are still looking for a scripture that supports homosexuality you need to close your Holy Bible and open The Satanic Bible!”

That’s right. The Satanic Bible is the only “gay-affirming” Bible in existence (save a handful of heretical and intentionally mistranslated Bible counterfeits).

Schott quotes The Satanic Bible verbatim:

“Satanism condones any type of sexual activity which properly satisfies your individual desires, be it heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual, or even asexual, if you choose. Satanism also sanctions any fetish or deviation which will enhance your sex life, so long as it involves no one who does not wish to be involved.”

Satanism? Sounds more like the “values neutral” “comprehensive sex education” curriculum pushed on children in most of today’s public schools.

Contrast this with Christianity. Romans 13:13-14, for example, commands, “Let us behave properly as in the day, not in carousing and drunkenness, not in sexual promiscuity and sensuality, not in strife and jealousy. But put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh in regard to its lusts.”

“Satan’s existence is consumed with a mission,” continues Schott, “to defy and mock God, to defy His order of creation, and to mock His governing orders. … The Church of Satan reverses the order of the Lord’s Prayer, saying it backwards as they begin their services, to defy God. God says love; the Church of Satan says hate. God says heterosexual relationships; the Church of Satan says homosexual relationships. God says monogamous marriage between a man and woman; the Church of Satan says polygamous and sexually open relationships. God gave the Ten Commandments; the Church of Satan established their version, called the Nine Tenets, shown below:”

Satan represents indulgence instead of abstinence! Satan represents vital existence instead of spiritual pipe dreams! Satan represents undefiled wisdom instead of hypocritical self-deceit! Satan represents kindness to those who deserve it instead of love wasted! Satan represents vengeance instead of turning the other cheek! Satan represents man as just another animal, sometimes better, more often worse than those that walk on all-fours, who, because of his “divine spiritual and intellectual development,” has become the most vicious animal of all! Satan represents all of the so-called sins, as they all lead to physical, mental, or emotional gratification! Satan has been the best friend the Church has ever had, as He has kept it in business all these years! When walking in open territory, bother no one. If someone bothers you, ask him to stop. If he does not stop, destroy him.

Consider The Satanic Bible’s following sex-centric passages. They read like the mission statements of the Human Rights Campaign (HRC) or GLSEN:

Each person must decide for himself what form of sexual activity best suits his individual needs.

Satanism ENCOURAGES any form of sexual expression you may desire so long as it hurts no one else.

If all parties involved are mature adults who willingly take full responsibility for their actions and voluntarily engages in a given form of sexual expression – even if it is generally considered taboo – then there is no reason for them to repress their sexual inclinations … you have no cause to suppress your sexual preferences.

It is important to point out here that spiritual love and sexual love can, but do not necessarily, go hand in hand.

The Satanist realizes that if he is to be a sexual connoisseur (and free from sexual guilt) he cannot be stifled by the so-called sexual revolutionist any more than he can by the prudery of his guilt-ridden society.

“That last verse from The Satanic Bible,” observes Schott, “reminds me of a powerful proverb on the adulterous woman. Proverbs 30:20 says, ‘This is the way of an adulterous woman: She eats and wipes her mouth and says, “I’ve done nothing wrong.”‘ Again and again The Satanic Bible tells its readers that there is nothing wrong with giving in to your natural sexual desires. The Bible tells us to resist the sexual desires of the flesh,” he concludes.

Schott points out, and I agree wholeheartedly, that homosexual practitioners are not necessarily demonic (or demon possessed) and that they are desperately in need of Christ’s Truth, in love, as well as much prayer.

Even so, it remains true that homosexual sin is demonic.

All good things come from God the Father, and all wickedness comes from the father of lies. If God designed biblical marriage and natural human sexuality, and He did, then we are left no doubt as to who designed its counterfeit – as to who fabricated pagan “gay marriage” and otherwise perverted God’s perfect purposes for human sexuality.

Sin is from Satan. Homosexual behavior is sin. Therefore, homosexual behavior is from Satan.

Yes, “gay marriage” is evil.

Yes, homosexuality is evil.

For the Bible – and The Satanic Bible – tells me so.