Topics: Barack Obama, Congress, Executive power, gitmo, Guantanamo Bay, John Boehner, National Defense Authorization Act, President Obama, Republicans, signing statements, Terrorism, War on Terror, White House, Politics News

The prison at Guantanamo Bay is a blight upon America. It’s a useless, expensive, and indefensible mockery of American ideals that should never have been opened. It harms American interests by doing nothing more than existing. It undermines any aspiration we may have to be an international beacon of human rights and justice. It weakens our credibility when we criticize regimes that make it a regular practice of locking people up, without charge, until they are dead. Gitmo should be closed as soon as is feasible.

To that end, the White House is, according to the Wall Street Journal, “drafting options that would allow President Barack Obama to close the detention facility in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, by overriding a congressional ban on bringing detainees to the U.S.” Obama’s been promising a lot of executive action of late, and this would certainly be among the more ambitious assertions of his authority. But we’ve been down this road before. Many, many times.

Obama campaigned on closing Gitmo and signed an executive order his first day in office pledging to have it shut down within a year. That, obviously, didn’t happen. A lot of the blame belongs to Congress and its members – both Republican and Democratic – who blend a paralyzing fear of terrorists with an outspoken (and completely unjustified) lack of faith in the civilian criminal justice system to handle terrorism cases. In the 2010 lame-duck session, Congress attached language to the National Defense Authorization Act forbidding the White House from transferring Guantanamo inmates to U.S. soil. Because the bill funded continued military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, Obama signed it. But he attached a signing statement expressing his “strong objection to these provisions” (more on signing statements in a moment).

Since then, the push to close Gitmo has withered. Obama’s brought it up a few times here and there, throwing a line or two into speeches about how our principles and governing ideals demand that the prison be closed down, but Gitmo persists. Not only is it still there, it’s digging in. The Huffington Post’s Ryan Reilly reported last year that even though the number of inmates at Gitmo has dwindled to less than 200, Congressional resistance to ever doing anything means that the ones who remain will be there indefinitely. “Effectively banned from the continental U.S. by Congress, disowned by their home countries and unwelcome pretty much everywhere else, they have no place to go.”

In the meantime, more money is spent housing the detainees ($2.7 million per detainee, per year) and refurbishing the facility, while little to no progress is made in the legal cases against the detainees. For all the faith Republicans and neoconservatives put in the military tribunal system for trying terrorism cases, they’re actually quite terrible at producing convictions. The masterminds of the 9-11 terrorist attacks held at Gitmo – including Khalid Sheik Mohammed – are still awaiting trial.