ST. MARYS — The main strategic deterrent to nuclear conflict are the submarines home-ported at Kings Bay Naval Submarine Base, and there is money in the budget to design the replacements for the Ohio Class subs that will begin going offline in 14 years, Adm. Jonathan W. Greenert, chief of Naval Operations said Tuesday.

That was good news to an appreciative crowd that gathered at a luncheon to thank Greenert, who visited sailors at Kings Bay at noon and Mayport later, for his continued support of the base. The Camden Partnership hosted the luncheon.

Among other things, Greenert came away with a resolution from Camden County, St. Marys, Kingsland and Woodbine declaring it Jonathan W. Greenert Day.

Most of the talk, however, was a serious discussion about the Navy’s needs, especially the new class of subs for Kings Bay. Kings Bay has eight Ohio Class subs.

Although Greenert cautioned the Navy needed “money help’’ in getting the replacements done on time, he said, “It will happen. It has to be done right.”

Some of the costs will be reduced because the U.S. is working with the United Kingdom to design the missile compartments for the submarines, Greenert said.

When the boats are complete, the U.S. and Great Britain will be capable of firing each other’s missiles, Greenert said.

U.S. Sen. Saxby Chambliss, R-Ga., who greeted Greenert at the luncheon, said simply of the $1.2 billion in design funding, “That’s huge. We’ve got to keep it going. That’s full funding.”

Chambliss also gave the same weight to Greenert’s description of Kings Bay in the Navy’s plans.

“When he says Kings Bay is the No. 1 base in the U.S. for strategic deterrence, that’s huge,’’ he said.

The man who is running to replace Kingston, U.S. Rep. Jack Kingston, R-Ga., said Congress has to make sure there is continued funding for military programs such as Kings Bay’s key mission as money gets diverted.

He pointed to President Barack Obama’s proposal to increase the funding for administration of the Affordable Care Act from $5 billion to $23 billion in a single year.

“That’s just for the bureaucrats. That’s not one dime in medicine,’’ Kingston said.

CUTS STILL A DANGER

Protecting Kings Bay’s subs doesn’t mean Obama won’t cut other military funding, Kingston said.

“He doesn’t have trouble finding money for programs he likes, but when it comes to the military, we’re out of money,’’ Kingston said.

Even if all the money is there, Greenert said there could be trouble finding the companies and labor force to build the replacement submarines and other ships.

The Navy needs major ship builders to construct the submarines and other replacement ships and their numbers have fallen from 10 in the 1990s to five now with another going out of business, he said.

“Imagine losing one more,’’ he said.

In addition to building a new class of submarines, the Navy must also modernize its fleet of 22 cruisers.

Eleven already have been modernized but the rest must undergo the same transformation or they’ll be obsolete in five or six years, he said.

He also said the Navy is still suffering the impact of sequestration under the Budget Control Act of 2011. The reduction in funds slowed the maintenance of ships so that others had to remain on deployment longer than they otherwise would have, but the Navy is finally catching up, Greenert said.

He made one announcement that should make Navy spouses happy.

By 2015, he said, “we’re looking at a stable eight-month deployment.’’

That depends, however, on stability, and should the “world go crazy” more ships would have to be deployed, he said.

Former state representative Charlie Smith of St. Marys advised Greenert the Navy could save a lot of money by moving “a squadron of fast attack submarines from the icy north to Kings Bay.”

“Well, Mr. Smith,’’ Greenert joked, “I hadn’t thought of that.”

After leaving Kings Bay, Greenert was due to visit Mayport.

Terry Dickson: (912) 264-0405