HARTFORD >> Gov. Dannel P. Malloy has issued an executive order that could halt the proposed merger between Yale New Haven Health Services Corp. and the Lawrence + Memorial Corp. in New London.

He is asking that the Office of Health Care Access and the state Department of Social Services not make a final decision on any proposed consolidation of hospital systems until January 2017, after a new task force reviews whether changes are needed in the review process.

The specifics of the order appear to be applicable only to the Yale New Haven Health System and Hartford HealthCare, the largest in terms of operating revenues in the state.

Charlotte Hungerford Hospital in Torrington announced Thursday that it was investigating an affiliation with Hartford HealthCare, which already has five hospitals within its orbit. The Yale system has Yale-New Haven Hospital, Bridgeport Hospital, Greenwich Hospital and the former Hospital of Saint Raphael.

Advertisement

The governor is concerned about the increasing number of proposed mergers or affiliations “for reasons other than significant financial distress.” There has been much discussion in the legislature and nationally on the effect of mergers on competition, access and prices.

If OCHA legally is required to make a decision before next year, the order directs it to reject requests from hospital systems where consolidation would result in operating revenues in excess of 20 percent of the total operating revenues for the 28 hospitals in Connecticut.

The Yale New Haven Health System in 2014 already had operating revenues of $3.4 billion, according to OCHA, which was equal to more than 27 percent of the total for all the hospitals.

Hartford HealthCare’s operating revenues were $2.5 billion that fiscal year, or just over 20 percent of the total.

The order not only took the hospitals by surprise, but also lawmakers, unions and health care advocates who have been working for more in-depth reviews of consolidations.

Neither the office of Senate President Pro Tempore Martin Looney, D-New Haven, nor that of Senate Minority Leader Leonard Fasano, R-North Haven, knew that the order was about to be posted. Looney and Fasano, who differ on many policies, have been on the same page on hospital issues.

A study issued by union and health care advocates in December concluded that allowing the Yale New Haven system to merge with Lawrence + Memorial Health would put upward pressure on prices, a position that Yale has disputed.

Looney said the data in the report suggest that the state’s hospital markets are already concentrated and the purchase of Lawrence + Memorial would further that along the Shoreline.

Malloy, in his order, said the certificate of need process overseen by OCHA has been piecemeal for too long and a comprehensive review was in order.

“With continuing changes in the health care industry, it is critical that our state laws ensure that all hospitals continue to thrive, and that the deck is not stacked in favor of fewer than a handful that dominate the marketplace. We need balance. Fewer health care systems mean fewer choices for consumers, and that can dramatically affect both the quality of care and costs. It’s time we take a holistic look at the acquisition process,” he said in a statement.

Michele Sharp, a spokeswoman for the Connecticut Hospital Association, said it was examining the executive order, “but we have grave concerns about a blanket moratorium on acquisitions and conversions, including those already in process. Hospital integration is part of a shift to adjust to healthcare sector changes, including the impact of healthcare reform. Healthcare reform requires hospitals to find new strategies to reduce the cost of care by operating as efficiently as possible while providing excellent, integrated quality care.”

Vincent Petrini, senior vice president for public affairs at Yale-New Haven Hospital, also said they are studying the executive order, but “it seems to have a disproportional impact on Connecticut-based health systems.”

He said these partnerships create efficiencies of scale necessary to respond to changes brought about by the Affordable Care Act and to survive increasing taxes and inadequate reimbursements by Medicaid.

Petrini said they hoped OCHA would conclude its review of the Lawrence + Memorial affiliation by the summer. Putting a moratorium in place until January creates “a much higher degree of uncertainty in the regulatory process,” he said.

In his view, “Connecticut is incredibly competitive,” given the affiliations by a number of hospitals with larger out-of-state systems.

Both Looney and Fasano have asked OCHA to press the Yale New Haven system for pricing data after it brought three other hospitals under its aegis.

Health advocates and union leaders were happy with the governor’s decision.

“Governor Malloy today took a vital step to protect Connecticut patients, health care workers and taxpayers. The Governor’s Executive Order will open breathing room for a measured assessment of the impact of growing hospital and physician monopolies on communities across the state,” said Laurie Kennington, Unite Here Local 34, which represents workers at the Yale School of Medicine.

“Connecticut’s two largest hospital systems — Yale-New Haven Health System and Hartford HealthCare — are actively seeking to buy more hospitals and doctors’ practices. This is the right moment to create a framework to ensure that expansion promotes appropriate competition, access to services and affordable health care,” she said.

“It is phenomenal,” said Ellen Andrews, executive director of the Connecticut Health Policy Project.

“It is a really good policy in terms of preventing market concentration and providing patient choice,” Andrews said.

Jan Hochadel, the president of the American Federation of Teachers, Connecticut, which represents personnel at Lawrence + Memorial, weighed in with a similar observation.

“One of the lessons learned from the recent gutting of services at Windham Hospital is that current patient and community protections are not always sufficient,” Hochadel said.

She said the merger of Yale New Haven Health System with Lawrence + Memorial is “creating more questions than answers. The proposed task force is an opportunity to take an honest look at whether these and other consolidations are actually serving the needs of patients, caregivers and communities.”