More Video...

After 30 years as an elected official, Senator Mike Johanns said he won't be running anymore. 10/11 News sat down with him to take a look back at his long career serving Nebraska.

Johanns has had six jobs, ran in more than a dozen elections, and helped thousands of Nebraskans in the last 32 years.

"In the time I've been a U.S. Senator we've had about a million contacts from Nebraskans. Letters, phone calls, emails, whatever. It does feel good when you can help people," said Johanns.

Johanns career started in 1983 as a Lancaster County Commissioner. From there, he went to the Lincoln City Council, eventually being elected mayor. Johanns served as Lincoln's mayor from 1991 to 1998. It was the snowstorm of 1997 that he remembers as a defining moment.

"Thousands of people without power, couldn't turn on the heat. It was just chaotic," he said. That boosted his run for Nebraska's Governor. "I was better known and that became the base upon which we built the statewide campaign," added Johanns.

After winning the election in 1998, Johanns was 3 years into his term when September 11th changed the nation. He said after that he focused on keeping Nebraska's economy afloat, but the emotional toll couldn't be balanced like a budget.

"My wife Stephanie said to me, a week after 9/11 or so, 'I wonder what will be the first day that I don't cry,'" remembered Johanns.

In 2005 Washington called. Johanns answered, becoming the secretary of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.

"On a personal level being the Secretary of Agriculture was remarkable. I grew up on a farm," he said. Johanns spent his three years as Ag Secretary working to help other farmers in Nebraska, the U.S. and the world.

For the last six years, Johanns has served Nebraska as Senator. Now, he's looking forward to a busy life out of elected office.

Since he's now wrapped up his time in Washington, Johanns said he'll enjoy some time with family while he figures out what comes next. He's also reflecting on his time in office.

"I never would have gotten the 1099 requirement repealed from Obamacare without the support of democrats. I never would have gotten the de-funding of ACORN done without the support of democrats," he said.

Still, Johanns said partisanship is a major setback at the Nation's Capitol.

"I think there's just a need for that to end and people to work together and solve problems," Johanns reflected.

So, as he leaves his post, he hopes colleagues and newcomers will remember what's important.

"Now it's time to govern and you govern for all the people," recommended Johanns. "You govern for Republicans and Democrats and Independents. You govern for the wealthy and the poor. You govern for the people that have no voice," he said.

Johanns said he's taken pride in doing just that, including mental health reform that he passed as Governor. He tells 10/11 he'll announce his next move in January.