GUEST MENTOR Ryan Smith, CEO and co-founder of Qualtrics: Everyone says we’re living in the “Age of the Customer,” and as 2013 comes to an end, if you don’t already know this little fact, then you’re probably not in business anymore.

But being a successful business in 2014 means more than simply providing great customer experiences. I believe we’re seeing another major shift, and this one is all about the employee experience.

Being successful in 2014 is all about the intersection of the employee and the customer, because employees are the fabric that binds your customers to your brand. Your employees know how to make your customers happy better than you do. It’s those on the front lines that make the real difference. These are the people that build brand loyalty and turn customers in advocates. Ignore this fundamental truth at your own risk.

Now, I’m not saying to abandon your customer engagement programs. What I’m saying is to build out your employee engagement program in conjunction, because happy employees help to build stronger, more successful businesses.

With this in mind, here are two resolutions to give startups the insight they need to kick off the New Year.

Engage with employees or suffer the consequences.

The effects of having an unengaged workforce are far too great to ignore. Gallup’s recent “State of the American Workplace” study found that active workplace disengagement costs American businesses between $450 and $550 billion per year.

So before a company can even begin to provide its customers with the best possible experience, it must first make sure that its own house is in order. In other words, make sure that your employees are fully engaged.

Do you know if your employees would recommend your company to a friend? Do staff members feel that their talents are being well utilized? Are employees passionate about their work? If you don’t know the answers then find out now, because employees are an organizations biggest asset or its greatest liability.

To add fuel to the fire, with more and more Millennials entering today’s workplace, those companies and leaders who learn about them and what they require as a workforce will be the ones to succeed. I’m not saying that you have to ride a horse through your office to excite your employees (although I have done this) but Millennials admire new and creative approaches to management styles and work environments.

By instilling an ethos of creativity and radical transparency, employees are more likely to increase productivity and engagement in the workplace. In turn, as these employees become knitted into the fabric of the business, and you develop a team singularly focused on the customer experience, your customers will always reap the benefits.

Do everything you can to keep the customer happy.

Again, don’t get rid of your customer experience programs. Grow them instead. Take them to the next level, because today’s customers are more demanding then ever before.

There are real advantages to having constant open dialogue with customers. This lets you identify both the opportunities and the challenges in your business and allows you to address them as quickly as possible.

I believe that companies should be available and responsive to customers both in person and online. For example, surveys are an excellent vehicle for communicating and engaging with clients personally and directly to understand what they like and don’t like, for what they need and for how you can serve them better.

And honestly you’ll never create customer advocacy if you don’t act on customer feedback. It’s simple. Your customers are dying to tell you what they think! Don’t believe me? Just ask.

Ask your customer’s opinions, make real change based on this feedback and then share the love with them. Thank them for the help. Articulate how you’ll use their voice to improve your product or service. Don’t miss the opportunity to form genuine relationships with the people that you exist to serve.

Going beyond the Internet, organizations must also actively seek opportunities to be present with their customers in person. Face-to-face interactions are extremely powerful. It establishes trust in a way that you just can’t build online.

As with any business year, there will be companies that thrive and companies that fade away. But by taking the time to truly understand and gain insight into your customers and your employees, you can ensure that 2014’s New Year’s celebration will last well beyond January 1.

Follow @Qualtrics

Follow @WSJstartup