Please enable Javascript to watch this video

SUPERIOR -- Comments by Superior's mayor about First Lady Michelle Obama are generating a lot of controversy. Some are calling for his resignation. This, as Mayor Bruce Hagen addresses his recent Facebook post.

Despite the calls for his resignation, Mayor Hagen says he won't step down.

However, he has confirmed he will not seek re-election when his term ends in 2019.

Hagen has been under fire since he commented on a photo of Michelle Obama on Facebook -- writing: "Unbelievable! She and her Muslim partner have destroyed the fabric of democracy that was so very hard fought for."

Since the comment, several groups have called for a retraction, an apology, and Hagen's resignation.

If that doesn't happen...

"The main action we are considering right now is an economic boycott of any and all activities and events sponsored by the Mayor and his office," Kym Young, community activist said.

Leaders of the Superior African Heritage Community say they'll protest on Monday, December 28th. They'll attempt to shut down traffic and business to City Hall.

"At this point, in civil disobedience, that is always a possibility when you are protesting against a perceived injustice," Young said.

Hagen says he was exercising his freedom of speech.

People in Superior are split on the issue.

"He takes care of the people here. He's right. I think people are blowing this way out of proportion," a Superior resident said.

"Somebody who is supposed to work across county lines like that, shouldn't say such stupid, bigoted things," a Superior resident said.

City leaders say it's creating an unwanted controversy.

"Whether people think the mayor was right or wrong, you know, we all kind of got to come together and in a consensus, building time to get this completed, healed, and move on with business. And learn from it," Tom Fennessey, city council president said.

Superior's police chief issued a statement about the possible protests. He warned that obstructing access to City Hall for the public and employees will not be tolerated.

Chief Nicholas Alexander says he's reaching out to organizers in the hopes of avoiding any conflict.

READ IT: Full statement from Mayor Hagen via KQDS.