New motion simulator, spinning bumper cars among attractions offered

Youngsters are spun around as they run into each other in Spin Zone bumper cars at Loveland Laser Tag on Thursday. The bumper cars as well as the high-tech motion simulator X Rider are new additions to the center. ( Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

A Loveland business focused on fun has added half a million dollars' worth of new attractions for local thrill-seekers.

Loveland Laser Tag Fun Center opened its X Rider motion simulator on Labor Day weekend, and owner Jeff Willy said the state-of-the-art device has contributed to the company's best October ever.

The fun center at 401 Denver Ave. also has added a Spin Zone bumper car ride, more than doubled the number of arcade games and is adding new twists to its three-level laser tag arena.

The motion simulator is one of a very few in Colorado, Willy said, and provides an experience on the level of a Disney theme park.

"It has been incredibly popular so far. It beat our expectations for September and October," he said.

A screen shot of The Wall of China scenario from the X Rider motion simulator at Loveland Laser Tag captured Thursday shows the back of the driver of a pedicab on the Great Wall of China. The ride offers eight different virtual-reality scenarios to visitors. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

The device looks a bit like a roller coaster car enclosed in a room, with eight seats divided into two levels. "Riders" strap in with seat belts and put on 3-D glasses.

Riders have eight 5-minute movies from which to choose, and the platform shifts on six different axes to simulate the motion projected on a large screen.

Surprisingly realistic

The Wall of China, the X Rider's most popular choice so far, depicts a ride in a pedicab. As the coolie hops on his bike, the seats shift and bounce accordingly. The ride along the Great Wall quickly barrels out of control, the cycle separates from the cab and the riders are in for a wild roller coaster ride.

Advertisement

In addition to the 3-D visuals, motion and surround sound, the X Rider blows wind, snow and bubbles at its riders. The result is an astonishingly realistic experience that makes a rider check his surroundings to remind himself that he's not really about to crash over a 1,000-foot precipice at breakneck speed.

Willy said he has taken all the rides several times each.

"I can't get enough of it," he said.

The X Rider has three motion settings, from gentle to energetic.

"No one's actually gotten sick, but some people come out and say 'whoa, that made me feel butterflies like I was on a roller coaster,'" he said.

The other videos include a dinosaur safari, roller coaster ride, snow-tubing adventure, space chase, roller coaster ride, wild West mine ride and Journey to the West fantasy, plus for Halloween, The Butcher 4D — "the world's first live-action motion horror film."

Bumper cars

The Spin Zone, the other major addition at Loveland Laser Tag, features eight round battery-powered bumper cars encircled with inner tubes. Each car has two targets on its tube, which when hit, will send the driver into an uncontrollable spin for 3 seconds.

Tiffany Moss sneaks around an obstacle at Loveland Laser Tag, looking for a clear shot at an opponent Thursday. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

And if that spinning weren't enough, the operators of the ride take over control of all the cars and send them into spins or random "chaos mode" several times during a 3 ½ -minute ride.

Four of the single-passenger cars can be outfitted with a child's seat so that a parent can take a youngster along for the ride.

"The bumper cars seem to be a big hit with middle school and high school kids," Willy said.

On Thursday evening, Ben Dunaisky, an eighth-grader at Preston Middle School in Fort Collins, was celebrating his upcoming 14th birthday at Loveland Laser Tag with five of his buddies.

Between laser tag games, the gang hopped on the bumper cars.

"I thought it was funner than normal bumper cars because of the spinning around when you hit someone," Ben said before running off to take a climb on the ropes course.

The X Rider and Spin Zone cost $5 a ride, and Willy said he has added the bumper cars to the fun center's $29.99 all-attractions pass. The pass covers everything except the X Rider and arcade games.

More of everything

Loveland Laser Tag now has almost 35 arcade games, Willy said, including Jurassic Park and the brand-new Star Wars: Battle Pod Standard Edition.

Willy said he started adding new attractions such as the ropes course before a major competitor, The Summit in Windsor, opened last year.

"I took that as a challenge," he said.

A beacon glows on a wall of the Egyptian-themed arena at Loveland Laser Tag on Thursday. The new beacons were designed and built in Loveland for Laserforce International and this week will be shipped all over the U.S. and to Germany. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"We want to provide so many different things to our customers that they can do something different every time they come in," he said.

And he's found that parents, who normally sit and wait with a book or mobile device while their children are playing, have started joining in with their kids on the new attractions.

"That's what we wanted," he said.

Craig Young: 970-635-3634, cyoung@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/CraigYoungRH.