The Denver medical examiner has identified the man killed by Aurora police earlier this week as 25-year-old Chan Lieth, a man with a history of auto theft.

Lieth died just after midnight Tuesday after he was shot multiple times after an encounter with police outside a convenience store at 1103 Yosemite St. in Denver. He was taken by ambulance to University of Colorado Hospital where he died, according to a medical examiner’s news release.

The incident started around 8:46 p.m. Monday when Aurora police officers spotted a stolen Jeep Cherokee on East Colfax Avenue, according to police reports. Police had been searching for the stolen vehicle for a week after a driver had eluded police after appearing to bait police into a chase. However, police department policy bars car chases under most circumstances and officers would back off.

Officers located the stolen Jeep on Monday at 11:36 p.m. in the convenience store parking lot, and a patrol officer used his car to block it into a parking space.

Lieth then began ramming the police car and the building with the Jeep as he tried to escape, police said.

Six people were inside the store and a propane tank cage was against the storefront, police said. One Aurora police officer was positioned between the building, the propane cage and a Red Box movie dispenser.

Police and store patron lives were in danger, the Aurora police said in a news release and during a news conference.

Two police officers fired at Lieth.

Lieth graduated from Cherry Creek High School in 2010, one of his friends told The Denver Post. He also had attended South High School.

Fithum Gebre, 26, said he met Lieth at South and had maintained a friendship over the years.

“He used to be a smart guy in high school,” Gebre said.

Gebre said he never had met any of Lieth’s family and did not know anything about them. He often loaned money to his old friend, who would call and say he was hungry.

Gebre loaned Lieth $20 on Monday so he could eat. Hours later, another friend called to say Lieth had been shot by police.

The incident was not completely surprising, Gebre said, because his old friend had started running with the wrong crowd.

“It’s really, really sad,” Gebre said.

Lieth was on parole from the Colorado Department of Corrections.

His criminal convictions include motor vehicle theft in 2013 in Ada,s County. He also had been charged with motor vehicle theft in Denver.

On Tuesday night, Denver police reported a caller had phoned in a tip about people associated with Lieth who were threatening to kill police officers in retaliation. The threat was not substantiated but officers were put on alert.

The officers who were involved with the altercation with Lieth are on paid administrative leave, pending an investigation by the Denver Police Department. Their names have not been released. The Denver District Attorney’s Office will review the case to determine whether criminal charges should be sought against the officers.

One of the officers involved is a 12-year department veteran and has been involved in one prior shooting. The second officer has been at the department for two years and has prior law enforcement experience. He has not been involved in any other police shootings, the Aurora police said.

Monday’s shooting was the 15th involving Front Range police firing at suspects since Halloween. It was third officer-involved shooting for the Aurora Police Department in less than two weeks.

Noelle Phillips: 303-954-1661, nphillips@denverpost.com or @Noelle_Phillips