I'm going to miss Barack Obama's presidency, if only for the fact that his State of the Union address has become an occasion for Republicans to proudly let their freak flags fly. Let us see what we had last night. We had Randy Weber, tweeting about his fear of our tyrannical kommander-in-chef. We had Tim Huelskamp hearing the echoes of the jackboots in every syllable every uttered by kindly Doc Maddow. (Huelskamp had a nutty on the Twitter machine, too.) And then we had Michael Grimm's threatening to throw a reporter off the balcony and probably making Richard Sherman of the Seattle Seahawks say, "What the fk, dude?" out loud in his hotel room.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

(By the way, I think I have it now. A signing statement that allows the United States torture people = good. An executive order that gets a Capitol janitor a raise = bad. Constitution, baby!)

And then there was Cathy McMorris Rogers, who was not nutty, but who, I believe, was attempting to sell me a dinette set. Also, can I just say to the nice furniture lady that I'm happy that she and her retired Naval commander husband both had that sweet government health-care so that their newborn son's pre-existing condition wasn't the kind of hardship it is for parents who are only now, through the Affordable Care Act, able to stave off financial disaster in similar circumstances.

Most Popular

(And, yes, Cathy, who really doesn't want "government" or "Washington" making your health-care decisions for you, voted for this nonsense a few hours before her big moment on the national stage.)

But the real prize goes to our old friend Senator Huckleberry J. Butchmeup from South Cackalacky, who spent the hours before the speech hanging with the Duck frauds, one of whom, I believe, "ducked" (Ha!) out early because there was a sale on Dockers at the Old Navy store up on K Street. Afterwards, Huck pronounced himself shocked that a declaration of war was not tucked in there among all the other girly-man stuff.

"The world is literally about to blow up," Graham said, saying he completely disagrees with Obama on Iran policy. Obama pledged to veto any additional sanctions legislation while negotiations over the Iranian nuclear program are ongoing. "The world as I know was not remotely described by the president. Syria is a contagion," Graham said. "Explain to me what happens if the Syrian conflict goes on another year and Assad continues to win," Graham said, referring to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad. "Iraq is disintegrating. The whole region is moving toward chaos, and we're doing nothing. We're talking about limiting drones?" said Graham, who brought "Duck Dynasty" co-star Korie Robertson to the speech as his guest.

Quack.