Sex assault on young artist at National Gallery: Woman attacked as she sketched masterpiece

A 20-year-old woman was assaulted as she drew at the tourist attraction

A South Korean man was arrested for offence and will face court



London museum has been criticised for reducing number of employees



A young artist was groped as she sketched a masterpiece in the National Gallery.

The 20-year-old told security staff she had been sexually assaulted in a room full of some of the prestigious gallery’s best-known works.

The attack is the latest worrying incident at the London museum, which has been criticised for reducing the number of assistants it employs – a move art experts fear could make its priceless collection more vulnerable to damage or theft.

The woman was reportedly touched by a man while she sketched in a room at The National Gallery (pictured)

Police called to the Trafalgar Square premises at around 5.30pm on Friday were told the woman was sitting in room 34 – which houses work by John Constable, William Turner and Thomas Gainsborough – when a man approached her.

They arrested a 27-year-old South Korean man, believed to be on a short visit to London, who will appear in court today charged with ‘sexual touching’.

More than 500,000 art lovers visit the National Gallery every year but its central location in the capital also makes it a magnet for troublemakers.



In June, a Fathers4Justice campaigner was charged with criminal damage after allegedly sticking a photograph of a boy to the canvas of Constable’s The Hay Wain.

In 2011, a vandal sprayed two paintings by 17th-century artist Nicolas Poussin, including The Adoration of the Golden Calf, with red paint.

The museum which houses work by William Turner (pictured) among others has been criticised for having too few staff

A National Gallery spokeswoman said: ‘Police were called after a woman visitor reported to security staff that she had been assaulted by a man in Room 34. Police attended and a man was arrested.’

A Met spokesman said: ‘We were called at 5.30 on Friday December 13 to reports of a 20-year-old woman who had been sexually assaulted.’