Dr. James Bosse works with Gay Lewis, who has been a patient throughout Bosse's entire career, Wednesday at Skyline Vision Clinic. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

Dr. James Bosse talks about his retirement Wednesday at Skyline Vision Clinic. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

Dr. James Bosse has had an eye on retirement for a few years, and Thursday, he put away his chart projector and ophthalmoscope for good.

Bosse, 64, has owned and operated Skyline Vision Clinic, the longest-running vision center in Fremont County, since 1976.

"I feel blessed that I did enter optometry at that time when the whole profession was growing up and coming to age," he said. "I feel lucky that I entered the field at such an exciting time and was able to witness all of the changes, and through continued education, keep up with the wonderful new education that the new optometrists have now when they graduate.

"It was a good ride."

Bosse said he and his wife, Nancy, plan to continue spending time their grandchildren.

"We spend a lot of time with the grandkids, and I am a musician, so I spend a lot of time with that," he said.

Bosse said his tenure in optometry has been exciting, particularly the maturity of optometry as a profession.

"When I started out in the '70s, optometrists did routine eye exams and nothing more," he said. "Somewhere along the way, we grew up and started doing other things."

Optometrists earned the right to use diagnostic pharmaceutical in the 1980s, and later were permitted to write prescriptions, treat eye diseases and do post-operative care for surgeons.

"It was an exciting time," he said. "There was never any time for burnout in my tenure because the profession is completely different at this point in time than when I started."

Advertisement

Technology has evolved, but the basic equipment to do an eye exam is the same, Bosse said.

"We have laser scanners now, sophisticated peripheral vision testing instruments, cameras that photograph the inside of the eye," he said. "These are all pieces of equipment that were more or less invented and put online to use during my tenure in optometry."

Skyline Vision Clinic also has its own unique, rich history. Bosse operated the practice at 700 Main St. from 1976 to 2012, when the office moved to its current location at 2776 E. Main St.

In the early 1900s, during the World War I era, an optician/optometrist named J.H. Higgin operated out of a jewelry store in downtown Cañon City. Later, an optometrist, whose last name was Meelis, took over the jewelry store and the practice, Bosse said.

"Somewhere around 1940, John Wagner, an optometrist bought the practice," Bosse said. "John Wagner retired in 1976."

Bosse purchased the practice in December of the same year.

"Up until that time, it was a mom and pop operation all the way through John and his wife, who was his receptionist and office manager," Bosse said. "She worked for me for a year, which she insisted at no pay, in the transition, and then gradually, over the next 38 years, the practice grew to this large establishment with half a dozen doctors."

Bosse has hired different optometrists through the years, and about seven years ago, he sold his business interest in the practice to Dr. Britt Buckley, an eye surgeon based in Colorado Springs, who owns and operates the practice along with Dr. Matthew Chang.

After the sale, Bosse continued to work part-time for Skyline Vision Clinic, gradually phasing into retirement. What he will most, he said, are the patients.

"I've been very fortunate here to have many, many patients that I saw from the very beginning, some of them I saw as children and now they are adults with children of their own," he said. "The other thing I have enjoyed is having a wonderful staff here."

Most of his staff has retired, but he had four employees who were with him nearly 37 years, including Shirley Meigs and Kim Stallman who still work at the practice.

Gay Lewis, 93, and his late wife, Mildred, began seeing Bosse as patients during his first month of operating Skyline Vision. Lewis saw Bosse for his last appointment Wednesday.

"As far as I am concerned, he's the only eye doctor in town," Lewis said. "I consider Dr. Bosse my friend besides being my doctor. He's a great guy."

Bosse said most of his patients are like family and friends, including the staff.

"Especially patients like Gay who I see every year for 38 years," he said.

Bosse said Dr. Stephanie Bestwina will relocate to Cañon City from Tennessee to care for his patients.

"I feel very comfortable that my patients will be very well taken care of with the existing doctors that are here, and the new ones," he said.