Buy Photo Dontaveon Love, 11, gets a little help making a toy helicopter from John Francis at a crafts booth sponsored by Lowe's Home Improvement Stores. Both Love and Francis were part of the Love family tent at the Louisville Defender NewspaperÕs West Louisville Appreciation Celebration & Proud Family Reunion. 25 July 2014 (Photo: David R. Lutman/Special to The CJ)Buy Photo

With his family watching, Ta'Quavious Wheeler, 12, positioned his right foot on a yellow plastic rock roughly 15 feet in the air.

"I made it to the top, I made it to the top," he said.

Ta'Quavious actually just missed the bar positioned at the top of the rock wall put up in Shawnee Park as part of Saturday's West Louisville Appreciation Festival. But he still rappelled down excitedly before heading toward the archery and fishing area.

The festival had hoped to bring "non-traditional recreational activities" such as rock climbing and archery to West Louisville, where there's less access to activities than in other parts of the city, said event coordinator Bennett Knox.

The latest budget passed by the Metro Council included $170,000 earmarked for the establishment of a center and development for nature-based recreation for West Louisville. Surveys out to festival-goers will help determine what kinds of programs stand out to locals.

"We want to introduce folks to what is possible," Knox said.

Saturday's temperatures in the 90s didn't keep new archers away from Georgia Lacy and the archery range.

About 50 people — most of whom had never shot — picked up bows, said Lacy, a seasonal staffer for Jefferson Memorial Forest.

"Nobody's been perfect yet, but we've had a couple bull's-eyes," Lacy said.

Chris Russ, an Indiana resident who works in West Louisville, was outscored by his 9-year-old daughter, who's been shooting with the Girl Scouts.

Russ said he was impressed with how large and well-maintained the park was.

"I didn't even know all of this was back here," Russ said.

Nicholas Williams, at an obstacle course nearby, watched as a young woman on a bicycle took a sharp left turn on the hard plastic bike course.

She screamed as she cleared the ramp, but laughed as she left the course.

"I'm having so much fun it's doesn't even feel like I'm working," said Williams, a Kentucky State University senior.

Windy conditions prevented Ohio River canoe rides that a lot of people — including Metro Councilwoman Cheri Bryant Hamilton — had been looking forward to. But Hamilton, who represents the district that includes the park, said she was glad the weather didn't disrupt the festival too much.

"A lot of kids are coming out and trying things they've never tried before, like the climbing wall and bicycle track," Williams said. "I think it's going to build. I hope we do this every year."

Construction on the Shawnee Outdoor Learning Center will not start for another two or three years.

Reporter Michael McKay can be reached at (502) 582-4653 or on Twitter @MichaelMcKay716

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1mQxau1