Asked why the largest insurers were raising their rates more steeply than their competitors, Gee said, "I don't have a good explanation for that."

But the article detailing the study said there may be "other possible justifications for the higher premiums" that weren't covered by the scope of the analysis.

"Perhaps the largest insurers in each state expanded their network [of health providers covered by a plan] faster than other issuers, so that premium increases reflect more accessible or higher-quality medical care," the article said.

Another possibility is that the higher premium increases are the result of the biggest insurers having higher rates of enrollment of older customers, who "have higher variance in their medical utilization costs."

A third reason could be that large insurers may have been more conservative than smaller ones in how they priced their plans initially, because they had less need to attract new customers, and because they had little actual information about health-care use by their Obamacare customers when they had to set prices for 2015.

Because open enrollment in Obamacare plans ran well into the spring of 2014, the first year of such plans, insurers had very little time to craft 2015 proposed rates, which had to be submitted by last summer.

One of the insurers mentioned in the study, Premera Blue Cross, said the 37 average rate increases it obtained for the Alaska market on HealthCare.gov for this year were justified given a number of factors in that state, including the relatively small size of the individual market there and an influx of disproportionately less health customers.

"We've seen a large influx of individuals with very significant medical needs and related medical costs purchasing new coverage under" the Affordable Care Act, the company said in a blog post last year explaining its rate hike requests. "In short, there are not enough healthy members in Alaska's individual market to offset the cost of members with very high medical costs."



Premera spokeswoman Melanie Coon said the company only had one competitor on HealthCare.gov in Alaska—Moda—and noted that while Moda's rate hikes were "a bit less than us," it was "not by much."