GOP presidential contender Ted Cruz's name is, once again, being invoked in the heated 1st Congressional District race by challenger Dean Young, who claims that incumbent Bradley Byrne is nothing like the Texas senator.

But Byrne, who has been running campaign ads in recent weeks defending his conservative record, said it was Cruz who approached him in December to speak during a Daphne rally.

The latest tussle between the two camps comes ahead of a March 1 Republican Party primary in which Young is, for the second time in three years, trying to beat Byrne for the 1st District job.

Byrne defeated Young for the GOP's nomination to the open seat in 2013 following a fiercely contested runoff. Byrne easily topped Democrat Burton LeFlore during the December 2013 general election.

"The entire nation knows that Bradley Byrne is an establishment Republican," said Young, an Orange Beach developer.

Young's latest TV spots, which are mostly paid for out of his own pocket, offer highlights from national news shows such as MSNBC's "Morning Joe" and "Hardball" with the phrase "Bradley Byrne is the establishment Republican" edited throughout.

The segments were taken in 2013 ahead of the GOP runoff, which garnered extensive national coverage revolving around a narrative that Bryne was the Republican candidate supported by pro-industry groups such as the Chamber of Commerce while Young was the tea party darling.

Thus far, the 2016 rematch has generated little, if any, national press.

'Desperate attack'

Young, at the conclusion of the latest ad, encourages voters who would support Cruz, Donald Trump, Marco Rubio or Ben Carson for president to support him for Congress.

Byrne, on Thursday, said his supporters includes those backing a range of GOP presidential candidates.

Regarding Cruz, Byrne said the Texas senator – a tea party favorite – contacted him about making brief remarks ahead of a pre-Christmas rally at the Daphne Civic Center. Cruz is the only GOP presidential candidate to make a stop in Baldwin County – the home county of both Byrne and Young – since the campaign began last year.

"We were together at his request, not mine," Byrne said about Cruz. "I'm glad he was coming into the district. I welcome all these presidential candidates here. I have lots of supporters in the camps in the race." He said of Young's ad: "It's another desperate attack on his part to get some voters to pay attention to him."

Young said Byrne is "nothing like Ted Cruz and everybody knows it." He said, "This is just another weak attempt to mislead the people of south Alabama."

Young, when he last ran in 2013, fashioned himself as a Ted Cruz congressman and vowed to be among the most conservative congressmen in the country.

Cruz is perhaps most well-known for his efforts in leading a government shutdown. Young said in 2013, "If you guys send me to Congress, it will be like sending Ted Cruz to Washington."

An AL.com report before the November 2013 election showed that Ending Spending PAC, which was a big supporter of Cruz's 2012 Senate victory, contributed $100,000 on a pro-Byrne media spot.

Brian Baker, the head of the PAC, told AL.com at the time: "It's a great talking point to say you'll be like Ted Cruz. But Ted Cruz is a very smart, a very thoughtful person. And we think Bradley Byrne is better on all of these points."

'Completely false'

Byrne, meanwhile, is defending his conservative record that has been under attack by Young since November. Among the issues is Planned Parenthood, which Young claims Byrne voted to support.

Planned Parenthood, which has become a hot button issue in 2016, is the largest single provider of reproductive health services, including abortions, in the U.S.

"My opponent's ads are filled with falsehoods," Byrne said. "Perhaps the biggest is the any vote I've taken is on Planned Parenthood directly or indirectly."

Byrne cited his "zero" percent rating with the Planned Parenthood, which is the same rating among all Alabama Republicans in the U.S. House.

Byrne joined 240 others in the House to vote in support of defunding Planned Parenthood on Sept. 18.

Byrne is credited with a 100 percent voting record by the National Right to Life Committee. The committee, Byrne said, would not have given him a 100 percent voting record if he had supported Planned Parenthood funding. "That's a clear example where my opponent is running ads that are completely false," he said.

Young has also claimed that Byrne voted in support of executive amnesty, something that he claims Cruz as well as Alabama Sens. Jeff Sessions and Richard Shelby oppose.

Young, on his campaign's website, highlighted instances in which Byrne voted for pro-Obama initiatives including a 2014 federal spending plan that Byrne said at the time was "good news" for southwest Alabama because it provided funding for military ships at Mobile's Austal USA shipyard and included measures to restrain domestic spending.

Other Republicans, at the time, voted against the proposal complaining that the $1.1 trillion spending plan failed to take on the president's executive action on immigration or make any attempt to repeal the Affordable Care Act.

Byrne, in a March 3 vote, did join other Alabama Republicans to oppose U.S. Department of Homeland Security funding because language stopping executive orders on immigration issued by Obama were stripped out.