Re: "Boulder seeks feedback on University Hill 'event street' designs" (Daily Camera, Sept. 3): The "event street" designs, about which the community is asked to provide "feedback," address a false premise: the Hill commercial district "has no gathering space." To the contrary, the entire commercial district is its "gathering space." All events on the Hill (a) have been too large for the laughably small space set aside, (b) don't want to be hidden on a side street, and (c) benefit from a network of existing streets that can be easily closed in any combination, disturb little traffic, and result in better visibility.

The "event street" notion takes advantage of last year's 2A ballot language, "...improve public streets" to instead boost a pet scheme favored by a few. The $750,000 set aside will provide a briefly shiny new "project," to which the responsible parties can point and say, "We're fixing the Hill!" But this diverts resources from addressing its perpetual run-down condition. The Hill doesn't have a design problem, it has behavior problems — litter, vagrancy, vandalism — that drive a greatly increased need for oversight and quality maintenance of its public spaces.

Advertisement

The new Hill coordinator appears to have no budget, and relies on volunteers to counter minimal upkeep and unending casual abuse. The occasional cleanups and sporadic graffiti/sticker removal efforts timidly avoid removing large tags on private surfaces and dumpsters. The news boxes are trashed. The Brownies are enlisted for a sweet, though inappropriate, planter-pot "art" program. The constantly dirty, sticky sidewalks don't get cleaned unless it rains. Snow/ice removal is spotty at best; many walks become glaciers. Planting areas are neglected. All abet the negative perception of the Hill as an "anything-goes" zone, especially in late evening.

An expensive distraction won't remediate the Hill's public space quality and character. The city council needs to show some leadership: Redirect these funds to fix the Hill's real problems and provide this potentially outstanding commercial district the care it — and the community — deserve.

Michael Doyle lives in Boulder.