WASHINGTON, DC—Today, U.S. Representatives Doris Matsui (D-CA) and David Joyce (R-OH) announced their reintroduction of HR 2071, The Safe Streets Act, to ensure that streets and intersections are designed with adequate pedestrian safeguards in mind. As a part of its efforts to make certain federal transportation infrastructure investments provide safe travel for all, AARP fully supports this important, bipartisan legislation and urges Congress to include it in its rewrite of the surface transportation bill.

“Every two hours, a pedestrian gets killed in a traffic crash, and one in five is someone age 65 or older,” said Jo Ann Jenkins, AARP CEO. “The Safe Streets Act would save lives by ensuring that the design of roads and crosswalks allow American families, especially older drivers and pedestrians, to travel to and arrive at their destination in a safer manner.”

The Safe Streets approach ensures that projects are built right the first time and would require minimal or no additional spending. State and regional planners and traffic engineers would consider the needs of all users, so that roadways and intersections include features to improve safety—such as sidewalks, proper crosswalk signal timing and bicycle lanes—as is found appropriate for each community. More than 700 jurisdictions, including 30 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico have adopted Safe Streets policies.

Planners would have two years to adopt “Complete Streets” policies that take the safety needs of all roadway users into account during the design, planning, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, maintenance and operating phases of transportation projects. The policy would apply to federally-funded new and reconstructed projects.

“AARP is thankful that Representatives Matsui and Joyce (and supporters) are leading the fight to give our communities the tools they need to keep our streets safe for people of all ages,” added Jenkins.

For more information, please visit www.aarp.org.

###

About AARP

AARP is a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization, with a membership of nearly 38 million, that helps people turn their goals and dreams into real possibilities, strengthens communities and fights for the issues that matter most to families such as healthcare, employment and income security, retirement planning, affordable utilities and protection from financial abuse. We advocate for individuals in the marketplace by selecting products and services of high quality and value to carry the AARP name as well as help our members obtain discounts on a wide range of products, travel, and services. A trusted source for lifestyle tips, news and educational information, AARP produces AARP The Magazine, the world's largest circulation magazine; AARP Bulletin; www.aarp.org; AARP TV & Radio; AARP Books; and AARP en Español, a Spanish-language website addressing the interests and needs of Hispanics. AARP does not endorse candidates for public office or make contributions to political campaigns or candidates. The AARP Foundation is an affiliated charity that provides security, protection, and empowerment to older persons in need with support from thousands of volunteers, donors, and sponsors. AARP has staffed offices in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Learn more at www.aarp.org.