DEARBORN — Whitney Litzner is approaching a health care insurance milestone: Her 26th birthday.At that point, she can’t be on her parents’ health insurance plan, and looking at other plans made her nervous because she has a pre-existing condition, Type 1 diabetes.But, she now has some peace of mind knowing that she can sign up for the Michigan Health Insurance Marketplace — the state’s version of the Affordable Care Act, or “Obamacare” — which was to go into effect Tuesday, regardless of a threatened federal government shutdown.“We’re not shutting down,” said Dr. Adnan Hammad, senior director of ACCESS’ Community Health and Research Center. “We have a lot of work to do.”Litzner, a Shelby Township resident, wanted to help others reach the same goal, so she recently was hired to work part time by ACCESS as an outreach and enrollment specialist and became certified to help those who are eligible sign up.ACCESS is one of four Detroit-area groups to have been awarded a grant to be part of the state’s Navigator program. The social service agency, which touted its Navigator status Monday in a press conference at the Arab American National Museum, received a grant of nearly $277,000. The other three groups are Michigan Consumers for Healthcare, Community Bridges Management Inc. and American Indian Health and Family Services of SE Michigan Inc.Though ACCESS is formerly known as the Arab Community Center for Economic and Social Services, it works with people from all walks of life. And, those it helps aren’t just from Dearborn — this program is statewide.When Litzner and her father began looking at health insurance options, they became nervous. She was diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes 21 years ago and has five prescriptions. Combined with four visits to her doctor a year, the fees would cost more than her salary.She said she called seven insurance companies, and the fees were “astronomical.” She said she was “pretty defeated.”Then along came Obamacare. Continued...

“The Affordable Care Act is a breath of fresh air for me,” Litzner said. “I no longer have to worry about making ends meet.”The insurance also covers preventive care for women’s issues, which she said was a draw.When she learned that ACCESS was looking for enrollment specialists, “It was an opportunity I couldn’t pass up,” she said.She was one of nearly 30 certified employees as of Monday afternoon, and ACCESS was training more than 60 others that were to be ready for Tuesday.Nearly 750,000 state residents will become eligible for health insurance, Hammad said. The enrollment period runs through March 31, 2014.Those who don’t already have health insurance, are eligible for the Affordable Care Act and don’t sign up are subject to varying fines. Those who enroll must be U.S. citizens or be in the U.S. lawfully, and not be incarcerated.Trained staff members can enroll people in the Marketplace free at ACCESS’ facilities in Dearborn, Ferndale and Sterling Heights. The agency also might have sign-up sessions at hotels, depending on demand.Those enrolling can begin the process by filling out a form at www.accesshealthcaremichigan.org or calling 1-888-670-6798 for an appointment.ACCESS can’t solicit enrollees, which is why it’s working with the group Enroll America, which can. The group, which launched June 22, is going door to door, running telephone banks and visiting community centers and community events to get the word out, said Shawn Dhanak, Enroll America’s communications lead in Michigan.As of Monday, ACCESS already had appointments set for first-thing Tuesday. Continued...

DEARBORN — Whitney Litzner is approaching a health care insurance milestone: Her 26th birthday.At that point, she can’t be on her parents’ health insurance plan, and looking at other plans made her nervous because she has a pre-existing condition, Type 1 diabetes.But, she now has some peace of mind knowing that she can sign up for the Michigan Health Insurance Marketplace — the state’s version of the Affordable Care Act, or “Obamacare” — which was to go into effect Tuesday, regardless of a threatened federal government shutdown.“We’re not shutting down,” said Dr. Adnan Hammad, senior director of ACCESS’ Community Health and Research Center. “We have a lot of work to do.”Litzner, a Shelby Township resident, wanted to help others reach the same goal, so she recently was hired to work part time by ACCESS as an outreach and enrollment specialist and became certified to help those who are eligible sign up.ACCESS is one of four Detroit-area groups to have been awarded a grant to be part of the state’s Navigator program. The social service agency, which touted its Navigator status Monday in a press conference at the Arab American National Museum, received a grant of nearly $277,000. The other three groups are Michigan Consumers for Healthcare, Community Bridges Management Inc. and American Indian Health and Family Services of SE Michigan Inc.Though ACCESS is formerly known as the Arab Community Center for Economic and Social Services, it works with people from all walks of life. And, those it helps aren’t just from Dearborn — this program is statewide.When Litzner and her father began looking at health insurance options, they became nervous. She was diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes 21 years ago and has five prescriptions. Combined with four visits to her doctor a year, the fees would cost more than her salary.She said she called seven insurance companies, and the fees were “astronomical.” She said she was “pretty defeated.”Then along came Obamacare.“The Affordable Care Act is a breath of fresh air for me,” Litzner said. “I no longer have to worry about making ends meet.”The insurance also covers preventive care for women’s issues, which she said was a draw.When she learned that ACCESS was looking for enrollment specialists, “It was an opportunity I couldn’t pass up,” she said.She was one of nearly 30 certified employees as of Monday afternoon, and ACCESS was training more than 60 others that were to be ready for Tuesday.Nearly 750,000 state residents will become eligible for health insurance, Hammad said. The enrollment period runs through March 31, 2014.Those who don’t already have health insurance, are eligible for the Affordable Care Act and don’t sign up are subject to varying fines. Those who enroll must be U.S. citizens or be in the U.S. lawfully, and not be incarcerated.Trained staff members can enroll people in the Marketplace free at ACCESS’ facilities in Dearborn, Ferndale and Sterling Heights. The agency also might have sign-up sessions at hotels, depending on demand.Those enrolling can begin the process by filling out a form at www.accesshealthcaremichigan.org or calling 1-888-670-6798 for an appointment.ACCESS can’t solicit enrollees, which is why it’s working with the group Enroll America, which can. The group, which launched June 22, is going door to door, running telephone banks and visiting community centers and community events to get the word out, said Shawn Dhanak, Enroll America’s communications lead in Michigan.As of Monday, ACCESS already had appointments set for first-thing Tuesday.“Today we are making history,” said Hammad, adding it’s a “privilege” for ACCESS to be a Navigator.