Good night and good luck: President Obama departs after delivering a live televised address to the nation on his plans for military action against the Islamic State. Saul Loeb / Pool

They say Americans don’t vote on national security issues. (You don’t have to take my word for it; even former U.N. ambassador and leader of the “Be Very Afraid” caucus John Bolton said so.) So, what was Barack Obama doing when he became the fourth consecutive U.S. president to go on primetime television to announce military action in Iraq?

Wait, what? Apples and oranges, you say? This was a speech about foreign policy in its own right, not electioneering — that’s what you’re going with?

O.K. Maybe. But let’s look at the speech a bit anyway.

First, this new four-point strategy — what is the president saying he will do differently?

“First,” Obama said, “we will conduct a systematic campaign of airstrikes against these terrorists.” But that is exactly what the U.S. is already doing; the president touted it in this very speech, just paragraphs earlier.

“Last month, I ordered our military to take targeted action against ISIL to stop its advances,” Obama said. “Since then, we have conducted more than 150 successful airstrikes in Iraq.”

“Second,” POTUS continued, “we will increase our support to forces fighting these terrorists on the ground.”

Also not new; also mentioned in the Wednesday address: “In June, I deployed several hundred American service members to Iraq to assess how we can best support Iraqi Security Forces.”

Yes, Obama said he will now deploy several hundred more “service members,” and the escalation should not go without notice, but that is what this is — mission creep, not a policy pivot.

The president also said the U.S. will aid Kurdish forces — something the administration stepped up over the summer — and “support Iraq’s efforts to stand up National Guard Units.”

I know it’s been a long war, but was that not in the works for, say, the last dozen years?

And, as for having “ramped up our military assistance to the Syrian opposition,” as Obama added under this same point, is this after backing off the military assistance to rebels that has in some cases fallen quite neatly into the hands of the Islamic State, or is this just a re-calculation of who the U.S. identifies as “the good rebels?” And how is this different from the administration’s June request for $500 million to outfit and train non-IS Syrian rebels?

“Third, we will continue to draw on our substantial counterterrorism capabilities to prevent ISIL attacks.” Come on! This point has the not-new-ness baked right in! “We will continue ...” followed in the next sentence by “we will redouble.”

And the same can be said for point number four: “we will continue providing humanitarian assistance to innocent civilians who have been displaced by this terrorist organization.” Again, already happening, and, of special note here, there is no language that says this effort will be “ramped up.”

Even the point most observers are calling the big policy announcement in this address — airstrikes on IS inside Syria — wasn’t actually part of the speech.

“I have made it clear that we will hunt down terrorists who threaten our country, wherever they are,” Obama said. “That means I will not hesitate to take action against ISIL in Syria, as well as Iraq. This is a core principle of my presidency: if you threaten America, you will find no safe haven.”

“I will not hesitate to take action” is not the same thing as “I have taken action,” or “I will take action.” The president very well might, but, then again, he might not. Airstrikes in Syria are far more complicated, for both political and logistical reasons, than what has already been done in Iraq. Striking inside Syria will take a lot of under-the-table conversations, and a lot of on-the-ground intelligence and military intervention.

For all those reasons and more, the U.S. hasn’t flown sorties inside Syrian space yet, and may not even want to in the future. Hesitation, actually, might not only be on tap, it might turn out to be prudent.

So, what has changed? What justified, in the eyes of this White House, a national primetime address?