The Boulder County Sheriff's Office and a large-scale rescue team found no new leads over the third day searching for a missing 53-year-old hiker from Westminster who did not return to his vehicle in Eldorado Canyon State Park on Saturday evening.

Aside from locating David Robles' car at the state park, sheriff's officials said they have no information suggesting where Robles was hiking in the canyon.

The rescue team has planned at least two more days of searching.

On Tuesday, Cmdr. Heidi Prentup wrote in a news release, "investigators from the Sheriff's Office will focus their efforts on trying to locate additional information that may lead search and rescue personnel to focus on a specific area within Eldorado ... such as a favorite hiking trail or area, or locate other family and friends who he may have spoken to about his planned outing.

"On Wednesday, another full-scale search of Eldorado Canyon State Park will commence, using multiple search and rescue teams."

According to sheriff's officials, Robles was initially reported overdue around 6 p.m. Saturday. He had last been heard from around 1:15 p.m., and had indicated he was hiking in the canyon. When he didn't return, a search was launched.

Crews conducted a search into the early morning hours Sunday, but did not find him. More searchers returned to the area around 6 a.m. Sunday, with rescuers ending the search for the day around 7 p.m. Searchers resumed at 7 a.m. today.

Robles, a senior accountant for the University of Colorado Foundation, is described as 5-foot-10 with a light build and dark brown hair. It is not known what clothing he was wearing, or if he was prepared to be out overnight.

Advertisement

Sheriff's officials are asking anyone who might have seen him or has any information on his whereabouts to call 303-441-4444 immediately.

Other agencies that have participated in the three days of searches include Colorado State Parks, Alpine Search & Rescue, Rocky Mountain Rescue Group, Rocky Mountain Fire Protection District, Front Range Rescue Dogs, Boulder Emergency Squad, Longmont Emergency Unit, Larimer County Search and Rescue, Arapahoe Search and Rescue and.Boulder County Sheriff's Office Emergency Services.

The search and rescue efforts are being coordinated by the Boulder County Sheriff's Office's Emergency Services Unit. Assisting in today's search are members of the Rocky Mountain Rescue Group, Arapahoe Search and Rescue, Larimer County Search & Rescue, Front Range Rescue Dogs, and Colorado State Parks.