Part of the Affordable Care Act calls for big investments in community health care centers to increase access to primary health care services. The health care law calls for a total investment of $11 billion over a five-year period “for the operation, expansion, and construction of health centers” throughout the country.

Today, Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell announced that $35.7 million in Affordable Care Act funding will go to 147 health centers in 44 states.

The funding will support 21 new construction projects and 126 renovation projects.

Seven of those health centers are in Michigan. These seven centers will split close to $1.7 million to support construction and facility improvements.

Here’s the list of health centers receiving funding:

Baldwin Family Health Care – Baldwin, MI - $250,000

Community Health and Social Services Center, Inc. – Detroit, MI - $189,081

Health Delivery, Inc. – Saginaw, MI - $250,000

County Of Ingham – Lansing, MI - $250,000

Intercare Community Health Network – Bangor, MI - $250,000

Midmichigan Health Services, Inc - Houghton Lake, MI - $250,000

The Wellness Plan – Detroit, MI - $250,000

Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell says the funding will be used to provide higher quality services, treat multiple needs of patients at once, and increase access to care.

More from an HHS press release:

“Health centers provide access to quality health care for millions of Americans regardless of their ability to pay,” said Secretary Burwell. “We’re making these investments so that health centers will be able to provide even higher quality services to the patients that rely upon them.” … Health centers are also playing a critical role in helping the public learn about new coverage opportunities under the Affordable Care Act, by conducting outreach and enrollment activities that link individuals to affordable coverage options available through the Health Insurance Marketplace. Today’s awards help support high quality care and updated facilities for the millions of newly insured.

To find a health center near you, try this searchable database.