Topics: Atheism, Catholic Church, Catholicism, Christmas, Church, faith, Gay, Religion, Politics News

Only recently have I come to accept Christmas as a secular holiday. Because of my religious awakening in high school and the subsequent falling out I had with God in college, its symbols and stories were too freighted with meaning for me just to enjoy the pretty colors.

But I used to be a true believer. My parents made sure all five of their children were baptized and went to catechism until they had their first communion, which among Catholics is the first time a child receives the body of Christ in the form of unleavened bread and His blood in the form of wine.

For those who may not know, Catholics (like I was) are taught that, when consecrated by a priest, a thin piece of bread that looks like a Vanilla Wafer that’s been left out in the sun and tastes like glue smells is the body of the messiah.

For some reason, this doctrine of “transubstantiation” was always the most difficult for me to accept — even during my conservative Catholic phase, which lasted from my sophomore year of high school until my second year of college. Perhaps it shouldn’t have been so hard, given the other things I thought at the time. If you believe in the virgin birth of Christ, the miracles He performed — see, my feelings toward religion are so ambivalent I questioned whether capitalizing “He” would constitute a betrayal of my values — that a man rose from the dead after three days and then ascended to heaven, it shouldn’t have been such a stretch.

For a gay teen not ready to come to terms with his sexuality, the Church’s teachings about homosexuality also offered a convenient way to hide. I wasn’t attracted to women, but the expectation of sexual purity took sexuality out of the picture — I could simply ignore my attraction to men.

My attraction to religion wasn’t all about self-hatred, though. Catholicism was the first intellectual tradition I was introduced to. Growing up on the U.S.-Mexico border in Arizona, where no one I know reads the uppity New Yorker, the writings of Saint Augustin, Saint Thomas Aquinas and Blaise Pascal provided a rich lens through which I could view and parse the world. During high school I spent many a late night discussing theology with my grandmother, a devout Catholic and the person who is most like me in the family.

I was an absolutist as a Catholic, and to this day I can’t understand “cafeteria Catholics” — a term orthodox Catholics use to describe those who pick and choose which things to believe. If people were to be expected to believe all this out-there stuff without proof, the authority behind the information would have to be pretty strong and reliable. The Catholic Church makes claims consistent with this point of view. Take, for instance, the doctrine of Papal Infallibility, which dictates that, when speaking on the subjects of faith and morals and the full authority of the Papal office, the pope is infallible. Wouldn’t God be likely to give him the keys while He was out? The Church’s authoritarianism and absolutism made its claim to infallibility more credible.

But I also grew to admire its rituals deeply as well as its music, art and literature. Midnight Mass on Christmas was my favorite. At the church in my hometown, the entire congregation held candles in the pitch dark at midnight as the flame from a single candle spread person to person from the back until it reached the altar. My husband will confirm that I have an unhealthy obsession with Schubert’s Ave Maria, which still stirs my emotions whenever I hear it, but there are a number of songs, in English and Spanish, that can send me back in time. I find stained glass and gothic architecture beautiful. Catholicism is so theatrical; it’s not hard to see why so many of us gays are drawn to it.