Three RI Health Centers Receive Nearly $3 Million to Expand Services

Rhode Island's Congressional delegation announced on Friday that three Rhode Island health centers will receive $2,988,180 from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services for facility renovation and expansion, increasing access to health care for a projected 11,250 additional patients.

Comprehensive Community Action in Cranston and Blackstone Valley Community Health Care in Pawtucket will receive 1 million each while the Providence Community Health Centers will receive $988,180.

“Community health centers are a vital source of health care for many families. This federal funding will expand high-quality primary and preventive care options for thousands of Rhode Islanders who need them most,” said U.S. Senator Sheldon Whitehouse.

Nationwide, HHS estimates that this federal funding, which comes from the Affordable Care Act's Community Health Center Fund will allow health centers to provide care to more than 800,000 new patients.

U.S. Senator Jack Reed added, “this is another example of the Affordable Care Act's positive impact on Rhode Island. I am pleased these community health centers are receiving additional federal funds to continue to effectively serve local residents and provide comprehensive, integrated care. This is a smart investment that will help provide patients with better quality health care in a more efficient manner"

Health Centers React

"We are extremely excited about receiving this grant, and want to thank our entire federal delegation for their continue support,” said Joanne McGunagle, President and CEO, Comprehensive Community Action (CCAP).



“We are most appreciative of the efforts of our Congressional delegation for their continued support of health centers. Our HRSA funding will help Blackstone establish the nation's first Neighborhood Health Station in Central Falls. We look forward to great accomplishments with the help of this federal funding,” said Ray Lavoie, Executive Director, Blackstone Valley Community Health Care.



“The Providence Community Health Centers are very happy to receive this grant as it will allow us to add additional exam rooms and clinical support space needed to meet our growing patient's needs. We also thank our entire Rhode Island Congressional delegation as their continued support make grants like this possible, and directly impact our community,” said Merrill Thomas, CEO and President, Providence Community Health Centers.



Related Articles

Enjoy this post? Share it with others.