Dr. David Malis To Speak At ‘Healthy Day At Ball Park’

By Space Coast Medicine & Active Living // April 6, 2015

will speak about Sinus Disease

Don’t Miss Dr. David Malis’ Informative Seminar at the Doctors’ Goodwill Foundation “A Healthy Day at the Ball Park” at Space Coast Stadium in Viera on April 18.

Dr. Malis of My Family Ear Nose & Throat will speak from 2:20 – 2:35 p.m. on Sinus Disease. See more details below.

Dr. David Malis: Changing Lives With Balloon Sinuplasty

One of the great things about living in coastal Florida is our beautiful weather and the ability to enjoy outdoor activities year-round.

Unfortunately for those who suffer from allergies and sinus infections, the impact on quality-of-life can be significant.

Symptoms of sinusitis can include throbbing facial pain or headaches, drainage of discolored discharge from the nose or down the back of the throat, nasal congestion with difficulty breathing and sleeping, bad breath, irritability, fatigue, nausea, and loss or reduced sense of taste.

Although traditional endoscopic sinus surgery, which was introduced to the United States in the mid-1980s, represents an improvement over previous sinus surgery techniques, it does require a trip to the operating room, general anesthesia, the removal of bone and tissue to open the blocked sinus passageways, and, although rare, potentially serious, life altering, surgical complications.

Historically, treatment for recurrent or chronic sinus infections has been limited to treatment with multiple medications or, if unsuccessful, traditional endoscopic sinus surgery.

Results Have Been Great

Thanks to Balloon Sinuplasty, there is now a much better alternative. Introduced and approved by the FDA in 2006, Balloon Sinuplasty is a revolutionary breakthrough procedure in the management of patients with sinus disease.

Similar to how coronary angioplasty uses balloons to open blocked arteries in the heart, Balloon Sinuplasty uses catheter-based instruments to open blocked sinuses and is dramatically less invasive than traditional endoscopic sinus surgery.

CLICK HERE TO SEE ARTICLE IN SPACE COAST MEDICINE & ACTIVE LIVING

‘A Healthy Day At the Ball Park’ Set For April 18

LECTURES OPEN TO PUBLIC AT SPACE COAST STADIUM

1 – 1:15 p.m.: The Impact of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) on consumers, presented by Health First’s Jason Alford, Director, Individual Sales & Product Innovation of Health First Health Plans, Inc.

1:20 – 1:35 p.m.: Cataract Surgery – Are You Ready?, presented by Dr. Rohit Parihar of Florida Eye Associates.

1:40 – 1:55 p.m.: Back Pain Diagnosis and Treatment, presented by Dr. Vijay Katukuri of Deuk Spine Institute.

2 – 2:15 p.m.: Vaginal Atrophy and Other Related Issues, presented by Dr. Marja Sprock of Central Florida Urogynecology.

2:20 – 2:35 p.m.: Sinus Disease, presented by Dr. David Malis of My Family Ear Nose & Throat.

2:40 – 2:55 p.m.: Hospice care, presented by VITAS.

3:00 – 3:15 p.m.: Latest in Diabetic Retinal Surgery, presented by Dr. Hetal Vaishnav of The Eye Institute for Medicine and Surgery.

3:20 – 3:35 p.m.: Detecting Lung Cancer Early, presented by Dr. Richard Ramnath of Neuroskeletal Imaging Institute.

3:40 – 3:55 p.m.: Depression, presented by Dr. Joseph Louis of Parrish Medical Center.

HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL ONLY LECTURES

4:30 – 6:30 p.m. (2 Hours Credit): Prevention of Medical Errors, presented by Rosanne Cain, BSN, RN, LHRM, CLNC, Patient Safety Risk, Mgr II, The Doctors Company.

6:30 – 7 p.m. (Non-Credit): Pain Management, Compounding Pharmacy for Special Pain Relief, presented by Dr. Ashish Udeshi, Florida Pain Institute and DermaTran Health Solutions.

7:05 – 7:20 p.m. (Non-Credit): Latest Technology in Radiology, presented by Infinite Imaging.

7:25 – 8:25 p.m. (1 Hour Credit): Prescription Drug Abuse- An Epidemic, presented by Rosanne Cain, BSN, RN, LHRM, CLNC, Patient Safety Risk, Mgr II, The Doctors Company.

Click here to contribute your news or announcements Free