Republican presidential and congressional candidates may be working overtime to slam Barack Obama’s economic policies as part of their campaign strategies, but the truth is that the president has nothing to be embarrassed about in that regard. The most recent jobs report is looking as positive as ever, and the numbers speak for themselves:

1. 72 Months of Consecutive Job Gains

For as long as the U.S. has tracked these sorts of statistics (since 1939), never has there been an unbroken streak of job growth that’s lasted this long. Seeing the steady increase in employment not wavering for six straight years shows that Obama’s economic efforts are not only successful, but leaving the country on the right track for continued improvement.

2. The Unemployment Rate Sits at 4.9%

Since the economy crashed back in 2008, experts have told us that recovery would be a gradual process. It’s panned out that way, too, and now eight years later, we’re currently at the lowest rate of unemployment yet. While we still have a disproportionate rate of Africa American unemployment (8.8%) that needs to be addressed, the good news is that number is down by 50% since the country hit 16.7% black unemployment back in the summer of 2011.

3. 242,000 New Jobs Were Created in February

While the rest of the world is somewhat stalling on job creation at the moment, the U.S. recorded over 242,000 jobs last month – that’s 50,000 more than economists had anticipated. Most of the jobs came from a few specific industries doing particularly well at the moment: retail, restaurants and bars and – yes – health care. Obama took the opportunity to joke about all the criticism he faced for the Affordable Care Act. “Our businesses have created jobs every single month since I signed that job-killing [law,]” he said.

4. 2.2% Wage Increase

In the past year, Americans started earning 2.2% more at work. While the number isn’t large enough to change a lot of people’s lives or make them feel more optimistic about income equality, and least it’s going up rather than down. It’s going to take some action by Congress to better address the wealth gap and devise rules that might ensure that wage increases are in lockstep with the rate of inflation.

In fact, it’s greater wage increases that Obama wants to address in his final months in the White House. “That’s what we should be debating,” said the president. “That’s the debate that is worthy of the American people. Not fantasy, not name calling, not trying to talk down the American economy. There’s a huge gap between the rhetoric that’s going on out there and the reality of success that we’re seeing in America’s economy.”

Still, it’s no wonder that Republicans are resorting to painting a negative picture of the economy and blaming Obama for these fabricated problems. If Americans were to take an honest look at the job and unemployment figures, they’d probably be impressed with the work Obama has done thus far, and that’s not going to help Republicans at all at the polls this November.

Photo credit: Thinkstock