'Never seen a food industry come and go quite that fast'

Grayer Faubus, 6, of Lyons, watches intently as owner Doug Gunn puts sprinkles on his frozen yogurt at Boulder Chill on Tuesday in Boulder. ( Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer )

During the grand opening of Yoyo's Frozen Yogurt on March 16, 2013, in Boulder, the machines nearly froze from overuse.

The self-serve frozen yogurt shop, on the college town's student-heavy University Hill district, gave away almost 1,100 cups of the icy treats that day. A line of people streamed out the front door.

"We thought we were off to a great start," said Bonnie Dahl, a veteran Hill merchant who co-founded Yoyo's.

Eighteen months later, Yoyo's was selling off its machines.

"Never seen a food industry come and go quite that fast," Dahl said.

The second-coming of the frozen yogurt industry entered with a fury.

Self-serve frozen yogurt shops cropped up in California in 2005 and the purveyors of pay-by-weight, tart-flavored treats quickly gained in popularity. As the recession waned, the industry swelled and shops popped up across the nation.

Boulder added five self-serve yogurt shops in a matter of months.

From 2009 to 2014, the average annual sales growth rate of U.S. frozen yogurt shops chugged along at 22.7 percent, and the industry also nearly tripled in both stores and revenue, according to data from IBISWorld, a global market research firm.

Sales were projected to be $1.8 billion at the end of 2014.

"The industry is reaching saturation in many areas of the country, and competitors have begun to take market share away from one another," IBISWorld researchers wrote in the firm's frozen yogurt industry report released December 2014.

Looking ahead to 2019, that annual growth rate is expected to diminish significantly — to the tune of 3.4 percent, IBISWorld projected.

Weathering the fallout

Owner Doug Gunn prepares an order of frozen yogurt for a customer at Boulder Chill on Tuesday in Boulder. (Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer)

As the fandom started to turn faddish, the ranks of frozen yogurt shops thinned, with independents being the hardest hit. Boulder now is a two-froyo-shop town: the long-running Boulder Chill traditional frozen yogurt shop and Ripple, the first of the self-serves to open.

"We had the self-serve market pretty much to ourselves; then we got a lot of stores," said David Humphrey, who opened Ripple at 1682 30th St. with his wife, Jamie Gardner, in 2011 . "Each time a store opened, we would drop a little more.

"I think it was pretty lean for all of us."

Ripple attempted to differentiate itself through innovation, Humphrey said, noting the shop had an on-site bakery that created unique toppings. When the bubble burst, Ripple started making its own flavors of frozen yogurt and added offerings such as soft-serve ice cream and gelato.

"Boulder doesn't have a lot of room for many of these stores," he said. "We luckily remain popular."

Now having survived two bottoming-outs of the frozen yogurt business — the first being in the mid-1990s — Doug Gunn of Boulder Chill, 2525 Arapahoe Ave., is confident his shop will continue to stay the course.

"I've definitely seen a resurgence in sales," he said.

Gunn has owned Boulder Chill since November 1990, when the shop was an I Can't Believe It's Yogurt store.

"I changed the name in the late summer of 1995; best thing I ever did, because shortly thereafter, all the remaining ICBIY stores went out of business," he said. "Today, there isn't a single ICBIY in existence. The yogurt store business model isn't profitable over the long-term with the franchise format."

Gunn credited Boulder Chill's longevity to the full-service approach and local feel. Gunn, who puts in 70- to 80-hour weeks, knows many of his customers on a first-name basis and, in some cases, will have their orders ready by the time they park and walk in the store.

"We just continue to cater to our customer base," he said, noting the addition of new machines and flavors when the self-serve competitors emerged.

The business still comes with its challenges, especially the changing of seasons, he said.

"Every Halloween, I just say a prayer for a mild winter," he said. "Come Valentine's Day, I let out a deep sigh of relief."

'Humbling experience'

Self-serve shops, which emerged during the recession, benefitted from being a relatively affordable treat, said Darren Tristano, executive vice president of Technomic, a Chicago-based research and consulting firm specializing in the food industry.

The business concept that could garner returns in the $700,000 to $800,000 range also were approachable business opportunities for those who lost their jobs amid the downturn, he said.

But the new take on a concept that was popular in the 1980s and '90s ended up losing its luster.

"When you can get it everywhere, everyone doesn't want it anymore," he said. "I think the big loser has been the independent stores that tried to move into the space."

Consumers' tastes went more in the direction of traditional and super-premium ice cream, he said.

"Overall, the dollars tend to be pretty flat for treats," he said. "It just shifts between categories."

Tristano projects that the frozen yogurt industry likely will see consolidation among chains and franchise operators. He said he also wouldn't be surprised if shops offered fixed-price servings.

Susan Linton, president of the International Frozen Yogurt Association, said the key factors driving frozen yogurt demand are: health-consciousness, novelty and fun.

"Also, with the low entry/startup costs, competition is a constant concern," Linton wrote in an email to the Daily Camera. "If someone starts offering frozen yogurt or another type of dessert/snack on the next block as your shop, what's to keep someone from going to that other shop?"

Linton said she's seeing the rise of alternative locations such as mall kiosks and diverse offerings such as smoothies, juices or soft-serve ice cream.

IBISWorld expects the frozen yogurt industry to continue to grow, but at a far slower pace. Revenue likely will plateau at $2.1 billion starting in 2017, according to IBISWorld projections.

The rise of the self-serve competition and the increasing popularity of tart flavors — as opposed to traditional frozen yogurt's ice cream-like flavors — shifted market share away from industry leader TCBY.

TCBY's market share shrunk to 10.8 percent in 2014 from its 50 percent stake prior to the recession, according to IBISWorld.

IBISWorld estimated that the privately held TCBY's domestic stores would close out 2014 with $194.7 million in revenue, down 10.6 percent from 2013.

Officials for Broomfield-based Famous Brands International, TCBY's parent company, declined to comment for this article. Z Capital, the private equity fund that owns Famous Brands, reportedly is seeking a buyer for the Broomfield entity, according to a report last month from the Wall Street Journal, which cited unnamed sources.

Yoyo's, located off University Avenue at 1335 Broadway, was a late-comer to the froyo frenzy, but owner Dahl was optimistic about her shop's chances.

Dahl had 40-plus years of experience in running The Fitter pipe and apparel shop on the Hill, and she liked the idea of diversifying the business district's retail base.

"I didn't feel like there was saturation in Boulder," Dahl said. "We were the only ones really close to downtown with self-serve and the rest were farther east. It wasn't about saturation. It was about a food fad coming and going."

Operating a frozen yogurt shop also came with some difficulty, she said. The startup expenses were in the hundreds of thousands of dollars and the venture continued to be costly because of aspects such as food spoilage and high energy use, she said.

Selling $3-to-$4-dollar items weren't enough to make up the difference.

Dahl estimated that Yoyo's cost her and her business partner $400,000.

"This would be enough to remind me that it's not as easy as it looks," she said. "We've never been in the food business ... I'm done with the food business.

"It's a humbling experience."

Alicia Wallace: 303-473-1332, wallacea@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/dc_alicia