By

While working as a personal trainer at the YMCA as a young man, Kevin Rigg discovered he really enjoyed working with people. He also found he didn’t necessarily want to work as a trainer long-term. “The person I was dating at the time had a good friend who had a mother who was in real estate,” he recalled. “I talked to that mom to find out what was involved in real estate and from there I ended up talking with Shorewest about a career and started there at the age of 24.” Since becoming an agent, he’s helped 300 families buy or sell a home or both, resulting in sales in excess of $50 million. He discusses his 11 years in the real estate business in this edited interview.

What is it you enjoy about selling real estate?

Working with different people and the different dynamics of each transaction. There is really no monotony in the business. Every day is different, every transaction is different. You’re dealing with different challenges every day.

What do you believe makes you different from other agents?

I consider myself to be more of a real estate consultant than a sales person. It’s my opinion that houses sell themselves; what is needed is a good, ethical professional to guide people through the process. When I see others out there who are more sales focused and only about closing the transaction as opposed to putting their clients’ needs first, it reinforces that my approach is more appropriate.

What role do you believe a realtor should play for a client?

Obviously they should play the role of advocate for the person they’re representing, whether it’s a buyer or a seller. We really try to work as counselors through the entire process because, I believe, it’s much like a marriage from the start of the transaction through the end of it. Whether it’s a first-time buyer or someone who’s lived in a home for 40 years, it’s a new experience for each individual, and having someone there to walk them through the process helps them avoid as many complications as possible.

What qualities make for a good realtor?

Being patient, a good listener and knowledgeable--and I really need to stress, ethical. They also need to put the clients’ needs ahead of their own. Additionally, it’s important for all agents to have a certain level of expertise as far as homes and their mechanical components and potential repair items so they can talk in an educated manner about the homes they take buyers through or help prep sellers for various items that may come up during the sale. By that, I mean items such as whether a roof is at the end of its life expectancy or is brand-new. Plus, that includes things like the quality of windows, the plumbing and electrical.

What is your philosophy of selling real estate?

Again, houses sell themselves; I’m just there to help them navigate through the process. I’m helpful in laying out the pros and cons of each property, but at the end of the day, the buyer or seller is in the driver’s seat and we just help guide them based on our past experience.

How have you developed as a realtor?

Since I’ve entered the business, it’s been a roller coaster market. When I started at the age of 24, I was working primarily with first-time buyers looking at entry-level housing. Today, I’m working more with sellers who bought their first home with me and now have families and are moving on to buy their second or third houses.

Have you had any mentors?

With Shorewest Realtors, there is kind of a family attitude that goes along with the company. Rick Bohmann is our office manager and, given that I came into the business as young as I did, he helped me for the first few years getting my feet wet. Also I really can’t say enough about the Horning family, Joe and John Paul. They really make you feel like an individual, not a number.

What’s been the best advice you’ve been given?

That I’m in the business of making good, long-lasting relationships and not in the business of selling houses, and that if you treat people as you want to be treated, it will pay you back ten-fold in the future.

What do you do for recreation or to relax?

I have a wife and three children under the age of six. We find plenty to keep us busy, whether it’s going to the park or the zoo or playing around the house. When my downtime isn’t focused on my family, I enjoy golfing and going to the gym.

What charitable groups are you involved with?

We donate to the Boy’s and Girl’s Club. We also participate at our church, St. Anthony’s Parish in Milwaukee.