Keith Miller (Photo: Provided)

The Iowa Senate State Government Committee recently approved Senate Study Bill 1068. This bill would allow Iowans to participate in fantasy sports competitions and receive cash prizes. Proponents of the Senate bill maintain that fantasy competitions do not constitute gambling and that the results are predominately skill-based. But these claims do not hold up to scrutiny.

Fantasy sports have become one of the most popular activities in the U.S. The origins of fantasy sports go back to the early 1980s with "Rotisserie Baseball," a game created by a group of friends and named after a restaurant where the idea was hatched. Some estimate that 40 million Americans play some form of fantasy sports.

In fantasy sports, competitors build a "virtual" team that competes against other fantasy owners. The teams compete based on the statistics generated by the real individual players or teams. Fantasy competitions have spread from baseball to football, basketball, hockey, golf, soccer, and NASCAR, just to name a few.

Many fantasy leagues involve season-long competitions where participants match wits by trading players, strategizing, adjusting their rosters, and dealing with player injuries. These are the fantasy competitions supporters usually refer to, ones where co-workers or friends engage in a little friendly fun. But the season-long fantasy leagues have been surpassed in popularity by daily fantasy competitions.

FanDuel and DraftKings are web-based companies that, usually for an entry fee, allow a participant to draft a team and compete against tens of thousands of other players online. These other players are typically strangers and not part of any bona fide social relationship. Each day there are thousands of contests for whatever sport is in season. FanDuel advertises "Over $10 million in real cash prizes paid out every week."

Because the fantasy competition would not be considered gambling, the Iowa Racing and Gaming Commission would not regulate the activity and online sites, and Iowa casinos could offer fantasy competitions.

Fantasy sports and sports betting have a close connection. Sports betting is one of the most popular forms of gambling. But Nevada is the only state where federal law permits traditional sports betting to occur. Recently, Sen. John McCain commented that there needed to be frank discussion about whether the federal prohibition on sports betting outside Nevada should be overturned. In the meantime, what should the role of fantasy sports be in quenching Iowans' thirst for sports betting?

First, when fantasy sports promoters assert that the competitions do not constitute gambling, they are making a dubious argument. While a player's skill may play a significant role in a season-long competition, daily fantasy games involve considerable chance, that is, luck. The fact this legislation has even been proposed is the best indication that sponsors know daily competitions satisfy the basic criteria for gambling — a contest where a prize is offered for the payment of cash, and where chance plays a predominate role in the outcome. Daily fantasy competitions will become non-gambling activity only if the Legislature passes a law that says as much.

Second, like all forms of gambling, fantasy sports will have more losers than winners, especially in daily competitions. Treatment specialists say that fantasy sports addictions are common. By not viewing fantasy sports as gambling, problem gambling issues are ignored. This is bad public policy.

Third, daily fantasy sports have flourished because of younger players who do not have the patience for a competition that lasts an entire season. The contests that produce daily wins and losses better fit their gambling tastes. Age requirements of 18 or 21 may be set. But any activity, call it what you will, where money is put up in order to win more money needs careful scrutiny, especially where the participants are young people.

Fourth, according to polling by The Register, Iowans do not support Internet gambling. But if fantasy sports competitions aren't considered gambling, Internet fantasy contests in Iowa would be unrestricted. This would introduce Internet wagering through the back door.

With a state lottery, riverboats, land-based casinos, pari-mutuel gambling, and racinos, Iowa has become, for better or worse, a gaming industry leader. But all forms of gambling, or gambling-like activity, have societal costs. The claim that "everyone is already playing fantasy sports" is not a convincing rationale for an expansion of this activity, especially of the daily competition variety. Instead, decisions about gambling must be informed by the interests of the state after an honest discussion of the trade-offs involved.

KEITH C. MILLER is the Ellis and Nelle Levitt Professor of Law at Drake University, where he teaches gaming law.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1E9SeWI