Dum Dum Girls

ENLARGE Dee Dee of the Dum Dum Girls Getty Images

Mercury Lounge

217 E. Houston St., (212) 260-4700

Thursday

When UC Santa Cruz graduate Kristin Gundred started her own garage-pop band, she took a page from the Ramones' playbook, rechristening herself Dee Dee and naming her band after a song by Talk Talk of 1980s fame. Dum Dum Girls favor candied 1960s girl-group harmonies as well as Jesus and Mary Chain black-leather fuzz guitar. Much like Ms. Gundred did on the group's last studio album, she again worked with producer Richard Gottehrer, who not only penned "My Boyfriend's Back," but also produced Blondie and the Go-Gos. The Dum Dum Girls will no doubt highlight songs from the latest album, "Too True."

Mark McGuire

Baby's All Right

146 Broadway, Brooklyn, no phone

Friday

Not to be conflated with the disgraced baseball player, guitarist Mark McGuire came to prominence with the Cleveland-based trio Emeralds, which drew on '70s German kosmische, early '80s electronic soundtracks and '90s noise music with Mr. McGuire's echoing layers of cleanly picked melodies. That group disbanded early last year, but Mr. McGuire's solo career will soon be in ascent. His forthcoming album, "Along the Way," is a shimmering and assured statement, employing things his previous band avoided: drums (as well as drum machines), vocals, piano. He plays solo tonight, but he still conjures multitudes.

Fall Out Boy

ENLARGE Pete Wentz of Fall Out Boy FilmMagic

Brooklyn Bowl

61 Wythe Ave., Brooklyn (718) 963-3369

Wednesday

There's a tongue-in-cheek gesture in naming your first album (after a five-year hiatus) "Save Rock and Roll," but Chicago's ecstatic pop-punk mastercraftsmen Fall Out Boy remain mainstream rock stalwarts. The act took a break back in 2009 (right around the time most rock acts and record sales cratered), but when Fall Out Boy returned to the top of the charts last spring with their comeback album and single "My Songs Know What You Did in the Dark (Light Em Up)." Tonight's concert is being taped for VH1; it's a rare opportunity to see a band of platinum status energize a small room.

Steve Earle,

Robert Earl Keen

Capitol Theater

149 Westchester Ave., Port Chester

(914) 937-4126

Saturday

For the first half of Steve Earle's career, he was marketed as a country songwriter, selling songs to Johnny Lee and Carl Perkins. But, as a singer, he had more in common with the roughneck stylings of Dwight Yoakum, and by the time of his 2002 astute talking point " John Walker's Blues," which became a point of controversy in the post-Patriot Act political climate, Mr. Earle was more of an Americana iconoclast. His is a lineage of country-indebted songwriters who never could toe the line. His opener, the great Robert Earl Keen, similarly roams between genre.

Dawn of Midi

Merkin Concert Hall

129 W. 67th St., (212) 501-3300

Saturday

Composed of bassist Aakaash Israni, pianist Amino Belyamani and drummer Qasim Naqvi, the trio Dawn of Midi began life in Los Angeles, before relocating to Brooklyn. On last year's refreshing third album "Dysnomia," the trio looked like a classic jazz piano trio, but the group favored rhythms and dynamics closer to those of electronic music, be it Four Tet or Aphex Twin. Pointillist and precise to the point of mesmerism, Dawn of Midi also evokes comparison to new chamber music as well as the minimalism of Steve Reich. With Bright Wave. As part of the ongoing Ecstatic Music Festival.