On June 2nd, Bill Powers will end his tenure as president of the University of Texas.

During his nine years as the leader of the university, Powers helped the school to reform the undergraduate experience; elevate graduation rates, increase student body diversity, expand online education, create the Dell Medical School, grow its research programs and successfully reach a fundraising goal of over $3 billion, the largest in Texas history. Off campus, Powers helped to build lasting relationships with community members in East Austin, a segment of the city’s population that the school had ignored for decades.

His accomplishments, however, weren’t without controversy.

Clashes with Gov. Rick Perry, state leaders and his boss, former University of Texas System Chancellor Francisco Cigarroa, have overshadowed the last half of Powers’ tenure.

Depending on who you ask, Powers’ presidency was either a huge success or an utter disgrace. Indisputable is how Powers led the school: with conviction, courage and persistence. The impact Powers made, both on and off campus, will undoubtedly leave lasting impressions on those whose lives he most directly affected.

As he prepares to leave his seat as president, Powers’ commitment to students, staff and faculty continues to be a priority for him he said in a conversation I had with him recently. An edited transcript of that conversation follows:

On why he focused increasing diversity at the university was important:

It seemed natural to me. I came in during the early stages of diversifying the law school. A number of faculty had already worked at it, and I distinctly remember one of my students, Rudy Green, an African-American student, was quite involved in going out and recruiting students. He was a good friend of mine. So he and I started recruiting students. I grew up during the civil rights movement. I was in California. This is back in the days when people in California and places like Boston where people didn’t think there were any civil rights issues outside the south. We were wrong. So, diversifying at the law school and the university just seemed like the right and natural thing to do.

On reaching out to communities in East Austin.

They are our neighbors, I was here after Disch-Falk opened. The scar (created when the university destroyed the homes of many in the East Austin Blackland neighborhood to build the field) was still there and that made an impression on me. Back then, I wasn’t in a leadership position of any sort. But I remembered those days. East Austin is our most immediate neighbor and in the Disch-Falk days, we weren’t good neighbors.

Current vice president for Diversity and Community Engagement Greg Vincent was a great ally (in helping reach out to East Austin residents). I remember telling him, “Let’s set up a meeting to talk to the neighbors of East Austin.” When we did it, there were still scars, but it was a very candid conversation. It impressed me that we could be better neighbors.

East Austinites’ concerns about the next administration:

I think they will be in good hands. One of the reason I sanctioned to get housing on Leona Street done, was to give some solidity and permanence to what I think is a better relationship with our neighbors.

His response to then Gov. Perry’s request in 2008 for universities to cut waste by focusing less on research:

I’m for cutting waste and making education as affordable as we can. I don’t think that was the source of the issue. We’ve done a tremendous amount to incorporate technology into student success. The big issue was that I see our mission as teaching students and doing world class research. I think the issues around the state at the time were that the research mission was under attack. Not every university should be a research university. We have small liberal arts colleges, we have community colleges, we have technical institutes — all are important in the higher education ecosystem. But so are flagship, major research universities like the University of Texas and the University of Texas A&M. I saw the issue of defending the research arm of those universities’ mission.

On any regrets over how he handled admissions for some students with political connections:

I think we did it appropriately. It was very rare when it happened; less than 1 in 1,000 admitted students. The blue ribbon committee (which includes former university presidents and regents from across Texas) said it was the right way to go about admissions and that in rare cases, the president takes the overall interest of the university into account. I think it was both intended to be and was in the best interest of the university. I will continue to stand by that. The blue ribbon committee agreed. And I think the board of regents will too when they analyze the blue ribbon committee’s report.

His proudest accomplishments at the university:



I don’t know if one stands out, but there are many things I’m proud of. We got a lot done with the freshman signature courses and the School of Undergraduate Studies, and others elements. That process, what we call ‘the campus conversation’, on undergraduate education is ongoing. We have focused nicely on the undergraduate experience. Certainly the (Dell) Medical School is important. The capital campaign (fundraising efforts to raise $3 billion in 8 years) was important. I think continuing to diversify the campus has been important. Those are the main areas I’m most proud of, as was getting through the recession. I’m very proud of the campus, the students, the faculty, the staff. These were tough times and people rolled up their sleeves and worked hard to get through them. So, I’m proud of the campus and the alumni for what they’ve done.

How he wants to be remembered:

I think I’d like to be remembered as somebody who brought together the campus community – student, faculty, alumni, staff — when there were challenging times and helped get through those tough times together.

His advice for incoming president Greg Fenves:

I’m delighted that Greg Fenves will be president. I think he’s exactly the right choice. You know, this is a hard job. My advice to him, would be: remember that we love this university and it’s worth all the effort, hard work and long days. Just remember the student, faculty, alumni, staff; this is a great place. You have to remind yourself that it’s all worth it.

Aside from teaching law full-time at the university, what else is on the horizon:

I will probably stay active in some way in the legal world, and maybe work on some national higher education projects. I want to stay active in the civic world.