MOUNTAIN VIEW, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--HealthLoop, the leading patient engagement platform, together with the International Consortium for Health Outcomes Measurement (ICHOM), today announced that HealthLoop has achieved designation as an ICHOM Certified Supplier. The company is only the seventh health technology provider globally to have been granted this certification by ICHOM. HealthLoop launched patient reported outcome measures (PROMs) as part of its suite of engagement products in March, 2015.

Health outcome measures and PROMs have become increasingly crucial elements of healthcare, both internationally and under the reform taking place in the U.S. with the Affordable Care Act. ICHOM convenes international working groups of leading clinicians, researchers, and patients to develop Standard Sets of outcome measures for the most relevant medical conditions. Standardizing these outcome measures enables better care by allowing patients to share their progress in ways that are both patient-centric and clinically meaningful.

“HealthLoop brings a unique blend of patient-physician engagement to the health outcomes measurement space that will undoubtedly continue to raise the bar on both the quality and quantity of outcomes reported by patients,” said Jacob Lippa, ICHOM’s Director of Global Implementation.

With HealthLoop PROMs, questionnaires are automatically delivered to patients as part of an ongoing, interactive dialogue with their healthcare teams at baseline and before and after the encounter. More than 80 percent of patients enrolled in HealthLoop are actively engaged and answering health questions, an industry-leading survey completion rate.

“We’re honored to have received Certified Supplier designation from ICHOM and look forward to working with them in the years ahead,” said Ben Rosner, MD, PhD, CMIO of HealthLoop. “ICHOM has created an impressive collection of widely accepted outcome measurement sets that will enable healthcare providers to learn best practice from one another in ways not previously possible. And in the emerging world of value-based care, doing so is becoming increasingly important for providers and healthcare systems to demonstrate quality. Having added PROMs to our existing patient-physician engagement platform and enabling the capture of ICHOM’s Standard Sets such as the Hip and Knee Osteoarthritis Set was an obvious choice that will benefit both the patients and physicians we serve.”

ICHOM is launching the first international Standard Set on hip and knee osteoarthritis next week. Medical professionals interested in arthritis and joint care are invited to RSVP for a webinar hosted by ICHOM’s Working Group on hip and knee osteoarthritis on July 8, 2015, at 4:00 p.m. EDT to learn more about this advancement in the measurement of orthopedic care.

Additionally, healthcare providers choosing to use ICHOM’s Standard Sets will receive a 15 percent discount on HealthLoop’s PROMs collection tools.

ABOUT HEALTHLOOP

HealthLoop keeps doctors, patients, and caregivers connected between visits with clinical information that is insightful, actionable, and engaging. HealthLoop’s peer-reviewed, detailed follow-up plans proactively communicate routine aspects of care while tracking patient progress and monitoring clinical areas of concern, boosting efficiency and improving outcomes through patient engagement. HealthLoop is a Mountain View, CA–based company, founded by Dr. Jordan Shlain, a primary care doctor in San Francisco. (www.healthloop.com)

ABOUT ICHOM

The International Consortium for Health Outcomes Measurement (ICHOM) is a nonprofit organization with the mission of transforming healthcare systems worldwide by enabling and promoting standardized measurement and reporting of health outcomes. ICHOM organizes global teams of physician leaders, outcomes researchers, and patient advocates to define Standard Sets of outcomes per medical condition, and then drives adoption to enable healthcare providers globally to compare, learn, and improve. (www.ichom.org)