Good morning! To start off your day, we turn to the latest Bigfoot rumors, which appear to be headed for the rubbish bin.

Doubting scientist Sharon Hill writes: "We've been duped. Again. As usual." Turns out that before the Sasquatch sighting in Bradford County, there was a Bigfoot Calling Contest at the Kinzua Bridge Festival there, she reports. … Hill goes on to skewer the going’s on at the Sasquatch Genome Project, refusing to label any of it real science.

Read the full story

You think you have enough to worry about with Obamacare with all the ongoing glitches, but Attorney General Kathleen Kane warns that the scammers are alive and well and looking to prey upon the system's vulnerabilities.

Kane advised: Be wary of illusory government and company names claiming to help with enrollment, especially if they list a toll-free number other than that of the official help center. Enrollment is simply an option available to consumers, who will not be contacted by state or federal government in person or by phone, email or text.

Read the full story

Former Penn State president Graham Spanier's long wanted his day in court to address the issue of former university counsel Cynthia Baldwin. A pre-trial hearing will be held in the matter.

Attorneys for Spanier, former Athletic Director Tim Curley and retired senior vice president Gary Schultz have long argued that at a minimum, Baldwin must be barred from testifying against them because she was acting as their attorney at the outset of the investigation. Spanier has also filed a separate motion for dismissal of the charges lodged against him, arguing most are the ill-gotten fruit of Baldwin's turn from university lawyer to prosecution witness. Dauphin County President Judge Todd Hoover has not considered the motions to date, and efforts to reach his office Monday were not successful.

Read the full story

News you might have missed:

The top 10 things you need to know for today from The Associated Press

1. WHAT'S ECLIPSING THE SHUTDOWN: A possible national default is looming closer, rattling markets in the U.S. and overseas as Congress remains gridlocked.

2. HEALTH CARE ROLLOUT DRAWING RANGE OF RESPONSES: Opponents of the new law are crowing about its glitch-ridden start, while others insist the online enrollment system can be fixed.

3. HOW SEPARATE US RAIDS IN AFRICA ARE LINKED: The two operations, thousands of miles apart, show an American readiness to go after militants in nations where authorities are unable to do so, even years later.

4. EGYPT'S UNCERTAIN PATH FORWARD: Its leaders are pumping up a pro-military, nationalist fervor while also trying to crush ousted president Morsi's Islamist supporters. The result has been more turmoil.

5. WHO'S TAKING A FRESH LOOK AT CAMPAIGN FINANCING: The Supreme Court is considering whether to undo some limits on contributions from big givers to political campaigns.

6. ARGENTINE PRESIDENT FACES SURGERY: A clot pressing against Cristina Fernandez' brain was causing headaches, but worrying new symptoms are prompting immediate attention.

7. PROJECT LAUNCHED TO DECODE INFANTS' DNA: The study raises questions about how parents might make use of predicted health risks for their offspring.

8. MISSING PERSON CASES ON THE RISE IN RIO: An AP analysis shows 4,090 such cases were filed in the city and its impoverished outskirts last year, with heavy-handed police tactics raising suspicion.

9. TWITTER SEES BIG ROLE FOR SMALL SCREEN: The microblogging site, preparing for its IPO, is touting the revenue it hopes to make from TV tie-ins.

10. NFL TO MEET WITH TRIBE ON 'REDSKINS' NAME: The league says it intends to sit down with the Oneida Indian Nation — leading a "Change the Mascot" campaign — in the coming weeks.

Today's highlight in history: On Oct. 8, 1871, the Great Chicago Fire erupted; fires also broke out in Peshtigo, Wis., and in several communities in Michigan.

Today’s birthdays: Entertainment reporter Rona Barrett is 77. Actor Paul Hogan is 74. Rhythm-and-blues singer Fred Cash (The Impressions) is 73. Civil rights activist Rev. Jesse Jackson is 72. Comedian Chevy Chase is 70. Author R.L. Stine is 70. Actor Dale Dye is 69. Country singer Susan Raye is 69. TV personality Sarah Purcell is 65. Actress Sigourney Weaver is 64. Rhythm-and-blues singer Robert "Kool" Bell (Kool & the Gang) is 63. Producer-director Edward Zwick is 61. Country singer-musician Ricky Lee Phelps is 60. Actor Michael Dudikoff is 59. Comedian Darrell Hammond is 58. Actress Stephanie Zimbalist is 57. Rock musician Mitch Marine is 52. Actress Kim Wayans is 52. Rock singer Steve Perry (Cherry Poppin' Daddies) is 50. Actor Ian Hart is 49. Gospel/rhythm-and-blues singer CeCe Winans is 49. Rock musician C.J. Ramone (The Ramones) is 48. Actress-producer Karyn Parsons is 47. Singer-producer Teddy Riley is 47. Actress Emily Procter is 45. Actor Dylan Neal is 44. Actor-screenwriter Matt Damon is 43. Actress Kristanna Loken is 34. Rhythm-and-blues singer Byron Reeder (Mista) is 34. Actor Nick Cannon is 33. Actor Max Crumm is 28. Singer-songwriter-producer Bruno Mars is 28. Actor Angus T. Jones is 20. Actress Molly Quinn is 20.

Thought for today: "There is an abiding beauty which may be appreciated by those who will see things as they are and who will ask for no reward except to see." — Vera Brittain, British author (1893-1970).

Sign up to get 'Today's Front Page' in your inbox every morning

"Today's Front Page" is a new morning email newsletter that delivers the day's top headlines to your inbox seven days a week.

This newsletter is sent every morning at 6 a.m. and includes the morning's top stories, a full list of obituaries, links to comics and puzzles and the most recent news, sports and entertainment headlines.

The newsletter is free and it's easy to sign up. Just visit pennlive.com/newsletters to sign up for "Today's Front Page" and other PennLive newsletters.