Yangervis Solarte nipped at the sun with a high home run off Kyle Kendrick in the first inning. Without a cloud in the sky on a sunny Sunday afternoon, it nevertheless stormed at Coors Field.

Home runs fell like rain. The San Diego Padres blasted four homers in four innings against Kendrick. The Rockies pitcher allowed six hits through 12 outs — and 66 percent of them were homers.

The Padres then breezed by the Rockies for a 10-4 victory, avoiding a series sweep. Colorado was trying to win every game in a series for the first time since July, when the Atlanta Braves were swept in Denver.

“Ball was in the air a lot,” said Rockies manager Walt Weiss. “Today wasn’t pretty.”

Kendrick retook the major-league lead in home runs allowed with 32 this season, passing the Arizona Diamondbacks’ Rubby De La Rosa and Chicago Cubs’ Dan Haren. But Kendrick has pitched about 50 fewer innings than those two. His ratio is troubling.

In consecutive road starts, at San Diego and Seattle, Kendrick won twice, allowing five runs in total over 10 innings. It was the first time he won consecutive games since signing a one-year, $5.5 million contract with Colorado in January.

His return to Coors Field went south. He faced 18 batters on 65 pitches and nine reached base.

“He got several pitches elevated,” Weiss said.

“Big Game” James Shields countered for San Diego with little trouble. He retired 19-of-21 batters from the first to the seventh inning.

Charlie Blackmon’s leadoff home run in the first inning signaled an incoming home run derby. But the Rockies didn’t follow through. Only Corey Dickerson and Kendrick reached base before the seventh, on walks.

Shields reversed a pattern of trouble against the Rockies this season. He entered having pitched 22 innings against Colorado, with a 5.24 ERA and a 1.84 WHIP — well above his season averages.

But he was 3-0 against the Rockies in four starts. He’s now 4-0 after striking out eight Sunday in 6 innings. He allowed just two hits.

“We’ve swung the bats pretty well against him, but not today,” Weiss said.

Justin Morneau’s double in the seventh was the first hit off Shields since Blackmon’s homer. Shields then walked Daniel Descalso and Dustin Garneau, and Morneau scored on a wild pitch. Shields was relieved.

But between Blackmon’s homer and Morneau’s double, the Padres went wild. They scored in each of the first six innings — matching a franchise record for the first time since 1990.

Solarte’s first-inning homer scored two runs. Then Matt Kemp and Jedd Gyorko hit solo shots in the third. And Cory Spangenberg homered to lead off the fourth. They homered to right field, left field and center field.

The Rockies found some life in the seventh as the Padres lost focus. Shields threw two wild pitches and Bud Norris tossed another. Descalso and Garneau added runs after Morneau. But the Rockies still trailed by six.

San Diego finished with 15 hits off four Colorado pitchers. The Rockies, who struck out six times in the eighth and ninth, had just four hits in the game.

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or @nickgroke

Looking ahead

Pirates’ A.J. Burnett (8-5, 3.15 ERA) at Rockies’ Jon Gray (0-1, 5.00), 6:40 p.m. Monday, ROOT; 850 AM

Gray is on an innings- limited path that should carry him through to the end of the season. The rookie recently tweaked his delivery to eliminate most of his windup. His preamble is now an abbreviated step and turn — just a little more action than he uses from the stretch. In his previous start, Gray nearly matched wits with Dodgers ace Clayton Kershaw. Gray called it “the biggest stage I have ever been on.” But after entering with a major league- record seven no-decisions to start his career, Gray was tagged with a loss.

Tuesday: Pirates’ J.A. Happ (5-2, 1.96 ERA) at Rockies’ Chris Rusin (5-8, 5.11), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Wednesday: Pirates’ Charlie Morton (9-8, 4.26) at Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (9-7, 4.17), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Thursday: Pirates’ Jeff Locke (8-11, 4.48) at Rockies’ Chad Bettis (8-5, 4.46), 1:10 p.m., no TV

Nick Groke, The Denver Post