China’s slowing economic growth and mounting bad loans should send distressed-debt investors treasure hunting in the Middle Kingdom.

However, as we report in this month’s issue of Private Equity Analyst, only a handful of firms such as Oaktree Capital Group, Shoreline Capital Management and Clearwater Capital Partners have been active in China’s distressed loan market—or its credit markets in general.

The level of deal activity stands in contrast with the amount of opportunity available. Chinese banks reported 982.5 billion yuan ($154 billion) in problems loans as of March 31, up from CNY646.1 billion a year earlier and the highest level since the third quarter of 2008, according to official statistics from the China Banking Regulatory Commission.

The problem-loan ratio–or the percentage of total outstanding loans that are nonperforming–also has increased steadily since the first quarter of 2012 to 1.39% as of March 31, even as overall bank lending has expanded during that period, according to the official statistics.

The actual ratio of problem loans could be much higher than that, if one includes loans that are technically performing but may become problematic if the economy continues to slow down, analysts and investors say.

Qiang Liao, a Beijing-based analyst with Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services, estimates that 5% to 6% of total outstanding bank loans in China are either nonperforming or possibly problematic.

Only a sliver of those loans will be available to investors, said Ben Fanger, co-founder and partner of Shoreline, citing high barriers to entry, limited conduits for deals, and the complexity of China’s bankruptcy laws among challenges firms face.

“It’s not a question of how big the market is,” said Robert Petty, co-founder and managing partner of Clearwater. “It’s a question of buying good portfolios at the right price.”

Private Equity Analyst is a monthly magazine published by Dow Jones & Co. focused on noteworthy trends in the private equity industry. For a trial subscription, visithttp://pevc.dowjones.com, scroll to the bottom and click “try for free.”

Write to Shasha Dai at shasha.dai@wsj.com Follow her on Twitter: @ShashaDai1