Ronny Richards for Congress

Democrats are fortunate this year to have an exciting primary that has energized our base and attracted new voters. Those of us who live in the Second Congressional District also have the opportunity to elect a strong progressive representative who will defend our Democratic values.

Ronny Richards is a Vietnam veteran, a proud union member and worked at The Ohio Division of Forestry for 26 years. He has served his community as a volunteer firefighter and is an active leader at Friendship United Methodist Church. He brings a wealth of life experience that is so important in understanding and defending the needs of American workers, our veterans and their families.

Ronny will fight for a higher minimum wage, equal pay and stronger unions. He understands that our veterans need expanded benefits and our young people need affordable education. He sees the need to improve the Affordable Care Act as we work toward a single payer system. Ronny is also a fierce advocate for clean, sustainable energy and a healthy environment. Visit www.ronnyrichardsforcongress.com to see his entire platform.

The Second District deserves someone who will rise above corruption and corporate influence to ensure that our voices are heard. Common sense and integrity are still possible in Congress. Let's send Ronny to Washington.

Karen Marotta

Batavia

Big shoes to fill

After 28 years as Clermont County treasurer, J. Robert True will step down next year. He will be remembered not only for his sharp wit and quick mind, but for making his office one of the most efficiently-managed county offices in Ohio.

During Mr. True's tenure, the delinquency rate on real estate tax bills in Clermont County has been reduced below 2 percent, resulting in one of the best collection rates in the state. This is of utmost importance for our local school districts and the agencies which rely on tax settlements to continue to operate.

For those of you who will be voting in the Republican primary election on March15, please consider a candidate for county treasurer who has both the on-the-job experience and moral integrity to keep this office on top – Jeannie Zurmehly.

Over the past three years I had the privilege of working with Mrs. Zurmehly. She serves as supervisor of the delinquent tax department, but she also has experience in every phase of the operation of the Treasurer's Office.

I know her to be a hard worker, detail oriented, loyal to her boss and co-workers, and possessed of the integrity and intelligence to serve Clermont County as a top notch treasurer. Bob True's shoes will be difficult to fill. Jeannie Zurmehly is the best choice to continue his excellent legacy.

Marshall McCachran

Union Township

Levies help families meet challenges

I have been a board member for the Clermont County Board of Developmental Disabilities for two years and am its board president.

My years on the board have really opened my eyes to the tremendous work that goes into supporting individuals with developmental disabilities to live and work as independently as they can in Clermont County. It also makes me proud to live in a community where its citizens recognize the gifts and talents of those with disabilities, but also are willing to support them when they need it.

In this upcoming primary election March 15, Clermont DD is asking voters to approve replacement of two continuing levies that were originally passed in 1979 and 1980. With approval, these two levies would become one moving forward. Revenue generated from replacing these levies would not only maintain much-needed services we see throughout our county, but would help to responsibly address ever-growing waiting lists. This levy will cost the owner of a $100,000 home an additional $35 per year – or about $3 per month.

During my time on the board, I have seen and heard stories of certainly the successes: the young child getting the therapy needed; the teenager getting the job training necessary to get a job; the older adult with significant physical disabilities that is receiving the care needed to live in a residential home here in our community. I also have had to be part of difficult conversations, where challenges remain because of a lack of resources to adequately address the needs.

On March 15, please do your part for the individuals with developmental disabilities and their families in Clermont County by voting for Issue 5, the Clermont County Board of DD replacement levy.

Rex Parsons

Clermont DD Board president

Zurmehly knows treasurer’s office

I write to encourage my fellow Clermont County residents who intend to vote in the Republican primary March 15 to vote for Jeannie Zurmehly for County treasurer.

My thoughts on this issue are based upon my working relationship with Jeannie in the treasurer’s office. One of the areas of my practice of law in Clermont County is the providing of real estate title opinions to assist in the collection of delinquent real estate taxes. I provide such title opinions to Jeannie several times a week in her capacity as head of the Delinquent Tax Division of the Treasurer’s Office.

Jeannie is the treasurer’s liaison between the Prosecutor’s Office (the treasurer’s attorney in real estate tax foreclosure suits) and the taxpayer. In this role, she has exemplified all the qualities one could wish for in the Office of Treasurer. She interacts with the taxpayers in a courteous, kind and compassionate manner. She interacts with the Prosecutor’s Office in a knowledgeable, efficient and professional manner.

In her more than eight years at the Treasurer’s Office she has worked diligently and collegially with Bob True, who is retiring at the end of his term in 2017, Connie Bare, his chief deputy treasurer, and all of the fine staff they have assembled to work for the best interests of all of the taxpayers of Clermont County.

In sum, then, given the fact that Jeannie Zurmehly knows all the facets of the Treasurer’s Office inside and out, and has demonstrated over these past eight years a thorough and diligent work ethic in the very office she seeks, I would be remiss, given my inside look at her performance, not to suggest to my fellow Clermont County citizens that they vote for Jeannie M. Zurmehly.

Richard P. Schuler

Pierce Township

Huber a good choice for 27th District

I am writing to support the election of Heidi Huber for state representative, Ohio House 27th District. I have worked with Heidi on education issues and I have great admiration for her leadership skills.

Locally, she immersed herself in the fight to stop the implementation of the Common Core Curriculum. She worked tirelessly on this project always with children’s best interest at heart.

Heidi Huber is a superb person in every respect. The thing I admire most about her is that she takes great pride in everything she does and as a result, every project she is involved in is done in a first class manner. I think of her as an “impact” person because she has the vision, background and skills to make great things happen.

I highly recommend her election as state representative because I know in my heart that she will make a positive impact on the Ohio State Legislature and the people of Ohio’s 27th District.

Michael D. Hall

Covington

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1oP1Xj9