Justice There’s Now A Coloring Book To Teach Your Children To Love Ted Cruz CREDIT:

Are you a new parent terrified that the liberal media will turn your child into an Obama supporter? Or do you just need something to entertain your kids during those long drives to Tea Party rallies? If so, then a brand new coloring book is just the thing for your family! The “Ted Cruz to the Future™ – Comic Coloring Activity Book” is a “non-partisan, fact-driven view of how Texas Sen. Rafael Edward “Ted” Cruz became a U.S. senator and details, through his quotes and public information his ideas for what he believes will help America grow,” according to its publisher Really Big Coloring Books.

Some of the “non-partisan, fact-driven” things children will learn from the new book are:

Ted Cruz Is A Man Of Great Virility And Stamina : Many “career establishment politicians are far too out of shape, old or overweight to even perform such a magnificent feat” as standing on the Senate floor and talking for over 21 hours. But not Ted Cruz!

: Many “career establishment politicians are far too out of shape, old or overweight to even perform such a magnificent feat” as standing on the Senate floor and talking for over 21 hours. But not Ted Cruz! Ted Cruz Can See The Future : Cruz spoke with “clairvoyant precision” about the “quickly approaching Obama Care disaster.

: Cruz spoke with “clairvoyant precision” about the “quickly approaching Obama Care disaster. Cruz Is The Constitution’s Guardian : Ted Cruz is a “passionate fighter for limited government, economic growth, and the Constitution.

: Ted Cruz is a “passionate fighter for limited government, economic growth, and the Constitution. America Is A Christian Nation : American history is “replete with official references to the value and invocation of Divine guidance, including official Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays, House and Senate chaplains, the national motto ‘In God We Trust,” the Pledge of Allegiance, [and] religious paintings in the National Gallery.” So hands off those government-sponsored Ten Commandments monuments!

: American history is “replete with official references to the value and invocation of Divine guidance, including official Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays, House and Senate chaplains, the national motto ‘In God We Trust,” the Pledge of Allegiance, [and] religious paintings in the National Gallery.” So hands off those government-sponsored Ten Commandments monuments! Providing Health Care To People Who Can’t Afford It Is Worse Than War: Cruz’s failed stand against the Affordable Care Act “was so important because millions of citizens believe Obama Care is worse than any war. At least American soldiers have weapons with which to defend themselves.”

The book also warns children that President Obama and his administration will “use any opportunity to go after the Second Amendment right and other constitutional rights such as free speech.” So make sure you snatch up a copy quickly before Obama bans it.