It’s Saturday and that can only mean one thing — it’s time for The TiP Weekly!

Tech moves fast and it can be hard to keep up with all of the developments in the mobile industry — especially when Apple is concerned! So, every Saturday, we bring you all of the important stories from the week in Apple tech in an easy to digest format. Think of it as a weekly newsletter of all the stuff you care about.

We round up the posts you might have missed here at Today’s iPhone and from sources around the web. We bring you the biggest stories as well as the insightful analysis. And we also gather together our app and product reviews for you to peruse. Plus, to round out the post, we’ll give you our Picks of the Week — from apps, to music, movies and podcasts!

Sound good? We thought so. Let’s dive into issue #5 of The TiP Weekly…

The News

Black Friday

Yesterday was Black Friday. There were deals galore to be had and the shopping is not yet over so be sure to check out our list of deals on Apple products and related accessories. We also brought together as many Black Friday discounts on iPhone and iPad apps as we good find with more being added throughout the weekend.

After rumors, Apple officically unveiled its own Black Friday/Cyber Monday deals with its (RED) iTunes gift card campaign, donating a portion of sales on both days to the global fund to fight AIDS. Other notable deal included 50% off selected Twelve South products and some huge price cuts on Misfit wearable devices.

The Holidays

Black Friday is here which means the holiday season is just beginning. With it being a time of giving, we rounded up some of the best gadgets and accessories for the tech fan in your life in our 2014 Gift Guide with recommendations including the UE Boom Wireless speaker, Beats headphones, SteelSeries Stratus gaming controller, BrydgeAir iPad keyboard, Knomo Dering iPhone charging purse, and many more…

Plus, we split out under $50 items into their very own Gift Guide as there are so man great products in that price range like the Misfit Flash, Google Chromecast, SurfacePad for iPhone 6, Night Cable and more.

Future of the iPhone

There was much talk this week about the iPhone and its future. Firstly, KGI Securities’ analyst Ming-Chi Kuo predicted a strong holiday quarter for the iPhone with 71.5 million units sold. Kuo also suggests, rather unsurprisingly, that the iPhone 5c will be discontinued in late 2015, seconded by a report out of Taiwan.

More news on the future of the iPhone too with Foxconn’s new $2.6 billion factory said to be producing sapphire screens for next-gen devices as well as possible changes to the default search engine within Safari on iOS and OS X as Google’s deal expires.

Links from around the web:

iOS 8 at 60%

According to Apple’s latest data, iOS adoption has reached 60% — a 4 per cent increase on the last available data. While iOS 8 adoption appeared to be stagnating earlier, the release of iOS 8.1 and the new features seems to have given iOS 8 a much needed boost.

Links from around the web:

Apple Says iOS 8 Is Now Installed on 60% of iOS Devices — Chris Hauk at MacTrast

New Apple Watch info

Apple updated its Apple Watch microsite with new sections detailing the device’s features. With more information on Timekeeping, New Ways to Connect and Health & Fitness, Apple is beginning to show us where an Apple Watch can fit into our lives.

Links from around the web:

Tidbits from around the web

From across the PhoneDog Media Network:

Other interesting articles, opinions and posts that you might have missed:

Reviews

Sphero 2.0

Sphero, the app-controlled robotic ball, was put through its paces by yours truly early this week. The little ball of fun is sturdy and strong and the plethora of apps and augmented reality games for Sphero make it worth the hefty price tag.

Ollie by Sphero + Giveaway

Ollie is the latest app-controlled robot from the team behind Sphero. We tested one out this week to see just how fast, fun and durable it is! TL;DR – very.

We’re also giving one away to one luck reader and the giveaway is still open to entrants worldwide! Check out all the details and enter HERE.

ProTube

ProTube, once a jailbreak tweak, has made its way onto the official App Store. We took a look at the YouTube player that offers ad-free video with selectable playback quality, audio only playback, background playback and adjustable playback speed. Check out our review to see how it fared.

SurfacePad for iPhone 6 and 6 Plus

As lovers of Twelve South’s accessories for Apple devices, we were delighted to get ahold of the company’s latest SurfacePad — this time for iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus. The luxurious leather cover is a great addition to Apple’s latest smartphones and provides a decent level of protection without sacrificing the iPhone’s good looks.

Picks of the Week

Screeny

Screeny is a nifty little utility on iPhone that enables you to quickly find and delete screenshots that you’ve taken on the device. Rather than manually scrolling, selecting and deleting screenshots yourself, Screeny searches your photos, collects all of your screenshots together and allows you to delete all, delete all except those taken in the last 15 days, or delete all except those taken in the last 30 days. There are a couple of kinks in the app — no way to find landscape iPhone screenshots or cropped screenshots just yet — and no iPad support. But, those who find their device clogged up with screenshots regularly (amiright bloggers?) will find Screeny to be a real time saver.

Download Screeny for iPhone on the App Store now for $0.99.

Read more about Screeny:

Rormix

Music discovover app Rormix was treated to an update recently. The app, designed to help music videos from unsigned artists and bands get more exposure, implemented a new feature described to me as “Tinder for music” by one of the app’s cofounders. Essentially, the new Quick Discovery feature shows 15 seconds of a music video and you can swipe left or right depending on if you liked the video or not. It’s a neat idea and an easy way to find new videos and artists you like.

While the update landed a little while back, I’ve only just had chance to check it out and have been enjoying it so far.

Download Rormix for iPhone on the App Store for free.

Read more about Rormix:

The Talk Show Ep. 101: ‘Like a Butt Crack’, With Christa Mrgan

On this week’s The Talk Show, host John Gruber of Daring Fireball is joined by software designer Christa Mrgan to talk OS X Yosemite’s UI, Apple TV’s aesthetics, Apple Watch speculation and the device’s font and icon choices. For any designers, or those interested in the software of their Mac and iOS devices, The Talk Show will provide some food for thought and is well worth a listen this weekend.

Download The Talk Show in iTunes, subscribe via RSS or listen online.

Feedback

As this only the fifth issue of The TiP Weekly, we want to get your thoughts! While the Weekly might differ in length some weeks, be more focused on news rather than reviews (all depending on the content of that week), we want to know what you’d like to see!

What would you like to see more of? What would you like to see less of? Get in touch below in the comments, or grab me on Twitter: @TiP_AdamO! We’re always happy to hear from our readers.

Have a great weekend, and we’ll see you for issue #6 this time next week!