That effort appears to be bearing fruit. Earlier this month, U.S. Sen. Mike Lee sent a letter to Bureau of Land Management Director Neil Kornze regarding his concern for the future of the Bonneville Salt Flats in light of "the last-minute cancellations of several international land-speed race events." And on the homefront, Gov. Gary Herbert composed his own letter to Kornze, requesting that the BLM "engage in an effort to start an immediate restoration program."

"Our alarm is amplified because the Bureau of Land Management, which is responsible for the care and protection of this national historic landmark, has long identified the internationally famous speedway as an area of critical environmental concern," Herbert said, "and yet the Bonneville Salt Flats are not only severely damaged, but are, in fact, approaching ruin."

This movement isn't all talk, either; there's real political action involved, Sullivan said. A special interest group in Washington is working to introduce a bill to Congress that would "get the BLM" to make a plan to save the salt flats, he said. Locally, state Rep. Steve Handy, R-Layton, has said he intends to introduce a resolution that would support the restoration of the salt flats.

Racers hope that mining the political complex for support will put pressure on the BLM, which Sullivan said has "totally ignored" the racing community and the salt flats.

But Wendover Mayor Mike Crawford said the racing community might be overstating its own importance — possibly at the expense of Wendover residents.

"Racers seem to jump over us, too," he said, pointing out that the racing community went straight to the city's representatives to speak on the city's behalf. "Those aren't your senators, they're ours."

Racers, he said, "can't forget that this is our backyard."

—

Top priority • The BLM is "committed to responsibly maintaining" the salt flats, spokeswoman Megan Crandall said in a statement, and is looking forward to "continued collaboration with our many partners and stakeholders to ensure the salt flats remain protected."

The racing community has more specific plans in mind and hopes the political attention will spur the BLM to implement three projects the racers believe will reverse the decline of the salt flats.

First on the list would be revising current mineral leases to require that companies mining salts for the minerals contained within them pump at least a million tons of salt brine back onto the salt flats every year.

Brine-pumping began in the late 1990s as a voluntary experiment conducted by the BLM and several potash mining companies. But follow-up surveys conducted in the 2000s found no discernible increase in the depth of the salt crust, and the experiment was formally abandoned, although Intrepid Potash continues to voluntarily pump salt brine back onto the flats.

Sullivan insists brine-pumping does work — and the supposed failure comes down to a difference in what scientists and racers have in mind when they talk about the flats' "salt crust."

Geologists consider the "salt crust" as comprising many different layers of material, including the sticky mud that lies below the topmost layer of hard, consolidated salt. But, to the racers, the only thing that matters is the depth and stability of that upper layer, Sullivan said.

And that upper layer did benefit from the pumping, Sullivan said, so much so that some of the best racing in decades took place in the early 2000s.

"It's proven that [brine-pumping] does make a difference in the salt," Sullivan said. "And that's something that can be done right away, because the infrastructure is already in place."