In the lead up to National HIV Testing Day (June 27th), Walgreens and Greater Than AIDS are teaming up with health departments and local AIDS service organizations to provide FREE HIV testing at select Walgreens stores in more than 150 cities across the nation:

JUNE 25 – Thursday – 3pm to 7pm

JUNE 26 – Friday – 3pm to 7pm

JUNE 27 – Saturday – 10am to 2pm

Use this map to find Walgreens stores offering FREE HIV testing near you, or click here [PDF 261KB] for a full list of participating locations and partners.

Don’t see a participating store near you or can’t make these dates? Visit the AIDS.gov locator to find local HIV organizations that provide testing and other services year round. Many offer free or low-cost options.

Rapid HIV tests administered onsite by trained counselors provide results in less than 20 minutes and in some cases as fast as one minute. Alere North America, BioLytical Laboratories, D.I.V.A Foundation and OraSure Technologies have donated test kits to support the 2015 Walgreens/Greater Than AIDS promotion.

“We have come so far in our understanding of HIV,” said Tina Hoff, Senior Vice President and Director of Health Communication and Media Partnerships at the Kaiser Family Foundation. “Today, there are very effective treatments that not only help people with HIV to long, healthy lives but also significantly reduce the chances of passing the virus to others. Knowing one’s status is a crucial first step.”

According to the CDC, approximately one in seven people in the U.S. with HIV do not know they are infected.

I Got Tested: What’s Next, a new online resource from Greater Than AIDS designed for mobile-phone accessibility, provides information about HIV testing and staying healthy, regardless of HIV status.

Walgreens is distributing 150,000 copies of an 8-page printed version of the resource through stores and local partners. The CDC and Alere North America are supporting digital promotions.

With more than 180 health departments and AIDS service and other community-based organization involved this year, and the NAACP, among others, helping to get the word out, the Walgreens/Greater Than AIDS partnership is the largest coordinated FREE HIV testing activation in the nation.

Since 2011, more than 20,000 HIV tests – including 10,000 last year alone – have been administered cumulatively at Walgreens/Greater Than AIDS-sponsored testing events across the nation.

Help get the word out about HIV testing! Share posts and pictures to social media using #IGotTested and #NHTD!