Illinois health insurance premiums to increase in 2016

The majority of Illinoisans who bought health insurance plans through the federal marketplace should expect to see their premiums increase in 2016, according to new data released by the Department of Insurance.

In some parts of the state, particularly in northern Illinois, premiums are increasing by as much as 28 percent for mid-range plans. While rate increases for the majority of Illinois counties will range from 5 percent to 10 percent for the cheapest silver plan and 15 percent to 20 percent for the second-cheapest silver plan, Cook County is the only one of the state’s 13 “Rating Areas” in which rates will drop next year — by an average of 8 percent.

More from the Chicago Tribune:

Across Illinois, 2016’s second-cheapest silver plan is rising an average of 6.1 percent, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Health insurance policies sold on the federal exchange are arrayed in bronze, silver, gold and platinum categories, with silver considered the mid-range plan. Illinois’ price hike on the silver plan compares favorably against a block of other states. Across all 37 states that rely on the federal exchange as the enrollment system for people who buy health plans under the Affordable Care Act, the cost of the second lowest-cost silver plan will increase on average 7.5 percent next year.

It’s important to note price decreases in Chicago are helping to keep the statewide average increase low. Residents in each county will have a minimum of 37 plan offerings from 10 different insurers to choose from in the individual market place.

Here are some highlights from the Illinois Department of Insurance’s analysis of 2016 health insurance plans and rates:

Overall average increase in lowest cost plans

Lowest silver plan average increase is 5.3 percent

Lowest bronze plan average increase is 11.3 percent

Rate changes vary

Rate changes in lowest silver plan range from -8 to 28 percent

Rate changes in lowest bronze plan range from -4 to 39 percent

Rate changes in lowest gold plan range from 3 to 34 percent

Competition generates lower rate increases

Rate increases in the lowest plan tend to be lower when there is a new issuer in that spot, or where an existing carrier has expanded their service area.

Majority of areas show increase in choices over 2015

Number of plans increase to 480 in 2016 from 410 in 2015 (includes multi-state plans) 290 individual plans and 190 small group plans

Three new issuers on the Individual Marketplace for a total of 10 Aetna, Celtic, Harkin

Counties with a decrease in the number of issuers include: Adams, Logan, Mason, Menard, Morgan, Pike and Sangamon

Number of issuers in down-state counties did not change

All platinum plans in the Individual Marketplace were terminated

The third open enrollment season begins Nov. 8, 2015 and ends Jan. 31, 2016. According to the Tribune, roughly 350,000 Illinoisans enrolled in Obamacare plans through the federal exchange at the end of the second enrollment season.

More from the Tribune:

The premium increases in Illinois and nationally do not account for income-based tax credits that reduce costs for some people. About 8 in 10 who bought an exchange-based plan this year qualified for financial assistance, HHS said.

The Illinois Department of Insurance’s full analysis of 2016 rates and plans can be found below.

Illinois Rate and Plan Analysis

[RECOMMENDED]