Full appeals court to rehear Obamacare case

Joanne Kenen of Politico reported on Thursday that a lawsuit challenging the core Obamacare health insurance tax subsidies will get another appeals court hearing in December.

The full US Appeals Court for the District of Columbia announced on Thursday it will rehear the case, Halbig v. Burwell, on Dec. 17. A three-judge panel of that court in July dealt a major blow to the Affordable Care Act by ruling 2-1 that the subsidies can be available only in state-run exchanges, not through the federal HealthCare.gov, which serves 36 states that couldn’t or wouldn’t set up their own Obamacare marketplaces, Kenen wrote.

A few hours later that same day, a separate US appeals court in Virginia ruled precisely the opposite: that the subsidies should be available to anybody who is eligible, no matter which kind of exchange their state relies on. The plaintiffs in that case, King v. Burwell, have already asked the US Supreme Court to take it up without waiting for further action in the lower courts.

Millions of people are getting subsidies, which come in the form of a tax credit, to make health insurance more affordable. None of the credits was cut off, though, pending more legal battles over one of the key provisions of the healthcare law’s massive coverage expansion, Kenen wrote.

The decision to have a full, or en banc, hearing vacates the earlier ruling by the DC court, according to the article.

The top 20 most annoying buzzwords and phrases in the workplace

According to a recent Accountemps survey of human resources (HR) managers, “dynamic,” “deep dive,” and “leverage” were among the most overused and annoying business buzzwords being used today.

Trending {{item['sft-title']}}

“Clarity is still king when communicating in the workplace,” Bill Driscoll, New England district president of Accountemps, said in a written statement. “Jargon tends to confuse, not clarify. It’s generally best to avoid the tired cliches and trendy buzzwords in favor of clear, straightforward language.”

More than 600 HR managers at US and Canadian companies with 20 or more employees were interviewed for the survey. They were asked, “What is the most annoying or overused phrase or buzzword in the workplace today?” Here are the top 20 based on their responses:

“Out of pocket” “Deep dive” “Forward-thinking” “Dynamic” “Let me get back to you.” “Pick your brain” “Employee engagement” “LOL” “It’s not my job.” “It’s above my pay grade.” “When am I going to get a raise?” “I am overwhelmed.” “Crunch time” “Win-win” “Value-added” “Think outside the box.” “Leverage” “At the end of the day” “Circle back” “Synergy”

TIGTA: The IRS needs to improve its processing of complaints against tax preparers

The IRS is not processing complaints against tax return preparers in a timely manner, according to a report released publicly by the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration (TIGTA) on Thursday.

TIGTA’s review of the 8,354 complaints against preparers received by the IRS between Oct. 1, 2012, and Sept. 11, 2013, identified 3,953 (47 percent) for which work on the complaints had yet to be initiated. Of the 3,953 complaints, 1,920 (49 percent) had been in the agency’s inventory for at least 60 business days with no work initiated.

In addition, IRS processes did not ensure the complaints were accurately and consistently processed. TIGTA also found that processes were not established to effectively track complaint referrals to IRS business functions to ensure that the complaints are received for evaluation and track how the referred complaints are resolved, according to the report.

“Tax return preparers play an increasingly important role in helping taxpayers to comply with the tax laws,” Treasury Inspector General J. Russell George said in a written statement. “Unqualified or unethical tax return preparers can negatively impact taxpayers, as well as tax revenue, if the tax returns they prepare are incorrect and/or fraudulent.”

TIGTA made eight recommendations to the IRS, including that it establish goals and procedures to ensure that complaints are timely processed; develop a process to ensure that complaints are recorded in inventory records; ensure that criteria for referring complaints to business functions are appropriately applied and that the business functions’ resolution of complaint referrals is tracked; and establish procedures to contact taxpayers for missing information.

IRS management agreed with six of TIGTA’s recommendations and plans to take corrective action.

Click here to download the report.

House GOP to push tax bills this month

Bernie Becker of The Hill reported on Thursday that the Republican-led House of Representatives will take up a string of tax bills during lawmakers' brief stint in Washington this month, according to a memo from House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-CA).

House Republicans will take up a series of new proposals dealing with the IRS’s improper scrutiny of Tea Party groups. Those measures include proposals that would let the US Treasury Department give more information to taxpayers who have had confidential information leaked, bar any IRS employee from doing government work on a personal email account, and codify a group’s right to appeal a denial of tax-exempt status, Becker wrote.

Also expected to be discussed is a broad repackaging of more than a dozen bills related to the economy that the House has already passed, including extensions of tax breaks for corporate research and business expensing. The measure also includes a permanent reauthorization of a bill barring states from taxing online access, according to the article.

Chamber to intensify tax reform efforts

Becker also wrote an article for The Hill on Thursday about how the US Chamber of Commerce is using a new ad campaign to intensify its efforts to push policymakers toward tax reform.

The Chamber said on Thursday that the Fair Reform for Growth will be a multimillion-dollar campaign that will urge both voters and elected officials to back a rewrite of the tax code.

“Faced with the highest statutory tax rate of any major country, American employers must do everything they can to stay competitive in the global marketplace and keep their employees working,” said Bruce Josten, the Chamber’s executive vice president for government affairs, according to the article. “Comprehensive tax reform is essential to ensure continued success for middle-class families and businesses across the country, and this campaign will keep this issue top of mind for policymakers and voters.”

The Chamber’s announcement gave few details about the campaign, which includes a petition for those wanting to lobby the White House and Congress on tax reform, Becker wrote. The campaign also hasn’t spelled out many details about what it would like to see in an overhauled tax code, though Thursday’s announcement did bash attempts by Democrats to retroactively target companies that shift their legal address abroad.

US tax revenue to rise if Obama legalizes some immigrants: report

Richard Cowan of Reuters wrote on Thursday that US government tax collections would get a multibillion-dollar boost if President Obama issued an executive order giving temporary legal status to millions of undocumented residents, the liberal-leaning Center for American Progress said in a new report.

The group, which has close ties to the Obama administration, estimated $21.2 billion in additional payroll taxes would be collected over five years under one scenario available to President Obama, who has made immigration reform a priority of his second term.

That revenue increase is based on a scenario where 4.7 million undocumented immigrants receive temporary legal status, allowing them to get work permits. These immigrants live with at least one child who is either a US citizen or undocumented, Cowan wrote.

“Many workers and employers will be able to emerge from the underground economy and pay payroll taxes for the first time,” the report said, according to the article.

The report also looked at the revenue impact if President Obama included broader groups of people in an executive action. If he aimed the program at undocumented residents who had been in the United States for at least 10 years, for example, it would effect 7.4 million people and raise $33.4 billion in payroll tax revenues over five years.

Click here to download the report.

Arthur ashes

Francine McKenna wrote a guest article for Reuters Breakingviews on Thursday about Arthur Andersen’s rise from the ashes. It was announced earlier this week that Wealth Tax & Advisory Services, an independent tax consultancy in San Francisco led by former Andersen partner Mark Vorsatz, bought the rights to the Andersen name and renamed the firm Andersen Tax.

McKenna wrote that reviving the brand a dozen years after its demise is a “display of hubris that attempts to give credence to some revisionist history about Andersen.”

“Former colleagues say if anyone can make a go of a new Andersen, it’s probably Vorsatz. He made partner at the old version in record time,” she continued. “Even so, it is unrealistic to think the Andersen banner can reliably promise accountability again. Only an echo chamber full of bruised egos would truly believe that’s possible. Rather than rise to some semblance of former glory, the Andersen name is more likely to haunt clients again.”

Is Tesla’s decision to park ‘gigafactory’ in Nevada good or bad for taxpayers?

Joe Harpaz, managing director of the corporate market for the Tax & Accounting business of Thomson Reuters, offered his thoughts on Tesla Motors’ selection of Nevada as the site for its planned $5 billion “gigafactory.”

The new solar-powered factory, which will be responsible for producing batteries for Tesla’s vehicles, will cover approximately 10 million square feet, spread out across 500 to 1,000 acres, and will allow the company to produce 500,000 vehicles per year by 2020. The company estimates that it will employ 6,500 people and will produce more batteries by 2020 than were produced worldwide in 2013.

Harpaz said: “In exchange for this promised boost to the local economy, Nevada Gov. Brian Sandoval has offered an unprecedented $1.25 billion tax incentive to the company. He has convened a special section of the Nevada Legislature next week to vote on the package, which will allow Tesla to operate in the state tax-free for 10 years.

“This has already started to stir major controversy on both sides of the political aisle. As USA Today reports, both the right-leaning Nevada Policy Research Institute (NPRI) and the left-leaning Progressive Leadership Alliance of Nevada (PLAN) have come out against the factory plan with some scathing comments.

“Populist sentiment aside, a more apt question might be what kind of long-term impact the development of this factory might have on the region. Rich state tax incentives – if executed well – can have a tremendous impact on a local economy.

“The enormity of Tesla’s project cannot be ignored. As part of its deal with Nevada, Tesla must invest a minimum of $3.5 billion in manufacturing equipment and real property in the state. Based on current estimates, Nevada officials expect the Tesla project to generate a $100 billion economic impact over 20 years.

“It’s also important to consider the knock-on effects of a deal like this. Panasonic, currently a partner with Tesla on battery production, will surely be involved with the new plant, and untold startups and ancillary technology companies will likely be pulled into the orbit around Tesla’s new center of gravity. AT&T, for example, has already gone on record in support of the deal.

“The precise impact of the Tesla factory on the Nevada economy is subject to many variables, and the project is sure to hit its fair share of bumps along the way, but Nevada’s bold move has the potential to rewrite the rules of local tax incentives as we have known them.”

Quick Links: