I would like to donate $

Per Month Per Year One Time

Donate Now

“We work hard. We don’t mind working hard. But we want the system to be equitable,” Blackwood said. “How can we make this work so that we’re able to maintain our house?”

Video by Brian Myers, Media Arts Center San Diego

Here’s Blackwood’s question:

“My spouse is a hard-working woman that makes $18,000 to $20,000 a year. Her health care costs are $2,400 a year through her company. Is there a subsidy available to help her?”

The Takeaway: You’ll get subsidies if coverage through your work is unaffordable, but you and the government could disagree on how much is too much.

Anyone can shop on the Covered California insurance exchange, but not everyone is going to qualify for subsidies. If you have an affordable option through your job, you won’t get financial assistance.

The Affordable Care Act says a plan is affordable if the premiums cost within 9.5 percent of your income and the insurer pays at least 60 percent toward covered health services.

Blackwood’s wife will get a subsidy because the $2,280 she pays annually for benefits through her employer surpasses that 9.5 percent threshold. The subsidy could bring her monthly payment down to a dollar.

But this case is unique. Though Blackwood calls her his wife, they’re not married and don’t file taxes together. If they did, Covered California would use the entire household income. Together, they make about $45,000 and pay $320 in combined premiums, which is affordable by the government’s standards.

The Orders: Appeal Covered California’s decision.

Because Blackwood’s wife has already completed the application process, she’ll need to send an appeal request through the exchange’s website or call 1-800-300-1506.

For folks just starting the process, remember that the information you tell the exchange should match what you tell the IRS each year. If you file taxes with someone else, use your household income. If you file as an individual, use only your income.

This article relates to: City Heights, Community, Health Care, News, Share

Written by Megan Burks Megan Burks is a reporter for Speak City Heights, a media project of Voice of San Diego, KPBS, Media Arts Center and The AjA Project. You can contact her directly by emailing meburks@kpbs.org.