A 15-day strike by teachers was the top 2014 story for the Reynoldsburg school district, which also hired a new superintendent and ended the year with the surprise resignation of the board of education president.

Leadership changes

Superintendent Steve Dackin announced in November 2013 that he would retire from his post at the end of July 2014.

The Reynoldsburg Board of Education opted not to conduct an extensive search for a new superintendent, deciding in January to name Tina Thomas-Manning to succeed Dackin.

Thomas-Manning was associate superintendent at the Ohio Department of Education, directing the Division of Accountability and Quality Schools.

Prior to that, she served as principal at Hannah Ashton Middle School for six years, had a stint as assistant principal at Reynoldsburg High School and was also the district's executive director of middle level education.

She came on board May 1 and worked with Dackin for several months to make the transition to the district's top leadership post.

Dackin started a new job in mid-August as superintendent of school and community partnerships at Columbus State Community College, a newly created position funded by a $2.5-million grant from the JPMorgan Chase Foundation.

'Break Every Chain'

A group of students from BELL and eSTEM academies formed the Reynoldsburg Youth Human Trafficking Coalition and hosted a "Break Every Chain" Human Trafficking Awareness Conference in January that drew Reynoldsburg students, residents, community leaders, state legislators and law enforcement officers.

Students worked with Reynoldsburg City Councilman Cornelius McGrady III to organize the coalition and plan the conference.

McGrady works with the Central Ohio Rescue and Restore Coalition, which defines human trafficking as a serious crime where "victims are subjected to force, fraud or coercion for the purpose of exploitation in commercial sex or forced labor."

He also helped to organize a safe dating program at Reynoldsburg schools, through Jewish Family Services.

State of the Schools

At his annual State of the Schools address in February, Dackin said Reynoldsburg should become a "destination district."

He said with finances stable -- partly due to dollars brought in by open enrollment -- leaders could concentrate on strengthening STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) programs and continuing to individualize instruction.

"Our goal is to maximize what we provide for our kids without going back often to taxpayers to ask for more money," he said.

Innovation

In April, Reynoldsburg partnered with Columbus State Community College, the Educational Services Center of Central Ohio, Mount Carmel Health System, Battelle for Kids and Columbus 2020, along with area career centers, to expand post-secondary options for students to earn college credit.

Fueled by the state's $14.4-million Straight A grant, the initiative is a part of the Pathways to Prosperity Network, which establishes career pathways in advanced manufacturing, robotics, business logistics, health care and information technology.

Reynoldsburg received more than $1 million from the grant and decided to build a mobile Fab Lab to make advanced manufacturing equipment available to more students.

Financial forecast

Treasurer Tammira Miller said May's five-year forecast looked better than expected.

She said the district exceeded a promise made to voters after they approved a 6.9-mill incremental operating levy in 2010. The levy increased by 1 mill each year until it reached 9.9 mills in January.

"We promised voters a positive fund balance at the end of fiscal year 2014, but this forecast has a positive fund balance through 2018 and we are on target to have a positive fund balance in 2020," she said.

Trouble brewing

The school board and the Reynoldsburg Education Association -- the union representing district teachers -- began negotiating a new contract in May.

The board's initial proposal, partially written by Thomas-Manning, eliminated step increases and scheduled pay raises, basing compensation on teacher performance in the classroom, student scores on state tests and ratings under the Ohio's new teacher evaluation system. It also eliminated group health insurance in favor of cash payments to buy policies through the new Affordable Care Act.

The contract proposal was published on the district website in response to a public records request and an effort "to keep things as transparent as possible," according to Tricia Moore, director of shared services and partnerships.

The REA balked at the terms of the contract, rejecting merit-based compensation and asking for firm caps on class sizes and more planning time. The union also filed an unfair labor practices complaint against the district, claiming details of the proposed contract should not have been published online.

Talks between the two sides collapsed June 26 when district negotiators "walked away from the table," according to then-REA spokesperson Gina Daniels. On June 30, more than 150 teachers picketed in front of the administration building.

Moore said the REA circulated an email letter shortly before negotiations collapsed, urging its members to "prepare for a strike" later in the summer.

Daniels said basing salary increases on merit pay put too much emphasis on high-stakes, standardized testing. She said the contract proposal and "out of control" class sizes were major reasons teachers were "leaving the district in droves." She said more than 50 teachers had resigned so far in 2014 and she herself was resigning.

At the July school board meeting, more than 500 people crowded into the Encore Performing Arts Center to speak publicly about the contract proposal. Several teachers who had submitted their resignations said the district ignored large class sizes and lack of teacher planning time, making teachers "feel like second-class citizens."

Thomas-Manning encouraged the district team to "stand firm" on the contract offer, which she said was about attracting and retaining talented teachers, not about saving money.

Mediation fails

Both sides met with a federal mediator in early August, but contract issues remained unresolved.

On Aug. 8, the REA membership voted to authorize the negotiating team to issue a 10-day strike notice. New REA spokesperson Kathy Evans said questions about student learning conditions, class sizes and the compensation package remained unresolved after the latest talks.

Thomas-Manning said school leaders were hoping to avoid a strike, but assured parents, "Our schools will remain open."

Parents rallied behind the teachers, forming a Facebook group called Raider Strong We Care, sending a flurry of letters to school board members and voicing their concerns at board meetings.

Meanwhile, the district prepared for a strike by purchasing nearly $200,000 worth of laptop computers and software to support lessons taught by substitute teachers. The district agreed to pay an outside company, Huffmaster Inc., about $81,000 to begin acquiring those teachers if a strike notice was issued.

More than 1,000 purple-and-white "We Support Reynoldsburg Teachers" signs started cropping up in yards all over Reynoldsburg.

Strike begins

The REA issued a 10-day strike notice Sept. 8 after rejecting yet another board proposal.

Thomas-Manning said she still hoped to reach a settlement before the deadline, but a last-ditch bargaining session failed. Teachers hit the picket lines Sept. 19.

Huffmaster substitutes arrived, but there were not nearly enough to fill all the classrooms. Reynoldsburg police reported students walking out, fights between students and chaotic conditions at the Reynoldsburg High School Livingston campus. Twelve high school students were charged in strike-related incidents the first day of the strike.

The students who stayed in class were issued laptop computers for online lessons, but many complained about the "highly structured" day, where they could not change classes, had to eat lunch at their desks and did not have enough exercise time or restroom breaks.

Students also took cellphone photos of some substitutes sleeping at their desks or touting religious beliefs instead of curriculum.

Lawsuit filed

The union and district negotiating teams reached a complete impasse by the 10th day of the strike. Evans said the board team refused to compromise on class sizes, despite the fact other school districts have caps on class sizes written into their contracts.

Moore said the class size caps teachers wanted would mean the district would have to hire 16 more teachers, which would cost more than it could afford to spend.

Hundreds of parents held rallies for the teachers, delivering supplies to picket lines and protesting outside the district administrative offices.

Parent Thomas Drabick -- also a lawyer -- sought court intervention to close the schools because of safety issues after an elementary-school girl broke her arm and a substitute teacher failed to get help for her.

Franklin County Common Pleas Court Judge Michael J. Holbrook refused to close the schools, but ordered the REA and district teams into mediation with Judge Richard A. Frye, not only about safety, but about the teachers' contract.

The five days of mediation did not produce a contract, but both sides asked to work again with a federal mediator. Holbrook agreed, but reserved the right to put them back into mediation or close the schools if they again reached an impasse.

Strike ends

By Oct. 9, the strike had ended and teachers had a new contract, but it did not include caps on class sizes. Written into the contract instead was the sentence, "Parties agree to inspirational goals of 25 students per class in grades K-4 and 32 students per class in grades 5-8 and 35 in grades 9-12.

Near the end of the strike, the district had paid Huffmaster more than $700,000 for security and coordination of substitutes.

Tragedy

Soon after teachers returned to their classrooms, the community was stunned by the loss of a Taylor Road Elementary teacher and her husband. Louann Widdoes, 53, and her husband Bob, 56, died Oct. 17 in a car crash in Bucyrus. They were headed to Sandusky to be with Louann's family after her father had died nine hours earlier. Their two sons, Bradley and Brian Widdoes, lost their parents and grandfather the same day.

Principal Jeremy Miller said the school had seen more than its share of tragedy in the fall: Four students each lost a parent in September. One of the parents was Stephen Byus, a U.S. Navy reservist who died Sept. 16 in Afghanistan after a suicide bomb attack.

Bonuses and board resignation

In late October, the school board voted to reduce athletic fees for students by almost half, from $335 per sport to $170, but the news caused barely a ripple among parents who packed the first school board meeting since the strike. They were more concerned about a total of $87,000 in bonus payments given to principals and other administrators as "extra-duty pay" because of the strike.

Board President Andrew Swope unexpectedly resigned in December, leaving a seat open for appointment. A Reynoldsburg High School graduate, he had served as a board member for 15 years and won re-election in November 2013 in a tight race against former board member Ryan Brzezinski.

At Swope's last school board meeting, the board approved hiring Todd Hutchins as communications director, at an annual salary of $80,000.

The board also approved student improvement incentive awards for 50 teachers, ranging from $1,000 to $4,000 each, plus a total of $34,158 in performance bonuses for 32 administrators.

Tina Thomas-Manning