BRADENTON, Fla. — Baseball is a numbers game, and nobody at Pirates camp has put up numbers quite like Arquimedes Euclides Caminero. This flame-throwing right-hander can reach triple digits with his fastball, has struck out 1½ batters per inning this spring and is a perfect 1 for 1 with an RBI at the plate.

It’s appropriate, then, that Caminero is named after a couple of Greek mathematicians, Archimedes and Euclid. Caminero’s father, a construction worker in Santa Domingo, Dominican Republic, picked the names out of an algebra textbook.

"I do like math,” Caminero, 27, said Friday. “I used to be really, really good. Now, I'm slowing down a little."

The competition in the Pirates bullpen, though, is just picking up.

Caminero, acquired from the Miami Marlins in February for cash considerations, is fighting for a spot in the bullpen, as are right-handers Jared Hughes, John Holdzkom, Stolmy Pimentel, among others.

Caminero is out of minor league options, so the Pirates will have to either keep him in the majors or run the risk of losing him in waivers.

So far, Caminero has made a good case for staying. He has struck out a team-high 12 in eight innings this spring, allowing two runs, six hits and one walk.

“I feel like I’m competing against one thing, and it's my goal,” he said. “That's my only competition. I just see them as teammates who are trying to help the team, just like me."

That goal?

“To get better than last year.”

Caminero had a 4.86 ERA and 79 strikeouts in 63 innings in 2014 with Class AAA New Orleans. He was called up to the majors twice and allowed eight runs in 6⅔ innings.

Caminero’s arsenal includes a cutter, splitter and short slider. That all comes secondary to the fastball. If the heater is right, Caminero said, everything else falls into place.

Caminero arrived in Bradenton 10 days before camp eager to work with pitching coaches Ray Searage and Jim Benedict. They watched a few bullpen sessions and worked to refine Caminero’s mechanics.

The trick to the sky-high strikeout rate, Caminero said, is “I don't try to strike them out." He laughed. "When you try to strike them out, you won't. I used to try.”

Or, as he put later, he’s learning to pitch rather than to throw. The focus now is on mixing pitches and becoming an efficient pitcher. He wants every at-bat over in three pitches or fewer. If it results in a strikeout, so be it.

“I don't want to go deep into counts,” he said. “I just go after them.”

● NOTE — The Pirates optioned right-hander Nick Kingham and catcher Elias Diaz to Class AAA Indianapolis. Kingham struck out three and allowed three hits and no runs in six innings this spring. Diaz was 7 of 16 (.438) with a home run and four RBIs.

Stephen J. Nesbitt: snesbitt@post-gazette.com and Twitter @stephenjnesbitt.