Topics: cliven bundy, George Zimmerman, Kim Davis, Mike Huckabee, Sean Hannity, Politics News

Every now and then – and especially around election time – someone from the general public becomes a household name thanks to a politically exploitable controversy. Politicians are eager to highlight how their philosophy and policies interact with real people, so they seek these representative examples. But the recent causes célèbres that have been exploited by the right are much worse than your average Joe the Plumber. They are of a distinctly nasty character and help expose conservatives’ mainstreaming of bigotry, lawlessness and violence.

Most recently, of course, was Kim Davis, the county clerk from Kentucky who refused to issue marriage licenses after the Supreme Court recognized gay marriage as the law of the land. An elected official, Davis refused to comply with the mandates of her office and got thrown in jail for it. A thrice-divorced defender of “traditional” marriage, her only claim to fame is that she’s a bigot, a hypocrite and a breaker of constitutional oaths.

Of course, conservatives couldn’t wait to cast their lots with her. On the day Davis was released, presidential candidate Mike Huckabee set up a stage and a press conference and embraced her on national television. So desperate was he to be the candidate associated with Davis that his goons physically restrained another presidential contender, Ted Cruz, from going onstage. Huckabee then went on Sean Hannity – who is frequently instrumental in thrusting these conservative causes célèbres into the spotlight – to discuss the “criminalization” of Christianity.

To many conservatives, the right to be intolerant is under assault from big government. It’s the bigot who’s being oppressed and persecuted. In the case of Kim Davis, this thinking led to horribly misguided comparisons and invocations of Martin Luther King Jr. The National Review, ostensibly a paper of choice for intellectual conservatives, published a defense of Davis praising her “civil disobedience.” The article made no mention of the fact that Davis’ disobedience was explicitly aimed at denying a group of people equality under the law, a stand Dr. King might not have endorsed.

But those who’ve had their right to be intolerant taken away by left-wing big government are just one favorite conservative victim. Another archetype is the man’s man who’s being railroaded for making a living or protecting himself.

Rancher Cliven Bundy provided Sean Hannity’s viewers a healthy dose of red meat in the spring of 2014. Bundy inherited a family ranch in Nevada and for 20-plus years allowed his cattle to graze on adjacent federal land without paying the required fees. In effect, Bundy was stealing from Americans to the tune of about $1.2 million. This led to a standoff between Bundy militiamen and federal agents.

Rand Paul pledged his support for Bundy and Sean Hannity had him on his show several times. In fact, no one was more responsible than Hannity for making Bundy a national figure in the first place. Yet when Bundy began waxing philosophical about whether black people were better off as slaves, his mainstream Republican supporters fled. So while it’s perfectly all right to trample federally protected land, and gay people are still a fair target for conservative intolerance, one must be careful to veil racist statements in euphemism, lest even fellow conservatives abandon your cause.

What might not get you cast out of conservative circles, though, is killing a black person. It’s hard to think of a more reviled name in America than George Zimmerman, who made national headlines for stalking, accosting and murdering a 17-year-old kid in a hoodie. For this most heinous and indefensible of actions, Zimmerman became a hero in some circles. He was infamously acquitted of any wrongdoing. Around the time of his trial, Zimmerman found a very accommodating home on Sean Hannity’s show, sitting down with Hannity for sympathetic interviews.