Health insurance rates rising Among reasons cited: Cost trends, new required benefits

Small businesses and individuals in Michigan have complained long and hard the past several weeks to health insurers, agents and state insurance regulators over health insurance renewal quotes they have received for 2014 that range from under 10 percent to up to 75 percent or more.



Southeast Michigan's health insurers, including Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan, Priority Health, HealthPlus and Health Alliance Plan, have told customers that rate increases next year are driven by a combination of regular medical cost trends along with new taxes, coverage of pre-existing conditions, regulations and additional benefits required under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.



While an estimated 10 percent to 20 percent of policyholders will receive lower premiums next year, insurance agents and health insurance executives confirm that a majority of clients and customers will pay a larger increase in premiums in 2014 than they have in recent years.



Over the past three years, average employer health insurance costs for midsize employers have ranged from 6 percent to 8 percent, according to Troy-based McGraw Wentworth's Mid-Market Group Benefits Survey.



But between 1998 and 2008, two years before the new health care law, family premiums for companies with fewer than 199 workers rose nationally 123 percent — from $5,683 to $12,696, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation's 2009 Employer Health Benefits survey.



"We are aware the plans being sold in many cases are more expensive than the plans that were sold in 2013, but these are not the same plans," said Caleb Buhs, spokesman with the Michigan Department of Insurance and Financial Services.

"There are increases, depending on the individual or small business," Buhs said. "Each person has to decide if (their new plan) is a better plan. The plans offer more coverage. ... The question is do people want that coverage" that is mandated?



Under Obamacare, health insurance policies renewed in 2014 must comply with at least the 10 essential health benefits, including mental health, rehabilitation and prescription drugs.



Some customers have been offered early renewal options for 2014 to lock in plans from 2013 that in some cases are priced only slightly higher.



But thousands of other customers have had their current policies canceled — told by insurers their plans are not compliant with Obamacare for 2014 — and given new plan choices that are generally richer because of the essential benefits but more expensive.



Mike Embry, senior account director at Comerica Insurance Services Inc. in Detroit, said health insurers appear to be pricing their products fairly based on competitive pressures and additional costs they expect for 2014.



"The more you give in benefits, the more expensive it will be. You can't add benefits to a program without adding to the costs," said Embry, noting that 75 percent of his small-business customers are paying much higher rates than they have in the recent past.



Steve Miller, account executive with Grand Rapids-based Mills Benefits Group, said small groups of all sizes are paying more. Less than 10 percent of his groups have received lower rates, he said.



"The overall average is higher this year, and the dollar amount of increase is much higher for all groups," Miller said.



Buhs said the state insurance department is receiving a high volume of questions and complaints about having coverage discontinued and rates being increased.