Jeremy Grantham, a Boston-based money manager, and known as one of the best at predicting bubbles, says bubble territory is at 2,250 on the S&P. So, if you buy into his thinking, we aren’t even close to the collapse many are calling for.

And, maybe more encouraging, he says we are in for an explosion of M&A activity. Not an increase - an explosion.

His reasoning?

The cost of debt is next to nothing, profit margins are very high and expected to stay there and he sees this recovery as being very young and with lots of room to run.

The fact that he sees this recovery as very young is significant since the recent implosions in stocks in 2000 and 2007 happened at very mature stages of the respective economic cycles.

Keep in mind that in 2000, growth companies like Cisco had earnings multiples of 60! Except in a few rare instances, we are nowhere near that level now.

I don’t follow Grantham as closely as another Jeremy, Jeremy Siegel of the Wharton School at Penn, so I am not as on board with his calls. But Jeremy Siegel - in my opinion the best market guru ever - is calling for 20,000 on the Dow by the end of this year. By the end of this year!

I have never known Siegel to be wrong. He is nothing short of a market genius.

So an M&A market Grantham sees exploding, a call for 20,000 on the Dow and an economic recovery in its early stages. You only have to buy into half of what these icons of the money business are predicting to conclude that we have a lot of opportunity before us.

GM: Out of the Ashes

They are having a tough year, but it is a setup for big, really big returns.

The ignition-switch nightmare has already cost GM two-thirds of last year’s profits, but other indicators are pointing toward a 30% increase in the price of their stock in 2015.

Light vehicle sales are back to 2006 levels, European sales are up nine months in a row and their market share is up to 18.9% from 17.7% in just one month.

Sales were up 9% last month and per-vehicle sales numbers are up $2,700 per car.

They are trading at just 7.5 times next year’s earnings, 18% below Ford and 50% below the market. That’s cheap!

They are expanding their production in China from 3 million to 5 million by 2020, and according to Sterne Agee, at that point, dividends could reach $2 per share up from $1.20 for a 5.3% yield based on today’s stock price. It is already paying 3.3%, well above the market average of 2%.

This is one of the lowest-priced stocks on the market with some of the best estimates. The ignition-switch issue has been huge and a complete disaster, but if you can look beyond the headlines, there is a lot to like about GM.

The Nuclear “Slap-in-the-Face” Award

I have been told not to criticize Obama in this segment because some of you are big fans, but this one needs to be on the record.

Back in 2012, Harry Reid asked the president to stop funding the Yucca Mountain nuclear waste storage site as a way of helping him get re-elected. The site is hugely unpopular in Nevada and it did, in fact, help Reid go back to D.C.

The problem was and still is that we have a mountain of nuclear waste that needs somewhere to go and it has just piled up even higher since Obama decided to ignore the law and stop funding the project.

Now, two years later, he has allowed funding to resume, but the shutdown he illegally created - yes, he just ignored another law he didn’t find helpful - has resulted in a two-year backup of radioactive waste that is just sitting on the surface. And the opening of the site, because of the two-year funding interruption, has been delayed even further until 2020.

I wonder what he plans to do with an eight-year backlog of nuclear waste. Nevada residents didn’t like underground storage of the waste in their state; I wonder how they feel about eight years’ worth above ground.

Maybe Harry Reid has another idea to help himself and his state. Let’s hope not!

Original image found at: http://www.chrycoautonewsdigest.com/assets/images/content/2014/06/146615_600.jpg.