Former state Sen. Roy Ashburn, right, is filmed meeting admirer James Tiede at Dagny's Coffee Company in Bakersfield as cameras roll. The two did at least three takes of their "impromptu" conversation about taxes, regulations and Ashburn's work as a consultant.

Roy Ashburn, right, meets with James Tiede at Dagny's Coffee Company in Bakersfield. The scene began with Tiede greeting Ashburn, who was reading The Californian while sipping a large coffee.

A camera rolls during a production that apparently centers on former state Sen. Roy Ashburn at Dagny's Coffee Company downtown. The crew of about 15 declined to give any details on the project.

Roy Ashburn was the focus of a camera crew at Dagny's Wednesday. The production folks were hush-hush on what was being filmed.

A production crew discusses a scene for a mysterious production, apparently centering on Roy Ashburn. The shoot took place at Dagny's Coffee Company for about two hours Wednesday afternoon.

Former state Sen. Roy Ashburn, right, meets with Dagny's Coffee Company owner Mike Walters as a production company records the two Wednesday afternoon. Walters said he believes Ashburn lives in Los Angeles these days but requested to do part of the shoot for the untitled production at his favorite coffee house in Bakersfield.

Former state Sen. Roy Ashburn, right, is filmed meeting admirer James Tiede at Dagny's Coffee Company in Bakersfield as cameras roll. The two did at least three takes of their "impromptu" conversation about taxes, regulations and Ashburn's work as a consultant.

Roy Ashburn, right, meets with James Tiede at Dagny's Coffee Company in Bakersfield. The scene began with Tiede greeting Ashburn, who was reading The Californian while sipping a large coffee.

A camera rolls during a production that apparently centers on former state Sen. Roy Ashburn at Dagny's Coffee Company downtown. The crew of about 15 declined to give any details on the project.

Roy Ashburn was the focus of a camera crew at Dagny's Wednesday. The production folks were hush-hush on what was being filmed.

A production crew discusses a scene for a mysterious production, apparently centering on Roy Ashburn. The shoot took place at Dagny's Coffee Company for about two hours Wednesday afternoon.

Former state Sen. Roy Ashburn, right, meets with Dagny's Coffee Company owner Mike Walters as a production company records the two Wednesday afternoon. Walters said he believes Ashburn lives in Los Angeles these days but requested to do part of the shoot for the untitled production at his favorite coffee house in Bakersfield.

It wasn’t exactly long-sleeve-denim shirt weather in Bakersfield Wednesday afternoon, yet there was Roy Ashburn, covered head to toe in his November best, sipping a large medium roast as he pretended to read The Californian for a camera crew outside Dagny’s.

The production detail of about 15 or so guarded information on the shoot about as closely as they guarded the former state senator, who was blocked more than once from a Californian photographer’s lens. What were they doing, these Dagny’s interlopers, with their release forms, expensive equipment and insistent warnings to passers-by that if they didn’t get off the sidewalk, they’d be in the shot?

The person in charge, a woman in a hat and sunglasses who refused even to give her name, was no help.

“Who are you again? You’re from the local paper?”

Was this a documentary? A “Where Are They Now” special? Reality series? Is this denim-shirted version of Ashburn the buttoned-down alter-ego for a Sacramento-set superhero blockbuster?

Ashburn, after all, is interesting enough to launch his own entertainment franchise. The career of the conservative Republican, who represented Kern County for decades, took an unlikely tabloid turn when he was arrested for driving a state car while drunk. The fallout from that episode revealed that Ashburn had struggled for years as a closeted gay man. His career ended by term limits, he has since done some consulting, served on a state board and appears to be living a happy, authentic life, chasing his own rainbows.

Sounds pretty Hollywood to us.

Except in the snippet filmed on the sidewalk, Ashburn talked about none of that. After a scripted-within-an-inch-of-its-life bit of banter with Dagny’s regular James Tiede — a scruffy coffee-house type wearing a T-shirt that said “Wisconsin: Smell the Dairy Air” — the two entered into a deep conversation about ... taxes. Regulations. Permits. Fees. Prop 65. Even, yikes, the Affordable Care Act.

If this is a reality series, they’re going to need some help in the editing room.

A sign said the production was called “American Journeys” but offered no further details. The television network HLN airs a program called “American Journey,” or so the Internet tells me. That program is about “the fearless pioneering spirit at the heart of American ingenuity and resilience, the spirit that is rebuilding America and making a real impact in communities all across the country.”

Even Dagny’s owner Mike Walters, who agreed to be on camera, didn’t seem to know what was going on. Then again, this is a coffee-shop owner who doesn’t like coffee.

“They called me a month ago and told me they were doing something with a politician. I figured because Roy used to come in here four or five times a week, that it was him.”

The only direction Walters received was to talk to the former lawmaker for two or three minutes.

“I said, ‘You never talked to Roy. He can talk for 30 minutes without taking a breath.’”

Ashburn’s partner in the “impromptu” scene outside was Tiede, 31, a regular at the 20th and Eye hangout. Though with his stylishly ripped jeans, shaggy hair and ironic T-shirt, he doesn’t look the part of a conservative Ashburn fan, he is.

“I used to work at a gun shop and would see him at these gun dinners. I know him to be a fairly good guy-ish.”

Tiede was drinking a Firestone double-barrel ale at Dagny’s Wednesday when producers overheard him greeting Ashburn and asked him to do it again, for the cameras.

“I heard two different things — a documentary and a reality series,” Tiede said.

At the end of the shoot, Ashburn ignored a reporter’s request for an interview, though he was gracious enough to look sheepish about it, as his handlers hurried him along down 20th Street.