The Cancer Alliance of Marion County is all about making a difficult journey a little easier for patients with breast cancer and all other types of cancer.

• About 1 in 8 American women (just over 12 percent) will develop invasive breast cancer over the course of her lifetime. • In 2013, there were more than 2.8 million women with a history of breast cancer in the U.S. • A man's lifetime risk of breast cancer is about 1 in 1,000. • Breast cancer incidence rates in the U.S. began decreasing in the year 2000, possibly due to the reduced use of hormone replacement therapy. • About 39,620 women in the U.S. were expected to die in 2013 from breast cancer, though death rates have been decreasing since 1989, possibly as the result of treatment advances, earlier detection and increased awareness. • For women in the U.S., breast cancer death rates are higher than those for any other cancer, besides lung cancer. • Besides skin cancer, breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer among American women. Just under 30 percent of cancers in women are breast cancers. • White women are slightly more likely to develop breast cancer than African-American women. However, in women under 45, breast cancer is more common in black women than white women. • Overall, black women are more likely to die of breast cancer. Asian, Hispanic and Native American women have a lower risk of developing and dying from breast cancer. • A woman's risk of breast cancer approximately doubles if she has a first-degree relative (mother, sister or daughter) who has been diagnosed with breast cancer. • About 85 percent of breast cancers occur in women who have no family history of breast cancer. • The most significant risk factors for breast cancer are gender (being a woman) and age (growing older). Source: www.breastcancer.org

And, alliance members are getting the word out with their newly designed website, www.crushcancermc.org, which is an effort by cancer healthcare professionals to shorten the distance between patients and needed resources, said Linda Koontz, alliance director.

The website information is updated frequently regarding clinical trial matching, peer counseling, Affordable Health Care Act FAQ's, new drug indications, event fliers and a calendar that includes local support group information.

Koontz compares battling cancer to navigating a minefield in a military engagement or fighting a war in the dark.

Helping guide those seeking a better understanding while dealing with all types of cancers is a goal set by the alliance, which is composed of, but is not limited to, oncologists, licensed clinical social workers, physicians, office managers, mental health counselors, translators and pastors.

The alliance is funded by H.U.G.S. Charities Inc., a 501(c)3 under which the alliance operates.

A recently established allocation committee is designed to provide patients in Marion County with assistance with daily expenses. Applications are available on the website.

Amy Roberts is a licensed clinical social worker for the Robert Boissoneault Oncology Institute in Ocala. She serves as a community navigator for the institute as well as for the alliance.

“The Marion County Cancer Alliance is a community program where anyone who can provide resources and knowledge is welcome,” Roberts said.

“As a social worker, I partner with the alliance to help anyone, regardless of who their doctor is, to connect them to those resources and programs. Someone may get a referral through the website, and they are encouraged to contact me. I can do an assessment and refer them and guide them to help with transportation, bills, screenings and care,” she added.

Since its inception, the alliance has facilitated a partnership with the Marion County Public Library to create a mini cancer resource center. A Kids & Cancer Summit regarding the human papillomavirus is also offered, with education provided by the University of Florida and the Marion County Health Department.

The Cancer Alliance of Marion County meets from 11:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. on the third Wednesday of September, November, February and May at the Marion County Sheriff's Office, Emergency Operations Center, 692 NW 30th Ave., Ocala.

The group welcomes professional cancer care providers to discuss community needs assessment, improve existing programs and create solutions to gaps in cancer healthcare.

There also is a need, Koontz said, for attorneys to assist patients with legal, insurance and employment issues.

“From primary care to palliation, our goal is to empower you with cancer-related information through a user-friendly, upbeat local website,” Koontz said.

“We just don't want people to be struggling and not know there is help available. Marion County is a giving, caring community,” Roberts added. “There are so many programs out there. The amazing thing about the alliance is we are all there for the patient and the family.”

To contact Roberts, call 732-0277.

For information about the alliance or how to be involved, call Koontz at 690-3764 or 812-4378, or visit www.crushcancermc.org.