COLUMBUS, Ga., Sept. 9, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Aflac, the leading provider of voluntary insurance at the work site in the United States, has partnered with LifeHealthPro to conduct a three-part webinar series, "Thrive from 2015 to 2025," beginning tomorrow. The three-part webinar series aims to address the ongoing changes in the health insurance industry resulting from the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and how brokers can take advantage of their new role as health benefits advisors.

"There is unprecedented change in the health care marketplace, leaving employers looking for more guidance and consultation from their brokers than ever before," said Tye Elliot, vice president of Broker Strategy at Aflac. "For our webinar series, we invited industry leaders to share insights and tools to help brokers work smarter, adopt emerging strategies to take advantage of this new landscape and position themselves for long-term success."

The webinars will take place on Thursday, Sept. 10; Thursday, Oct. 8 and Thursday, Oct. 22 at 2 p.m. Eastern. Participants in this three-part leadership series will learn more on the following topics:

3 essential ways the ACA transformed brokers

Thursday, Sept. 10, 2015

Patricia Griffey , regional vice president at National Association of Health Underwriters, will discuss recent shifts in product sales. She'll also explain why brokers can no longer remain solely product focused and must become consultative partners in shaping companies' overall human resources strategy.

The new, game-changing model for selling voluntary

Thursday, Oct. 8, 2015

David Fisher , voluntary benefits specialist, and Justin Phipps , employee benefits broker at Gus Bates Insurance & Investments, will provide perspectives about why and how brokers who elevate voluntary benefits to be part of the overall benefits model and strategy are most likely to increase their client base and sales.

Grasping the essential solutions to win tomorrow

Thursday, Oct. 22, 2015

Susan Combs , president of Combs & Company, will explain how innovative strategies can help brokers remain competitive. She will also share the best tools to provide incremental value to brokers' clients.

For more information and to register for a webinar, visit aflac.com/brokers or click HERE.

About Aflac

When a policyholder gets sick or hurt, Aflac pays cash benefits fast. For nearly six decades, Aflac insurance policies have given policyholders the opportunity to focus on recovery, not financial stress. In the United States, Aflac is the leading provider of voluntary insurance at the work site. Through its trailblazing One Day Pay℠ initiative, Aflac U.S. can receive, process, approve and disburse payment for eligible claims in one business day. In Japan, Aflac is the leading provider of medical and cancer insurance and insures 1 in 4 households. Aflac individual and group insurance products help provide protection to more than 50 million people worldwide. For nine consecutive years, Aflac has been recognized by Ethisphere magazine as one of the World's Most Ethical Companies. In 2015, Fortune magazine recognized Aflac as one of the 100 Best Companies to Work For in America for the 17th consecutive year. Also, in 2015, Fortune magazine included Aflac on its list of Most Admired Companies for the 14th time, ranking the company No. 1 in innovation for the insurance, life and health category. Aflac Incorporated is a Fortune 500 company listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol AFL. To find out more about Aflac and One Day Pay℠, visit aflac.com or espanol.aflac.com.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150817/258757

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20100423/CL92305LOGO

Media contacts -- Kristen Fraser, 706.243.5543 or mediarelations@aflac.com

Jon Sullivan, 706.763.4813 or jsullivan@aflac.com

SOURCE Aflac