Topics: College, Editor's Picks, Education, Excellent Sheep, Harvard, ivy league, Princeton, Universities, William Deresiewicz, Yale, Entertainment News

Is it even possible to talk about the Ivy League rationally these days? If you’re a product of it, you partake of its prestige even when criticizing it and, more often than not, end up endorsing its importance. And if you’re not Ivy, then you’re well aware that whatever you have to say about those eight institutions will seem tinged with the resentment of the excluded. The worth of an Ivy League education is a theme that drives many fine minds to gibbering and evasion, and nowhere has this syndrome been more evident than in the response to William Deresiewicz’ new book, “Excellent Sheep: The Miseducation of the American Elite and the Way to a Meaningful Life.”

Deresiewicz went to Columbia (undergraduate and graduate) and was an associate professor at Yale, where he did some time on the admissions committee. “Excellent Sheep” argues, often eloquently, that “elite education” (the Ivies as well as Stanford and other private colleges like Williams) and the whole feeder system that trains upper-middle-class kids to succeed in it — “the ever-growing industry of tutors and consultants, test-prep courses and enrichment programs” — is broken. It produces, he insists, “students who are smart and talented and driven, yes, but also anxious, timid and lost, with little intellectual curiosity and a stunted sense of purpose: trapped in a bubble of privilege, heading meekly in the same direction, great at what they’re doing but with no idea why they’re doing it.”

Deresiewicz first aired these opinions in an essay for the American Scholar in 2008, but he also recently published a piece titled “Don’t Send Your Kid to the Ivy League” in the New Republic to herald the release of his book-length treatment of the subject. Each iteration has produced a spate of stormy controversy, much of it as revealing as a Rorschach blot. For Maureen O’Connor (Princeton), writing in New York magazine, for example, the most egregious aspect of Deresiewicz’s book is its author’s flaunted “privilege.”

I’m all for encouraging the obliviously advantaged to check their privilege when they’re telling the less lucky how to live or when they’re acting as if their own happy circumstances are standard issue. But calling “privilege” on someone can also be a cheap rhetorical tool that asserts moral superiority without really earning it. Deresiewicz knows he’s privileged; privilege is the very subject of his book, which aims to describe the soul-deadening effect of the technocratic “achievement” race and the thoughtless quest for name-brand credentials. O’Connor points out that there’s a long history of a “paradoxical social practice” she calls “elite populism,” in which commentators bemoan the shortcomings of the fancy world they inhabit, or once inhabited. But so what? Who else is better suited to describe the inner lives of Ivy Leaguers if not a writer intimately acquainted with the Ivy League? Certainly not someone like, say, me — the product of a public university in California and at least a decade of bohemian lollygagging around San Francisco. When I’m curious about the culture of Harvard, I want to hear from someone who’s spent some time at Harvard.

And I am curious about how Ivy Leaguers think, because it matters. These people run the nation. As Deresiewicz points out, every president since Reagan went to Harvard or Yale at some point. The Ivy League Deresiewicz describes is like a greased channel, smoothly funneling junior masters of the universe into cushy if demanding jobs in finance, law and consulting. Their actions and outlook affect all of us. In this light, the insinuation that a critical, self-reflective look at the mentality fostered by elite universities is somehow trivial because it concerns the privileged is, frankly, bizarre. But that’s fairly typical of the convoluted, shamefaced, defensive way we talk about class in America: An Ivy Leaguer mocking another Ivy Leaguer because his denunciation of the Ivy League is just so Ivy League.

No, it’s not easy getting a bead on how these people’s minds work! And for that reason alone, Deresiewicz’s book has value. Yet one of the solipsisms of “Excellent Sheep” is that its author assumes his readers are all Ivy Leaguers, too — either alumni, current students or aspirants. His 2008 essay, he explains, “went viral,” and as a result he apparently has spent much of the intervening years corresponding with Ivy Leaguers as well as giving talks at colleges about what education is really for. This has fostered an annoying propensity to catchphrases and aphorisms: “A real education sends you into the world bearing questions, not resumes”; “You may not be interested in politics, but politics is interested in you”; “The point is not to have a high IQ. The point is to use it.” A little bit of this goes a long way in a written text (as opposed to a talk), and even when you basically agree with the sentiments, it starts to sound pat.

The middle section of “Excellent Sheep” is given over to exhorting top students not to reflexively major in economics and aim for Wall Street careers just because everyone they know — especially their helicopter parents — expects them to. They should explore, take chances, consider majors in the humanities, break up their habitual ways of thought, figure out who they really are, and so on, all decent advice, but hardly revelatory. I’ve enjoyed Deresiewicz’s literary criticism, but I don’t need him to explain the value of art and perils of status-seeking to me. Too many passages begin with the sort of cranky refrain best confined to Andy Rooney spots and Facebook comments. Pro tip: Whenever you find yourself beginning a sentence with “Whatever happened to…” just stop right there.

If some of “Excellent Sheep” feels padded or unduly shaped by the public-speaking element of Deresiewicz’s work, other parts are self-contradictory. (He urges students to pursue their quirkier dreams, such as becoming an organic farmer, then scolds them for thinking running an organic farm constitutes meaningful social engagement.) Yet Deresiewicz also presents plenty of evidence, both statistical and anecdotal, that Ivy League students often feel lost or trapped on a treadmill of obligatory and fundamentally hollow man-in-the-grey-flannel-suit-style achievement. “I am just a machine with no life at this place … I am a robot just going page by page, doing the work,” said one. “I hate all my activities, I hate all my classes, I hated everything I did in high school, I expect to hate my job, and this is just how it’s going to be for the rest of my life,” said another.