The U.N. General Assembly Timothy A. Clary/AFP/Getty Images World leaders descend on New York this week for high-level talks this week at the United Nations General Assembly. The gathering marks the 70th anniversary of the organization and comes at a time where the world is facing a particularly widespread and complicated set of global ills. A massive refugee crisis, civil wars and nuclear proliferation are just a few of the issues leaders will discuss as they use the opportunity to meet and debate.



In what officials refer to jokingly as "diplomatic speed dating," President Barack Obama and Secretary of State John Kerry will meet with their counterparts from various countries. Their agenda will focus on the conflict in Syria and include Russia's role there, violent extremism and the spread of the Islamic State group and the refugee crisis. Obama will also lead a high-level meeting on U.N. peacekeeping efforts.



Here's a look at five of the most pressing diplomatic issues world leaders will discuss: Russia

Russia Evan Vucci/File/AP President Barack Obama will meet with Russian President Vladimir Putin on Monday to address two main issues: the recent Russian military buildup in Syria and the ongoing conflict in Ukraine. Putin requested the meeting with Obama, which will take place Monday afternoon after both presidents address the General Assembly.



Recent Russian movements in Syria indicate it may be planning to intervene militarily on behalf of its ally, Syrian President Bashar Assad, but Putin insists the buildup is actually to intensify its efforts in fighting the Islamic State group. Russia is not a formal part of the global coalition against the terrorist organization, and National Security Council Senior Director for Russia Celeste Wallander said that during the meeting Obama "will seek to understand what Russian government means when it states that it is enhancing or increasing its military involvement in Syria in order to support efforts to counter" the Islamic State group.



Kerry met with Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov Sunday for precursor discussions to Monday's meeting between Obama and Putin. Speaking on background, a State Department official said the two had "a very thorough exchange of views" on Russia's action in Syria and the need to deconflict militarily. Kerry said the discussions were the beginning of "a genuine effort" on how to do that, and eventual realize a stable Syria.



On Ukraine, Wallander said an important benchmark will be whether Russia allows Ukrainian elections scheduled for Oct. 25 to take place without incident. Under the Minsk agreement, Russia is obligated to support local Ukrainian elections. Wallander said the meeting will be an opportunity for Obama “to make crystal clear” to Putin that the U.S. expects him to comply.



Syria and the Refugees

Syria and the Refugees The Associated Press World leaders converge as the civil war in Syria and the refugee crisis it spawned show no signs of abating. Syria’s civil war began in 2011, and the resulting chaos helped fuel the rise of the Islamic State group in the region. Government forces, various rebel groups and the terrorist organization now vie for control of territory. The U.S. and its allies maintain that the only solution to the conflict is a political one, calling for Assad to step down. The Syrian leader has given no indications he intends to do so.



The violence has driven millions from their homes, with some displaced inside the country and others fleeing Syria altogether. Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey and Iraq are straining under the weight of millions of additional inhabitants, conditions that have encouraged thousands to try and reach Europe via dangerous sea journeys. Europe recently agreed to a refugee quota system that would distribute people across the continent, but several former Soviet bloc countries vehemently oppose the measure.



Kerry will participate Wednesday in an event on the refugee crisis hosted by the U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon. The U.S. announced it will take in 10,000 Syrians as a part of an overall increase in its refugee resettlement program. Currently capped at 70,000 refugees per year, the U.S. program will resettle 85,000 next year and increase that to 100,000 by 2017. Aid groups have said refugee efforts from the West are insufficient to appropriately address the crisis and call on governments to pledge more toward humanitarian efforts to support those still in the region.

Iran

Iran Atta Kenare/AFP/Getty Images Iranian President Hassan Rouhani delivers an address to the General Assembly on Monday, speaking to world leaders after a historic agreement reached over the summer to curb his country’s nuclear program in exchange for sanctions relief. The deal is set to be implemented on Oct. 17, at which time all parties to the agreement must begin complying with their obligations. Sanctions will not be lifted until the International Atomic Energy Agency has certified Iran’s adherence to the restrictions placed on its enrichment and stockpiling of uranium, among other things.



The White House said there are currently no plans for Obama and Rouhani to meet, saying that the “most effective and direct channel of communication” with Iran was through Secretary of State John Kerry and Iranian Foreign Minister Javad Zarif. After rumblings that Obama and Rouhani would meet at the U.N. two years ago, the men instead spoke on the phone for about 15 minutes as Rouhani was about to leave New York.



On Saturday, Kerry met with Zarif for the first time since the deal was reached in July. The two discussed implementation of the Iran agreement as well as Syria and Yemen. Kerry raised the issue of the Americans currently detained in Iran, an issue on which Rouhani recently indicated he may be willing to reach an agreement with the U.S.

Cuba

Cuba Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images Cuban President Raul Castro is attending the week of high-level discussions at the U.N. for the first time. His trip comes after he and Obama opened embassies in one another’s capitals over the summer, ending a break in relations that lasted over 50 years. Obama announced the end to the policy of isolating Cuba last December, noting the key role played by Pope Francis in urging the countries to talk. Francis was in Cuba last week before arriving in the U.S. for a six-day visit, his first trip to both countries.



Deputy National Security Adviser Ben Rhodes said Castro's attendance was a signal “things have changed” between the countries. Obama and the Cuban president met this spring in Panama at the Summit of the Americas, the highest level meeting of officials from the two countries in over 50 years. Rhodes said he expected Obama and Castro would interact while in New York, but said nothing was currently scheduled.

Saudia Arabia in Yemen