War is the same for ADF women and men in Afghanistan

Video

Image Families make pilgrimage to Afghanistan Family members of Australian soldiers killed in Afghanistan have made an emotional pilgrimage to Tarin Kowt.

FOR crusty old diggers lining up at war memorials around the nation tomorrow for Remembrance Day ceremonies the idea of sharing close living quarters with a female soldier on operations would be unthinkable.

But at the main Australian base at Tarin Kowt in Afghanistan the men and women in uniform who parade at the soon to be demolished TK Memorial Wall at the 11th hour on the 11th day for an Armistice Day ceremony will have showered in adjoining cubicles and stood side-by-side in their pyjamas to clean their teeth without raising an eyebrow.

Back in 1918 when the guns finally fell silent on the Western Front the only women anywhere near the battlefields would have been the nurses at the myriad hospitals and aid stations treating the armies of wounded men fighting in the trenches of Flanders.

For 23-year-old Army medic Lance Corporal Jessica Bailey from Bendigo in Victoria there has never been an issue with sharing facilities and jobs with male soldiers.

While the nearest she has come to treating a badly wounded soldier lately is a sprained ankle from a game of volleyball the petite blonde's thoughts will turn to the sacrifice of her forebears, and the 40 Australians lost in the nation's longest war, as she lines up in silent contemplation.

Lance Corporal Bailey works for the 8th Closed Health Company in Darwin and she weighs in at a slender 55kg, but is quick to point out that she can dead lift 104kg, squat 75kg and bench press 60kg and keep pace with most blokes her size in the base's large, well patronised gym. Like the boys she also consumes large volumes of protein shakes and won a recent weightlifting competition.

There is not much for her to do at TK these days so, after previously working 16-hours-a-day at the role 2 hospital rests bay nursing multiple trauma patients, she spends a lot of time in the gym and drinking coffee with her mates in between sick parades and tending to colds and flu.

"I was doing patrols outside the wire with the EOD guys on demolition duties and that was great,'' she said.

SHOULD WOMEN IN DEFENCE SHARE FACILITIES WITH MEN? HAVE YOUR SAY

It never occurred to the young soldier that she was a trail blazer for women in combat.

"I have never had an issue with the guys hassling me and they treat me more like a little sister,'' she says over yet another coffee at the Green beans outlet.

Lance Corporal Bailey has a younger brother in the Army serving with the 7th Battalion in Adelaide and two "ridiculously'' proud parents back in Bendigo.

Known as "rocky'' by her mates after she told a government minister that her biggest shock in Afghanistan had been the huge amount of rocks around the place, she has been in the army for four-and-a-half years after working in a suit shop and she has been at Camp Holland since June 4.

"On TV it is all sand but over here there are rocks everywhere and they are difficult for little feet,'' she said.

The feisty young soldier will be home in early December in time for Christmas back with the folks in Bendigo.

"This deployment has been a great opportunity and I have a lot more experiences to gain with the army,'' Lance Corporal Bailey said.

She plans to remain in the army and her aim is to become an aero-medical evacuation (AME) retrieval medic, the same role held by RAAF Flight Lieutenant Pam Wittmann from Adelaide, who is posted to the 3rd AME Squadron at Richmond base near Sydney.

The 28-year-old University of South Australia graduate joined the defence force as an undergraduate and is on her second posting to the Middle East Area of Operations.

"Working as a retrieval medic is the pinnacle for a RAAF nurse,'' she said.

"The opportunity to travel with aeromedical evacuation patients and to help people is really what nursing is all about.''

Putting aside the sparse living conditions in a bunk room at Camp Baker deep inside the dusty Kandahar base - and the shared bathroom facilities - Flight Lieutenant Wittmann loves her job.

"When I go to work I never know what I will be doing,'' she says.

At the camp's role 1 medical centre she even manages to keep her hand in by baking cup cakes in the microwave.

"I have seen how the folks live in TK and I have witnessed some terrible things in the role 3 hospital here, so I can't complain,'' she says.

Flight Lieutenant Wittmann said she always wanted to do medical work and when she spotted a defence recruiting ad for the undergraduate scheme she jumped at the chance.

That meant sponsored study, a full-time wage and all her text books and other costs taken care of.

Describing the RAAF as like a big extended family with strong camaraderie and a great lifestyle, the only regret she has over her nine years of service are the long absences from her parents, Walter and Jenny, and brothers Andrew and Christopher in Adelaide.

"When I go to work in the morning I never know what I might be doing that day,'' she said.

Apart from her two deployments to Al Minhad air base near Dubai she worked rebuilding after cyclone Yasi and was involved in an emergency flight from Lord Howe Island.

"In the past three weeks I have had back to back missions from TK to Kabul and back to TK, and I have been to Germany to pick up seriously injured patients and fly them back to Australia.''

One of her most seriously ill patients was AusAID worker Dave Savage who was blown up and gravely wounded in Afghanistan by a teenage suicide bomber.

Working with the air load team at the vast and eternally dusty Kandahar airfield is a tough job for anyone but nothing seems to phase 25 year old Leading Aircraftsman Kylie Barnes from Canberra.

Mixing it with the men has never been an issue for the tall former model who admits to hankering after a nice dress and a pair of heels as she drives a forklift into the back of a C-17 transport jet or manhandles cargo onto a pallet.

She works with the 1st Airfield Operational Support Squadron at Richmond RAAF base and arrived in Kandahar in September for a seven-month deployment as the mission in Afghanistan was winding down.

"We are sending everyone and everything home and constantly loading and unloading passengers and cargo,'' Leading Aircraftsman Barnes said.

She joined the RAAF as a 21-year-old on the advice of her big brother Matthew who is a Captain in the Army. Her parents Rick and Alice live in Canberra where Kylie was born and raised.

"I was working as an administrator and wanted to get out of the office. I wento to the Amberley air show with its fast jets and loud noises and I was sold,'' she said.

The travel and long, irregular hours take a toll, but she soon got used to it and now relishes the challenge.

"I was looking for a long-term career and until I can find something with the same pay and benefits I am happy here.

"I have never had any dramas with the guys and I have a lot of male mates and they tend top be a lot less catty anyway.''

###