FCS playoffs What: First round, Football Championship Subdivision (formerly I-AA) playoffs



Who: UNH vs. Colgate



When: Saturday, 3:30 p.m.



Where: Cowell Stadium, Durham



Records/league finish: Colgate, 7-4 overall, 6-0 in Patriot League (first); UNH, 7-4 overall, 5-3 (tied for fourth) in the CAA





— The University of New Hampshire football team got a second life Sunday morning. The Wildcats were selected to host Colgate University next Saturday in the first round of the NCAA FCS playoffs at Cowell Stadium (3:30 p.m.)...UNH beat Colgate on the road, 26-8, when the teams met in Hamilton, N.Y. on Sept. 12. The Raiders (7-4, 6-0 Patriot League) went on to win seven of their next nine games after losing to the Wildcats.Head coach Sean McDonnell’s team will appear in the postseason for the 12th straight year, the highest active streak of any program in the country. The Wildcats (7-4, 5-3 CAA) secured the postseason birth after finishing the regular season riding a four-game winning streak...“It’s been a great run,” McDonnell said. “These kids’ work of the season and especially the last four or five weeks paid off,” McDonnell said. “They all have a chance to play one more game. Now we have to go do something.”..The Wildcats scuffled to a 3-4 start this year and dealt with their fair share of injuries to key players, including starting quarterback Sean Goldrich. However, UNH hit its stride in a comeback win over Rhode Island that jump-started the team to four straight wins...“We had people hurt all year and I purposely didn’t mention it, didn’t care about it because those, in my mind, are excuses,” McDonnell said. “You have to have enough people in your program to win football games. And the kids found a way and that’s all that counts.”..Goldrich missed four games this season with a high-ankle sprain he suffered Sept. 12 at Colgate. The senior quarterback laughed while mentioning when the injury took place, saying he will “try to get through the whole” game this time around against the Raiders...The senior was at a loss for words when asked what it will mean to get the chance to play another game at Cowell Stadium.“Being a senior, you know that you want to get every opportunity you can to be out on the field,” he said. “It’s awesome that we have another home game, too, which is going to be outstanding for us, so we’ll be ready for this. That’s for sure.”..The team locker room erupted when “New Hampshire” popped on the TV screen as the Wildcats gathered to watch the NCAA selection show.Jullian Turner, a team captain and senior defensive tackle, was lost for words after he found out his team was heading to the playoffs...“I’m overjoyed for what just happened for us,” Turner said. “I felt my heart hitting my chest but even being that nervous, I had confidence in us and what we did in the past four weeks that they (NCAA) would show us some faith, and they did.”..Goldrich shared Turner’s joy following the highly anticipated decision.“I’m so excited I can’t explain it,” he said. “I thought the way we played over the last four weeks showed the country that we belong in the playoffs. I think we have a lot of momentum going into this and I’m confident we’re going to put on a show in the playoffs.”..McDonnell said he is proud of what the program has accomplished in past years in the playoffs, and he is confident his team can make noise again in these playoffs.“You look over the course of time what we’ve done, not just for 11 games, but for 12 years here,” he said. “And every time we’ve gotten into these tournaments, we’ve represented very, very well.”..An added plus for the Wildcats is that the game will be in the friendly confines of Cowell Stadium, where they are 5-0 this season and where they have historically been tough to beat. On Sept. 12, the teams met at Andy Kerr Stadium in Hamilton, N.Y...Turner said playing at home gives UNH an advantage.“We don’t lose here,” he said. “We just don’t lose here and it’s the best place to be in the world. I don’t want to play anywhere else, I don’t want to be anywhere else. They have to come here this time, and we’re a whole different type of animal.”..Colgate is on a hot streak similar to UNH. The Raiders are winners of five straight games and are a different team than when the two teams last met, according to Turner.“They have gotten a lot better since we played them. They have been on a roll, too,” Turner said. “There’s more film we have to study and be ready to attack a different type of opponent.”..Goldrich said his team is hitting the reset button as it approaches the postseason.“0-0 is everyone’s record,” the quarterback said. “It doesn’t matter at this point. It’s a new season, a new day. We’re going to show up like this is our championship game because it’s one and done at this point.”..