Topics: death comes to pemberley, Jane Austen, lizzy bennet diaries, longbourn, Entertainment News

The law of cultural fads should have ensured that Jane Austen-mania, christened in the ’90s when Colin Firth as Mr. Darcy dunked in a lake, would fade and make way for another literary obsession. But instead, the empire of Austen has only expanded since then, absorbing genres like chick lit, paranormal romance and zombies into its fold — with titles like “Me and Mr. Darcy,” “Pride and Prejudice and Zombies” and “Mr. Darcy, Vampyre.” Austen has proven to be the Shakespeare of the intimate, with most of her six novels serving as reliable blueprints for romantic comedies with heart, easily transferable to Boca Raton, Mars or Bollywood. And it doesn’t hurt that she sells copies. As a result of all this, Austen straddles the role of literary foremother, fan-fiction inspiration and commercial brand.

Recently the Austen juggernaut has returned to its roots with novels and Web series that take a deeper, more sophisticated literary approach. Maybe this more mature phase of Austenmania is due to the success of P.D James’ highbrow 2012 sequel to “Pride and Prejudice,” “Death Comes to Pemberley.” Or perhaps it’s a backlash against the plague of Regency zombies and ghouls. But the loftier ambitions of these new Austen projects raise the question: What, beyond gimmickry, makes a work that is essentially fan fiction an artistic success? What will give readers value beyond amusing twists like Elizabeth Bennet vlogging, Marianne Dashwood hopping into Mr. Willougby’s sports car, or a servant emptying Mr. Collins’ chamber pot?

The latter moment occurs in “Longbourn,” a new historical novel by Jo Baker, which tells the story of “Pride and Prejudice” from the perspective of the Bennet family servants, reminding us that the spunky obliviousness to dirt shown by Lizzy Bennet makes extra laundry for the folks downstairs. Think Occupy Austen. The same month that “Longbourn” appeared, “Sense & Sensibility” (yes, that’s the title) by Joanna Trollope hit shelves as the first installment of “The Austen Project” — a series of rewrites by novelists including Curtis Sittenfield and Alexander McCall Smith. Trollope’s “Sense” is incredibly faithful, keeping character names intact and staying on location, but with modern technology: Estates remain estates (although one is now an estate for recovering addicts), London stands in for London, and ditto for romantic encounters in the British countryside. Along with these new novels, there’s a new breed of Austen adaptations for the youth: “The Lizzie Bennet Diaries” and “Emma, Approved” are Web series that depict Austen’s heroines as Internet oversharers, divulging stories through YouTube videos with real-time tweets helping out. These virtual retellings may be hip, but in some ways they are the most respectful homage of all, thanks to their clever narrative devices, emotional highs and lows, and winks at fans of Austen’s work — “Kitty Bennet” shows up as a cat, for instance, and in the midst of the modern dialogue a choice Austen line is very liable to sneak in. It turns out you don’t need to be a book, a miniseries or a movie to do Jane Austen right. You can also be a fictional vlog.

As a Janeite, I encounter each of these new remixes anxiously. Retellings are tricky. If done well — think “Wide Sargasso Sea” or “Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are Dead” — we’ll enjoy the new work of art while reengaging thoughtfully with the source it’s based on. But if the project goes south, it risks being a crappy experience and clouding our perception of the original. After my husband and I read “Death Comes to Pemberley” last winter we were so irritated by its bland, insipid take on Austen’s characters that we had to binge-watch all five hours of the 1995 BBC “Pride and Prejudice,” just to get “the real” Lizzy and Darcy back in our consciousness. (I had to the perform a similar cleansing after skimming “Pride and Prejudice and Zombies,” and encountering its can’t-be-unseen images of Regency undead.)

But sometimes a new perspective on a classic can be healthy. Alas, Lizzy, I thought after reading scenes in “Longbourn” during which Lizzy thoughtlessly makes her housemaid Sarah’s backbreaking work harder. The novel’s counter-narrative shows that the precarious position of the unmarried women in Austen’s novels trickled down to those who served them. The threat looms: If the Bennet daughters don’t marry well, the household staff could lose its livelihood, its home. And each marker of status in Austen’s world, from white dresses to “family dinners,” taxes the servants’ labor — the extra burden below stairs signifies the family’s gentility. Unlike “Pride and Prejudice and Zombies” or other mashups, “Longbourn’s” disruption of Austen’s text has a singular literary purpose, adding a new layer of class awareness that complements Austen’s own economic commentary.

Often, though, Baker’s effort at “rewriting” the characters to show their privilege feels didactic — we get it, they’re enabling the gears of oppression. And the novel’s references to outhouses and other effluvia come relentlessly, almost as though Baker is purposely trying to shock decorous Austen fans with a taste of historical reality. This poking is all very well, but I would have preferred to see ”Longbourn” respond even more to Austen thematically, zooming in and lingering on the parallels between the servants’ lives and those of Austen’s characters: their mistaken pride and false impressions among the dirty dishes. When Baker does this effectively, as when the male servant, James, takes over the diaper-washing from Sarah and she relishes a moment of relief, it’s sublime — and it echoes the favor Darcy does for Lizzy toward the end of “Pride and Prejudice.”