Photo

JACKSONVILLE, Fla. — Character witnesses for a Florida man being tried in the fatal shooting of a teenager after an argument over loud music say they never knew him to be violent, as prosecutors rested their case on Monday in the first-degree murder trial.

The defendant, Michael Dunn, has said he acted in self-defense when he fatally shot Jordan Davis, 17, of Marietta, Ga., in November 2012 outside a Jacksonville convenience store.

Mr. Dunn, 47, had been at his son’s wedding before he pulled up to the convenience store where Mr. Davis was with his friends. The defendant’s ex-wife, Phyllis Molinaro, and son, Chris Dunn, told jurors on Monday that Mr. Dunn did not appear drunk and was in good spirits at the wedding.

“He seemed fine,” Ms. Molinaro said. “He seemed happy to be there.”

Asked if she had ever seen him impaired in the past, she laughed and said she had.

According to the authorities, an argument began after Mr. Dunn told Mr. Davis and his friends to turn down the music they were listening to in an SUV outside the store. One of Mr. Davis’s friends lowered the volume, but Mr. Davis told him to turn it back up.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Officials say Mr. Dunn became enraged and he and Mr. Davis began arguing. Mr. Dunn, who had a concealed-weapons permit, pulled a 9-millimeter handgun from the glove compartment of his car, according to an affidavit, and fired shots into the Dodge Durango. Nine bullet holes were found in the car.

Emotional testimony came from Mr. Davis’s father, Ronald.

Sometimes with tears in his eyes, he said his son’s friends Leland Brunson and Tevin Thompson, both of whom had been in the Durango with Jordan Davis the night he was killed, came to his home in the days after the shooting.

“They came over to the house, and they talked to me about how they were sorry,” Mr. Davis said. “The boys were just so sorry that my son was killed, and they were trying to console me.”

Prosecutors rested their case after an associate medical examiner testified that the first bullet that hit Mr. Davis in the abdomen most likely killed him. The bullet went from his lower right abdomen, into his diaphragm, through his liver and hit his aorta, said Stacey Simons, the associate medical examiner.

“I believe it would have been fatal within a matter of minutes,” Ms. Simons said.

At the end of the day, Mr. Dunn’s lawyer, Cory Strolla, told the judge he expected to call only one or two more witnesses on Tuesday before wrapping up the defense.

Under cross-examination, Ms. Simons said it was unlikely that Mr. Davis was standing up when he was shot. Mr. Strolla had argued that Mr. Davis had threatened Mr. Dunn with a four-inch knife. Ms. Simons said the bullet appeared to have struck something hard, like a car door, before hitting Mr. Davis.

Sukhan Warf, an analyst for the Florida Department of Law Enforcement, said toxicology tests on Mr. Davis showed no signs of drugs or alcohol in his body. No gun was found in the SUV.

Mr. Strolla called several friends and a co-worker of Mr. Dunn’s to the stand. They testified that they had never seen him get angry, and that he had been something of a peacekeeper.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Beverly Berry, who with her husband met Mr. Dunn through Mr. Dunn’s parents and often socialized with him, said he they had not seen him get angry.

“Never have I observed anything other than a very calm demeanor,” she said.

Another Law Enforcement Department analyst, Maria Pagan, testified earlier in the day about the steps Mr. Dunn took before shooting the teenager, bolstering the prosecution’s contention that he acted with premeditation.

Mr. Dunn would have had to remove the gun from its holster, load the chamber and then apply six pounds of pressure to fire, Ms. Pagan said.

He fired the gun 10 times, hitting the SUV nine times, and he would have had to pull the trigger every time using more than six pounds of pressure each time, Ms. Pagan said.

Ms. Pagan answered affirmatively when the prosecutor, Angela Corey, asked, “Does that take a conscious effort of the shooter to have a second round come out?”

In continuing to talk about his son’s friends visit to his home, Ronald Davis said Leland Brunson, Jordan Davis’s best friend, was crying uncontrollably.

“He was going back and forth from the living room to bedroom and sitting on the bed, then came back to the living room,” Ronald Davis said. “Tevin Thompson was crying. He usually has a big smile on his face.”

Mr. Davis said he has little recollection of the visit because of his own emotional agony.

“I think I said at the time that I was shocked that my son was killed,” he said.