Facebook app employed to gather individuals' data

If you've ever wondered whether you're predisposed to depression, addiction issues, or even diabetes, there's now an app for that.

Genes for Good is a large-scale research study based out of the University of Michigan that aims to involve tens of thousands of people in genetic research using one simple tool —Facebook.

"What we've come to realize in the last five to 10 years is that you really need a lot of information from a lot of people to see trends between genes and diseases or disorders," said Scott Vrieze, one of the co-investigators on the project and an assistant professor in the department of psychology and neuroscience at the University of Colorado.

By answering health-related questions through the Facebook application, participants can learn more about their health, behavior, and ancestors. In return, researchers will obtain key data that can be used to better understand the origins of complex diseases that have a combination of causes, like heart disease, cancer, and alcohol abuse.

Since the survey's official launch Tuesday, over 1,100 people have already participated in the questionnaires that ask about things like sleep, mood, and exercise. Vrieze noted that, thus far, there's been a bias toward young female respondents.

Advertisement

In addition to the survey, those who participate at-length will also be eligible to receive a spit kit to use to provide a saliva sample for genetic analysis. Currently, researchers have enough funding to test the samples from 20,000 individuals — but if the project shows promising results, they hope to be able garner enough support to test an additional 80,000 kits.

While the issue with such ambitious genetic research used to lie in a lack of available manpower and resources to test so many DNA kits, the issue is now attracting enough interest in the projects, said Goncalo Abecasis, chair of the University of Michigan School of Public Health's Department of Biostatistics.

"Over time the genetic part of the study has gotten easier, but now the challenge is how can we enroll enough people so we can ask all the interesting questions we'd like about their DNA," he said.

Early on in the study's conceptualization, Facebook emerged as an easy solution. Now, instead of interviewing participants one-on-one in a short amount of time, researchers can ask a few questions each day about an individual's dietary choices or sleep schedule.

"It's hard to get a good idea of something like diet if we ask what it was like over the past year, as opposed to asking simple questions on a daily basis like, 'Did you skip breakfast this morning?'" explained Abecasis.

Both Vrieze and Abecasis also pointed to Facebook's existing integration in most people's daily schedules as the reason for its adoption. If they had hosted the surveys on a separate site, it's unlikely they would receive repeat business.

Though personal DNA testing isn't a new idea — several commercial enterprises will conduct a gene profile for a fee — Vrieze said their approach is novel as the data they collect will be widely available to other researchers looking to learn more about diseases and disorders.

"We don't think of it as our data, we want to give the data back to the scientific community so it can be used widely," he concluded.

To participate in the project, visit apps.facebook.com/genesforgood.