The Florida House of Representatives supports true free-market approaches to increasing access to quality health care for more Floridians. Obamacare's Medicaid expansion clearly does not take this type of approach.

The Senate has put forward a proposal, called FHIX, which it would have you believe is a free-market approach, rather than traditional Medicaid expansion. But, truth be told, the Senate's plan is simply Medicaid expansion by another name.

FHIX serves the same population, uses the same federal dollars, and has the same strings attached as traditional Medicaid expansion. The fact that FHIX uses "private" plans through Florida Health Choices doesn't make it "not Medicaid."

The Senate plan covers the whole Medicaid-expansion population originally mandated by Obamacare. While the Supreme Court has made expansion voluntary, no state has the ability to choose what populations it wants to cover. It's all or nothing — just as the federal government told the Florida Senate in 2013.

The Senate plan also uses the increased federal match rate available for Medicaid expansion under Obamacare. This match rate is not available for a partial expansion, and it's not available for any coverage program that is not Medicaid.

The Senate plan must be approved by the federal Medicaid agency as a Medicaid-waiver program. If it weren't Medicaid, it wouldn't require federal approval.

That approval and those federal dollars come with many restrictions and limitations, which would prevent the federal government from approving the more creative aspects of the Senate proposal — like mandatory work requirements and premium payments.

Pennsylvania and Utah both asked for approval for mandatory work requirements — the federal government denied them. No state has been approved for mandatory premium payments. In other words, the federal government will quickly knock down any "conservative guardrails" the Senate feels it has attached to its plan.

No matter what you call it, the Senate plan is still an entitlement program. Members will try to tell you it's not because their program will automatically terminate if certain events occur (like if the federal government reduces its matching funds, for example). However, that does not change the fact that while the program exists, it is an entitlement that comes with constitutional due-process protections and federal limitations, which prevent it from being private coverage.

Their plan will not help end the cycle of dependency on welfare, but will perpetuate it.

The Senate will try to tell you its plan is a pathway to ending Medicaid. But spending another $2.8 billion on a program that currently costs $23 billion is growth, not extinction.

Instead, the House chose to increase access by pursuing solutions that reduce cost and eliminate government barriers to new, more-efficient ways to care for people.

The House wants to expand the use of telemedicine and broaden the authority of advance-practice nurses to treat patients to the full extent of their education and training. We want to help physician practices use new service-delivery models like direct primary care, which restores the doctor/patient relationship and makes health care available at dramatically lower costs.

We support expanding medical malpractice reform to reduce frivolous lawsuits that increase health-are costs, and expanding choices for where patients get their health care by eliminating unnecessary government regulations.

We want to break geographic monopolies for hospitals. We support allowing consumers to buy health insurance across state lines. All these solutions, and others, would address access and cost better than more Medicaid.

The Florida House does not believe Obamacare's Medicaid expansion is in the best interest of our state, and that is why we cannot support the Senate's plan. FHIX may be a creative name, but it's still Medicaid.

Jason Brodeur is a state representative and chairman of the House Health and Human Services Committee. A Republican, he lives in Sanford.