CLIFTON – The city school board introduced a $158.7 million budget for 2015-16 that would for the first time in several years increase property taxes beyond a state-imposed limit.

The district’s business administrator, Karen Perkins, said during a presentation this week that the district needed to increase taxes by $3 million, made necessary mostly by sharp rises in health insurance costs. Medical benefits are slated to go up by 16 percent in the coming school year, she said.

The $3 million rise in spending is equal to a 2.4 percent increase in tax-supported spending, above the state’s so-called “2 percent cap.” Perkins said that’s allowed because the district spending was below the cap during the last two years.

The picture is less dire than it may appear, Perkins said, because the district’s taxes for debt service are going down. Factoring in the decrease, the owner of a house assessed at the city average of $171,000 would pay an additional $81 a year in property taxes under the proposed budget.

Trustees unanimously supported the budget, if reluctantly. Jim Daley, the finance committee chairman, said before Perkins’ presentation that his committee would work to whittle the budget down before its final approval.

“For me, it’s got to be 2 percent or under,” Daley said about the tax increase.

Board President Gary Passenti said trustees were reviewing health-insurance costs in a special committee. He said the district should consider shopping for better rates and combining with the city to increase the pool of insured workers.

Passenti also repeated a call often made by local officials for more state aid to the district.

“Our surrounding districts get multi-million dollars but we get pennies on the dollar,” he said.

State aid remained flat this year at $26 million.

No new major initiatives are funded under the proposed budget, aside from boiler replacements at Schools 3, 4, 5, 9 and 11, and new roofs at Schools 3 and 16. One of the boilers is 89-years-old and long overdue for a replacement, trustees said.

“None of us would step on an airplane that’s 89-years-old,” said trustee Michael Evans.

Email: greenj@northjersey.com