The words, “Si, se puede,” rang through the streets of north Denver Saturday morning as hundreds of people marched to commemorate Cesar Chavez.

Their destination was Cesar Chavez Park, named for the Latino civil rights activist who dedicated his life to improving conditions for farm workers. His legacy of, “Si, se puede,” translates roughly as, “Yes, it can be done.”

“A lot of times, Chicano and Latino history get overlooked or flat-out ignored,” said Mace Castillo, a school counselor who attended the march. “Events like this keep the spirit of Cesar Chavez alive… It makes sure his legacy lives on.”

The 14th annual march, which began at the Regis Chapel following a Mass, was organized by the Cesar Chavez Peace and Justice Committee of Denver. The group has spent more than a decade working toward Saturday’s main event: the unveiling of a new statue of Chavez in the park.

“Let this statue serve as a symbol of what we all should believe in,” said Denver Mayor Michael Hancock, who participated in the march. “Today we celebrate Cesar Chavez and the legacy that each and every one of us stand on today.”

The bronze bust was created by Denver artist Emanuel Martinez, whose artwork is featured in the Smithsonian and the Colorado Capitol. Saturday, the statue received a joint blessing from an Apache group and the Huitzilopochtli traditional Aztec dance group.

“Them coming together here is symbolic of Cesar Chavez, a Mexican-American who served as a bridge between all people who were struggling,” said Renee Fajardo, a professor of Chicano studies at Metro State University. “With these two religious leaders coming together, it’s symbolic of how us as a people should all come together.”

Since Chavez’s death in 1993, a number of states have declared his March 31 birthday a state holiday.

In 2001, then-State Rep. Frana Mace and then-State Sen. Rob Hernandez sponsored a bill to establish the holiday in Colorado. Denver City Councilwoman Ramona Martinez then initiated the holiday in the city, to be celebrated the last Monday of March.

In 2014, President Barack Obama proclaimed March 31 a national holiday as well, encouraging citizens to observe the day with service, community and education programs.

“It’s nice to be able to celebrate the rights we have now,” said Belinda Blea, 34, who attended the march. “It inspires us to help each other, move forward and progress. It spreads positivity.”

Anna Gauldin: 303-954-1666, agauldin@denverpost.com

All city offices will be closed Monday, March 30, in observance of Cesar Chavez Day. Parking meters in the city will be free, and city trash services will be delayed one day.