A familiar narrative dominates public debate over campaign finance reform. It goes like this:

Entrenched powers oppose campaign finance reform because they have a vested interest in the free flow of money from corporate coffers into the pockets of elected officials who, as a result, become nothing better than paid-for mouthpieces. Our Democracy will cease to exist absent ever-tougher laws to regulate and limit financial contributions.

Actually, the very opposite is true and has been true since the 2002 Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act, more infamously known as McCain-Feingold. To understand why the “accepted wisdom” of the speech police is anything but wise, simply consider who the real winners in a regulated system are – the true beneficiaries of each attempt to level the playing field by silencing criticism.

ADVERTISEMENT

It is entrenched incumbents who always stand to gain the most from campaign finance reform, for numerous reasons.

Incumbents have nearly unlimited access to media while serving in Congress. They have staffs polished and proficient in the art of communication. Most of what incumbents spend in disseminating their points of view, and in trumpeting their ostensible accomplishments, is not strictly speaking “campaign spending.” And, they have limitless access to the thousands of “inside the beltway” special interest groups all too eager to curry favor regardless of the rules.

So for incumbents, the sky’s the limit. The information (or propaganda) that they publicize in the normal course of congressional business can build an impregnable reelection fortress of name recognition and support long before the election cycle officially begins. So why would they want to deregulate the rules on contributions and give more potential challengers the ability to compete? The most common refrain from the self-serving class in Washington is attacking those groups that serve the outsider, the challenger, the grassroots while assiduously protecting the same rights for their own well-funded allies – and that’s as true for some union and Hollywood liberals as it is for some crony capitalist Republicans.

For incumbents, election cycles never begin and never end, they’re always running for reelection from day 1. The more Byzantine those rules, the greater the burdens and costs of compliance – the better – because they have time, money and resources those extra years to navigate the regulations that stop the challengers like a big road block. Incumbents are long-reigning masters of a game that many challengers are trying to learn for the first time, and in much less time.

Incumbents also have measurable advantages in terms of hard dollars, no matter what laws are passed to regulate contributions. Past campaign funds carry over; what they haven’t yet spent can be applied toward the next campaign.

In an over-regulated environment, institutional money goes to incumbents; 80 percent of it, in fact. Because institutional interests ultimately don’t care of particular incumbents are Republican or Democrat, live or die – they care about stable policy making environments that are, ideally, more favorable to their view than not. And that’s their right to do so, but when the beneficiaries of rivers of institutional support seek to dam the streams available for outsiders, it’s not about Democracy, it’s about their own re-election and rigging the game. No one wants to watch the official referees play. We want to see the players compete in a fair intense game of ideas.

In McCutcheon v. FEC, the case I won before the Supreme Court, we succeeded in striking down unconstitutional campaign finance laws. It was a very rare event. There, the High Court ruled, not against maximum limits on individual contributions, but on the aggregate number of candidates to whom an individual can contribute. That’s all I was asking for, but the speech police instinctively opposed our position because this modest deregulation simply means more candidates and informative messages to oppose them.

The unnecessarily complex campaign finance issues affecting immediate and long-term incumbent interests are particularly relevant to congressional races, but not exclusively. In 2012, Mitt Romney could not draw on the resources of the RNC at a critical point in his campaign, so he simply ran out of money (choosing not to use his own). So a full critical month in August elapsed with no TV ads from the Romney campaign. Romney could have possibly won in a less constrained environment, but the point is moot. Advantage went to the incumbent as usual. The RNC has moved the convention up to July for the upcoming cycle.

The question gets begged, if campaign finance reform is so useful to incumbents, why have those privileged lawmakers not yet succeeded in imposing a permanently convoluted regimen that will serve their own class interest ad aeternum? I fear the operative word is “yet.” Indeed, recent history suggests that the courts, and the courts alone, have stood in the way of such oligarchic usurpation, especially when Democrats, who would rescind the First Amendment’s full scope of freedom, are in power. Democrats work to pass a “Democracy for All” amendment to the Constitution so they can “regulate the speech of any entity.” That’s regulate all speech for short.

Remember the dominant narrative to which we earlier alluded? That narrative also depicts the Supreme Court as disingenuous on campaign finance cases when in fact our Constitution clearly and plainly prohibits congress from making laws that abridge free speech or prohibit political activity of the people.

Again, the dominant narrative is dead wrong. Free speech empowers the people to have power over elections in accordance with the First Amendment so we can make changes. Moving political activity into government control – thus taking it away from the people creates corruption against the people, keeping incumbents in office.

McCutcheon, an electrical engineer in Alabama, is the successful plaintiff in McCutcheon v. FEC and author of Outsider Inside the Supreme Court.