David Sparrow, of Whitehouse Station-based QuickChek, and Rich Daggett, CEO/president of Tasty Enterprises Inc., compete in cooking competition

QuickChek culinary specialist David Sparrow (right) scored high marks in a recent food-service industry culinary cooking competition. The Whitehouse Station-based fresh convenience market chain, which has 140 store locations throughout New Jersey, New York’s Hudson Valley and Long Island, has received numerous awards for its innovative fresh food and beverage program. (Photo: ~Courtesy of W. Scott Mitchell) Story Highlights QuickChek culinary specialist David Sparrow was among the chefs competing

Their dish of a creamy caramelized-onion mac and cheese and brisket sandwich scored high

Established as the fresh convenience market leader in the metropolitan area with an award-winning fresh food program and voted as making the best cup of coffee in America, QuickChek Corporation received high marks in a recent national industry culinary cooking competition.

At CSP magazine’s annual FARE Conference, which brings together food-service operators from across the country, QuickChek’s culinary specialist, David Sparrow, was among the chefs competing on June 24 to determine who could prepare the best dish in an hour or less.

The contestants, who ranged from convenience store chefs to senior-living operators and restaurant chefs, were given 60 minutes to prepare, package and serve an original and innovative on-the-go-style meal item.

Sparrow, of Whitehouse Station-based QuickChek, teamed with Rich Daggett, CEO and president of Tasty Enterprises Inc., New York. Their dish of a creamy caramelized-onion mac and cheese and brisket sandwich scored high with the judges and placed them within the top four teams.

To create their dishes, teams had to use at least one product from sponsor companies Arcobasso Foods, Emmi Foodservice, McCormick for Chefs and Tyson. They had to serve their dishes in to-go containers provided by Georgia-Pacific Professional and use the Ovention ovens at each teams’ station. A pantry of basic staples was also available.

They were judged on a 10-point scale in four categories, each weighted equally: taste, creativity and innovation, presentation and portability/convenience: Dishes could be considered grab-and-go or made-to-order and either travel well for later consumption or be eaten easily on the go.

The winning team of Clementine de Roode of the United States Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville, Alabama, and Peyton Edmonson of the Sinema Restaurant and Bar in Nashville, Tennessee, prepared a Southwestern-style Asian bulgogi wrap with fruited rice salad and a caramelized-onion and barbecue vinaigrette spring salad.

“Food service continues to evolve and we strive to meet the needs and tastes of today’s consumer,” said QuickChek CEO Dean Durling. “We’re very proud of David and his team for continuing to create restaurant-quality breakfast, lunch and dinner menu items our customers can enjoy every day.”

Other industry honors for QuickChek, which has 140 stores throughout New Jersey, New York’s Hudson Valley and Long Island, include being voted Best Overall Beverage Quality (coffee) and Best Food Quality in America in 2014 in a Technomic survey; Hot Beverage Innovator Gold Medal Winner in 2014 and 2012; and Foodservice Innovator Silver Medal Winner in 2013.

For further information or to find the closest QuickChek store location, visit www.quickchek.com.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1IYpPID