Tonight's the second GOP debate, and everyone's excited to find out who will finally punch Donald Trump in the face. The debate is three hours long, so hopefully Jeb Bush has had a nap. And a member of the House Freedom Caucus publicly disavowed the group's plot to shut down the government, pointing out that women will continue to roam free even if the government's closed. This is HUFFPOST HILL for Wednesday, September 16th, 2015:

THE CANDIDATES WILL COME OUT SWINGING, BUT WILL THE DONALD DUCK? Igor Bobic with your debate preview: "Presidential hopefuls participating in the first Republican presidential debate last month in Cleveland approached the elephant in the room gingerly, giving businessman Donald Trump and his brawling persona a wide berth as they auditioned before a primetime audience for the first time in the campaign. But the gloves are sure to come off Wednesday in the second GOP presidential debate at the Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley, California, after weeks of polls showing Trump solidifying his lead over his rivals in nearly every early primary state. The surge is a remarkable turn of events given the real estate mogul's penchant for making controversial statements that would likely sink a more traditional candidate." [HuffPost]

GOVERNMENT LOOKING KINDA SHUTDOWNY RIGHT NOW - Amanda Terkel: "Rep. Tom McClintock (R-Calif.) broke with his fellow conservatives Wednesday and publicly came out against the idea of shutting down the federal government over funding for Planned Parenthood. The House Freedom Caucus is a relatively new group of conservative lawmakers who have been pushing GOP leaders to the right. On Wednesday afternoon, McClintock announced his resignation from the caucus, saying their stance on a possible shutdown is 'counterproductive.'... 'I have strongly opposed the public funding of abortions throughout my 29 years in public office, but this tactic promises only to shield Senate Democrats from their responsibility for a government shutdown and to alienate the public from the pro-life cause at precisely the time when undercover videos of Planned Parenthood’s barbaric practices are turning public opinion in our favor.'" [HuffPost]

Also, canceling Planned Parenthood money would mean loads of women have nowhere to go for medical care, the CBO says.

TAKE THAT, DONALD TRUMP'S HAT! Per tradition, Obama makes one funny joke a year. This is 2015's. Greg Jaffe: "'America's winning right now,' Obama told executives at a meeting of the Business Roundtable in Washington. 'America's great right now.'" You see, because Trump wears this hat that says…. [WashPost

It's hard to tell if Tom Brady is being serious about his support for Donald Trump.

SAM JOHNSON RIDES AGAINST EVIL-DOERS ONCE AGAIN - The Texas Republican has already thwarted Nazi efforts to collect Social Security benefits. Now he's vowed to stop Obama from grabbing Social Security recipients' guns. "It's no secret President Obama isn’t a fan of our 2nd Amendment," Johnson says in a press release announcing the Social Security Beneficiary 2nd Amendment Rights Act. "Because he failed to push his gun control agenda through Congress, his Administration is now seeking to deny millions of law-abiding Americans their right to bear arms by going through Social Security." Johnson's bill would stop the Social Security Administration from telling the background check system about Social Security recipients who can't manage their own affairs because of mental incapacity. Thanks, Sam Johnson!

YOU'RE ELECTABLE ENOUGH, HILLARY - This is not how the Illuminati planned out this election season for Hillary Clinton, but she has faith they'll sort it out for her in the end. Anne Gearan: "Faced with her worst poll ratings since she was losing badly to Barack Obama in 2008, Clinton is doubling down on a strategy laid out months ago. As drawn up by campaign manager Robby Mook and others when Clinton was seemingly invincible, the prospectus is a detailed month-by-month, state-by-state strategy to roll out serious policy proposals, raise a prohibitive amount of money, lock up Democratic delegates and woo members of her party’s disaffected left." [WashPost

OBAMACARE DESTROYS LIBERTY FOR MILLIONS - Sadly, many Americans lost the freedom to get sick and die without seeing a doctor between 2013 and 2014. Sarah Kilff: "The Census Bureau estimates that 8.8 million Americans gained coverage in 2014. The percentage of Americans who lack coverage dropped from 13.3 percent in 2013 to 10.4 percent in 2014. The declines have happened all across the country, with states that expanded their Medicaid programs seeing some of the biggest declines" [Vox]

Haircuts: Sara Bondioli. Jason Linkins (shave). Did a political or media person get a haircut? Please tell us -- huffposthill@huffingtonpost.com. Anonymity GUARANTEED.

DELANEY DOWNER - The poverty rate didn't budge. Or actually it budged backward. From the Census: "The nation’s official poverty rate in 2014 was 14.8 percent, which means there were 46.7 million people in poverty. Neither the poverty rate nor the number of people in poverty were statistically different from 2013 estimates. [The 2013 rate was 14.5 percent.] This marks the fourth consecutive year in which the number of people in poverty was not statistically different from the previous year’s estimate." [Census.gov]

Does somebody keep forwarding you this newsletter? Get your own copy. It's free! Sign up here. Send tips/stories/photos/events/fundraisers/job movement/juicy miscellanea to huffposthill@huffingtonpost.com. Follow us on Twitter - @HuffPostHill

DEMS PLOT SEQUESTER ATTACK - Sam Stein and Laura Barron-Lopez: "With just days left in the legislative calendar before government funding expires, Senate Democrats are increasingly confident they'll be able to net long-term increases in domestic spending. The strategy came into focus this past week, after Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) said he would be open to funding the government on a short-term basis to allow for broader negotiations. Senate Democratic leaders have said they're fine with such an arrangement, but only if the context for subsequent talks is clear: They would only back a deal that alleviates spending cuts, or sequestration; that does so equally for defense and non-defense accounts; and that doesn't include extraneous provisions attacking Democratic priorities (like Planned Parenthood funding). Party leadership has made this demand before. But with deadlines nearing, it now appears that the rest of the conference is on board. 'Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes,' said Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.), the incoming minority leader, when asked if all members were behind the approach." [HuffPost]

We told you on Monday that after Bernie Sanders noted America was founded on "racist principles," someone would say Sanders was only three-fifths right. Today, Sean Wilentz is that someone -- thanks for being a joke, Sean!

MONETARY POLICY IS AMERICA'S NEW NATIONAL PASTIME - Regular folks got a hankerin' to chew the fat about interest rates an' such with the nice ladies and fellas at the Fed'ral Reserve, we reckon. Daniel Marans: "Around 9 a.m. Monday, activists reported being unable to record additional messages on the public comment hotline because it apparently was full, according to Fed Up. This continued for another two to three hours." [HuffPost]

BUT THESE GUYS AREN'T SCIENTISTS -- OKAY, FINE, THE NEUROSURGEON IS - Will CNN moderator Dana Bash question the Republican presidential candidates about climate change? Would it even matter if she did? Kate Sheppard: "When the Republican presidential candidates gather for their second debate Wednesday night at the Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley, California, they'll have a slate of important issues to discuss, like Carly Fiorina's face and who will build the biggest border wall. But will climate change be one of them?" [HuffPost]

VOTE FIORINA SO WE CAN FIND OUT WHAT SHE STANDS FOR - Republican presidential contender Carly Fiorina is "not prepared" to talk about Social Security, saying she will only propose reforms after she's president. "I am not prepared to go to the American people and talk to them about how we're going to reform Social Security and Medicare," Fiorina told CNBC's John Harwood in an interview published Wednesday, "until I can demonstrate to them that the government can execute with excellence, perform its responsibilities with excellence, serve the people who pay for it with excellence." Harwood was impressed. "That is a dodge worthy of a very good politician," he told the former Hewlett-Packard CEO. [HuffPost]

Rand Paul can't stop shooting/shredding/playing with the tax code. He CAN'T STOP.

NICE WORK, MACARTHUR HIGH SCHOOL - Way to put Irving, Texas on the map! Avi Selk: "Ahmed Mohamed -- who makes his own radios and repairs his own go-kart -- hoped to impress his teachers when he brought a homemade clock to MacArthur High on Monday. Instead, the school phoned police about Ahmed’s circuit-stuffed pencil case. So the 14-year-old missed the student council meeting and took a trip in handcuffs to juvenile detention. His clock now sits in an evidence room. Police say they may yet charge him with making a hoax bomb -- though they acknowledge he told everyone who would listen that it’s a clock. In the meantime, Ahmed’s been suspended, his father is upset and the Council on American-Islamic Relations is once again eyeing claims of Islamophobia in Irving." [DallasNews]

The mayor of Irving, no stranger to hassling people for being Muslims, pinned the whole mess on the kid, and she wants everyone to know that cops are the best.

IF ONLY THERE WERE A GOOD WEBSITE FOR MASS OUTRAGE OVER THIS KIND OF THING - Oh wait, it's called Twitter. Here are two examples: @HillaryClinton: Assumptions and fear don't keep us safe -- they hold us back. Ahmed, stay curious and keep building. @POTUS: Cool clock, Ahmed. Want to bring it to the White House? We should inspire more kids like you to like science. It's what makes America great.

Obama's invitation turns out to be serious.

INSIDE THE LIBS SECRET PLAN TO END THE RIGHT TO WORK - Your bosses are totally looking out for your best interests at all times, so this is dumb. Dave Jamieson: Lawmakers proposed a bill, crafted with the input of the AFL-CIO union federation, that would make workplace organizing akin to a civil right. The bill, called the Workplace Action for a Growing Economy (WAGE) Act, would do so by amending the National Labor Relations Act, the bedrock Great Depression-era law that set the boundaries for collective bargaining." [HuffPost]

JON STEWART IS SO MUCH LESS FUNNY IN REAL LIFE - Stop bumming out Congress and tell more dick jokes, funnyman! Michael McAuliff: "Stewart was hoping to spur Congress to renew the James Zadroga 9/11 Health and Compensation Act. It starts expiring next month, and lawmakers have yet to begin considering the new legislation that could make the aid permanent." [HuffPost]

UH, WE'RE SPIES, NOT TECH SUPPORT - America's superspies have no interest helping catch hackers who broke into federal computers, because they're too busy listening to everyone's phone calls. Ali Watkins: "The U.S.’s lead agency in countering foreign intelligence threats, has one answer for people asking why it failed to identify the massive database of sensitive information that was hacked starting last year as a potential vulnerability: not our problem." [HuffPost]

BECAUSE YOU'VE READ THIS FAR - Pretty graphs showing the historical winning averages of NFL teams.

COMFORT FOOD

- Upsetting photos from high-up places.

- One of those "you're doing it all wrong" things, for ground beef.

- These grandmas identify as Mets fans.

- Ooh, new Hunger Games trailer!

TWITTERAMA

@aterkel: Ugh. Wore a bomb on my wrist today. Wondered why it was ticking.



@DangerGuerrero: BREAKING: The British appear to have developed some sort of giant bomb, possibly attached to a rocket.



@katherinemiller: Wait how long is this debate

Got something to add? Send tips/quotes/stories/photos/events/fundraisers/job movement/juicy miscellanea to Eliot Nelson (eliot@huffingtonpost.com) or Arthur Delaney (arthur@huffingtonpost.com). Follow us on Twitter @HuffPostHill (twitter.com/HuffPostHill). Sign up here: http://huff.to/an2k2e

More: Huffpost Hill