Resort also anxiously awaits U.S. Forest Service ruling on expansion

Boulder County skiers and boarders can now count on one hand the number of days until their closest option for downhill delight is open for business.

Eldora Mountain Resort raises the curtain on its 2014-2015 season at 9 a.m. Friday and is hoping that the nice dumping of snow across the Front Range in the past week is a harbinger of good things to come in the months ahead.

"We're excited about this coming season and look forward to seeing lots of happy people," said JP Chevalier, Eldora's new director of marketing and skier services. "We'll be looking after our guests to the best of our abilities with both the available infrastructure and quality employees that work with us."

Snowmaking was suspended Friday during a power outage -— "A Nederland thing, a transformer thing," Chevalier said — but the resort has enjoyed the past week as much as any other business dependent on wintry weather.

As of Friday morning, the resort was reporting an 18-inch base.

"Eldora is all about the snow," Chevalier said. "That's what we pride ourselves on, whether that's through the snowmaking system, which is very comprehensive, and we're also blessed with upslope snowstorms. And when those happen, we tend to get the most snow."

Chevalier comes to Eldora from two years as director of snow sports at Summit at Snoqualmie, in Washington, and previously was at Copper Mountain for seven years as director of skier services.

Advertisement

"Boulder is the best-kept-secret ski town in the U.S.A.," Chevalier said. "People don't view it as a ski town, but it is, for part of the year. It is one of the key hubs for snow sports, with a lot of (snow-sports-related) companies based there. Eldora is just a real treat in terms of being a ski area right on the doorstep of the ski town, Boulder."

Chevalier is not the only fresh blood at Eldora, being joined there by Paul Fillion, new director of mountain operations who comes from a long career at Vail Mountain, where he was most recently director of mountain operations.

Ellie Orszulaka puts away some rental skis at Eldora on Friday in preparation for opening day. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

Expansion decision looms

As the new season approaches, Eldora officials, along with many resort users, environmentalists and people who live nearby, are anxiously awaiting release of the finalized environmental impact statement by the U.S. Forest Service on the ski area's proposed expansion.

A draft of that document was released in February, drawing strong opinions on many fronts, including the Boulder County commissioners. They voiced concerns on what they saw as insufficient consideration of upgrades without expanding Eldora's boundaries, on the potential impact on the town of Eldora, and on bordering Middle Boulder and Jenny creeks.

Highlights of the proposed expansion include 15 new ski trails and two new chairlifts — one on the front side and another on the back side. Additionally, the resort proposes construction of a new lodge atop the Challenge Mountain, expansion of The Lookout facility and the addition of 560 parking spaces.

The Forest Service's finalized environmental impact statement, and a draft decision on the planned expansion itself, will be coming soon.

"It is estimated that they are pushing it back until following Christmas or early January," said Boulder Ranger District spokeswoman Marcia Gilles.

Eldora Planning Director Jim Spenst said a positive outcome for Eldora's plans at the hands of the Forest Service is "absolutely critical" to the resort's long-term success.

Chevalier said such approvals "never come through quickly."

"We're patient," he said. "Our plans are to progress, whether with or without.

"We'll make anything succeed. It's just that we would be better off, in my mind, if we were able to move standards forward, with what I consider community interests and commercial interests."

Alpine/Nordic split

Chevalier acknowledged that Eldora took a few public relations hits in the past year. Controversy arose when continued tenure at the resort was briefly threatened for Ignite Adaptive Sports, an independent nonprofit providing instruction in alpine and cross-country skiing, snowboarding and snowshoeing to people with cognitive and physical disabilities.

Some longtime patrons were also upset when the resort announced it was separating the alpine and Nordic areas in its passes, which had previously included both options.

But the adaptive ski program was preserved, and it returns this year.

The alpine/Nordic split also remains.

"We'd like both businesses to succeed," Chevalier said, "and we want them both to stand on their own merits ... ."

No other resort in the region offers combined alpine and Nordic passes, he said.

The resort is happy to have added two new Kassbohrer PistenBully snow groomers to its fleet.

Some customers might not be happy that Eldora has also added to the cost of its season passes.

Its Adult Super Value Pass, for example, is now $299, up from $269. Children's passes are $229, up from $209. The Adult Full Pass is priced at $449, an increase from $399.

Chevalier defended the price hike, pointing out that the passes would still represent the smallest area of expense for most skiers, costing less than the clothes they'll be wearing, the equipment they'll be using and the mileage they'd put on their cars in driving back and forth from most other resorts. "Drive less, ski more" is a favored slogan at the resort.

"It's an investment in the sport that you love," he said.

Charlie Brennan: 303-473-1327, brennanc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/chasbrennan