This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

the president promised the American people a lot of things when he was selling Obamacare remember ... if you like your doctor you can keep your doctor ... but there was another province sandwiches that the new healthcare law was going to reduce healthcare costs ... Heritage Foundation Chief Economist Steve Moore has won the numbers Steve ... what is that they say ... you know ... me right this was the one of the highest profile promises that this will not have a dime to the budget deficit can ... so I started looking at the numbers were for months and the fiscal year two thousand fifteen right now ... the ad of the Congressional budget office came out with these numbers it didn't get a lot of attention which is that if you look at the federal spending is up eight percent already this year which is a lot on ... the ad what's driving the big increase in expenditures ... yes what of this its Medicaid which was expanded under Obamacare and the other one is these Obamacare subsidies ... is that want to call for an Anwar is ... the correct delays and Apple the talent level I said I've been WASHINGTON for almost thirty years the biggest lie that her to the problem lies wash and ... Xavier were put ... twenty five and thirty million more people on governments of size healthcare it was going to say so ... the other way expenditures are up thirty per ... one hundred it's the it's heated ... the CBOE administration again these numbers in the first day's wild a low bar they basically lowball what ... that what they assumed was that by putting this to a whole system and applies ... that they were enviable or the overall cost of health care so much that was to save money so we can put it more and more people health care ... what the statistics also show was that hasn't happened remember the other promise Mary did you get your twenty five hundred dollars in savings for a career as a family ... of for for ... your health insurance so that have happened in fact the cost a lot of these plans ... were up seven to temper stock so costs are rising for people who have health care ... taxpayers are put putting a bug repellent people is in the health of the eyes of the day I went on to the American people have never liked the Obamacare ... had majority support ... on it but are there ways to reduce costs seats that don't reduce choice ... is you know a lot of ... these am you don't wanna ration care so happens that I would say actually choices the way to reduce costs you know that you wanna give people that I were the Republican sentiment can run off ramp from Obamacare get the kid people ... of the whole range of choices they can be offered a sunny come upon they want ... and that'll drive down costs because of their ... costs rise they have to pay out of pocket ... you know we have choice in everything else it's interesting or if you look at the two we areas of the economy right now where prices are exploding ... education health care and those are the two areas were governor runs where consumers have very little choices and every other consumer prices are actually falling as people demand lower prices if the Republicans will have the opportunity to make that bargain with the president ... does all this because it has given us what what what are here now in especially if the Supreme Court strikes down the estates of season kept allow ... presence Canada states to say ... well you don't wanna have all those millions of people that I the health care is not a good time for the GOP twenty haven't let you know we saw what happened in a number of states like Indiana whether the ... government there Mike pence at you know what will take the Obamacare money ... will sign people up to work in a huge toy Selamat and ... you know ... the kinds of options that give that drive down costs and cover more people you can do that we we can come for everyone in the nine states with health insurance for a fraction of the cost of what Obamacare cut costs the reason is cuz we married ... the Obamacare requires you buy the package you have to buy the gift of IoT dry for