There are leverage points and tipping points in the Missouri General Assembly.

For the minority party, the big one is having enough members to prevent the majority from overriding a veto when the governor also is from the minority party.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

Democrats in both chambers are short of that goal, with 55 seats in the House and 12 in the Senate. The Republican majority this year used its swollen numbers and divisions among Democrats to override Gov. Jay Nixon on 47 spending items and 11 statutory bills.

Republicans were in a similar spot in the 1980s, with Kit Bond and John Ashcroft in the governor’s office, yet veto override attempts were rare and rarely successful.

Since then, the balance of power has swung the GOP’s way, but Democrats hope to start chipping away at Republican dominance this November and gain numbers in the House that will weaken the majority’s ability to override the governor.

When a party controls a legislative chamber, its leaders set the agenda and pace of legislative work. For Republicans this year, that meant tax cuts for individuals and business owners, more permissive gun laws and a longer waiting period for abortions, all done with veto overrides to get past Nixon’s objections.

“At the end of the day, 110 Republicans got elected, and that is reality,” state Rep. Caleb Jones, R-Columbia, said. “Those districts elected people who campaign on lower taxes and fewer regulations on small businesses and more individual liberties and government that stays out of where they won’t belong. We set an agenda that would reflect the desires and the wants of the folks who elected us.”

From left, Rep. Scott Fitzpatrick, R-Shell Knob, Rep. Casey Guernsey, R-Bethany, and Rep. Caleb Rowden, R-Columbia, talk Sept. 10 during the annual veto session. Nick Schnelle

The legislative tipping point is the number needed to become the majority, 82 in the House and 18 in the Senate. Republicans achieved those goals in the Senate in the 2000 elections, and the House followed suit in 2002. The GOP had not been in control of either chamber for 50 years.

Republicans today hold 109 seats, and Democrats hold 52 in the House, with two vacancies. The Senate is 23 Republicans and nine Democrats, also with two vacancies.

Democrats have lost 22 House seats over the last two elections. “We are just hoping to stop the slide at this point and trying to pick up a few seats if possible,” said House Minority Leader Jacob Hummel of St. Louis.

The key to Republican success has been a disciplined fundraising, messaging and candidate support operation that Democrats have been unable to match. For example, several GOP incumbent House members seeking re-election contributed at least $5,000.01 to the House Republican Campaign Committee on the same day during the candidate filing season.

That is the minimum amount to trigger a special disclosure statement filed with the Missouri Ethics Commission within 48 hours. That effort brought in $201,500, including larger contributions from some members.

The money did not come from members’ personal bank accounts. Instead it came from the accumulated reserves in their campaign treasuries provided by individuals at home and interest groups with political action committees.

John Wright, D-Rocheport, right, walks in to vote during the veto session at the Missouri Capitol. Nick Schnelle

“The reality is that HRCC has become very large and very dedicated to making sure we get good conservatives in the House, and anybody who gives to HRCC is not giving to one candidate,” said Jones, one of three members of the HRCC executive committee.

Jones has contributed $57,075 from his campaign fund to the cause since January 2013. The other two executive committee members, Rep. Todd Richardson, R-Poplar Bluff, and House Speaker-designate John Diehl, R-Town and Country, have contributed $124,000 and $380,000, respectively.

Success has bred more success, Jones said.

“A lot of what has made the Republican Party and the HRCC successful is we have always, always been willing if someone is working hard to make sure the conservative message is out in their district, whether it be a strongly conservative district, a 50-50 district or a Democratic district,” Jones said. “We got involved in races that 20 to 30 years ago we wouldn’t even be involved in.”

The perceived weakness of the party has added to Democratic woes, Hummel said.

“The farther we slip into the minority, the harder it is to recruit people to run for these seats,” he said. “When you have a big block, it is easier for them to move money around, and it is hard to compete against.”

This year, Democrats seem to have been studying Republican methods. They have unified all campaign efforts in the Missouri Democratic Party and received $200,000 from Attorney General Chris Koster and $290,000 from U.S. Sen. Claire McCaskill to spend on legislative races. Hummel has added $62,500 from his own campaign.

“We have all the statewide” elected officials “contributing, helping out, going to events and donating money,” Hummel said. “It is a great thing to see everybody pulling together. Win, lose or draw, we have learned from our mistakes of the past.”

■

The outcome in 81 of 163 House districts has been decided. There are 56 Republicans running uncontested and 25 Democrats who have no opponent, giving the GOP a big advantage as it battles in the 82 contested districts.

The Senate is certain to remain in Republican hands. Of 17 seats on the ballot in that chamber this year — half of the Senate is elected every two years — nine Republicans are running unopposed and will join the 11 GOP members elected in 2012. With one uncontested candidate, Democrats are ensured to have seven seats. Seven will be decided by voters.

In Boone and Callaway counties, three House races — one held by a Democrat, one held by a Republican and one open seat now held by a Republican — have been targeted by both parties. The outcomes will likely show how the state as a whole is trending.

In the 44th District, freshman Rep. Caleb Rowden, R-Columbia, faces a Democratic challenge from Hallsville Alderman Tom Pauley. In the 47th District, freshman Rep. John Wright, D-Rocheport, is being challenged by Republican Chuck Basye, a retired air traffic controller. And in the 49th District, former House Majority Leader Gracia Backer, a New Bloomfield Democrat, is seeking to return to the House to replace incumbent Rep. Jeannie Riddle, R-Mokane.

Riddle is seeking a Senate seat, and Backer faces Travis Fitzwater, chief operating officer of the Missouri Pharmacy Association.

All three districts include large expanses of rural territory Democrats must win back if they hope to rebuild their numbers. Much of rural Missouri was reliably Democratic at the state level from the Civil War to the 1980s.

“The Republicans didn’t take over in five years,” Backer said. “It took over a decade to get the majority. The pendulum swings. We may not make 83 this year, but people are starting to listen. We want some things to change. We don’t want to see a half a billion dollar tax cut that doesn’t help the middle class.”

In 2012, Rowden narrowly defeated former state Sen. Ken Jacob, a Democrat who had never lost a November election in Boone County. He won, Rowden said, because Republicans were able to spend more than $200,000 on his race in the final weeks that neither Jacob nor the Democratic Party was able to counter.

“They provided the last big push needed to get me across the finish line in 2012,” Rowden said. “They are able to do that because of the organization. They have resources, they do the legwork, and they know what they have to do and how to do it.”

Rowden voted with his party to override Nixon on an income tax cut that failed in 2013 and one that passed this year despite heavy pressure from school districts and Boone County business groups to oppose them. He supported overriding Nixon’s veto of the abortion waiting period bill and the bill pre-empting local control of firearms.

He also supported overriding Nixon on a bill stripping the Missouri Department of Conservation of its authority over captive deer and a bill cutting unemployment compensation to 13 weeks. The bill on captive deer failed by a vote, while the unemployment bill failed by two.

“When I think, for me, as someone who was helped pretty extensively by the party in 2012, I still have 100 percent freedom to do what I do, and that is because I am in a 50-50 district,” Rowden said. “The last thing people in Columbia want is a Republican Party puppet. I have never been pressured on one vote in my life.”

This year, Rowden has raised $101,693 for his re-election. He has given $11,000 to the HRCC to help other candidates and had $58,812 in the bank after his uncontested primary. Pauley has raised $14,549 and had $1,928 in the bank.

Because it was a close race in 2012, it is a seat Democrats hope to win by portraying Rowden as a captive of his party. Pauley said the Democratic Party has been helpful with polling, research and training him to focus his message.

“The call for money is incredible, and it is part of the problem,” Pauley said. “My opponent and his party are so incredibly well-funded by people who would buy the legislators. My supporters are the folks who want to see the Affordable Care Act succeed, and they don’t have $500 or $1,000 to give to a campaign.”

Basye, like Pauley, is working to raise money against a well-funded incumbent. He has raised $7,254 and had $2,757 on hand after the primary. Wright has raised $194,755 for his re-election campaign, much of it from his own personal resources, and had $12,900 in the bank.

Wright also has dipped into his personal wealth to give $20,000 to the Democratic Party.

In 2012, Wright won a narrow race against Republican Mitch Richards, who received $100,000 in help from the Republican Party. Unlike Jacob, Wright had the money to match that amount.

Basye was recruited for the race by the HRCC. The committee will likely spend extensively to boost his campaign in the final two weeks of the race. Whether the party helps or not, Basye said he will be a reliable but not automatic vote if he wins.

“I am not going to sacrifice my values,” he said. “I would have to agree with it. But most of the stuff I have read and learned about that happened this session, I would not have voted any different.”

Wright downplays party labels. “We run our own campaign — more than anything else we need independence of thought and independence of action,” he said.

What the House needs, he said, is not a larger Democratic or Republican caucus but more members concerned with solving problems instead of serving special interests or seeking advantage.

“I am aware of parties,” Wright said. “I know there is a lemming dynamic we see sometimes. In the majority party, there is a lot of success raising money at a committee level, which promotes the centralization of organization and keep members in line in an organization. That is not what I am about, and that is not what legislating is about.”

Wright was the only Democrat to vote to override Nixon’s veto of the bill cutting unemployment benefits to 13 weeks. He said he supported the change because it allowed longer periods during bad economic times and required a larger reserve in the insurance fund. It was designed to prevent expensive borrowing from the federal government during recessions, an important goal, Wright said.

“It asked a little more of employers and a little more of employees,” he said. “I think 13 weeks in a strong economy is enough time to find another job.”

That view does not fit with the party message. To Hummel, the unemployment bill was a slap at people who were struggling. “We were going to cut Missourians’ legs out from under them as they were trying to get a job.”

■

As of Aug. 30, the Missouri Democratic Party had raised $1.1 million for this year’s elections and had $700,000 in the bank to support candidates in House and Senate elections. The House Republican Campaign Committee had raised $1.6 million and had $1.2 million on hand, and the Missouri Senate Campaign Committee, which supports Republicans, had raised $511,742 and had $348,942 on hand.

The source of most of that money comes from interest groups, some with an ideological stance that only contribute to candidates on their side and some, without ideological ties, that give most of their money to the party with the most power. And in Missouri, with no limits on campaign contributions, large donations have become common.

Large independent expenditures without direct party ties are a newer addition to the election landscape.

Wealthy conservative activist Rex Sinquefield has become the state’s biggest donor as he pushes to end income taxes and remake public schools. He gave $2.5 million recently to an organization called Grow Missouri, money the organization said would support a listening tour for 100 ideas that will take Diehl around the state.

The Club for Growth PAC spent $628,000 donated by Sinquefield during the August primary to defeat four Republicans who opposed overriding Nixon on an income tax bill in 2013. All four won their primaries.

Money that has no ideology in this election cycle has been donated by Doe Run Mining Co. Last year, bipartisan groups of lawmakers fought over legislation designed to protect the company from punitive damages for past lead-mining practices.

In the 2011-12 election cycle, the company donated $15,500, most of it directly to political parties. Since January 2013, Doe Run has contributed $104,032 to parties, lawmakers and other PACs. Democratic Party committees received $16,000, Republican committees received $25,000 and individual lawmakers have received almost $47,000.

Doe Run won its exemption on a veto override. In the House override vote, 110 members supported the bill after only 94 had done so when the legislation passed originally. Two days after the bill passed, Doe Run settled outstanding liability claims for lead poisoning.

Rowden, Wright, and Reps. Stephen Webber, D-Columbia and Chris Kelly, D-Columbia, voted against overriding Nixon on the Doe Run legislation. Wright said the entire episode shows why limits on contributions would produce a better legislature.

“You see situations where interest groups cut deals with those in positions of leadership who manage these committee purse strings,” he said. “That way they don’t have to cut deals with individual lawmakers. Doe Run contributed big chunks of money in one period of time when they had legislation written just for them.