RENO, NV - This is a story of breast cancer and how it affected the lives of a mother and her two daughters.

MGN Online

Roseanna Webber's mother was diagnosed with breast cancer 22 years ago, and is still alive. Roseanna was just diagnosed with the disease in February of this year. She had surgery and will have her last chemo treatment in April.

The woman Roseanna wants to talk about, though, is her younger sister. Fearless, tenacious, smart--except when it came to breast cancer.

“Until she found a lump in her breast at age 47 and that's when she had her first mammogram. Bad. She was diagnosed with stage 4 metastatic breast cancer with metastasis to the liver right out of the gate,” says Roseanna. Roseanna says as a nurse she took care of her sister the last three years of her life. She put up a brave fight.

Roseanna says it didn't have to happen, but it does happen. About five percent of the time breast cancer is diagnosed in its latest and most fatal stages. And that number hasn't changed since 1975.

Reno surgeon Dr. Frieda Hulka says there are just some breast cancers that are more aggressive or won't be picked up by standard diagnostic equipment in the earliest stages of the disease. Those cancers are the bane of breast surgeons' careers, she says.

But there are other factors that play into that stubborn five percent.

“I've seen a lot of patients like that. A lot of women who come to see me now that they have insurance under the Affordable Care Act. They now have insurance; they've had a lump for a year or 2, but just haven't had the money to do it,” says Dr. Hulka.

Roseanna says her sister is an example of another kind of late-stage breast cancer patient.

“We make excuses. I think there was an element of not wanting to know. There are certain people that just don't want to know, regardless of the options they have and all the way they can take care of themselves to avoid this disease from advancing to that point where you are diagnosed like that,” says Roseanna.

In the end the biggest challenge may be convincing some women to make the first step.