State Senator Kirk Dillard (R-Hinsdale) is running for governor of Illinois and he is calling for "fairness on Obamacare benefits."

(Courtesy of WTTW)

Dillard told the Chicago Election Examiner in an email yesterday that, "Politicians should play by same rules as everyone else." The proposal made by Senator Dillard and fellow State Senator Dave Syverson (R-Rockford) would require state Constitutional Officers and state lawmakers to carry the same standard health insurance benefits that citizens are now required to carry under Obamacare.

"Far too often, legislators pass laws effecting everyone else, but then exempt themselves," Dillard said. "Most citizens believe that their elected officials should play by the same rules as they are required to. This has never been more evident than when you talk to people about Obamacare."

Obamacare exempts certain classes of people from its requirements, in effect creating separate classes of insurance coverage. "Governor Quinn and the Democrat legislature created the Illinois Health Insurance exchange," Dillard said. “If they truly believe this is the best health plan for the citizens of Illinois, then they should be willing to be covered under the same health plan."

Dillard spent the day on Thursday at the ABC7/Daily Herald GOP forum held for the upcoming gubernatorial primary. All four candidates on the Republican side attended and participated, including Dillard. Also attending and participating were Bruce Rauner, Illinois State Treasurer Dan Rutherford and State Senator Bill Brady. The GOP gubernatorial primary that will be held on Tuesday, March 18 and the forum was held in Mount Prospect.

It was at the first meeting for all four GOP candidates of the year, as Rauner decided at the last-minute to attend as he had first declined this and most other forums.

According to Chicago Sun Times reporter Natasha Korecki, both state Sens. Kirk Dillard of Hinsdale and Bill Brady of Bloomington spent the hour and a half forum hurling criticism at frontrunner Bruce Rauner, from accusations he clouted his daughter into a public high school in 2008 to having ties to convicted insider Stuart Levine.

Rauner enrolled his daughter into an "elite" Chicago Public School, Walter Payton College Prep. His daughter at first was rejected into enrollment at the school because her testing score did not meet the standard necessary. Rauner used his "influence" by picking up the phone and calling then Chicago Public School CEO Arne Duncan, as his daughter by passed some 7,000 other candidates for the coveted slot.

Rauner also has an "unanswered question" about his relationship with Stuart Levine. Rauner brushed off the questions and at one point he frustratingly said, "It's been a beat-up-Brucey kind of morning"

Greg Hinz of Crain's Chicago Business uncovered this relationship between Rauner and Levine earlier this year and is still looking for an answer. That was ten months ago and it is likely not going away. The question: "How can Mr. Rauner be trusted to clean up corrupt Springfield when he won't fully explain how and why Mr. Levine made $25,000 a month trying to get government business for a company owned in part by Mr. Rauner?"

Rauner has had a rough couple of weeks in the campaign, having added another public relations staffer. The Rauner consulting team has been struggling of late in its messaging. Brought on board to the Rauner team yesterday is Lance Trover, a longtime veteran of Illinois politics who most recently has worked for U.S. Sen. Mark Kirk (R-IL), the state's highest ranking elected Republican reported Greg Hinz of Crain's Chicago Business.

***

Send John Presta an email and your story ideas or suggestions, johnpresta@att.net.

***

Sources for story:

Chicago Sun Times story by Natasha Korecki

Chicago Business - Political fixer Stuart Levine

Chicago Sun Times - Natasha Korecki, Stuart Levine star witness

Capitol Fax - Rauner tries to walk it back

Chicago Sun Times - Voices - Newly surfaced video

Chicago Sun Times - Voices (Rauner video)

Capitol Fax - Rauner kicks in another million bucks

Other related pieces about Bruce Rauner:

Bruce Rauner's one unanswered question in the Illinois Republican gubernatorial primary

Bruce Rauner campaign in full-blown crisis mode on series of 'minimum wage' snafus

Bruce Rauner says he will lower Illinois minimum wage from $8.25 to $7.25 an hour

Bruce Rauner promotes charter schools for the rest of us, not good enough for his daughter

Bruce Rauner raises $4 million in fourth quarter, but can money buy him love

Bruce Rauner is the Mitt Romney of Illinois politics (Part 1)

Bruce Rauner is the Mitt Romney of Illinois politics (Part 2)

Bruce Rauner is the Mitt Romney of Illinois politics (Part 3)

***

More Mr Grassroots:

MrGrassroots on Facebook

MrGrassoots on Twitter

MrGrassroots on Allvoices