Habitat for Humanity of Greater Plainfield and Middlesex County is currently seeking applicants for a new home on South Tenth Avenue in Highland Park.

Habitat for Humanity seeks applicants for new home in Highland Park (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF HABITAT FOR HUMANITY) Story Highlights Families who were affected or displaced by Hurricane Sandy are especially encouraged to apply.

The Borough of Highland Park has donated the property to Habitat.

Habitat for Humanity of Greater Plainfield and Middlesex County is currently seeking applicants for a new home on South Tenth Avenue here. Families who were affected or displaced by Hurricane Sandy are especially encouraged to apply. Anyone interested in possible ownership of a 3-bedroom, 1 ½ bath home is advised to attend a mandatory orientation session.

The Borough of Highland Park has donated the property to Habitat. Funds for building this home are provided by the Neighborhood Enhancement Program (NEP) under CDBG‐DR funds administered by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Hence, selection preference will be to serve a family displaced and/or affected by Hurricane Sandy.

"This is an amazing opportunity to own a home in a lovely neighborhood," comments Rev. Jeremy Montgomery, executive director for Plainfield Habitat. "By requiring no cash down payment, we help working families acquire the dream of ownership with the support of our volunteers."

This home will be built at 236 South 10th Ave. Construction is a cooperative effort, involving both volunteers and future homeowners. Houses are sold on a no‐profit, 0%‐interest basis. Home price will be based on household income, number in household and will not exceed $250,000. The funds originally used to build the house is returned to Habitat through the homeowner's monthly mortgage payments over a 20‐30 year period, and is used to build more Habitat houses locally.

Application forms are only available at the mandatory home application orientation meetings. The location of these meetings is at the Highland Park Senior/Youth Center, 220 South Sixth Avenue on these dates and times: 6:30 to 8 p.m. Feb. 17 and 10 to 11:30 a.m. Feb. 21.

To best understand Habitat for Humanity's program of offering home-ownership to qualified families, Habitat offers working families a hand up, not a hand out. Every partner family contributes 200 hours of "sweat equity" per adult in building their home or other homes, financed with zero interest loans provided by Habitat. By using volunteer labor and donations of money and material from the community, they sell the houses at the cost of construction with no profit.

In order to receive an application, attendance is required at the mandatory orientations. The application process will include income verification, a credit check, and personal visits and interviews by team members. The deadline to submit complete application is noon March 16. Qualified applicants will be assigned a lottery number, and the prospective homeowners will be selected via lottery in April.

Interested families should fill out a "Housing Interest Form" at www.gphabitat.org/homeownership to receive important notices on this opportunity.

To volunteer, donate or own a Habitat home, visit www.gphabitat.org.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1DOVkiF