WASHINGTON — A federal judge rejected a legal challenge on Wednesday to a central part of President Obama’s health care law, ruling that millions of low- and moderate-income people could obtain health insurance subsidies regardless of whether they bought coverage through the federal insurance exchange or in marketplaces run by the states.

Critics of the law had said that a literal reading of it would allow subsidies only in the 14 states that ran their own exchanges. But the judge, Paul L. Friedman of the Federal District Court here, said that was absurd and contrary to the whole purpose of the Affordable Care Act.

“The plain text of the statute, the statutory structure and the statutory purpose make clear that Congress intended to make premium tax credits available on both state-run and federally facilitated exchanges,” Judge Friedman said.

After analyzing the law and its legislative history, he said, “Congress assumed that tax credits would be available nationwide” and “on any exchange, regardless of whether it is operated by a state” or by federal officials.

The ruling is important because the federal government runs the exchange serving 36 states, which account for about two-thirds of the nation’s population.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Ronald F. Pollack, the executive director of Families U.S.A., a liberal-leaning advocacy group, said the ruling was “an important win for health care consumers across the country.”

Sam Kazman, general counsel of the Competitive Enterprise Institute, a libertarian advocacy group that is coordinating and helping finance the lawsuit, said the plaintiffs would appeal the decision.

From Oct. 1, when the exchanges opened, through Dec. 28, nearly 1.2 million people selected health insurance plans in the federal marketplace, and nearly a million chose plans in state exchanges.

About four-fifths of people choosing health plans at both levels of government qualified for subsidies that reduced their premiums. Subsidies may be available to people with annual incomes up to $45,960 for individuals and up to $94,200 for a family of four.

The lawsuit, Halbig v. Sebelius, was filed by several people in states that use the federal exchange: Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and West Virginia. They objected to being required to buy insurance even with subsidies to help defray the cost.

They said the health care law authorized subsidies specifically for insurance bought on “an exchange established by the state.” Congress, they said, provided subsidies in that way as an incentive for states to establish and operate exchanges, rather than leaving the task to the federal government.

However, Judge Friedman found no evidence of such a purpose. He quoted remarks on the Senate floor by Senator Max Baucus, Democrat of Montana and an architect of the law, who said in December 2009 that Congress was giving states a choice to set up their own exchanges or to allow the federal government to do so.

When federal officials create an exchange, Judge Friedman said, they “stand in the shoes of the state.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In voting for the Affordable Care Act, Democrats in Congress assumed that states would set up their own exchanges. But many Republican governors and state legislators balked, and opposition to the law became a rallying cry for the party.

Judge Friedman said the plaintiffs’ argument seemed intuitively appealing. The section of the law providing health insurance subsidies, “viewed in isolation, appears to support plaintiffs’ interpretation” because “the federal government, after all, is not a state,” he said.

But this reading of the law leads to “strange or absurd results,” the judge said, adding that courts must interpret statutes as a whole, not just isolated provisions.

The first page of the law declares the intent of Congress to ensure “health care for all Americans.”

“Plaintiffs’ proposed construction in this case — that tax credits are available only for those purchasing insurance from state-run exchanges — runs counter to this central purpose of the Affordable Care Act: to provide affordable health care to virtually all Americans,” Judge Friedman said.

Thus, he said, the regulation in question, issued by the Internal Revenue Service in May 2012, was a reasonable interpretation of the law and was consistent with the intent of Congress to provide subsidies in the federal exchange as well as state exchanges.

Similar lawsuits, challenging subsidies in the federal exchange, have been filed by several Virginia residents and by state officials in Oklahoma and Indiana.