After 19 years of a National Basketball Association (NBA) career, Steve Nash has officially announced his retirement from the NBA, after suffering injuries that have kept him out all season. At 41-years-old, Nash has had a great career, full of ups and downs, but now it seems he will be enjoying family life more, as injuries to his back will keep him from being able to play the game professionally. But the two-time MVP player made several statements reflecting his gratefulness to have had this opportunity and his decision that he will not let this get him down.

Nash has no doubt been an amazing player and asset to the NBA. As one of the best three-point shooters in the association, Nash averaged 14.3 points and 8.5 assists, with 42 percent of his three-point shots being successful. Having played for the Phoenix Suns, the Dallas Mavericks, and his most recent team the Los Angeles Lakers, Nash has definitely seen his share of innovative coaches. He stated, “The greatest gift has been to be completely immersed in my passion and striving for something I loved so much.” He stated that his pursuit in his basketball career has made him who he is and taught and tested him. He said in addition to his basketball career, another incredible gift is that he still has much to learn about life, a statement that shows his award-winning spirit about moving on from the NBA.

Nash was expecting to soon end his career in the NBA, though he did not expect it to come so soon. With this year being the last of his contract, he was hoping to help the Lakers win another championship. Teaming up with Kobe Bryant, this was his goal all along, but now will not be able to happen. As Nash was kept out all season due to his injuries, he will unfortunately be unable to help Bryant in the pursuit. He called it bittersweet, stating that he will likely never play basketball again, during the official announcement that Steve Nash made about his retirement from the NBA. Though he did not win a championship, especially as he did not play much this season, he is an eight time All Star.

Even after retirement it is no doubt that he will continue working with kids and trying to help them achieve their dreams. In fact, the “essay” he wrote and posted on The Player’s Tribune when announcing his official retirement was, as he said, a letter to the kids who have no idea what their future holds. As the Steve Nash Foundation, works with children, it is sure that he will continue to do good work in his future. But sources are posting of the disappointment of his announcement, as well.

Steve Nash never won a championship, or even made it to finals. Though some sources state he has a history of good team work, many are stating that his not winning a championship is predicated on the fact that it takes more than one man. His final seasons were hard to watch, as he missed many games over injuries, but overall his legacy of going from Canadian basketball play to U.S. NBA All Star, is a great story, even though he must now retire.

Nash’s essay “Life After Basketball,” highlights his plans to move on with life and explore new things. He made sure to thank all of the people who helped him in his career, who he said shaped him into what he is. He made a name for himself in the NBA but stated that now, he could not think of anything more exciting and rewarding than moving on to spend time with his three kids. As Steve Nash has made his retirement from the NBA official, fans are disappointed, but still wish him the best for his future endeavors.

By Crystal Boulware

Sources:

USA Today

Washington Post

Dallas Morning News

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr