Topics: 2016 Elections, Affordable Care Act, budget reconciliation, Healthcare Reform, Kevin McCarthy, king v. burwell, Obamacare, repeal, Rick Santorum, Politics News

Earlier this week, long-shot Republican presidential candidate Rick Santorum gave voice to one of the GOP’s great hopes heading into 2016: the opportunity to finally – finally – repeal the Affordable Care Act through a process known as budget reconciliation. “You give me 50 United States senators and a Republican House,” Santorum told the Weekly Standard, “and we can de facto repeal Obamacare through reconciliation. Take all the money out and make it impotent.”

Ever since the GOP took control of the Senate in the midterm elections, the Obamacare/reconciliation debate has always been aimed squarely at influencing the presidential election. Pursuing repeal through budget reconciliation would allow Republicans in the Senate to obviate a Democratic filibuster and send the measure to President Obama’s desk, where it would be promptly vetoed. Then the Republicans would take their argument to the people and say that a repeal of the healthcare law is indeed possible, but only if they elect a Republican president (and reelect a Republican Senate) in 2016.

Rick Santorum is obviously ready to make the case. All he needs is for Republicans in Congress to actually get around to using reconciliation to take on the Affordable Care Act. But the GOP leaders in the House and Senate – their stated urgency to kill Obamacare notwithstanding – don’t seem to be in any sort of hurry.

A couple of weeks ago I wrote about how the Supreme Court’s decision in King v. Burwell put a huge kink in the GOP’s plans to repeal Obamacare. They were clearly banking on the court’s conservative justices to blow up the law and do most of their dirty work for them, but that didn’t happen, and so full responsibility for repeal devolved to Congress. After the decision came down, conservatives in the House renewed their push to go forward with repeal through reconciliation, as prescribed by the House- and Senate-passed budget resolutions. But key Republicans on the relevant committees demurred and suggested that they may not meet the self-imposed July 24 deadline for submitting language that would repeal portions of the ACA.

Well, this week House majority leader Kevin McCarthy confirmed what everyone already suspected: Repeal through reconciliation will be put on hold for the foreseeable future. As reported by The Hill:

McCarthy acknowledged Republicans will miss Friday’s deadline to outline plans for reconciliation, though he dismissed the deadline as more of a guideline than a mandate. “We will not put anything out by July 24. It’s not a hard and fast deadline,” McCarthy said. […] McCarthy said a bill to repeal ObamaCare could come in September, but wouldn’t commit to the possibility. “I don’t think there’s a reason why we have to hurry. So you will see something later,” McCarthy said. “It’s something we need to do and we will, but it’s not by July 24.”