ENLARGE Sandra Bullock in 'Gravity' Warner Bros. Pictures

ENLARGE Christian Bale, Amy Adams and Bradley Cooper in 'American Hustle' Columbia Pictures

Back in the movie wasteland of last January, no one could have guessed what a bounty of good films the year would bring. Not just good films, but several that measure up to our idealized notions of what the medium once was. Two candidates for the top of the heap pretty much chose themselves. For sheer entertainment, the clear call is "American Hustle," David O. Russell's joyous celebration of 1970s-era con artists and their intricate cons. For innovation—a new theatrical experience born of new technology—"Gravity" whirls in its own orbit. With the understanding that there's nothing to be said against "American Hustle," and everything to recommend this screwball comedy for the ages, I think "Gravity" is the best movie of the year.

Alfonso Cuarón and his colleagues, most notably the cinematographer Emmanuel Lubezki, the production designer Andy Nicholson and the filmmaker's co-writer, Jonás Cuarón, have made a motion picture that expands the way motion pictures will be made. Readers with an interest in technology can get a sense of their extraordinary achievements from last month's cover story of American Cinematographer, which is available online. But the emotional essence of the film is already known to anyone who has seen it, and has been swept away by it—into the outer space of silence and menace, into an inner space of deep delight.

After "Gravity" and "American Hustle," my picks are in alphabetical order:

ENLARGE Benedict Cumberbatch and Chiwetel Ejiofor in 'Twelve Years a Slave' Fox Searchlight

"12 Years A Slave" is shattering and anguishing, a singular anomaly in an entertainment medium. More than that, Steve McQueen's hugely ambitious chronicle of slavery in America is revelatory, a work of art that has been embraced by mainstream audiences. That's a testimony to the power of art (as expressed in John Ridley's script and performances by Chiwetel Ejiofor, Lupita Nyong'o and Michael Fassbender, among others), and heartening evidence of moviegoers' hunger for substance and meaning in the films they choose to see.

ENLARGE Alec Baldwin and Cate Blanchett in 'Blue Jasmine' Sony Pictures Classics

"Blue Jasmine" belongs, chronologically, to Woody Allen's late period of self-renewal. Artistically, however, it's a comfortable fit with some of the brightest comedies—the brightest/bleakest/wriest comedies—he's ever done. The centerpiece is Cate Blanchett's astonishing performance as Blanche duBois re-imagined to be the half-mad ex-wife of Alec Baldwin's crypto-Bernie Madoff. Not all that far from the center, Sally Hawkins, Andrew Dice Clay, Bobby Cannavale and Louis C.K., among others, maneuver their way through mine fields of deceit and disappointment.

ENLARGE Noriko and Ushio Shinohara in 'Cutie and the Boxer' RADiUS-TWC

"Cutie and the Boxer" was hardly noticed by the movie-going public, but a list of fine films isn't a rundown of box-office triumphs. The reach of Zachary Heinzerling's debut feature-length documentary is equaled by its grasp. On the surface it's about nothing more—or less—than a troubled marriage that has somehow managed to last 40 years. Beneath the surface, then startlingly out in the open, is a history of rivalry (both husband and wife are artists), enmity, reluctant devotion and, most startling of all, enduring love.

ENLARGE Michael B. Jordan in 'Fruitvale Station' Weinstein Co.

"Fruitvale Station" represents another remarkable feature debut, by the director Ryan Coogler. Its subject matter—the fatal shooting of Oscar Grant, a black, unarmed 22-year-old by a white transit cop in Oakland, Calif.—might have made a documentary. Mr. Coogler had the better idea of exploring it as a dramatized, and to a considerable extent fictionalized, account of the day in Oscar's life that preceded his death. He's played by Michael B. Jordan, whose performance can break your heart or fill it with joy, sometimes simultaneously.

ENLARGE Joaquin Phoenix in 'Her' Warner Bros. Pictures

"Her," which was written and directed by Spike Jonze, takes romance into the virtual realm, and its hero on a gently crazed journey of genuine passion. Joaquin Phoenix is the poignantly lonely guy who falls in love with his smartphone's new operating system. The basic conceit is a fragile one, but it's beautifully and bravely developed, as well as elegantly photographed by Hoyte Van Hoytema, with perfectly calibrated performances by Mr. Phoenix, Amy Adams and Scarlett Johansson, who is that system's voice and soul.

ENLARGE Oscar Isaac in 'Inside Llewyn Davis' CBS Films

"Inside Llewyn Davis" finds the Coen brothers, Joel and Ethan, in a hauntingly somber mood that somehow translates into memorable drama. I think my review should have made it clearer that this elegy for a casualty of pop culture is a special taste; some of it is fairly glum. So much of it, though, gets to something stirring by way of Oscar Isaac's phenomenal performance as a self-defeating folk singer fatefully dedicated to his art.

ENLARGE Bruce Dern and Will Forte in 'Nebraska' Paramount Vantage

"Nebraska" gets to the heart of Bruce Dern's prickly old geezer, Woody Grant, by way of a road trip across Montana and Nebraska, shot in radiant black-and-white. (Here again one of the movie's stars is its cinematographer, Phedon Papamichael.) Alexander Payne directed, flawlessly, from Bob Nelson's stellar script, which is all about thwarted love, and reconciliation, between Woody and his son Will; he's played with painfully quiet eloquence by Will Forte. Here's the American heartland as it's seldom portrayed on screen, with humor and almost palpable fondness.

ENLARGE Brie Larson and John Gallagher Jr. in 'Short Term 12' Cinedigm

"Short Term 12" is one of those small indie features that stays with you in a big way. It's only 96 minutes long, a modest production set in a foster-care facility for troubled teens. Yet Destin Cretton's direction and Brie Larson's performance elevate the film to, well, one of the year's very best. Ms. Larson is almost a sure thing for not getting an Oscar—this year's competition is unusually fierce—but do catch up with her portrayal of Grace, a 20-something supervisor who is far from untroubled in her own life.

—Mr. Morgenstern is the Journal's film critic.