Here’s a fun fact: I studied classical Greek in my college days, and occasionally random bits of what I learned come back in weird, disconnected fragments.

Words such as "idiot," "ostracize" and "doula" all have interesting Greek roots.

As I recall it, the ancient Greek word for house was "oikos," which is part of the etymology of the word "economics"; it means the management or order of the house.

This also means that calling a class "home economics" is a bit redundant.

This all leads me back to the point relevant for a personal finance column: a healthy understanding of economics should start at home.

I have gathered a handful of general concepts that may be useful in understanding how the economics of the household interact with and inform the household’s finances; this understanding may lead to better decision-making.

Incentives

What motivates people to make certain decisions?

When we talk about the choice between renting an apartment or buying a home, or the choice between taking a job or starting a business, for instance, the whole decision framework rests on a complex set of incentives that range from internal feelings to external prompts.

External incentives in those cases might include how the federal government has incentivized home ownership through the tax code; or how, prior to the Affordable Care Act, there was a disincentive for entrepreneurs because individual health insurance was often too expensive or unobtainable.

Internal incentives often relate to an individual’s values system or their particular needs—a desire to spend more time with family, for example, creates an incentive to choose a less demanding or more flexible career path.

Taking the time to consider the various incentives involved in a family or household decision may lead to a better understanding of the choices, and ultimately a better decision.

Comparative advantage

This is another core concept in economics, although it is often discussed more in terms of how one region or country may have a production advantage based on local resources.

For the household, comparative advantage may relate to the division of labor inside the house, as in who does which chores or which parent works outside the home.

In that example, if there is a desire for only one parent to work and one has a nursing degree and the other does not have a degree, the nurse may have a comparative advantage in terms of income potential.

Another way to use the concept at the household level is in considering what to outsource; a lawn care company likely has the advantage of being very efficient at cutting and trimming a yard, and a painting contractor may do a job faster and cleaner than a homeowner.

In a case in which the incentives argue more for quick and professional work over the DIY option and saving on costs, the comparative advantage of those professional services becomes important.

Cognitive bias and behavioral finance

Economics on a societal level is very much interested in how people make decisions individually or in groups.

In some cases, people’s choices do not line up with the obvious incentives and comparative advantages the way one might expect.

Research into cognitive bias and behavioral finance attempts to reconcile some of the disconnects between expectation and reality, and these concepts apply at the household level as well.

Some examples that come up regularly in the discussion of household financial management are:

Loss aversion, in which a person may be unwilling to give up on a bad investment despite rational arguments to do so

Confirmation bias, in which people who are inclined to a particular investment are really only open to the data and research that supports their inclination

The availability heuristic, in which an anecdote from a friend's or family member’s investment experience may loom overly large for a person’s own consideration, even though that other experience may be atypical or irrelevant

Herd behavior, which happens when something that is popular becomes more popular because it is popular—think Kim Kardashian’s celebrity or flipping houses in 2006 or everyday investors getting into venture equity (for some reason, occasionally, an idea really takes hold in the public psyche, and before you know it everyone is buying tulip futures right when nobody really likes tulips)

David Wattenbarger plays trivia at bars and Boggle at home when he is not out exploring Chattanooga with his wife and two sons. He is president of DRW Financial and can be reached at David@DRWFinancial.com, on Facebook or on Twitter. This column is not intended as formal financial advice. Consult a financial or tax professional before taking action. The opinions expressed in this column belong solely to the author, not Nooga.com or its employees.