Republican Ryan Costello answers a question during a political debate for the 6th Congressional District at West Chester University Main Hall in West Chester on Monday, Oct. 20, 2014. VINNY TENNIS — DIGITAL FIRST MEDIA

For the first time in more than a decade, there is no incumbent running in Pennsylvania’s 6th Congressional District.

Republican Jim Gerlach, whose re-election efforts were regularly ranked as among the most hard-fought in the nation, announced in January that he would not seek a seventh term.

The Democrat looking to fill the open seat is familiar to 6th District voters. Manan Trivedi, 40, an Iraq war U.S. Marine veteran and doctor from Union Township in Berks County is making his third run for the office. He has not previously held elected office and lost twice to Gerlach.

By contrast, his Republican opponent, West Chester resident Ryan Costello, 38, is chairman of the Chester County Board of Commissioners and has served previous as an East Vincent Township Supervisor and as Chester County Recorder of Deeds.

Advertisement

Both candidates agreed to speak with The Mercury separately, but about the same subjects.

Trivedi agreed to speak on camera and video from his interview is posted on pottsmerc.com; Costello opted for a telephone interview.

There was at least one area of agreement — both candidates said they do not oppose same sex marriage, Trivedi as a matter of principle, Costello as a matter of settled law.

Middle Class erosion

The candidates approach to the stagnating economic conditions increasingly faced by the district’s mostly middle class voters reflected their party’s positions.

Costello echoed Gerlach’s prior calls for a “complete re-do of the tax code,” saying making it more simplified and predictable would decrease the cost of complying freeing up more money for businesses to make capital investments and expand, thus creating more jobs.

He also pointed to more domestic energy production, noting that the shale natural gas boom in Pennsylvania has created many higher-paying jobs. “You don’t need a college education to get a job with good pay in that industry. There is a tremendous future in that industry,” Costello said.

Overregulation by the federal government is also squelching investment and business expansion, Costello said, noting that many regulations are undertaken “without anyone doing a cost-benefit analysis.”

As one example, Costello again borrowed from Gerlach’s list of issues, singling out the tax on medical devices as a job killer.

Another example is the Dodd-Frank regulations which, while still needed for large Wall Street banks to prevent another economic collapse, also make it more difficult for community banks to make the kind of loans necessary for smell businesses to be established.

“A community bank’s ability to lend is the heart and soul of Main Street,” Costello said.

Trivedi said the increasing difficulty of maintaining a middle class lifestyle “is the biggest issue Congress needs to address.” With more money coming under the control of the super-rich, “the middle class is disappearing,” he said.

The first thing Congress should do is raise the federal minimum wage for $10.10 an hour, Trivedi said.

“Every time we have raised the minimum wage in this country, it has jump-started the economy,” Trivedi said. “If you give millionaires and billionaires a few extra bucks, they put just put it in their pocket. if you give a few extra bucks to people making minimum wage they put it right back into the economy.”

Trivedi said another way to support the middle class would be to slow the rapid growth in college costs.

“Big time banks on Wall Street can get very low interest rates, but kids who want to go to college, are paying rates five times or 10 times as much,” he said.

“I believe in evidence-based policies and although Washington seems to be an ‘evidence-free zone,’ these days, I can say one of the best investments you can make, even f you don’t care about kids, is in pre-K education,” Trivedi said. “By the time those kids graduate, they will make 10-times or 20-times what those who don’t get that help will make.”

Added Trivedi, “if you want to know that your economy is going to be in better shape 20 to 25 years from now, the single most important thing you can do is invest in education.”

Costello said the federal government does not control what private colleges charge, but he said the federal government can help ensure that “fair interest rates” are charged and that the terms of the loans are “transparent” to the students taking them out.

He also said more emphasis should be placed on “career awareness in junior and senior high school” so those students who do undertake large debts have a clear understanding of the return from their educational investment.

Obamacare

Trivedi said several positives came out of the Affordable Care Act, including coverage for adult children, the elimination of pre-existing conditions as a reason for being denied insurance and expanded coverage.

“The main problem is the ‘affordable care act’ is not really that affordable yet,” Trivedi said.

His experience in the medical field can help Congress find ways to save money on the medical end of the equation, Trivedi said.

“Look, 30 percent of what we do in health care makes no difference in outcomes,” he said.

Some providers, such as Geisinger Health Systems in the central part of the state, have focused on ways money can be saved and outcomes improved at the same time, such as ways to decrease in-hospital infections and incentivize doctors to make sure patients don’t return to the hospital with the same problem.

“That’s the Holy Grail of figuring out this health care crisis,” Trivedi said. “And who better to fix Obamacare than someone who’s a doctor?”

Costello said Obamacare has become a burden on small businesses and is one of the obstacles to higher wages and more Americans obtaining the middle class lifestyle.

“It’s 20,000 pages of complex rule-making and the premiums are too high for small businesses in the 6th District, which has resulted in businesses cutting hours below 30 a week and an increase in part-time employment,” he said.

Climate change

Both candidates agree that climate change is occurring.

Costello said the federal government’s response should be “promote energy efficient buildings and more domestic energy production to help lower our carbon footprint.”

The federal government should also alternative energy initiatives, he said.

Costello said he would have voted for a recent flood insurance bill, which, among other things has taxpayers providing coverage in flood-prone areas, like barrier islands, made more vulnerable by climate change and which private insurance companies have eschewed.

However he said he believes limits should be put in place on initiatives such as that.

Trivedi called climate change “the crisis of our time,” adding “all the other things we’re talking about might not matter if we’re underwater or broiling under higher temperatures.”

He agreed with Costello that the nation’s carbon footprint needs to be lowered and said the obvious answer is increased investment in alternative energy sources that don’t emit as much carbon into the air.

“We need to look at wind, solar, geo-thermal, hydro-electric. I mean China, Brazil and Germany are kicking our butts in development of solar energy resources,” Trivedi said.

Privacy Vs. Security

Both candidates also said they recognize the complexity inherent in trying to balance an increasingly hostile and diverse set of security threats against violating Americans’ right to privacy and the ease with which electronic spying makes that possible.

“As a guy who served in iraq, I certainly recognize there are a lot of evil folks out there who want to come and get us, and we need to go after them by any means necessary,” Trivedi said. “But it can’t be an affront to everything we in America stand for.”

“It seems to be a little too invasive,” said Trivedi. “Obviously, I’m not privy to any of the secret meeting, but there are smart people down there who know when enough is enough and I think we might have to see some reigning in of the (National Security Agency).”

“I’m not saying the federal government is over-stepping,” said Costello, “but I do think Congress needs to look more closely. As a private citizen, I am frequently asking myself what kind of sacrifice should we be making to be sure security is maintained?”

Costello added, “technology has promoted great progress in many ways, in the economy and quality of life, but it also raises some very complex policy questions.”

Residency

It is usually taken as a given that a candidate for office lives in the district he seeks to represent, but that is not the case in this race — any more at least.

“I think a representative from the 6th District, should live in the 6th District,” Costello said.

When Trivedi first ran for the 6th District seat, he lived within its borders.

But when redistricting came about in 2012, the lines were moved and Union Township is now in the 7th Congressional District.

“I think they were trying to figure out which side of the bed I sleep on when they were drawing the lines,” he joked.

His residence is now “a couple miles” from the district’s nearest point. And if he’s elected, Trivedi said he would not move to be within its borders, adding the law does not require it.

“Listen, I grew up in Fleetwood. My mom still lives there, to question my connection to the district is sort of ridiculous,” Trivedi said.

He said both sides play with the district lines when redistricting is done.

“It should be much more based on municipal lines, county boundaries and natural lines,” Trivedi said.

“Frankly, this is why people are so frustrated with Harrisburg and D.C. They keep playing these political games and they’re not getting anything real done.”

In case you are still wondering if you live in the 6th District, see the related article on where the lines are drawn in the TriCounty area.