An emergency notification towers, common on college campuses, will feature one-touch 9-1-1 access, mass communication capabilities, and a 360 degree camera that is activated when the tower is in use (Photo: Borough of Carteret) Story Highlights Technology security devices are designed to prevent crime and provide safety for residents.

The project is funded by a $100,000 public safety grant from the Carteret Business Partnership.

The security camera system transmits video between the Carteret Police Department and the park.

Several security utilities have been added in the borough, including emergency notifications towers and a camera system at Bishop Andrews Park in the Chrome section.

Mayor Dan Reiman and Councilman Skippy Sitarz said the installation of the devices is aimed at preventing crime and providing general safety for residents. Work on the installation is expected to be completed by the end of spring.

Funding for the project has been provided by a $100,000 public-safety grant from the Carteret Business Partnership.

"Investing in public safety has always been a top priority for my administration, and I am happy to say that investment is paying off," said Reiman. "According to recently released information from the New Jersey State Police, total crime in Carteret is down by over 16 percent. While any crime is too much, advancements in our prevention and reporting capabilities will help ensure this rate continues to decline."

The emergency notification towers, similar to ones seen on college campuses, feature one-touch 911 access, mass communication capabilities, and a 360 degree camera that is activated when the tower is in use. The security camera system will transmit video over a wireless spectrum, providing connectivity between the Carteret Police Department and the park. In turn, emergency dispatchers will be able to stream live and record video directly to the police vehicles as needed.

Reiman said the borough also has increased the size of its police force and number of walking beats, increased the minimum level of staffing, and upgraded technology in the police department by installing a Computer Aided Dispatch system that assists 911 operators.

As a result, Reiman said the borough has seen a 21 percent decrease in robberies, an 11 percent drop in assaults, a 38 percent drop in motor-vehicle thefts and a 18 percent decrease in forcible entry and thefts.

"The men and women of the Carteret Police Department work tirelessly to keep Carteret a safe place to call home, and for that, we are tremendously grateful," added Sitarz. "It is our privilege to be able to equip them with the most effective tools to 'serve and protect' the community."

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1I9B53v