It doesn’t seem to matter much these days whether the stock market goes up, down or sideways — average investors have little appetite for stocks. Consider that the Standard & Poor’s 500 index, a proxy for the stock market, posted a plump 6.5 percent gain in the fourth quarter, and yet investors withdrew money from their mutual funds in all three months.

“There is just a lack of enthusiasm to buy stocks,” said Craig Hodges, president of Hodges Capital Management, a Dallas investment firm. “Institutional investors and other professionals are in there buying stocks, but not small investors.”

The fourth-quarter performance brought the S&P 500 index back to essentially flat for the year — down 0.7 percent. Even with that tiny loss, the S&P 500 has gained more than 200 percent since the bull market began in March 2009, and the market’s five-year annualized return is above 10 percent.

Still, investors seem to have grown weary of an uncertain, volatile market where huge gains one day are often followed by big losses the next.

“This wasn’t the most painful of years, but it probably has been one of the most frustrating,” said Hodges, who co-manages the $1.8 billion Hodges Small Cap Fund. “I equate it to running on a treadmill where you think you have done some great things, but you have gone nowhere.”

Market experts often say that bull markets must climb a wall of worry. Well, this bull, born during the dark days of the global financial crisis of 2009, certainly climbed a huge wall of worry this quarter.

It faced down the first interest rate hike in almost a decade; horrific terrorist attacks in Paris and San Bernardino, Calif.; plummeting corporate earnings; sluggish global economic growth; and collapsing oil prices. Any one of these issues could have spelled the end of the third-longest-running bull market in history.

However, all of the major stock indexes lumbered through another year without lapsing into a bear market — defined as a 20 percent decline from their highs. In fact, the Nasdaq finished 2015 with a 5.7 percent gain. The Dow Jones industrial average was down 2.2 percent.

“There certainly was enough bad news this year to justify a weaker performance in the stock market,” said Robert Sweet, managing editor of Dow Theory Forecasts, an investment newsletter. “I would not have been surprised if the market had been lower with all this bad news.”

Pessimistic start

Coming into the fourth quarter, the market’s outlook was decidedly pessimistic, with the S&P 500 down 6.7 percent through the first nine months of the year. Many investors believed sharp declines in August and September were the prologue to a bear market.

The issues weighing on the market over the summer were an economic slowdown in China and Europe, fear of rising interest rates and sluggish corporate earnings. However, stocks took flight in the first month of the fourth quarter with a fine October rally that erased previous losses from the vicious summer sell-off.

In fact, the S&P 500 gained 8.3 percent in October — its best monthly performance in four years, and its fifth-best October performance since 1960. The Nasdaq was up almost 10 percent, and much of the worry over an imminent bear market subsided.

The catalyst for the October rally was strong quarterly earnings reports coming from some of the technology and e-commerce heavyweights like Amazon.com, Netflix and Alphabet Inc., the parent company of Google.

Also, worries that the slowdown in China would cause a worldwide recession began to subside. Even concern about the much-anticipated rise in short-term interest rates began to wane as investors viewed any hike as confirmation that the U.S. economy was strengthening.

So it seemed that after stumbling and bumbling its way through the first nine months of the year, the market had regained its composure and was ready to rumble as the holidays approached. The S&P 500 had even moved into positive terrain for the year by mid-November.

But the market soon lapsed into its all-too-familiar pattern of one step forward and two steps backward. It basically finished November where it started — with the same result in December.

The wall of worry

Skittish investors easily found reasons to shun stocks as the year wound down. For starters, corporate earnings growth turned negative for three consecutive quarters. Earnings fell 0.7 percent in the second quarter, declined another 1.6 percent in the third quarter and declined an estimated 4.9 percent in the fourth quarter, according to FactSet Research Systems Inc.

It was the first time companies in the S&P 500 have experienced three straight quarters of negative earnings since 2009.

“Declining earnings is one of the biggest and most overlooked issues out there,” said Sweet of Dow Theory. “However, the issue is not so much the lack of profit growth in the fourth quarter but rather the question is will profits be better in 2016. It’s hard to be confident that they will.”

The woeful profit picture was basically a reflection of the sluggish economic growth as measured by gross domestic product. It declined from a torrid 3.9 percent pace in the second quarter to 2 percent in the third quarter.

With those issues already weighing on the market, investors also had to brace for more upheaval in the Middle East and terrorist attacks both in the United States and overseas.

Europe was rocked on Nov. 13 when Islamic State attackers carried out terrorist assaults in the heart of Paris, killing 130 people. Then on Dec. 9, a couple with connections to people with Islamist extremist views opened fire inside the Inland Regional Center in San Bernardino, Calif., killing 14 people and wounding 21.

As horrific as all that was, the impact these events had on stocks was difficult to gauge. The market sold off modestly on the two days following the San Bernardino attack but then recovered most of the loss.

Collapsing crude oil prices also weighed on stocks during the final month of the quarter, with supplies far outweighing demand. The price of West Texas Intermediate crude oil dropped 40 percent during the year to just above $36 a barrel — its lowest level since February 2009.

Although cheaper crude oil is helpful to consumers, with the average price of a gallon of gasoline now below $2, it’s also an indicator that the global economy is struggling. And that worries investors and puts downward pressure on stocks. Energy companies in the S&P 500 index are expected to report an earnings decline this year of 65 percent — the biggest decline of all 10 sectors in the index.

Bright spots for 2016

Amid all this global and domestic turmoil, the U.S. economy and stock market continued to lumber along, albeit at a dilatory pace throughout the year. And one of the brightest spots involved jobs.

The labor market is doing better even as employment remains 2.8 million jobs below the pre-recession levels of 2008. The economy created 211,000 jobs in November — a bit more than the 200,000 Wall Street expected — and the unemployment rate held steady at a respectable 5 percent.

The tightening job market and at least the potential for some wage inflation gave the Federal Reserve the needed cover to raise short-term interest rates at its Dec. 16 meeting — its first hike since 2006.

At first glance a rate hike would seem to be a bad omen for the stock market as higher borrowing costs erode corporate profits and raise borrowing costs for consumers. However, the S&P 500 actually gained 1.5 percent on the day the 0.25 percent hike was announced.

It sold off slightly a few days later, but ultimately the market took the news in stride. In fact, the message from the Fed in raising rates was clearly that it believes the U.S. economy is finally strong enough to deal with slightly higher rates.

“There is nothing fundamentally wrong with the stock market or the economy,” Hodges said. “And I don’t think we are going to see a bear market in 2016.”

That dollop of optimism is built on two factors. First, stock valuations are not excessively high. The price-to-earnings ratio of the S&P 500, the most common measure of stock valuations, stands at a respectable 17, close to the historical average of 16.

During the dot-com bubble of the late 1990s, the P/E of the S&P 500 soared above 30, so current valuations are about half that. And there are many stocks with single-digit P/E ratios, meaning there are still some bargains in the market. In fact, Hodges said he has never seen so many opportunities to buy good companies at low prices.

A second factor — and this is a bit counterintuitive — involves the lack of investor enthusiasm for stocks. Historically, big sell-offs and bear markets arrive during periods of market euphoria when virtually everyone is buying stocks. That is not the case today as small investors have been jettisoning stocks all year.

Even as the market rallied early in the fourth quarter, investors continued withdrawing money from stock mutual funds. This is telling because mutual fund flows are a key barometer as to how small investors view the market.

Mutual funds had net withdrawals every month from March through December with total withdrawals topping $160 billion, according to the Investment Company Institute.

The reason this is a positive for the market in 2016 is that eventually all those who wanted to sell have already sold their stock. In Wall Street parlance, selling becomes exhausted as there are simply no sellers left.

“I don’t ever remember a time where a big bear market arrived during a time like this with such a lack of enthusiasm for stocks,” Hodges said. “That gives me confidence. Once the weak holders have sold, there is really nowhere to go but up.”