The four broadcast networks (ABC, NBC, FOX and CBS) won’t show President Obama’s immigration announcement Thursday at 8pm EST and will stick to their regularly scheduled programming.

Instead of the President’s plan for immigration reform, the majority of Americans will be tuned into “The Big Bang Theory,” “Grey’s Anatomy,” Bones” and “The Biggest Loser.”

Univision will interrupt the Latin Grammys to carry his remarks to millions of Spanish speaking viewers and the cable news networks were also planning to stream his speech.

Broadcast networks had previously snubbed the White House this Spring, when they reportedly refused to cut into prime time programming in April to carry the President’s remarks on Obamacare, according to BuzzFeed.

Tomorrow night I'm going to be announcing here from the White House some steps that I can take to start fixing our broken immigration system.

After his party’s disastrous showing in the midterm elections, Obama is preparing to flex his executive powers using the address from the White House’s East Room to announce that he is sidestepping Congress and ordering his own federal action on immigration. He revealed his plans for reform on Wednesday in a video posted to Facebook.

He’ll follow up the Thursday TV event with a pro-immigration rally in Las Vegas on Friday at Del Sol High School.

Obama had visited the same school, with a large population of non-English speaking students, in 2013 to unveil his blueprint for comprehensive immigration legislation.

Obama will attend a pro-immigration rally at Del Sol High School in Las Vegas. He is seen at the school in January. (© Jason Reed / Reuters/Reuters)

Nevada is the homestate of current Sen. Majority Leader (and soon to be Minority Leader) Harry Reid (D).

Reid had urged Obama early this week to go it alone and take executive action to reform the country’s immigration system.

Sen. Mitch McConnell, the current Republican Minority Leader, is expected to take to the Senate floor on Thursday to slam Obama for bypassing Congress.

llarson@nydailynews.com