Columbia's health care industry helped the city absorb and more quickly recover from the economic downturn of the last decade.

Three of Columbia's top 10 employers — University of Missouri Health Care, Boone Hospital Center and Truman Memorial Veterans Hospital — held their own and also have combined since 2010 for a whopping $429 million in new health care facilities and renovations.

That number includes the $190 million patient care and surgery tower at University Hospital that opened in March 2013 and also includes $50 million for the relocation of Ellis Fischel Cancer Center to the tower. The other top projects from that list include a $125 million patient care tower, parking garage and other improvements at Boone Hospital Center in 2011, and the $55.5 million Missouri Orthopedic Center, which opened in 2010.

The growth continued into 2013 with the opening of the $5.9 million Stewart Cancer Center at Boone Hospital Center and MU Health's March announcement of an affiliation between Ellis Fischel and Houston-based MD Anderson Cancer Network.

And coming soon: a 130,000-square-foot Boone Hospital medical campus on 13 acres at the corner of Nifong and Forum boulevards in south Columbia. The hospital's board of trustees has hired a project manager for the tract that it bought 21 years ago with an eye on the future. A final cost estimate for the three-phase project has not been determined.

In terms of overall health, the 2014 County Health Rankings and Roadmap, a Robert Wood Johnson Foundation program, ranked Boone County No. 2 among Missouri counties, in part because of the abundance of health care facilities. In fact, the county has a ratio of one primary care physician for every 941 residents, which is well above the state average and near the level of top-ranked counties in the country.

In addition, the Columbia/Boone County Department of Public Health and Human Services, working with dozens of representatives of local businesses, social service agencies and other community members, recently released the 2013 Community Health Assessment that maps out areas to focus energy and resources for improvement. The next phase of the five-year process is taking steps toward addressing the health assessment findings.

Not surprisingly, Columbia was a focal point for the launch of the Affordable Care Act, also called Obamacare, online marketplace health insurance sign-ups. A pair of Columbia-based organizations — Primaris Healthcare Business Solutions and the Missouri Association of Area Agencies on Aging — shared some $1.8 million in federal grants to hire staff to train as navigators to help people shop for the new health insurance options.