(The Courier-Tribune will provide detailed 2013 Fall Festival information, including a vendor list, calendar of events, stage schedules and a map in Thursday’s Get this! entertainment magazine.)

ASHEBORO — Leaves are beginning to change, nights are getting cooler and it’s time for Randolph County’s annual rite of fall — the Asheboro Fall Festival with its enticing smells, sights and sounds.

The 41st annual event takes place on Saturday and Sunday, Oct. 5-6, in downtown Asheboro. Festival-related activities kick off at 7 p.m. on Friday, Oct. 4, with the annual parade. The 36th Annual Randolph County Fall Festival 10K Run begins its trek through Asheboro streets at 8 a.m. on Saturday, Oct. 5.

Fall Festival XLI officially begins at 10 a.m. on Saturday, continuing until 6 p.m. Sunday hours are also 10 a.m.-6 p.m.

The Randolph Arts Guild (RAG)-sponsored event will offer new features this year in addition to the more than 400 vendors providing arts and crafts, plenty of favorite foods and many other items during the free street festival.

Street Stage, which debuted last year, has been expanded with “an eclectic blend of music” and other offerings for 2013 — from pottery demonstrations once again by Joseph Sand to cloggers and Dixieland tunes. This year, it’s located at the corner of South Fayetteville and Academy streets.

Bicentennial Park Music Stage will offer “a mix of Americana” this year, according to Derrick Sides, the arts guild’s executive director. The Courier-Tribune will also present its Readers’ Choice Best of 2013 Awards at this stage Saturday afternoon. And the Gospel Music Stage will again be on the front steps of PNC Bank.

A Heritage Village is being introduced on the lawn in front of the Historic Courthouse on Worth Street, representing a return to the festival’s roots as an arts and crafts show.

“We hope this grows in the future. We’ll have a select group of artists doing very traditional things,” Sides said.

This year’s festival-goers will be able to learn about fiber and spindle spinning, loom and basket weaving, herbal medicine, chair caning and soap making. Heritage Village organizer Kathy McFetters perused festival scrapbooks and newspaper clippings from the past to determine the type of crafts to feature.

“I saw pictures of dress making, lathing, blacksmithing and candlemaking. These are the kinds of things that should be featured during our Fall Festival,” McFetters said. “Randolph County continues to be a reservoir of skilled and talented people who work with their hands and practice colonial life skills.”

The festival area remains the same as in the past — on Sunset Avenue, from Fayetteville to Church streets, and along Fayetteville Street from Salisbury Street south to Kivett Street, with portions of some side streets (Worth, Scarboro and Academy streets) included.

The 68th Randolph County 4-H Dairy Show will once again take place during the festival and be located on South Fayetteville Street, at Kivett Street, at the festival’s southern end.

The family amusements area will also provide inflatables for the kids in the Bicentennial Park parking lot off Sunset Avenue.

One event is not being held this year, the annual Horseshoe Tournament which had been taking place the past 20 years at Memorial Park. Organizers said it was ended because of waning interest.

Festival-goers have a wide variety of offerings available again this year; all food sold benefits local nonprofits. All food sales benefit Randolph County nonprofits. Vendors are required to follow health department regulations and are inspected by the Randolph County Health Department during the festival.

Sides pointed out that the festival’s overall “continual priority” remains focused on arts and crafts.

“We feel we have made some strides in that.”

There is a commercial area on Academy Street, with about half of those vendors being local businesses.

“The people who come out and purchase items are helping many different organizations,” Sides said about the nonprofit and civic groups’ booths being their major fund-raisers of the year.

He also pointed out that the festival wouldn’t be possible without the support RAG receives from the City of Asheboro and Randolph County. “We would not be able to do this event without those resources.”

Several local businesses are once again helping RAG with the financial support needed for Fall Festival. This year’s sponsors are Randolph Telephone, Triad Heating & Cooling, Aaron’s, Wells Fargo, Fairfield Inn, Asheboro Dermatology & Skin Surgery Center and Hampton Inn.

Participants, other than nonprofits, in this year’s parade were asked to pay a $20 fee to cover costs of putting on the event.

“It takes time and effort for our organization to coordinate and put it on,” Sides said. “There’s no free lunch, especially since we’re using tax dollars, state and local. We need to be mindful of and make efficient use of our funds.”

Vendors also contribute a portion of their proceeds to the arts guild and must pay a registration fee to participate, the amount determined by when they sign up.

The city will be closing downtown streets to through traffic on Friday prior to the 7 p.m. parade. The streets will remain closed until about 10:30 p.m. Sunday after cleanup.

* * *

Cost to participate in this year’s 10K is $20 in advance if paid by 5:30 p.m. on Wednesday; after then, it’s $25. For information about the Fall Festival 10K, contact Asheboro Cultural & Recreation Services at (336) 626-1240 or go to www.Asheboronc.gov for an entry form.

For more information about the 41st Fall Festival, call the Randolph Arts Guild at (336) 629-0399 or go to www.AsheboroFallFestival.com or www.facebook.com/AsheboroFallFestival.