Welcome to OVERNIGHT REGULATION, your daily rundown of news from Capitol Hill and beyond. It's Monday evening here in Washington and we're expecting some pretty nasty storms tonight. Stay safe out there, everyone. Here's the latest:

THE BIG STORY

The House Rules Committee will meet on Tuesday evening to discuss a bill to repeal the U.S. country-of-origin labeling (COOL) rule, which forces beef, pork and chicken retailers to label where their meat has come from.

Countries like Canada and Mexico have long argued that the rule puts their meat at an unfair disadvantage in the U.S. market.

Last month, the World Trade Organization's said the U.S. rule violates trade obligations and imposes a disproportionate burden in record-keeping and verification requirements on meat producers and processors.

ADVERTISEMENT

Members of the COOL Reform Coalition are concerned that Canada and Mexico will now retaliate against the U.S by imposing billions of dollars worth of tariffs on U.S. food, agriculture and manufacturing.

Lawmakers are looking at how to bring the U.S. into compliance with its trade obligations. One bill, the Country of Origin Labeling Amendments Act, introduced by Rep. Michael Conaway (R-Texas.) would repeal the rule. The House Agriculture Committee passed the bill late last month by a 38-6 vote.

"This bill is a targeted response that will remove uncertainty and restore stability for the United States by bringing us back into compliance," Conaway said in a news release at the time. "We must do all we can to avoid retaliation by Canada and Mexico, and this bill accomplishes that through full repeal of labeling requirements for beef, pork, and chicken. http://1.usa.gov/1AYsG2n

The House could vote on the bill this week.

ON TAP FOR TUESDAY

The Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee will hold a hearing on "Oversight of the Transportation Security Administration: First-hand and Government Watchdog Accounts of Agency Challenges." http://1.usa.gov/1dhihDx

TOMORROW'S REGS TODAY

The Obama administration will publish 242 new regulations, proposed rules, notices and other administrative actions in Tuesday's edition of the Federal Register.

Here's what to watch for:

--The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) will issue new recommendations for police departments responding to situations where there is an active shooter or someone with an improvised explosive device.

The guidance document -- "First Responder Guidance for Improving Survivability in Improvised Explosive Device and/or Active Shooter Incidents" -- comes from a list of military strategies in responding to such situations, the agency noted. http://bit.ly/1eYItnP

--Financial regulators will look into a rule aimed at rooting out illegal Internet gambling.

The Federal Reserve and Treasury Department will renew a recordkeeping requirement intended to show that payment systems are implementing policies to "identify and block or otherwise prevent or prohibit transactions in connection with unlawful Internet gambling." http://bit.ly/1F4F7V2

--The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) will issue a new transportation security plan for protecting the shipment of classified materials.

The regulatory guide suggests what measures should be taken to "protect classified matter while in transport." http://bit.ly/1FF9mn9

--The Obama administration will issue a new rule for appraisal management companies, which comes as part of a requirement from the Dodd-Frank financial reform law.

The Treasury Department, Federal Reserve, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, Federal Housing Finance Agency, and Consumer Financial Protection Bureau will all issue new supervisory rules for appraisal management companies.

The rules go into effect in 60 days. http://bit.ly/1JzK28w

NEWS RIGHT NOW

Plastic guns: Democrats are proposing to ban plastic guns following reports of major security lapses at the nation's biggest airports. http://bit.ly/1eYLqVi

Mass shootings: The Department of Homeland Security is training local police departments how to respond to mass shootings and bombs. http://bit.ly/1G7QCz7

NFL: The Dallas Cowboys are using a drone to film the team's practices, according to ESPN. http://es.pn/1KXzVL4

Minimum wage: Democratic presidential frontrunner Hillary Clinton Hillary Rodham ClintonTrump aide: 'Hillary is the one who’s got a gender gap' WaPo editorial board: 'No excuse' for Clinton email practices Overnight Finance: Puerto Rico bill clears panel | IRS chief vows to finish term | Bill would require nominees to release tax returns MORE is throwing her support behind the fight to raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour, The Washington Post reports. http://wapo.st/1G7qFzN

Labor dispute: The Supreme Court will weigh in on a labor dispute between Tyson Foods Inc., and its employees that could have far-reaching implications for class-action lawsuits. http://bit.ly/1Gv58nI

Nuke watchdog: The Obama administration plans to downsize the number of nuclear regulators. http://bit.ly/1IqAtpi

Chemical laws: The Senate's Republican leader promised to hold a vote on legislation that would update the nation's toxic chemical laws by the end of the summer. http://bit.ly/1Qj5kem

BY THE NUMBERS

95: The percentage of cases in which undercover federal agents were able to sneak fake explosives and guns through airport security.

15,500: Transgender members of the military.

QUOTE OF THE DAY

"If detectable weapons can make it through security checkpoints, how can we expect to catch wrongdoers carrying undetectable plastic firearms?" -- Rep. Steve Israel (D-N.Y.) talking about his bill to ban plastic guns.

We’ll work to stay on top of these and other stories throughout the week, so check The Hill’s Regulation page (http://thehill.com/regulation) early and often for the latest. And send any comments, complaints or regulatory news tips our way, tdevaney@thehill.com or lwheeler@thehill.com. And follow us at @timdevaney and@wheelerlydia.

Click here to sign up for the newsletter: http://bit.ly/1pc6tau