NewsAbortion

WASHINGTON, D.C., December 11, 2013 (LifeSiteNews.com) – As the Christmas season draws near and New Year's beckons, Americans begin to look back on the highlights of the past year. Planned Parenthood has done the same in its new annual report.

ObamaCare, Wendy Davis' fashion-conscious filibuster, and the 2012 elections made its list of the top 10 “History-Making Moments” of the past year.

The adoption of ObamaCare topped that list.

“Millions more people begin getting free access to birth control, breast exams, and other preventative care as the Affordable Care Act goes into effect,” the abortion provider's 2012-2013 annual report states.

It adds that Planned Parenthood “led the fight” to include the HHS mandate, requiring all but a narrowly defined group of “religious institutions” to carry health insurance giving all employees contraception, sterilization, and abortion-inducing drugs without a co-pay.

Opponents of the law say the mandate violates the First Amendment religious liberties of employers, as well as the Religious Freedom Restoration Act.

Experts say the new health care system, the rollout of which was marked by website crashes and soaring cancellation rates, will represent a financial windfall for Planned Parenthood.

The law going into effect was one of several allegedly epochal events that would have many observers scratching their heads.

Number six says simply: “Wendy stood.”

“State Senator Wendy Davis' filibuster of a draconian abortion law lights a fire in Texas,” the report goes on to say, “as the public rises up against unprecedented attacks on women's health at the state level, from North Dakota to North Carolina.”

Davis famously wore pink sneakers and a catheter during her 11-hour marathon speech opposing a Texas bill to ban abortions after 20 weeks, as well as mandating greater safety regulations at abortion facilities. Her action and a raucous mob temporarily stalled the bill's passage. Governor Rick Perry later signed it into law after calling a special session to ensure its passage.

Number five on the list are the “historic elections” in 2012, which culminated in President Barack Obama's re-election. “Women's health plays a historic and decisive role in the presidential election and in key state elections with the largest gender gap ever recorded,” Planned Parenthood boasts.

In its annual report the organization also tells donors it is on the “offense in the states,” citing California Governor Jerry Brown's decision to sign a bill allowing non-physicians to perform abortions.

It also highlights decisions by Illinois and Colorado to mandaet “comprehensive,” rather than abstinence-based, sex education, another of Planned Parenthood's revenue streams, and touts its “global expansion” into western Kenya, lobbying Cosmopolitan magazine to “promote our brand,” and the establishment of a new program allowing teens to chat or text sexual questions to Planned Parenthood “experts.”

Click "like" if you are PRO-LIFE!

“Alex,” one such purported expert, was heavily criticized recently for telling his young audience on Planned Parenthood's Tumblr, “there’s nothing bad or unhealthy about having a big number of sexual partners.” The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) lists having multiple partners as a “sexual risk behavior.”

More recently, Planned Parenthood's Tumblr account answered the question, “Can my trans[gender] girlfriend get me pregnant?”