FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE:

CONTACT:

Michelle Alvarez



202-434-2560 or media@aarp.org

AARP ANNOUNCES NEW REVAMPED iPAD APP FOR ITS PRINT PUBLICATIONS



New App Features AARP The Magazine and AARP Bulletin in One Convenient Place

WASHINGTON, D.C. (December 23, 2013) – AARP today announced the launch of the AARP Publications App, which features AARP The Magazine and AARP Bulletin in one convenient and easily accessible location. The new app is available on iTunes and offers exclusive content and a variety of interactive features.

“Today’s announcement demonstrates AARP’s ongoing commitment to deliver the best experience for our 50+ audience across multiple platforms,” said Myrna Blyth, editorial director for AARP Media. “Our readers will now have easier access to their favorite AARP publications on the go, and can experience them in new, interactive ways. We are also looking forward to providing a wide variety of digital exclusives developed by our editorial team.”

Exclusive content available through the app includes behind-the-scenes celebrity videos, in-depth interviews, step-by-step recipes and photo slideshows. In addition, the AARP app allows users to read book excerpts, sample new music, take interactive quizzes and share stories via social media.

AARP members can sign in to the app to gain free and complete access to the publications, and non-subscribers can purchase per-issue or annual subscriptions to AARP The Magazine and AARP Bulletin via the app. Users will be able to see AARP's other publication offerings, including eBooks, as well as stay in the know by receiving alerts and digital access to special issues from AARP Publishing. To download the app visit https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/aarp-publications/id690063178?ls=1&mt=8.

About AARP

AARP is a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization, with a membership of more than 37 million, that helps people turn their goals and dreams into real possibilities, strengthens communities and fights for the issues that matter most to families such as healthcare, employment and income security, retirement planning, affordable utilities and protection from financial abuse. We advocate for individuals in the marketplace by selecting products and services of high quality and value to carry the AARP name as well as help our members obtain discounts on a wide range of products, travel, and services. A trusted source for lifestyle tips, news and educational information, AARP produces AARP The Magazine, the world's largest circulation magazine; AARP Bulletin; www.aarp.org; AARP TV & Radio; AARP Books; and AARP en Español, a Spanish-language website addressing the interests and needs of Hispanics. AARP does not endorse candidates for public office or make contributions to political campaigns or candidates. The AARP Foundation is an affiliated charity that provides security, protection, and empowerment to older persons in need with support from thousands of volunteers, donors, and sponsors. AARP has staffed offices in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Learn more at www.aarp.org.