Which? survey reveals best steriliser brands Bottle steriliser brands rated by parents

Parents rate the biggest steriliser brands including Boots and Philips Avent

Parents have rated the biggest steriliser brands - including Tommee Tippee and Philips Avent - in a recent Which? survey, so you can discover which are worth spending your money on.

We asked 1,491 parents about their experiences of using sterilisers from brands such as Boots, Innosense by Mothercare, Tommee Tippee and Philips Avent. From this we have calculated an overall customer score for each brand, as well as star ratings for ease of use, ease of cleaning, speed of the sterilising cycle and value for money.

Find out which are the best steriliser brands in our guide. If you're not a Which? member, you can gain access to all our reviews, from pushchairs to vacuum cleaners, with a £1 trial subscription to Which?.

Sterilising bottles

As babies' bodies are more vulnerable to harmful bacteria, you'll need to make sure their bottles are sterilised each time you use them, until they are at least a year old.

There are a number of ways you can sterilise bottles:

Steaming bottles in an electric steriliser

Steaming bottles in a microwave steriliser

Using cold water sterilisation, which involves specially designed tablets

By boiling the bottles in a pan on the hob

Take a look at our guide to sterilising baby bottles to find out which method would suit you best.

Tommee Tippee and Philips Avent, the most owed brands by parents in our survey, sell electric and microwave sterilisers costing between £26 and £60.

Boots also sells these types of sterilisers at a cheaper price, as well as a cold water steriliser kit. Innosense by Mothercare specialises in cold water sterilisation. Our table will help you decide whether it's worth spending more money on the pricier brands.

And remember, you'll need to wash your bottles and teats before sterilising them. If you're thinking of doing this in the dishwasher, make sure it's an efficient one that's quiet, quick and won't cost a lot to run - our guide to the Best Buy dishwashers for parents will help you find one.

Baby feeding

It's not just bottle sterilisers that might make life easier for you when feeding your baby.

We've been taking a look at some of the latest baby feeding products, such as the Tommee Tippee Prep Perfect, which claims to warm your baby's milk to the ideal temperature and the Chillipeeps Teat, which fastens to water bottles and cartons, supposedly making it easier to give your baby a drink when out and about.

We asked parents to try these out to help you decide whether they're worth spending your money on. See parents' verdicts on baby feeding products, and also visit our baby food blender reviews.

The Which? steriliser survey was carried out in March 2014.

More on this...