This week could be the true test of whether the market can brush off Greece.

A little bit of a wild ride for stocks and bonds came early this morning, spurred by that debt drama. Yields shot up, futures dropped hard. Then as fast as that move hit, it went away.

Though investors would love to forget it, the Greek topic keeps coming back and showing markets it can cause some damage.

And that’s not the only thorn in the side. Bloggers at CrackedMarket are getting pretty frustrated with the S&P 500 SPX, +0.70% which has tried and failed to crack 2,120 resistance since late April. They say there’s a “fuzzy line separating a healthy consolidation from far less productive stalling.”

“While every selloff bounces because confident owners refuse to sell their stock for a discount, those with cash are proving just as stubborn,” the CrackedMarket bloggers say. You might as well flip a coin if you want to figure out where this market is going next. More on that here.

It has been a fairly interesting overnight session at least. The dollar USDJPY, -0.42% popped above ¥125 in Asia — to a fresh 12-year high — until traders started piling in to take profits. One analyst expects it will only take a couple of upbeat pieces of economic data to move the buck solidly above that level. And we all know what’s coming Friday.

Yen weakness is going to become a big deal, says Albert Edwards, Société Générale’s bear in residence. While deflation fears are fading in the West, China’s economic situation has become more precarious. An ever-weakening yen will force devaluations across Asia and send a tidal wave of deflation westward, he says in a note out today.

Edwards, of course, is like a dog with a bone when it comes to deflation warnings, and he predicted a level of ¥145 against the dollar USDJPY, -0.42% by the end of March. But the dollar is an integral part to our “call of the day”, as the behavior of the buck could be make or break for whether the S&P 500 corrects this year.

And while you’re thinking about the dollar, maybe thinking about gold breaking out of its slumber as well. Our “chart of the day” says boring gold is about to get less boring. But not in a good way.

Key market gauges

Eurozone inflation and Greek worries are toying with this market. The latest? Greece’s creditors have reached a deal, which now goes to the Greek government. It was a bit of a woolly ride early on this morning. Futures on the Dow US:YMM5 and the S&P US:ESM5 fell sharply, then recovered, and are now flat. Europe SXXP, +1.29% is in the red. Shanghai stocks SHCOMP, -0.97% gained more than 1.5%, but mild losses were seen elsewhere. Crude US:CLN5 has moved up above $61 on a weak dollar and upbeat comments out of Saudi Arabia’s oil minister. Gold US:GCN5 is up a hair.

The quote

“In all of our schools it is illegal to have guns on campus, so again and again these guys go and shoot up these f***ing schools because they know there are no guns there. They are monsters killing six-year-olds” — Actor Vince Vaughn in a British GQ interview on how firearms in schools will prevent mass shootings.

The economy

Factory orders are coming at 10 a.m. Eastern, and figures on motor-vehicle sales will also be released.

The stat

ZeroHedge has crunched some numbers. So John Kerry falls off his bike in France, is flown to Geneva in a helicopter, then to Boston for surgery — via a “specially-equipped” C-17 airplane “used to carry over 100 combat troops and equipment into battle.” Assuming roughly 10 hours flight time, that’s at least a $250,000 bill for taxpayers.

The buzz

Dollar General DG, +0.85% is up after results. Check out more mentionables in Movers.

Apple AAPL, +1.76% TV may not be announced at next week’s Worldwide Developer Conference after all.

The chart

So far this year, gold prices are up less than 0.5%. Wow. Hence some have probably stopped looking at this commodity for thrills. But Tiho at The Short Side of Long blog says get ready, because a big move is coming.

Short Side of Long

Unfortunately for the gold bugs, it’s not because of good news or anything like that. “Despite awful performance, oversold price and persistent bearish sentiment, I believe that gold prices have not yet bottomed,” says Tiho. And where gold goes, silver probably is headed, too. Read the full blog here.

The call

A trio of weak commodities, dollar strength and a low 10-year yield TMUBMUSD10Y, -0.93% have been supporting the S&P 500, according to Stifel’s Barry Bannister and Jesse Cantor. But we’ve reached the end of the road on this line of support for equities, they say.

Here’s their worst case: “Unless all three reverse, we see the S&P 500 correcting around 10% to 1,900 in the seasonally weak May to October 2015 period,” said the strategists. Stock gains have been tightly correlated with the growth of the Fed’s balance sheet (seen in chart below) and the market needs to break away from that, they note.

Bloomberg/Federal Reserve/Stifel

A rebound in growth would help stocks pull free from that pattern, Bannister and Cantor say. And they are also upbeat about what they see lately: rising commodity prices, a dollar pullback and perking up of 10-year yields. They think oil will continue to recover and have set a first-quarter 2016 target for Brent at $80 a barrel, based on an expected 10% drop in the trade-weighted dollar. That could mean an S&P 500 at 2,350. That is, if that trio keeps reversing.

Random reads

A ship carrying more than 450 people has sunk in the Yangtze River in China.

Don’t settle for Paris. Visit every “Game of Thrones” location this summer.

The best restaurant in the world.

Benjy isn’t a “gay” bull after all.

Politics? All millennials ever learned they got from Facebook.

A million followers in four hours. Caitlyn Jenner sets a new Twitter record.

Need to Know starts early and is updated until the opening bell, but sign up here to get it delivered once to your email box. Be sure to check the Need to Know item. The emailed version will be sent out at about 7 a.m. Eastern.

More from MarketWatch