SARASOTA - To a packed house at the Sarasota Opera House, former Rep. Patrick Kennedy led a discussion on the future of mental health, ranging for improvements in brain research, insurance coverage for mental health treatment and breaking the stigma of mental illness.

“Everyone can benefit from having a better understanding to mental illness,” Kennedy said, in a plea to treat mental illness just like any other illness.

Kennedy sponsored the Mental Health Parity Act of 2008, which requires insurance companies to pay for mental health treatment equally as they do for physical illnesses. Because of federal rulemaking, the law has only been in place for about one year.

“We may not be able to get rid us of the societal biases against people with mental illness, but we can make sure that people are not legally discriminated against,” Kennedy said.

“With the parity law, it’s not just about trying to change attitudes. We can make sure the insurance companies follow the law and we can improve the lives of millions who are currently not getting treatment,” Kennedy said.

The proof is in the results, Kennedy said.

“Our best supporters of parity are Wall Street companies who can’t afford to have workers depressed and missing work,” Kennedy said. “They know that employee is not going to be as productive and it will cost them money.”

The economic bottom line also is why he thinks that Florida lawmakers will eventually expand Medicaid eligibility by taking federal dollars from the Affordable Care Act. Currently, state lawmakers have refused to accept $51 billion in federal funds to expand Medicaid coverage to about 800,000 low-income Floridians.

“The good news is that the numbers will validate the most economic ways to take care of people, and whether or not to expand coverage will become less of a philosophical argument about whether you think that people should be treated with human dignity, to what is the most cost effective way to limit my liability for your illness,” Kennedy said.

It is a cold argument, Kennedy said, but “the politics of the decision will be taken out as the numbers prove the point.”

“It makes a lot more financial sense to keep people healthy, and in business, it’s all about the bottom line.”

In addition to championing coverage of mental illness treatment, Kennedy also detailed his plans to lead the way on brain research. Through The Kennedy Forum, launched on the 50th anniversary of his uncle John F. Kennedy’s announcing of the mission to the moon, Kennedy is convening leading brain researchers to unlock the mysteries of the brain, calling it a journey into “inner space.”

“We don’t put a value on the most important research we can do in the nation, which is to understand everything from Alzheimer’s to autism to addiction,” Kennedy said. “We need a NASA for the race to ‘inner space,’ ” or brain research.”

He also plans to support research into traumatic brain injuries and post-traumatic stress disorder in veterans, and use that research to better understand other brain illness such as dementia and Parkinson’s disease. He called the research into battlefield mental illnesses our “Sputnik moment” for brain research.

“The Sputnik for our research into inner space is the signature wound of war in Iraq and Afghanistan-post-traumatic stress disorder and traumatic brain injury.”

“That is taking our heroes’ lives in record numbers. They’re still suffering even after they come home. It is our obligation as a nation to better understand and treat these illnesses — it’s a national security issue,” Kennedy said.

At the free event, hosted by the Mental Health Community Centers Inc., a Sarasota-based nonprofit that provides support services for people with mental illness, Kennedy also shared stories from his past struggles with mental illness and addiction.

Kennedy has been treated for addiction to painkillers and diagnosed with bipolar disorder, and detailed his experience growing up around his mother, Joan Bennett Kennedy, who was an alcoholic and severely depressed, and his father, Ted Kennedy, who wore a bulletproof vest daily after his brother was assassinated.

“I watched my mother paralyzed by alcoholism and a mood disorder, and as she walked through the house at 2 p.m. in her terrycloth robe, obliterated, everyone turned away,” he recalled. “This disease isolates you, because what we all do is turn away.”

He advocated for teaching better coping skills to children so they can better handle life’s struggles.

“There’s trauma all around us, and unless we help children out, they’ll carry the wounds for the rest of their lives,” he said. “We need to teach them how to be in touch with their mental health so they know they can get help.”