Six grade reading students Tamyra Myers, left, and Dorothy Follins, right, participate in a class activity at Amistad Academy in New Haven, Conn., Tuesday Jan. 25, 2005. (AP Photo/Jessica Hill)

HARTFORD, Conn. (WTNH)- A hearing in Hartford is taking on the topic of Charter Schools. These schools are claiming success with high scores and graduation rates. But some lawmakers have issues with the way these mostly private companies are running the schools, and while they look into that, they want a moratorium – no new charter schools for two years.

Pro-charter school groups held a rally before the education committee hearing on the moratorium.

“Public charter schools in Connecticut are getting results,” according to Jeremiah Grace, Connecticut State Director for the Northeast Charter School Network. “Hitting pause to new charter schools sends the wrong message to Connecticut families.”

Advocates lined up in the Legislative Office Building to say the state needs more charter schools, not fewer. 3,600 students are currently on waiting lists, and they say that there are already enough regulations.

“Connecticut already makes establishing a charter school hard enough,” said Rob Reed, the Senior Director of Legal Affairs for the National Alliance for Public Charter Schools. “It has some of the most restrictive limitations on charter school growth in the country.”

Charter schools point to impressive numbers to back up their claims. News8 visited Amistad Academy in New Haven two years ago when every graduating senior got into college. The American Federation of Teachers points out that may be because charter schools can do what called “cherry-picking.” In other words, take students who are not meeting goals and kick them out, back into public schools.

“There’s two times the amount of suspensions and expulsions at the secondary grade levels, said Connecticut AFT President Melodie Peters. “And more than five times at the grammar school level.”

Charter school proponents say they don’t cherry-pick. At the rally, the head of one school said, “We don’t steal good students, we create them.”