Photo

Pittsburgh Pirates Manager Clint Hurdle greets each new player on his team with a meeting in his office. It was no different upon Ike Davis’s arrival, even though he had come from a tumultuous situation with the Mets.

Davis, after slumping for more than a year, had lost his job as first baseman to Lucas Duda. He was bombarded with questions regarding his future, though he had little control over it. At times it appeared that Davis had lost his confidence, and he was certainly unhappy about having to be a bench player.

In those first few moments in the Pirates clubhouse, Hurdle simply sought to reassure Davis that he would play a pivotal role on his new team.

“Down the road, we’ll get to where you’ve been,” Hurdle recalled telling Davis. “I just want to let you know where you are and who we are. And we’re happy to have you. I think you’re going to add value in everything we do.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Don’t try to learn everyone’s name overnight. Just bite off little pieces. You’re here to play. Try to find a reset button.”

Davis’s career has been reset indeed with the April 18 trade to the Pirates. In 23 games with Pittsburgh before his return to New York for a weekend series with the Yankees, Davis had a .286 batting average and a .797 on-base plus slugging percentage. Last year, the worst of his career, Davis hit just .205 with a .661 O.P.S., and with the Mets this year, his batting average in 12 games was 208.

Photo

Since Davis’s trade, in which the Mets got Zack Thornton, a minor league relief pitcher, Duda has a .237 average and a .655 O.P.S. For now, it appears that the Mets may have traded the wrong first baseman.

“You guys are putting too much emphasis on the Mets,” Davis told reporters before Saturday’s game. “I had a great couple years, but I don’t hate them. They’re not really in my focus anymore. I had a great time, I made great friendships, but I’m on the Pirates and there’s not a hatred toward the Mets of, like, vengeance. I’m fine. I’m happy where I’m at. I had a great time with the Mets and I’m not with them anymore. I’m not going to do anything weird to the Mets. I’m just going to go play.”

Upon joining the Pirates, Davis was presented with some scouting information that the team had compiled about him. So far, that information seems to have helped Davis correct his approach. Davis has also been liberated from the high-pressure New York environment. During one stretch with the Pirates, Davis went hitless for 22 consecutive plate appearances but did not have to address the situation with reporters. Davis joked that in New York there would have been a graphic about his hitless streak in one of the tabloids.

“That happens all the time,” Davis said of slumps. “It’s just when you have to talk about your bad streaks every day, you can think about it more than you want to.”

In that first talk with Hurdle, Davis learned that the team was happy to have him and would give him playing time. He no longer had to worry about having to prove himself with each at-bat.

“Yeah, it’s nice to play for someone that actually wants you or thinks that you can help the team,” Davis said. “Obviously the Mets thought I could help the team for a couple years, ’cause I was there for almost five. I had one bad season, and they had to make a change. And they traded me away.

“I don’t really know what else to say about that. It’s nice to be with a team that likes you. I don’t think the Mets hated me, until, you know. ...”