Chanting and carrying signs, mental health workers from Kaiser Permanente strike along Vaca Valley Parkway in front of the local hospital on Wednesday. Greg Trott -- The Reporter

Kaiser Permanente mental healthcare workers stood up for patient care along Vaca Valley Parkway, another stop on day 3 of a statewide, weeklong strike.

The bone chilling temperatures Wednesday morning didn’t stop the 30 picketers from spreading their message, “Care delayed is care denied.”

Thousands of Kaiser Permanente mental health clinicians and other healthcare providers, members of the National Union of Healthcare Workers (NUHW), are participating in a week-long, multi-city strike to protest Kaiser’s approach to treating patients seeking help with mental health issues.

Bundled up carrying a picket sign, Marsh Maslan, a licensed clinical social worker who has worked for Kaiser for 25 years, said that today Kaiser has the lowest standard of care, in terms of staffing, that she has witnessed.

She said timing is the issue.

“I could have a very acute client who might be suicidal or even a mother of a child that was murdered and my ability to respond is delayed,” she said. “The stress that creates is tremendous.”

“That’s really what has galvanized us,” Maslan said. “The jobs are not sustainable. We really need help.”

Dr. Horace Beach, a psychologist for Kaiser Vallejo agreed.

“The administration won’t admit there is a staffing problem,” he said. “They don’t want to spend any money. Hiring more staff will solve the problem.”

He explained that the system is “front loaded” in that the number of intakes have increased, but the clients then they have to wait weeks before being seen by someone on staff. Instead, Beach explained that the patients are then sent to group therapy in the meantime.

“They won’t see a therapist for weeks and group therapy isn’t the answer for everyone,” he said. “The return access time is the problem. It’s the dark secret of Kaiser.”

“The problems have only increased with more patients accessing care through the Affordable Care Act,” he continued. “Psychiatry has been hit hard, no doubt about it. Even the group sessions are breaking down because of lack of staff.”

John Nelson, Kaiser Permanente’s vice president of Government Relations, explained that finding equipped mental healthcare workers is a challenge throughout the country.

“There is a shortage of mental healthcare workers in America,” he said, adding that nationally there is a push for more people to enter the profession. “It’s a real thing and we’re trying to change it.”

Advertisement

Nelson said that Kaiser Permanente isn’t immune to that need.

“The issue is finding qualified licensed therapists,” he said.

Even so, Nelson said, Kaiser has hired 25 percent more licensed therapists between 2011 and mid 2014, that does not include those that were hired to fill positions. He said Kaiser saw an 8 percent increase in membership during that same time and not all were mental health patients.

“It’s not been easy at all because of the shortage,” he said. “There is absolutely more to do and we’ll continue that effort. We know there is a need and we’re not finished hiring.”

He added that the strike is unfortunate.

“It’s disappointing that the strategy is to attack the organization,” he said. “We’re committed to work through those disagreements. We support the right to join or not to join a union, and to strike. But strikes are never productive or the solution.”

He said Kaiser is more than willing to continue with negotiations with the bargaining unit if they would return to the table.

The strike continues today at the Kaiser Medical Center in Vallejo, and in South Sacramento, Santa Rosa and Oakland on Friday.