Photo: Getty Images Selling insurance is important but challenging work. In a competitive industry that’s changing rapidly, the obstacles are many. But knowledge is power, as they say, so in Retirement Advisor’s recent Advisor Survey we asked your peers to name these obstacles directly. The answers ran the gamut from specific product concerns to looming legislation worries to straightforward sales hurdles that would resonate equally with those who sell houses or medical equipment or tax planning advice. Following are the five obstacles that independent insurance agents say are the most significant they’ll face this year, along with suggestions for how to meet them head-on. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

1. Lead generation (50.59%) Selling insurance products comes with its own unique set of lead gen challenges, not least among them the fact that prospects are either a) reluctant to admit they need what you’re selling, as is often the case with life insurance products or b) afraid to plan for one of their own looming obstacles, namely, how they will fund their retirement.

2. The economy (44.71%) The U.S. economy is making baby strides back to full health, but we’re still nowhere near the flush years of the late ‘80s and ‘90s. Prospects must make calculated calls about how to invest their money. There is also the fear factor: plenty of consumers are hesitant to trust financial advisors of all stripes, with insurance advisors on the low end of the spectrum. A recent Deloitte study revealed that just 20 percent of consumers believe banks to be highly trustworthy, while 14 percent highly trust life insurers; 13 percent, annuity carriers; and 11 percent, insurance agents and brokers.

3. Health care reform (35.29%) The beast that reared its head in early 2010 with the signing of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act shows few signs of quieting five years later. More than a year after the act was formally rolled out, consumers still have questions about their coverage options, fears over losing favored provider access and doubts that they can afford the level of coverage they need.

4. Industry legislation (20%) It’s been a busy few days in Washington, as anyone following the ongoing debate over the DOL fiduciary standard will tell you. This piece of legislation — still in its drafting stage — is just one of the regulatory items awaiting resolution, effectively creating a waiting game for advisors. When resolution will actually come is anyone’s guess, but the prospect of tighter industry regulation in coming years seems certain. And it’s one certainty that leaves uncertainty in its wake. It’s difficult to play when you don’t know the rules of the game. Your clients may not face the same oversight concerns, but they are none too pleased with the current state of government themselves. When asked about the biggest fears clients are facing, 47 percent of survey respondents listed the government as a source of fear.