Tensions flared Tuesday between the Story County Board of Supervisors and other county employees over the handling of mandated changes to health insurance options and the reorganization of two liaison staff positions that some viewed as problematic.

Although separate, the two issues became intertwined at the board’s weekly meeting, in part because of rumblings about whether the more than $2 million in flexible spending account money employees will no longer receive beginning July 1 because of an Affordable Care Act ruling would go toward funding the staff positions. (It wouldn’t, supervisors said.)

Others questioned the timing of the reorganization when the future of the county’s health insurance plan was uncertain.

In what was perhaps the most contentious moment of the meeting, Story County Auditor Lucy Martin questioned the timing of the board’s decision to reorganize the positions — intended to improve the efficiency of departmental communications with the board — when morale was low because of the regionalization of the county’s mental health program and health insurance change.

“In my opinion, we don’t know what the status quo is,” she said. “The status quo for the county is crumbling beneath us.”

“Where you’re going to superlative kind of statements that aren’t even close to accurate, it doesn’t help anything,” Sanders said. “Just tone it down a little.”

“OK, thanks Dad,” Martin shot back, before saying she thought the board had improved efficiency in recent years but risked “throwing all of that credibility away with this proposal.”

The board had proposed reshuffling current staff, moving Community Services Director Deb Schildroth into the position of director of external operations and county services and adding the position of director of internal operations and human resources to Human Resources Director Alissa Wignall’s workload.

One of the promotions, Sanders said, would come with a salary increase.

Other county employees split their allegiances. County Attorney Stephen Holmes sided with the board, noting it had broad discretion in hiring decisions.

But Information Technology Director Barb Steinbeck agreed with Martin’s assessment of “crumbling” morale.

Environmental Health Director Margaret Jaynes said the reorganization was an “insult” to other department heads, a suggestion they were inadequately efficient. Jaynes also criticized what she viewed as a lack of competition for the positions, arguing it seemed that Wignall and Schildroth had been “tapped on the shoulder” for them.

Earlier, sheriff’s Deputies Adam Christian and Bret Johnson grilled the board about how the flexible account money would be used next fiscal year and why employees were only informed this month about the change when, as Sanders said, the board knew a mandated change was a possibility 2 1/2 years ago.

“You realized 2 1/2 years ago that this could have been a problem and yet, because you thought that the issue wasn’t going to be a problem, you didn’t explore any other options,” Christian said.

Sanders objected, replying the county hired a broker to review the county’s insurance system then, and Sanders had argued that the county should explore ditching the flexible accounts “but was shouted down like you wouldn’t believe.”

He said he was only made aware of the required change this month.

The county’s flexible plan, which will become unlawful beginning July 1 because of an Internal Revenue Service ruling last November, allows employees to collect $575 a month in lieu of taking county health insurance that supervisors acknowledged was subpar.

Because taking the cash no longer will be allowed starting next fiscal year, the majority of the 300-plus full-time employees who opt out of the county insurance don’t know what will come of the $6,900 they would otherwise continue to receive.

Supervisors stressed that the flexible account money would not go toward the reorganized staff positions but to the county’s general fund.

“I think, looking at the initial numbers, that we will end up in a situation where Story County is spending more money total than it is right now on the health benefit package,” Sanders said.

“It’s going to mean that different employees get different things out of that package … (but) it’s in a pool, it’s going to stay in a pool, it’s just going to be divided differently.”

Sanders predicted that three separate health insurance options would be available for employees next fiscal year.

Supervisors took no action on the insurance question, which wasn’t on the agenda. But after they voted unanimously to appoint Wignall and Schildroth to the reorganized positions effective July 1, the sheriff’s deputies and the other critics of the board’s decisions exited the room.

Supervisors subsequently cast another unanimous vote to establish a new county job position for a “human resources generalist.”

Wignall guessed that the position would come with a salary of around $50,000.