Colorado St. earns solid road win in final minutes

Colorado State receiver Charles Lovett hauls in a 12-yard pass for the game-winning score Saturday at Boston College as defender Bryce Jones looks on at Alumni Stadium. It was Lovett's only catch in a 24-21 victory. ( Stephan Savoia / Associated Press )

CHESTNUT HILL, Mass. — The play was Colorado State's last chance, so quarterback Garrett Grayson turned to his last option.

Facing a fourth-and-10 from the Boston College 12-yard line, Rams quarterback Garrett Grayson found Charles Lovett wide open in the right corner of the end zone, making the Rams a 24-21 winner against the Eagles at Alumni Stadium.

The thing about the play was it wasn't designed for Lovett. In fact, the senior who hadn't had a catch all game figured his day would end that way.

"I knew I wasn't getting the ball," Lovett said. "I knew it in my head. I just had to run fast to clear something out, and doing my job paid off."

Colorado State running back Dee Hart (10) is tackled by Boston College linebacker Mike Strizak (30) during the first quarter. (Stephan Savoia / Associated Press)

The play was designed to go to the other side, but every Ram to the left was covered. Grayson rolled to his right where he found Lovett — the final option on the play — wide open. Grayson was afraid he put too much on the pass, but Lovett collected it and tapped his toes for the score, saying the burgundy color of the end zone gave him clarity on just how far he could wander.

The two seniors have run the play over and over and practice, but never with the same ending.

"I've never thrown that route on that play even in practice," Grayson said. "So that says that, and we've repped that play thousands of times. I've never thrown that pass in any practice, any game."

Advertisement

The play made up for many missed chances early on, when Grayson threw two interceptions in the first half and the Rams couldn't get anything going. Despite the defense playing well early, Boston College was able to build up a 14-0 lead with 5:28 remaining in the first half before the Rams fought back.

Grayson guided a nine-play drive that culminated in a 21-yard touchdown catch by Rashard Higgins, a short throw in which he found open space and Dee Hart cleared a path to the corner of the end zone with a strong block. It didn't hurt that Boston College missed a field goal on the final play of the half, either.

Getting the ball first to start the third, the Rams came up with another scoring drive, capped by Treyous Jarrells' 6-yard run.

"We were down 14-0 at one point and I was kind of all over the place, like I was against CU in the first half," said Grayson, who was just 12-of-21 for 115 yards at the break. "I wasn't accurate, and I'd thrown two picks. I just can't do that against a good team. I needed the final drive of the first half to get some confidence back in me and get us in a rhythm."

Grayson finished 27-of-41 for 268 yards and two scores, but the running game also returned to the equation, picking up 162 on the ground behind a 117-yard day from Dee Hart on just 10 carries. Of that, 48 came on the final drive for CSU, 38 on one play when it looked as if Hart was going to break free for the score, but was caught from behind.

It was the defense that gave the offense a chance to make a difference, stopping Boston College and it's vaunted running game on the first three series of the game. The Eagles did produce three scoring drives — all of them lasting 11 plays, each covering at least 80 yards. Boston College ran for 239 yards on the day. Normally, a total like that won't impress a coach, but that was nearly 100 yards less than their average (336.3), which ranked third in the nation.

"The physical nature in which we played, I was proud of that," McElwain said. "I can't say enough about our defense and the opportunities they gave us early in the game. For the most part, we controlled their quarterback. He got out on three specific third downs I can think of on the top of my head. They got after him a little it, and that was a huge interception obviously by Bernard (Blake) toward the end."

Blake's pick came as the Eagles had driven down to the CSU 27, but under pressure, Murphy hung up a ball he shouldn't have, and Blake stepped in front of the play. The offense didn't capitalize off the turnover, but it did help swing confidence a bit.

Murphy, was averaged 125 yards on the ground before Saturday, was limited to 79 on 16 carries, including a 7-yard scoring run. He was 12-of-18 throwing the ball for 169, with the Rams sacking him once.

After Colorado State tied the game at 14, the Eagles regained the lead with Jon Hilliman, who rushed for 128 yards, scoring on a 5-yard run. Colorado State countered with a 33-yard field goal on the second play of the final quarter, then things stayed stagnant until there was only 5:02 on the clock and CSU had 90-yards to go.

With one play to get at least 10 for a first, the Rams were still confident, even he guy who figured he would play no part in the action.

"I actually looked one of their defenders in the eye and was smiling," said Lovett, who with the catch extended his streak to 25 straight games with a reception. "I don't know how you guys will take that, but that's what I did. I continued to smile after the play, and I knew I wasn't getting the ball."