NAIROBI, Kenya —Quiet and respectful at the mosque as a boy, Hassan Abdi Dhuhulow later became angry and radicalized, people in the coastal town in Norway where he grew up said Friday of the Somali native — the first Westgate Mall attacker to be identified.

Security camera images show the 23-year-old and three other gunmen firing coldly on shoppers as they made their way along store aisles after storming the upscale mall four weeks ago.

Until recently, investigators had referred to the attackers only by the colors of their shirts. However, two officials in Nairobi, one Western and one Kenyan, confirmed Friday that one of the gunmen had been identified as Dhuhulow.

The suspect’s 26-year-old sister, reached in the southern Norwegian town of Larvik, said his family was unaware of any role he may have played in the four-day siege that killed at least 67 people.

“I don’t want to believe this. I don’t believe that this is him. It doesn’t look like him. It isn’t him,” Idman Dhuhulow said from the quiet town of 40,000 nestled between mountains and the sea where the family lived after moving from Somalia in 1999.

She said her brother went to the Somali capital of Mogadishu for a three-month visit in 2009, then moved to Somalia for good in March of the following year.

Newly released images from the mall’s security cameras show four men armed with AK-47 rifles firing on defenseless shoppers. At one point, a gunman is seen shooting a man trying to hide behind a statue of an elephant. Bleeding profusely, the man squirms. Then another gunman comes back and finishes him off.

In other scenes, terrified shoppers and employees are seen scrambling for safety, some scuttling like crabs, as tracer bullets flash overhead. In another, shoppers with children are herded toward a door by a gunman.

Authorities have been unable to identify any of the assailants from the bodies pulled from the rubble of the mall, where a raging inferno tore through its main department store and a roof parking lot collapsed.

Charred human remains recovered Thursday were awaiting forensic tests Saturday to determine if they belong to the attackers. They filled two plastic containers measuring a foot wide and a foot across, and were recovered along with four AK-47 rifles from a section of the mall that collapsed as security forces battled the terrorists, authorities said Friday.

The Somali Islamic militant group al-Shabab claimed responsibility for the Sept. 21 attack, saying it was in retaliation for Kenya sending troops into Somalia to go after the extremists. Kenyan officials initially said it was carried out by 10 to 15 gunmen, but security video shows only four. A police official said three suspects are in custody, though none directly took part in the attack.

“He was a quiet guy,” a former high school classmate of Dhuhulow’s said. “He was very committed to his religion, but not extreme. He brought a prayer mat to school.”