iStockphoto

There are a lot of companies angling to become the key player if and when the TV ad business embraces automated, or “programmatic,” buying and selling–something that has been slow to materialize. As CMO Today recently reported, the Web video ad buying technology firm TubeMogul is one of them.

Now the company’s TV ambitions are coming into clearer view. TubeMogul, which went public earlier this year, is looking to position itself at the center of what the company sees as TV’s impending move to automation. TubeMogul on Thursday is planning to announce a new software product, TubeMogul PTV, designed to help marketers buy TV ads more like the Web.

“The methods for buying TV haven’t fundamentally changed,” said TubeMogul CEO Brett Wilson. “We think its future is automated and data-driven, and we built software to enable that.”

Specifically, TubeMogul says its new PTV software will help advertisers buy local broadcast, cable and satellite TV ads through a variety of sources. Those sources include several technology companies that aggregate local TV ad space, including AudienceXpress, WideOrbit (as CMO Today previously reported) clypd and FreeWheel.

Mr. Wilson acknowledged this new product’s limitations, but said that advertisers might be surprised by how much TV ad inventory is currently available through its software. “What’s not available is inventory from networks yet,” he said. “We think it will be eventually. And there are definitely different levels of automation available depending upon what partners we are working with.”

He contested the notion that TubeMogul will only have access to subpar inventory, noting that 35% of it is in prime-time programming.

That claim is counter to the general perception about the state of programmatic TV–that what little inventory is available represents the leftovers. In fact, TubeMogul says that ad inventory from 80 different TV networks will be available via the software.

The brand 3M tested the new TubeMogul PTV software over four weeks in August and September. Chris Luna, 3M’s digital media specialist, said he was able to execute a national TV buy using the new software, with 80% of the ad impressions running on top 10 TV networks, and nearly a third of the ads airing in prime time.

Mr. Luna said the test helped 3M enjoy some of the same data and targeting insights available in online ad campaigns. “We were able to uncover so many things about the quality of the audiences we are buying,” he said. “Also, we were able to more narrowly target, get greater efficiency, and compare this network versus that one, this media mix versus that one.”

Does that mean 3M is about to blow up its overall media plan, pull all of its money out of TV and shift to digital? Hardly. Mr. Luna wouldn’t even commit just yet to using the new TubeMogul software again. But he did say that tools like this will help more advertisers figure out where to spend marketing dollars on a macro level.

“I think we start to look at it more holistically,” he said.

The digital agency DigitasLBi is also testing the new software. Adam Shlachter, the agency’s chief investment officer, said that while right now, programmatic TV represents “experimentation,” more marketers are interested in employing the same data for targeting consumers on the Web for TV campaigns.

“Now that we all have a better understanding of our audiences, you want to reach them across screens,” he said. “There is a tremendous opportunity here and it’s just the tip of the iceberg.”