The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey will take a re-vote on a controversial decision to cut NJ Transit's lease payments on a park-and-ride lot from $907,000 a year to just a dollar, an official of the bi-state agency said.



Recent reports of the original Feb. 9, 2012 vote by the Port Authority Board of Commissioners to let NJ Transit use the lot for free raised concerns that Chairman David Samson was in a conflict of interest, because his law firm, Wolff & Samson, had been retained by the state transit agency to help maximize revenues from its park-and-ride lots.



When The Record broke the story earlier this week, it reported that Samson had failed to recuse himself from the vote. However, in a highly unusual public notification, Port Authority General Counsel Darrell Buchbinder, the agency's top lawyer, released a letter addressed to Samson stating that the chairman had indeed recused himself, but that due to a "clerical inadvertence" the recusal was not duly noted in the meeting minutes.



A Port Authority source, who asked not to be identified because the board has not been officially notified of the March 19 re-vote, said today that Executive Director Patrick Foye of New York and Deputy Executive Director Deborah Gramicioni of New Jersey agreed today to the unusual do-over.



"Given the recent questions involving the park-and-ride lot, they thought the board should have the opportunity to reconsider the item," the source said.



Before the 49-year lease was approved, NJ Transit had paid the Port Authority $907,000 a year for the lot, located in northern Hudson County, off Route 1&9. Commuters pay $9.50 per day for a parking space and a round-trip NJ Transit bus ticket to the Port Authority Bus Terminal in Manhattan.



After retaining Wolff & Samson, NJ Transit paid the firm as much as $1.5 million to "advise" the agency on how to generate additional revenue from its parking facilities, The Record reported.



A spokeswoman for Samson has insisted that the 74-year-old real estate lawyer and former state attorney general holds himself to the highest ethical standards.



Samson, who was named Port Authority chairman by Gov. Chris Christie after chairing Christie's transition team, has come under intense public scrutiny amid ongoing legislative and criminal investigations into September's George Washington Bridge access lane closures.



In March 2012, one month after the park-and-ride vote, Samson was among the Port Authority commissioners to approve a $256 million renovation of the Harrison PATH station. The vote came just three months after a developer represented by Samson's law firm proposed converting a nearby warehouse into luxury apartments.



Samson's law firm was also at the center of a controversy in Hoboken. That city's mayor, Dawn Zimmer, claimed she was twice approached by the Christie administration to persuade her to approve a three-block development project sought by the Rockefeller Group, which was represented at the time by Wolff & Samson. She alleged the administration threatened to withhold Sandy funds because she refused to expedite the project.



Samson's firm has pulled in nearly $5 million from government contracts since Christie became governor four years ago. Two former Christie administration officials work there as well.