WASHINGTON — Gov. Chris Christie, who has not been shy about criticizing his rivals for the Republican presidential nomination, called out U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas on Monday for supporting a group challenging sitting GOP senators.

Christie was referring to Cruz's support of the Senate Conservatives Fund, a political action committee founded by then-U.S. Sen. Jim DeMint (R-S.C.) that has supported insurgent candidates in Republican primaries, including challengers to current Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky and Thad Cochran of Mississippi in 2014.

On Sunday, Cruz, unlike Christie and some other Republicans, refused to criticize fellow GOP presidential candidate Donald Trump's remarks on immigration, in which he called for building a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border and said of Mexican immigrants: "They're bringing drugs. They're bringing crime. They're rapists. And some, I assume, are good people."

Christie has called Trump's comments "inappropriate."

Asked about criticism of Trump on Sunday on NBC's "Meet the Press," Cruz responded: "I'm not interested in Republican on Republican violence."

Christie fired back Monday on the Fox News program "America's Newsroom," citing Cruz's ties with the Senate Conservatives Fund.

RELATED: Christie says he'll be in top 10 at debate time

"I find it is ironic that Ted Cruz is giving lectures on Republican-on-Republican violence," Christie said. "When you're trying to take out a fellow colleague in the United States Senate in a primary, I'd say that's a little more violent."

Cruz campaign spokesman Rick Tyler did not immediately respond to requests for comment.

In the interview, Christie called Cruz's remarks "hypocritical." Last month, he took aim at Cruz for opposing federal aid to help New Jersey recover from Hurricane Sandy while later calling for U.S. help after Texas was ravaged by flooding.

Besides Cruz and Trump, Christie has fought with U.S. Sen. Rand Paul over the Kentucky Republican's efforts to curb the government's bulk collection of Americans' phone records, and said former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker were not bringing substance to the race.

Cruz and two other 2016 GOP presidential candidates, Paul and U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida, won their Senate seats after the Senate Conservatives Fund helped them defeat establishment-backed candidates in the GOP primaries. Since then, they all have helped the conservatives fund, drawing the ire of other Republicans who have been their colleagues targeted by the PAC.

The Senate Conservatives Fund ran ads in 2013 against Senate Republicans, including Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, another 2016 GOP presidential candidate, and Lamar Alexander of Tennessee. The group attacked the senators for refusing to follow Cruz's lead and demanding a cutoff of money for the Affordable Care Act as the price for passing legislation to fund the federal government. House Republicans refused to approve a spending bill that didn't repeal or defund the health-care law, leading to a partial government shutdown in October 2013.

"The Senate Conservatives Fund has no plans to take sides in the presidential race, but Governor Christie was wrong to criticize our ads urging Republican senators to oppose Obamacare funding," said former Virginia Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli, president of the group. "Instead of defending liberal Republicans and liberal policies, he should be standing up to the Washington establishment and demanding the defunding of Obamacare."

Alexander told Politico that he was forced to spend "time and money to defend myself against attacks from so-called Republican groups."

MORE POLITICS

Jonathan D. Salant may be reached at jsalant@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JDSalant. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.