Ohio's Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender (LGBT) community and its allies came together to celebrate progress made during Pride Festivals last month in Cleveland and other cities across the state.

We have made great strides in the march toward equality, but we should not overlook one significant step forward for the LGBT community, thanks to the Affordable Care Act. You see, our progress toward legal equality is inextricably tied to our community's health equality.

Right now, every Ohioan has greater health care coverage options available because of the Affordable Care Act. Moreover, no Ohioan can be denied coverage because of sexual orientation, gender identity or gender expression – providing historic new protections for gay and transgendered people.

Lifetime and annual caps are now prohibited, and individuals can no longer be denied coverage for a pre-existing condition like HIV or cancer. This means that HIV patients will no longer need to worry about their coverage being dropped or denied and will no longer need to worry about running into limits to receive the treatment they need. Legally married couples can still receive financial assistance as a married couple on the Health Insurance Marketplace even if they live in a state that doesn't recognize same-sex marriage.

These are huge advancements that will help reduce health disparities in the LGBT community. That's why I'm proud to serve as a certified application counselor (CAC) with Stonewall Columbus — the only LGBT community center serving Central Ohio through programming and services that enhance the well-being and visibility of our diverse community. In my work, I help provide in-person assistance so people can sign up for health care coverage on the Health Insurance Marketplace available through HealthCare.gov.

According to a survey conducted by Enroll America, during the last open enrollment, in-person assistance was key to getting people to successfully enroll in coverage. In fact, people who received in-person assistance were about twice as likely to successfully enroll as people who didn't.

This kind of trusted, community help has been the backbone of the LGBT movement. At the height of the HIV epidemic, local charities and advocacy groups were the first line of defense as our community sought resources and education to combat the spread of an unprecedented killer. But securing health coverage is not just about one diagnosis, and that's why this effort to enroll our community now is just as important. Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, all health insurance plans offered in the Marketplace are guaranteed to provide essential benefits like mental health treatment, preventive services, and prescription drug coverage.

We have made a lot of progress, not only for the health of LGBT Ohioans, but for the health of all Ohioans. We just completed an open enrollment period on March 31 that saw more than 350,000 Ohioans enroll in coverage through the Marketplace, Medicaid or CHIP.

It's great news that thousands of Ohioans were able to find quality, affordable health care, but there is still a lot of work to do. As we gear up for the next open enrollment beginning Nov. 15, there are still ways to get covered. Medicaid and CHIP enrollment is year-round and some people may be eligible for a special enrollment period if they've had a qualifying life event. It's critical that we let all Ohioans know that there are new health care options available for everyone.

So as we celebrate Pride this year, let's recognize the important advancement for the health of all Ohioans under the Affordable Care Act and offer our community a helping hand in getting covered.​

Lori Gum is program director at Stonewall Columbus.