Highly available Cheap, easy to get heroin leaves communities scrambling

Share This Story 440 Tweet Share Email

In Burlington, Vt., the police chief sees soccer moms hooked on heroin.

In Knoxville, Tenn., addicts desperate for help are waiting six months to get into treatment facilities.

And, in Ohio, the Republican governor who had long called for the repeal of Obamacare has since sidestepped the GOP Legislature to enroll his state in a Medicaid expansion allowed under the Affordable Care Act because the state badly needed the included federal help to treat an overwhelming surge of heroin addicts.

“We've got soccer moms on heroin … you walk down any street in any town in Vermont right now and chances are there is at least one house where someone is dealing with this. This is a completely underground, behind-closed-doors phenomenon.” Police Chief Michael Schirling of Burlington, Vt.

The United States is in the grips of one of the worst heroin epidemics in its history, due in part to a flood of cheap doses of the drug, which can be had for as little as $4 apiece, ordered on dark corners of the Web and delivered to your front door in the suburbs. In some regions, such as the Great Lakes states, heroin is deemed "highly available" by local police in more than three times the number of communities as it was just seven years ago.

The resurgence of the deadly drug has sparked a flurry of action from governors' mansions and statehouses across New England and the Midwest to small-town police stations from northern Kentucky to Wisconsin.

"It's really on the top of everyone's radar from a public health perspective," said Thomas MacLellan, director of homeland security and public safety for the National Governors Association. Even Capitol Hill and the White House are weighing in on what's become a full-blown health crisis that cuts across geographic, social, racial and economic boundaries.

Government studies estimate the number of heroin users is around 330,000 and growing, up about 75% from five years ago and up almost three times compared with the decade low of 119,000 in 2003. It's a level of regular usage not seen since heroin's peak in the mid-1970s, when government studies estimated 550,000 regular users. Although heroin represents a small fraction of the nearly 24 million Americans who misuse drugs overall, heroin use is growing faster than all others.

"We've got soccer moms on heroin. … You walk down any street in any town in Vermont right now and chances are there is at least one house where someone is dealing with this," said Burlington Police Chief Michael Schirling, who said heroin trafficking cases there increased fivefold in two years. "This is a completely underground, behind-closed-doors phenomenon."

All told, heroin and related opioid pain pills have killed more than 125,000 in the U.S. in the past 10 years.

One very early victim of the developing crisis was Casey Wethington of Kentucky, who died in 2002 of a heroin overdose at age 23.

"Within six months of learning about Casey's heroin addiction, we were burying him," said his mother, Charlotte Wethington, of Morning View, Ky.

"We have a tremendous amount of needless deaths — tens of thousands," said Wethington, now an anti-drug activist pushing for increased awareness among local and state officials across the country. "These statistics are real people. And those who knew them, their lives will never be the same again."

Heroin Availability By Region The percentage of police agencies reporting "high availability" of heroin in their communities in 2008, 2010 and 2013 in federal surveys. 2008

2010

2013

Vermont to Tennessee Governors, state lawmakers grasp for answers

Governors and other state officials nationally are scrambling to try to control the epidemic, which a wide range of government statistics indicate is worst in the Great Lakes, New England and Mid-Atlantic regions along with New York and New Jersey.

In the Great Lakes, for instance, the Drug Enforcement Administration's National Drug Threat Assessment reported that 9% of law enforcement agencies deemed heroin highly available in 2007. By 2013, 40% of police agencies reported heroin as highly available. In New England, the percentage of police agencies seeing heroin as highly available rose from 40% to 55% over that same time. In New York and New Jersey, high availability jumped from 30% to 45%.

At least 18 state legislatures addressed new heroin bills this year, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures. Subjects range from allowing easier access to drugs that counteract opiate/heroin overdoses for first responders and even the public, as well as leniency for low-level heroin offenders who agree to treatment. Some states also are debating legislation that would toughen sentences for major drug crimes and trafficking involving heroin.

Vermont Gov. Peter Shumlin in January went so far as to devote nearly his entire State of the State Address to what he called the "rising tide of drug addiction and drug-related crime spreading across Vermont."

"In every corner of our state, heroin and opiate drug addiction threatens us," Shumlin said. "It threatens the safety that has always blessed our state. It is a crisis bubbling just beneath the surface that may be invisible to many, but is already highly visible to law enforcement, medical personnel, social service and addiction treatment providers, and too many Vermont families."

In Massachusetts, after deaths from heroin and opioid drugs spiked more than 90% since 2002, Gov. Deval Patrick declared a public health emergency in March. "Sometimes it takes a crisis with big numbers to get the public's attention," said Public Health Commissioner Cheryl Bartlett.

Under Patrick's emergency declaration, the state invested $10 million to create a court diversion system for non-violent drug offenders, getting them treatment, and spent another $20 million into the overall drug treatment system.

"Heroin is such a harsh drug that no one figures that it will be a part of their lives either through themselves or someone they know until it's too late," Bartlett said.

In Butler County, Ohio, the home of U.S. House Speaker John Boehner, the number of children being removed from their parents' custody doubled between 2010 and 2012, with heroin accounting for more than half of its child removal cases in 2012. Statewide, heroin addictions, demand for treatment and overdose deaths all prompted Kasich, a stalwart Republican, to opt to go along with Obamacare measures despite the political consequences.

“This is just overwhelming everyone. It doesn't help that most insurance only pays for 30 or 60 days of treatment, when it can take that long just to get the drugs out of your system.” Ginger Marshall, volunteer at addiction ministry in Knoxville

Across the Ohio River in Kentucky, heroin abuse is "spreading like a cancer," Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., told a Senate narcotics group in May. "We are losing close to 100 fellow Kentuckians a month to drug-related deaths. This is more lives lost than to fatal car crashes."

Overall drug abuse deaths now exceed car fatalities nationwide, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the National Institute on Drug Abuse, the federal agency that studies drug abuse and policy.

In Knoxville, Tenn., 73 people died from drug overdoses last year, more than from homicides and traffic accidents combined. Opiates of some sort were involved in at least 36 of those deaths, though it's hard to say which were heroin because of the difficulty in differentiating heroin from other substances through tests.

"Heroin got here later than other places, but it is here now full-blast," Knoxville Police Chief David Rausch said.

Treatment facilities are overwhelmed, with wait times of six months or longer.

"We have 40 beds available, and we're increasingly having to turn people away," said Ginger Marshall, the volunteer alcohol and drug treatment coordinator for the local Lost Sheep Ministry. "This is just overwhelming everyone. It doesn't help that most insurance only pays for 30 or 60 days of treatment, when it can take that long just to get the drugs out of your system."

Past Month Heroin Use 2007-2012 The number of people (in thousands) who are 12 years old or older and who reported using heroin in the past month in federal surveys.

People (Thousands) Year

The opioid connection Addicts cycle from painkillers to heroin

The government, law enforcement and medical experts now concur that the heroin surge can be traced to the rise of prescription painkillers such as OxyContin, Vicodin and Percocet. The drugs are heroin's chemical sibling — containing compounds derived from or similar to opium.

"Heroin is just a symptom of the prescription drug problem," said Joseph Rannazzisi, deputy assistant administrator of the Drug Enforcement Administration, during a Senate hearing in May.

Driven by drugmakers' promotion of physicians' wider use of painkilling drugs — advocacy later called into question by federal regulatory action and in state and federal courts — doctors wrote millions of prescriptions for opioids over the past 15 years. From 1999 to 2010, sales of opioid painkillers increased about 300%, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The drugs are now prescribed to 12 million Americans a year.

Drug companies "told us addiction is extremely rare. They told us opioids worked well for chronic pain," said Andrew Kolodny, of New York, president of the national Physicians for Responsible Opioid Prescribing. "They told us that it wouldn't be hard to get patients off of opioids. That was all totally not true."

In fact, hundreds of thousands of people got hooked on the painkillers. With the ultimate reformulation of prescription opioids to make them harder to abuse as well as government crackdowns aimed at curbing legal and illegal prescription of the drugs, those addicted to pills turned to heroin.

Mexican drug dealers met the new demand with cheap heroin and made it so that customers didn't have to risk their safety or reputation by being seen going to street corners to get it. Mexican heroin, which dominates the American market, sells for $4 to $10 a dose compared with $40 to $80 for an 80-milligram opiate pain pill. Perhaps as important, the new powder heroin can be snorted instead of injected, removing a psychological barrier for some users.

“I've been blown away by the depth of the addiction problem. I've been doing this a long time, and I've never seen anything like this.” Jim Baker, chief of police in Rutland, Vt.

"People are going to go where the drugs are, and right now, the cheapest and easiest way to keep that addiction going is through heroin," DEA spokesman Rusty Payne said. His agency first noted the painkillers-to-heroin "cycle of addiction" more than a decade ago.

In Vermont's Rutland County, population 63,000, doctors in 2011 prescribed more than 1 million individual doses of oxycodone, the primary ingredient in OxyContin and other opioids. That's according to Jim Baker, chief of police in the city of Rutland, who said the numbers came from local pharmacists.

"Now we have people openly admitting a heroin habit of 20 bags a day, and I haven't talked to a single person who did not get started by using the pills," Baker said. "I've been blown away by the depth of the addiction problem. I've been doing this a long time, and I've never seen anything like this."

Nora Volkow, director of the National Institute on Drug Abuse, the federal agency that studies drug abuse and policy, says surveys show about 80% of recent heroin addicts switched from opioid pain pills. Those same surveys show about 3% of the nation's 2 million opioid pill addicts turned to heroin since 2007, a percentage that she predicts will grow.

The nexus with pain treatment makes heroin "a very sensitive issue" for policymakers "because we can't just do away with opioid medication," Volkow said.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Charlotte Wethington of Erlanger, Kentucky knows the pain a heroin addition can cause. After losing her son to the addiction, she now works bring awareness to the need for better treatment options. VPC

It snuck up on us Feds pledging full attention to epidemic

U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder recently acknowledged the epidemic "snuck up on us" at a national law enforcement summit on heroin in April. But, he also used the summit to pledge renewed attention to what he called "an urgent public health crisis."

Holder cited a rise in investigations and heroin seizures by the DEA over the past three years and the Justice Department's commitment to specialty drug courts that let addicts get treatment "and return to their communities before incarceration."

Last year, the DEA seized more than 2,100 kilos, or about 2.3 tons, of heroin at the Mexican border. That's more than triple the amount seized in 2008. But DEA officials say they weren't specifically targeting heroin. There's just more heroin crossing the border.

At the summit, Holder acknowledged more needs to be done. "Addressing this ... will require a combination of rigorous enforcement and robust treatment."

At the same time, the explosion of heroin users, addicts and overdose deaths has some critics asking why it took so long and whether a faster response by public officials — at all levels — could have slowed or prevented heroin's resurgence. Much of the criticism is aimed at the Food and Drug Administration's handling of the approval the original opioid pain pills for wide use.

"This did not sneak up on us," said Kolodny, who is also chief medical officer for Phoenix House, a New York-based drug treatment non-profit organization. "The opioid epidemic began in the late 1990s, and very early on we saw people who were addicted to opioids move over to heroin. Had the FDA been doing its job, I don't think we would have an epidemic today."

“I never understood the concept of letting an addict crash and burn before you intervene. This is a public health crisis. Addiction is a chronic disease.” Charlotte Wethington, mother of a heroin victim and advocate for treatment

Wethington, the anti-drug activist, said the fervor with which government officials are acting is encouraging, but much delayed.

"I was trying to sound the warning bell and nobody was listening," said Wethington, who now works as an addiction and recovery counselor.

Unable to find local help from doctors, law enforcement or treatment centers during and after her son's overdose, Wethington pushed for changes to Kentucky law to allow families to petition courts to intervene and order addiction and rehab services for drug addicts — even if they had no criminal record.

"I never understood the concept of letting an addict crash and burn before you intervene," she said. "This is a public health crisis. Addiction is a chronic disease."

Kentucky adopted the Matthew Casey Wethington Act for Substance Abuse Intervention in 2004 — modeled after an existing Florida law. Ohio adopted a variation of Casey's law in 2012. Advocates in at least 11 other states, including Indiana, Arizona, New York and Florida, are working to do the same.

"I get calls from people all over the country who ask me how can I get Casey's law in my state. It's bittersweet because we couldn't save our own son."

Continue to Part 2: Heroin's Hidden Journey