By Jason Hart | Ohio Watchdog

Years of partisan maneuvering may be about to pay off for the budget-busting Obamacare Medicaid expansion in Ohio.

Gov. John Kasich, a Republican, wants to spend more than $7 billion on Obamacare expansion through Ohio’s 2016-17 budget, and Republican supermajorities in the Ohio House and Ohio Senate seem disinclined to stop him.

Lawmakers no doubt remember what happened to several of Ohio’s most vocal Medicaid expansion critics a year ago.

Six House Republicans sued to stop Kasich’s Obamacare expansion in 2013; months later, three found themselves without their party’s endorsement for re-election.

A fourth, former state representative Matt Lynch, opted to run for Congress when the wife of an Ohio Republican Party field director declared her candidacy for Lynch’s seat.

In a phone interview with Ohio Watchdog, Lynch voiced concern about the extent of Kasich’s control over major policy decisions.

“The governor and the Legislature are doing President Obama’s bidding by forcing Ohio taxpayers to subsidize Obamacare by Medicaid expansion,” Lynch said.

“It’s clear that the budget is a product of John Kasich’s philosophy; it’s just being implemented by the Legislature at his insistence,” he added.

Since 2014, severe cost overruns have vindicated Lynch and fellow critics of Obamacare expansion. For the current fiscal year, Kasich’s Obamacare expansion is 60 percent over budget.

In March, benefits for the 527,821 Ohioans enrolled under Obamacare’s expansion of Medicaid to able-bodied, working-age childless adults cost federal taxpayers $323 million.

Obamacare expansion enrollment was 42 percent higher than state estimates, revised upward in September. The monthly cost of the expansion was 84 percent higher than projected.

Wednesday, the House is expected to pass a budget scrapping numerous Kasich tax hikes, but nothing in the latest bill would stop Kasich’s Obamacare expansion from consuming one-tenth of the state budget for the next two years.

House Speaker Cliff Rosenberger — elected to his leadership position with help from Kasich’s closest lobbyists — has said he supports “reauthorization” of Medicaid expansion, with reforms to make it financially stable.

Obamacare promises 100 percent federal funding for Medicaid expansion through 2016, so exploding costs don’t seem to have jarred state lawmakers — yet. The increased burden on taxpayers is great news from the perspective of the Ohio Hospital Association and other entitlement lobbying groups.

“The expansion is working,” Universal Health Care Action Network Ohio director Cathy Levine asserted in a Tuesday email, warning, “The Ohio House is going to vote to defund Medicaid Expansion tomorrow.”

Even the introduction of a House floor amendment to end Medicaid expansion would be noteworthy, given Kasich’s marginalization of the policy’s critics in public and within the Ohio Republican Party.

The governor has used his bully pulpit liberally, accusing Obamacare expansion opponents of trying to send “Ohio money” to other states and even suggesting opponents will go to Hell.

“I couldn’t conceive of a half a million people all of a sudden wakin’ up one day and having no health-care coverage as provided under this program,” Kasich told reporters who asked about new Obamacare expansion spending during an April 9 news conference.

Kasich’s press secretary did not respond to an Ohio Watchdog request for comment on the expansion’s cost overruns.

After orchestrating a coup in the ORP State Central Committee in 2012, Kasich’s team has used the party to keep Republican lawmakers in line — even when the governor redefined the state’s largest welfare program.

In 2013, Kasich won approval from the pseudo-legislative Ohio Controlling Board to spend $2.56 billion in Obamacare money on Medicaid expansion. The 18-month Controlling Board appropriation ran out four months early.

The General Assembly could defund the Obamacare expansion, change permissive Medicaid eligibility and spending rules and limit Controlling Board appropriations, but these policies would require strong majorities in caucuses with numerous Kasich loyalists.

Jonathan Ingram, research director for the free-market Foundation for Government Accountability, expects politicians will face long-term consequences if they assent to Kasich’s Obamacare expansion.

“Gov. Kasich has already proven that welfare for able-bodied adults is a higher priority for his administration than services for kids with developmental disabilities, funding for children’s hospitals, and coverage for pregnant women,” Ingram said in an email to Ohio Watchdog.

Ingram asked, “Who else will Kasich throw under the bus in order to protect his ObamaCare expansion?”

Ingram said Kasich, who has defended Obamacare while visiting other states, is “putting his own state’s neediest patients at risk” and “unsuccessfully lobbying lawmakers and governors all over America to follow his lead.”

“Kasich’s unilateral expansion of ObamaCare is a policy disaster and will eventually prove a political landmine,” Ingram concluded. “Ohio’s budget-busting experience should serve as a warning to lawmakers everywhere.”