It’s called “Lippy” in Britain and Australia, “Sminka” in Croatia, “Lappstift,” in Sweden and “Krayion” in Greece. In 2014, drug stores alone generated $258.95 million in lipstick sales in the U.S. with Revlon, CoverGirl, L’Oreal, and Maybelline among the best-selling brands, according to Statista.

Last month, Heathrow Airport commissioned a report to identify the most popular shades of lipsticks in 50 cities around the world. New York’s color was Classic Red, but in Moscow, Raspberry Pink was all the rage. Hong Kong favored Coral Pink, Paris adored Dusky Rose, and Caramel Nude was the must-have shade in London. Here are the other lipstick facts you need to know:

Related: Exclusive: Henkel, Revlon, Coty prepare bids for P&G beauty brands-sources

During the Roman Empire, lipstick signified social status and rank, worn by both women and men.

The first lipstick was found in Ur—that’s 200 miles south of Babylon, and was estimated to be 5,000 years old. It was made of crushed gems.

That gave way to crushed carmine beetles, which gave Cleopatra that bright shade of red on her lips.

The women of ancient Greece wore a lip rouge made from red dyes and wine. Other ingredients used to produce that perfect hue? Sheep sweat, human saliva, and crocodile excrement, according to Lipstick: A Celebration of the World’s Favorite Cosmetic by Jessica Pallingston.

by Jessica Pallingston. Queen Elizabeth I wore red lipstick in the 1600s, with a mixture of beeswax and red stains from plants.

In 1650, the British Parliament tried to ban lipstick, or “the vice of painting.”

George Washington sometimes wore lipstick, makeup and a powdered wig.

The first commercial lipstick was invented by French perfumers in 1884. French perfumer Guerlain who wrapped it in silk paper.

Related: The Cheap Luxury Americans Can’t Live Without

In 1949, chemist Hazel Bishop invented the very first longwearing No-Smear lipstick after 300 experiments.

Winston Churchill didn’t ration lipstick during World War II because it boosted morale.