Muhiydin d’Baha leads a group protesting the shooting death of Walter Scott at North Charleston City Hall on April 8. D’Baha and other civil rights activists are calling for a review board outside police control.

Less than a day after video of Walter Scott’s death flickered on computer screens worldwide, some residents of North Charleston called for a new committee with the power to examine police abuses.

What they’re saying Donta Bowens, president of the Accabee Neighborhood Association, on whether residents report police brutality at community meetings attended by officers: “We’re there for the neighborhoods, but there are no complaints. ... You’ve got some bad cops, but until it’s documented, there’s nothing I can do about it.” The Rev. Robert Kennedy of St. Peter’s AME Church, member of Community and Police Panel, on the possibility of a review board with subpoena powers: “I think it could be a case where it may be needed.” Activist Thomas Dixon on the city’s response to call for review board: “The dialogue phase has never gotten off the ground. Once again, it’s those people saying the same thing: ‘It’s really not as bad as you think.’ ” Charleston NAACP President Dot Scott on fear that police critics will create civil unrest: “I don’t think the city realizes how close they are with some younger people who are saying, ‘Enough is enough.’ If they don’t get heard, they’re going to do it their own way. ... The dog you mistreat will turn around and bite you.”

They didn’t trust internal investigators to root out the problems they thought contributed to Scott’s fatal encounter with Michael Slager, a white officer who shot the fleeing black man in the back.

Mayor Keith Summey sees the idea as unreasonable. He refused to meet with some people making the demand. He didn’t see the need for a panel with subpoena powers, and he didn’t have the authority to create one anyway, he said.

But the divide between the police in North Charleston and some residents will never narrow unless city leaders listen to ideas from their harshest critics, according to former police officials, law enforcement experts and activists beyond South Carolina where review boards have worked. Last week, local advocates spoke of a fear that shutting out detractors who have issued veiled threats of unrest could have dangerous consequences.

When Chicago considered civil rights reforms over a decade ago, then-Police Superintendent Terry Hillard fought off allegations that his department didn’t thoroughly investigate misconduct. Hillard, now retired from the force and running a private consulting firm, eventually saw the benefit of getting outside input — no matter how extreme it seemed.

“I’m a believer that the police cannot investigate themselves when it comes to certain issues like brutality,” he said. “But in order to do something about it, you have to sit down with the people who don’t agree with you — the people who like the police and the people who don’t like the police.”

The oversight system that’s best for North Charleston likely would come from the community, either through discussions or a ruling in a class-action lawsuit that prompts a new law, experts said. It has taken different forms nationwide, from a former judge hired as an inspector general to a panel of appointed residents and hired citizen investigators and attorneys who recommend penalties for rule-breaking officers.

Several religious and neighborhood leaders on North Charleston’s Community and Police Panel, which the city created eight years ago during its first attempt to mend ties with alienated populations, said a new group was worth considering.

Summey, meanwhile, has vowed to open up police practices and policies for scrutiny, his spokesman said. Walter Atkinson, a community relations expert from the U.S. Department of Justice, also will visit the city. The Justice Department is looking for any civil rights implications in Scott’s death.

The mayor “has not been sitting idle,” spokesman Ryan Johnson said, but he won’t work to build a citizen board with subpoena powers.

Government organizations, usually courts, and attorneys issue subpoenas to compel someone to testify or produce evidence. Penalties for not complying can include jail time.

Summey “has always had an open door to discuss any reasonable issue,” Johnson said. “Building trust and mending relationships is a difficult task, and the city is dedicated to achieving this goal.”

A source of insight

Chuck Wexler’s heart broke when he saw the video of Slager shooting Scott. A former Boston police official who heads the Police Executive Research Forum in Washington, Wexler has considerable emotional stock in the North Charleston Police Department.

In 2007, coming off the deadliest year in the city’s history, then-Police Chief Jon Zumalt sought Wexler’s advice for finding community input on how to tackle the violence.

The Community and Police Panel was born, and Wexler oversaw the group’s early meetings.

“I’m a big believer in citizen involvement,” he said. “(Zumalt) was really trying to get them involved. But that was eight years ago, and it has to be a sustained effort.”

Panel members met monthly with police commanders and talked about the department’s saturation patrols in high-crime areas — a measure critics would label as an “occupation” — and cookouts where officers mingled with residents.

The panel offered feedback, and its discussions gave rise to an “immersion” program in which officers met residents by knocking on doors. Zumalt, now retired and living in Kansas, said last week that he often tweaked crime-fighting initiatives based on the group’s suggestions.

The panel never was designed to review police actions, he said.

“I found it to be very valuable,” Zumalt said. “I would get a lot of insight from them on what we were doing and how we could do a better job.”

Wexler recommended including a local leader considered at the time to be the department’s nemesis: James Johnson, now president of the local chapter of the National Action Network.

Johnson had complained for years about alleged abuses and racial profiling. The panel gave him an outlet. But he said few others wanted to hear his concerns about the aggressive tactics used to stifle the violence that made North Charleston a Top 10 most dangerous U.S. city in 2006 and 2007.

“They wanted to talk good about the department all the time, and I didn’t want to be a part of that,” Johnson said. “The panel would not make a decision to change the department. Until we can get a citizens review board, there will never be any true reform.”

Frustrated, Johnson quit going to meetings three years ago. He complained that the city had hand-picked other members because they fell in line with Summey’s views.

One member, activist Charles Tyler, said he was chosen because he mentors children in the community.

“The city is going to pick people they think are good for that board,” he said. “I don’t see anything wrong with it.”

‘Bridge the gap’

The panel’s goal always has been to bridge the gap between residents and the police, said Lydia Cotton, a Hispanic community activist seen as a group leader. Cotton often set out into her Stall Road neighborhood to bring what she had learned from the police to residents.

“We, the people, were making more mistakes than the Police Department,” she said. “They needed to understand how the police and the city work.”

Panel members saw homicides plummet from 29 in 2006, before their group formed, to five in 2010. It was a fruit of their labor to help narrow that divide, they said.

Complaints, though, rose. In 2011, 36 people filed written complaints against the police compared with 22 in 2008. The Post and Courier has requested more recent data from the city.

After Police Chief Eddie Driggers took over the department in early 2013, Cotton said her panel doesn’t meet as often as it used to. Members now get together every other month.

A dozen of the 22 members consistently attend the meetings, police spokesman Spencer Pryor said. But they’re still crucial to the police in “identifying issues of concern from citizens and bringing those issue to the department,” Pryor said.

‘Stick with it’

The panel never had legal authority to serve in a true oversight role. Many members, though, welcomed talk of the idea.

One of the citizen complaints against the police in 2013 was filed against Slager, the patrolman jailed in Scott’s slaying. A resident said Slager had wrongfully shocked him with a Taser, and despite other accounts to back up the man’s story, internal investigators exonerated the officer.

Democratic state Rep. David Mack, a North Charleston resident and panel member who acknowledged that he hadn’t been to a meeting in a while, said the group never delved deeply into complaints, but an oversight panel might help attack a perception that a “blue code of silence” leaves misconduct unaddressed.

“I’m sure the chief and us are going to work together closer than ever,” said Cotton, who declined to take a stance on the issue. “The fire in the heart of the people on the panel is very high because of what happened.”

But the call for a powerful board outside police control has been persistent. In a recent town hall meeting, activists, City Council members and national political leaders took on the topic.

“If we have subpoena powers,” said Muhiyidin d’Baha, a leader of the Black Lives Matter Charleston group who has led protests since Scott’s death, “we can ask an officer to be summoned to the court to say, ‘Hey, buddy, you’ve been messing around, profiling and harassing folks. Answer for that.’ ”

State Sen. Marlon Kimpson, D-Charleston, and U.S. Rep. Jim Clyburn, D-S.C., told d’Baha that it would take a new city ordinance.

“I think it’s a great concept to think about,” City Councilman Michael Brown said at the meeting, “but it has to be talked about.”

Ryan Johnson, the city spokesman, told The Post and Courier last week that the mayor won’t talk about it because it’s not possible.

“The city does not have and cannot grant subpoena powers,” he said. “So, yes, that is unreasonable.”

Other cities have found ways to create a review board.

The mayor of Newark, N.J., issued an executive order Thursday to create a police oversight panel with subpoena powers.

In cities like Chicago, such an organization has come about more painstakingly.

Hillard, the former Chicago police superintendent, said city leaders created the civilian-staffed Independent Police Review Authority in 2007 to replace the department’s internal affairs division.

In Cincinnati, residents filed a class-action lawsuit after officers killed two unarmed black men in 2001, said Iris Roley, a businesswoman and activist with the Cincinnati Black United Front.

City leaders and police unions fought the idea of a powerful oversight panel. But many people, Roley said, didn’t trust internal investigators to take their complaints and come up with repercussions for officers.

After a federal judge approved a settlement in the suit, the city was forced to create the Citizens Complaint Authority through a new ordinance. Now, the authority’s retired law officers and private investigators have subpoena powers. Hired by the City Council, they go behind the yellow crime tape to investigate misconduct and recommend penalties for officers to the city manager, Roley said.

“Change hasn’t been easy, and it doesn’t get easier,” she said. “But it’s something the people must do, and they must stick with it.”

Finding a solution

Whether a review board will work for North Charleston is an unanswered question, but many community leaders and officials, aside from the mayor, said it deserves more thought.

Wexler, the adviser for the former police chief, said the city should seek input from people who don’t agree with the mayor and the new chief. A police watchdog could come in the form of a retired, respected judge who serves as a police inspector general or an ombudsman, Wexler said.

“There is no one best model,” he said. “But what they all share is a way for citizens to play an important oversight role. But if you don’t fund it and it doesn’t have subpoena power, it’s not going to be very effective.”

The power typically lies in attorneys who use subpoenas for investigations in civil lawsuits, former S.C. Attorney General Charlie Condon said. To look into criminal matters, attorneys usually can use subpoenas when a court case is open, Condon said.

Legislative panels also use subpoenas for their own probes.

It likely would take an act by the state General Assembly or the City Council to create an oversight board with such powers, he said.

“It’s a monumental government power to give to an unelected board,” Condon said. “It’s a laudable purpose, but it could be subject to abuse.”

John Freeman, a professor emeritus at the University of South Carolina School of Law who has studied ethical aspects of subpoenas, said that an oversight board would need the power to be effective. But the issue requires close study, he said.

“Without having a compulsory way to accumulate facts, basically all you’ve got is a feel-good operation that does not have the ability to produce results,” Freeman said. “Frankly, it’s a toothless lion.”

Charleston County School Board Chairwoman Cindy Bohn Coats thinks the city’s current police panel that she joined five years ago could address the demand without forming a new organization.

“This would be a good conversation for the city to have,” Coats said. “You don’t have to reinvent the wheel, but, of course, you can always improve your processes.”

Members met two weeks after Scott’s death and talked about how they could better define their leadership. Mention of becoming more of an oversight body didn’t come up.

Ed Bryant, president of the North Charleston chapter of the NAACP, is a community leader who has the mayor’s ear. Coats’ group, he said, has never prompted meaningful change.

He thinks the City Council, rather, should assemble a review board by hiring attorneys, paralegals and investigators.

“When it gets down to the nuts and bolts, you’re not doing anything without experts,” he said. “You can’t have a Girl Scout cookie club investigating criminals at the Police Department.”

The mayor has welcomed input from Bryant, Johnson, the city’s spokesman, said.

“There will be opportunities” over the next several months, he said, “for the residents to express their concerns, in an open format, and be a part of the solution.”

But some area advocates said last week that they feared peace here would not last if younger residents grow frustrated with the pace of change. North Charleston has dodged the violent riots that erupted in Ferguson, Mo., and Baltimore, where officers’ treatment of black men also has come into focus.

James Johnson, the activist who defected from the police panel, said he had grown tired of complaining about an “oppressive” police system here.

“If the mayor thinks this will disappear, he’s got another thing coming,” he said. “We’ve seen it in Baltimore. If you push people into a corner, they’re going to come out fighting.”

Glenn Smith and Melissa Boughton contributed to this report. Reach Andrew Knapp at 937-5414 or twitter.com/offlede. Reach Christina Elmore at 937-5908 or at Twitter.com/celmorePC.