Several ads on billboards around Nashville are prompting people to urge House Speaker Beth Harwell to bring Insure Tennessee to a floor vote. (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights The Tennessee General Assembly is not taking its responsibility serious. Suspend the rules and act.

Nearly 14 months have passed since Insure TN first went to lawmakers and no floor votes to date.

Nearly 14 months have passed since Tennessee lawmakers first had a chance to weigh and approve Insure Tennessee, the program negotiated by Gov. Bill Haslam with the federal government to provide nearly 300,000 working poor people with health insurance.

They have avoided holding a serious debate on the floors of either the Senate or the House of Representatives, in spite of the facts and popularity surrounding the plan.

On Tuesday a Robert Wood Johnson Foundation report showed that the 31 states that have expanded Medicaid are reaping millions of dollars in savings — and covering previously uninsured people.

Yet only three Senate committees have considered the proposal, and that was in 2015, when just one of them approved. No action has taken place in the House.

Meanwhile:

Tennesseans will be losing out on $1.77 billion in 2016 without Medicaid expansion, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

280,000 vulnerable citizens will go without any affordable access to health care while health outcomes worsen.

Hospitals, especially those in rural areas, will continue to struggle for survival because of the cost of uncompensated care.

McNairy Regional Hospital in rural Selmer, south of Jackson, will close in May, partially because of issues related to Medicaid coverage.

Although normally quite powerful, Senate Speaker and Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey and House Speaker Beth Harwell have downplayed their ability to force a vote on the measure in their chambers.

Republican and Democratic legislators have proposed fixes or alternatives, from a pilot program to expand TennCare to requesting block grants from the federal government to placing a nonbinding referendum on the ballot on whether voters agree with Medicaid expansion.

These are all half-measures compared to an actual vote on Insure Tennessee.

However, there are a few procedural moves lawmakers might consider: Making a motion to suspend their rules either A) to bring Insure Tennessee to the floor of each chamber of the House or B) to strip themselves of the power to approve Insure Tennessee in the first place.

In 2014 lawmakers mandated that any Medicaid expansion plan negotiated by the governor and the federal government could only be implemented with the approval of the Tennessee General Assembly via a joint resolution.

It is clear lawmakers as a whole are not taking this responsibility seriously because of fears of being linked to the Affordable Care Act and election year politicking. That is why they should repeal the law and let Gov. Haslam proceed with implementing Insure Tennessee.

Legislation attempting to do that was filed by Sen. Jeff Yarbro and Rep. Mike Stewart earlier this year. However, House Bill 1018/Senate Bill 0885 that would repeal Tennessee Code 71-5-126 has gone nowhere.

Yet the public wants action.

A Vanderbilt University poll in May 2015 showed that nearly seven in 10 registered voters supported Insure Tennessee. A subsequent poll in December showed support still high, with a majority of Republicans, Democrats and independents on board.

In addition an unlikely coalition of business leaders, nonprofit workers, faith organizers and advocates joined in support of the plan and have been educating citizens about the proposal for nearly a year and a half.

The loud chorus advocating for passage has not swayed most legislators. While the Democrats in the minority of the legislature have pushed for full consideration, only a few Republicans have broken party ranks in support of the plan or offering an alternative. Petty partisan politics dominates over good public policy.

Remember, this is not a traditional Medicaid expansion. It is a conservative proposal paid primarily through federal dollars with a growing burden to the state up to 10 percent over the next several years. However, the Tennessee Hospital Association agreed to pay a higher tax to cover that 10 percent cost, eliminating exposure to Tennessee’s budget.

In addition those who would be covered would be responsible for their health care in terms of co-pays or reporting on their health needs and progress.

This is a win-win for the state, the citizens and future viability of the state vis-a-vis jobs, care and quality of life.

Kudos to Insure Tennessee proponents, from philanthropist Martha Ingram and Citizens for Insure TN, who are behind the campaign to purchase 20 billboards across the state calling on voters to urge Speaker Harwell to act, to lawmakers working to keep the discussion alive.

David Plazas wrote this editorial on behalf of The Tennessean Editorial Board. Call him at 615-259-8063, email him at dplazas@tennessean.com or tweet to him at @davidplazas.

Buy Photo Edward Chayehoi, 12, left, and Joyce Brown, both from Knoxville, sing before a rally in January in support of Insure Tennessee on Legislative Plaza. (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins / The Tennessean)

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1RiCW7R