Heartfelt Hugs offers days of play for brothers, sisters of critically ill kids

If you go What: Heartfelt Hugs sibling fun day at Paul Derda Recreation Center When: 2 to 4 p.m. Feb. 22 Where: Paul Derda Recreation Center, 13201 Lowell Blvd. Cost: Free for sibling and a guardian More info: Heartfelt Hugs offers outings for siblings of critically ill children. Events are for ages 8 to 16 with a guardian present. To RSVP, call 303-404-2346 or email heartfelthugs2015@msn.com. For more information, visit www.facebook.com/heartfelthugs2015 or www.heartfelthugs2015.weebly.com.

Kids just want to be kids, even in the face of hard times.

When Madelene Kleinhans' younger brother, Addison, was diagnosed with leukemia, her world was turned upside down. She was just 8 years old and was faced with constant worry about his health. In the whirl of doctor's appointments and chemotherapy treatments, she also felt something else — left out.

Madelene, now 13, wanted to create a space for siblings of critically ill kids to be themselves. That's why she created Heartfelt Hugs, a club that takes a break from doctor's appointments and sickness for a day to play. Kids ages 8 to 16 can join Heartfelt Hugs to go on trips to pumpkin patches, skating rinks and parks.

Advertisement

The next Heartfelt Hugs meet-up is Feb. 22 at the Paul Derda Recreation Center.

"It will be like a giant pool party where you can just hang out and meet new friends," she said.

Madelene came up with the idea for Heartfelt Hugs a few years ago, when Addison was still battling cancer. He has since finished treatments and is now healthy.

During his cancer treatments, Madelene was spending a lot of time at Children's Hospital with her brother. She wanted to put a toy box somewhere in the hospital, so siblings of sick kids could feel comforted and recognized with a simple toy.

That idea evolved into something much bigger — the idea that siblings care about their sick brothers and sisters, but also want to have a little fun once in a while.

Madelene's mother, Sarah Kleinhans, said both of her children have gone through a lot. She's happy Addison is now healthy, but recognizes his illness took a toll on Madelene in a different way.

"Mad was spending every holiday (at the hospital,) and even spending her birthday there," she said.

With Heartfelt Hugs, kids can run, jump and play together without the confines of hospital walls. It also puts the focus back on the siblings of sick kids, she said. Heartfelt Hugs is a program of There With Care, a Boulder organization that supports families with sick children.

Madelene said her first Heartfelt Hugs event was pretty small — just her and another friend. At the next event, five people showed up.

After constant networking and spreading the word, Madelene's upcoming meet-up at the rec center is expected to bring at least 28 kids from around the Broomfield, Boulder and Longmont area.

"It's really exciting. It just blew up," she said.

Carson Bayless, 12, who goes to Sunset Middle School in Longmont, went to the pumpkin patch meet-up in October, and said he wants to go to more Heartfelt Hugs events.

"It's just a time to have fun," he said.

Carson's older sister, Gabrielle, battled a brain tumor when she was just 2. Gabrielle has since recovered, but when Carson was born, his family was still dealing with his sister's scary illness.

Carson's mother, Edie Bayless, said Heartfelt Hugs is a great way for siblings of seriously ill kids to get their time in the sun. It also brings together kids from around the region who wouldn't otherwise be able to hang out.

"Cancer kids tend to get a lot of attention, and they have to, but siblings don't always get the same attention," she said. "It's important for them to have something created with them in mind, not just once a year."

Sarah Kleinhans said Heartfelt Hugs events have had an unexpected comfort for parents, too.

At the last Heartfelt Hugs event at an outdoor skating rink in Louisville, parents chatted about their lives while they watched their children skate. It was a quiet moment to let their kids be kids, and for parents to commiserate and relax, too.

The children bonded throughout the afternoon, she said.

Honor for Addison Addison Kleninhans was recently named a Colorado Distinguished Finalists for the 2015 Prudential Spirit of Community Awards. The nationwide program honors young people for outstanding acts of volunteerism. Addison, 10, has raised $38,500 for the Make-A-Wish Foundation since 2011. He collected 13,500 letters to Santa from 22 countries and delivered the letters to Macy's, which donates $2 per letter in Addison's name. Addison was 5 years old when he was diagnosed with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. He also has been recognized by the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society for his fundraising efforts. For more information, visit spirit.prudential.com

"The older kids watched out for the younger kids, and if we asked, 'hey, do you need us?' all the kids said, 'no, no, we're fine,'" Kleinhans said.

Dana Bacardi, vice president of development for There With Care, said Madelene has done all the legwork to make Heartfelt Hugs a reality. She has called people who might be able to donate funds for goodie bags or passes for roller skating rinks or recreation centers, and is brainstorming future meet-ups, including a summertime birthday party celebrating all siblings' birthdays at the same time.

"She is really making a difference in the lives of families," Bacardi said.

Madelene said she has big plans for Heartfelt Hugs that go beyond skating rinks and pool parties. Someday, she wants Heartfelt Hugs to have its own building and expanded programs year-round.

"I'm thinking about the future," she said.

Megan Quinn: 303-410-2649, quinnm@broomfieldenterprise.com or twitter.com/MeganQuinn2