Supporters of Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan gathered at a rally near his Brussels hotel on Sunday. Valentina Pop for The Wall Street Journal

The President of Turkey seems like a man who always gets what he wants. Except in Brussels, where Recep Tayyip Erdogan was refused an 18,000-seat arena and instead had to address a much smaller crowd outside his hotel, on top of a double-deck tourist bus transformed into an impromptu stage.

Between 2,000 and 3,000 gathered in Place Stephanie on Sunday night, according to local police estimates, waving Turkish flags and launching helium-filled balloons with Mr. Erdogan’s poster attached to them. They waited for almost four hours to see what to an uninformed by-passer would have assumed was a pop star. There was a stand selling Erdogan t-shirts and baseball caps and rap songs bursting from loudspeakers with the refrain: “Recep Tayyip Erdogan.”

When the President finally appeared, a dozen young Turkish women, some wearing headscarves as Mr. Erdogan’s wife does, threw red rose petals at the presidential couple. The Erdogans climbed on top of the double-decker, which was re-decorated with a huge Turkish flag and a poster of Mr. Erdogan to cover up the logo of the Brussels hop-on hop-off sightseeing tour bus. The speech lasted some 15 minutes and at one point, Mr. Erdogan and his wife launched two white doves in the name of freedom. The doves flew right back to the bus.

Mr. Erdogan and his wife on the impromptu stage. Valentina Pop for The Wall Street Journal

In election campaign mode ahead of the Nov.1 general elections, a repeat of the June elections which resulted in a hung parliament, Mr. Erdogan has already drawn criticism back home for overstepping his constitutional rights as president who should be impartial and not seen campaigning for his party. Mr. Erdogan led the Justice and Development Party, or AKP, as prime minister until his election as head of state in August 2014. The president denies the charges, saying he is acting on behalf of the people as Turkey’s first directly elected top statesman.

On his first state visit to Belgium as President of Turkey, Mr. Erdogan will have a series of meetings with top European Union politicians and Belgian leaders on Monday and Tuesday.

Last month, the Union of European Turkish Democrats (UETD) tried to book a venue for 18,000 people where Mr. Erdogan would hold a political rally on the margins of his visit to Belgium. They envisaged Palais 12 near the Atomium, one of the city’s most famous landmarks, but the mayor of Brussels refused. “Palais 12 can only be used for concerts and entertainment, not for political events,” said the mayor’s spokesman, Fabrice Voogt.

An UETD organizer, who declined to be identified by name, confirmed that his organization tried to book the Palais 12 and then a venue in another Belgian town, Hasselt, where Mr. Erdogan gathered 25,000 at a rally in May. “But we couldn’t get any of those venues because of security reasons. It wasn’t political,” the UETD organizer said.

Instead, the UETD decided to book a venue in Strasbourg, where Mr. Erdogan gathered some 15,000 people on Sunday afternoon, while a counter-demonstration of about 1,500 people took place nearby, criticizing Mr. Erdogan for what they said was his reluctance to fight Islamic State in Syria and for reopening hostilities with Kurdish militias.

Back in Brussels, Mr. Erdogan said “We need to live in peace with Kurdish people.” But he did not develop that idea further.