WAUKESHA, Wis. — Scott Walker officially announced his bid for the presidency on Monday, launching his campaign from some of the most reliably Republican turf in America and the site of the Wisconsin governor’s most unlikely victory.

Suburban Milwaukee’s Waukesha County is where Walker celebrated the 2012 recall victory that propelled him to national prominence. It was a bruising battle that added to an impressive streak over more than two decades in which Walker appeared on a ballot 14 times, and failed just twice. That record is at the heart of his pitch to Republican voters.

Story Continued Below

“My record shows that I know how to fight and win. Now, more than ever, we need a president who will fight and win for America,” Walker said, his sleeves rolled up.

Walker emphasized he is not a creature of Washington. Unlike many of his rivals in the crowded GOP field, senators or products of political dynasties, Walker presented himself as an outside leader with tangible accomplishments.

“We need new, fresh leadership; leadership with big, bold ideas from outside of Washington; the kind of leadership that can actually get things done — like we have here in Wisconsin,” Walker said.

And Walker’s choice of kickoff location underscored his play for the deeply conservative vote. Waukesha County, which abuts Milwaukee County, where Walker lives, is bright red territory — it delivered big for Mitt Romney and John McCain in 2012 and 2008. And for a combative Midwestern Republican whose path to victory in 2016 is predicated on energizing the GOP base rather than broadening it, it would be hard to find a better symbolic venue.

While Jeb Bush and Rand Paul have pushed messages of inclusiveness, there’s no talk from the Walker campaign about outreach to minority communities and other nontraditional GOP voters. His chest-beating announcement on Monday was a prelude to the smash-mouth campaign he’s likely to run.

“Americans deserve a president who will fight and win for them. Someone who will stand up for the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. Someone who will stand up for our religious rights and all of our other constitutional rights,” he said.

Walker ticked off a list of conservative grievances and vowed to address most of them on “Day One” of his presidency. Walker pledged to push for a repeal of Obamacare, sign off on the Keystone pipeline, terminate any nuclear deal with Iran and to take the threat of Islamic State more seriously than the threat of climate change.

He proudly pointed to his conservative wins in Wisconsin, taking on the unions, scoring a voter ID law, defunding Planned Parenthood and enacting anti-abortion legislation.

In many ways, Walker’s crippling of collective bargaining power for unions in his first term fueled his rise. The legislation he championed underscored the weakening of the labor movement around the country in a state considered friendly to organized labor.

He emboldened other governors and legislatures to pursue similar reforms, and his knockout punch came when he beat back the unions who sought to unseat him using Wisconsin’s unusual recall law. No governor had ever survived one before, and his win against Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett added to his presidential résumé.

On Monday, Walker made sure to exude average Joe-ness, too. He described bargain-hunting at Kohl’s, clipping coupons with his wife, Tonette, to get the best deals. Walker has turned to the retailer before to highlight his thriftiness

He took the reference further, though, saying Kohl’s makes its money off volume, and America would do well to take that approach to taxation, lowering rates and broadening the base and thereby encouraging more participation in the economy.

“Years ago, we saw this kind of plan work well under President Ronald Reagan. Back then, it was called the Laffer Curve. Today, I call it the Kohl’s Curve because I believe that you can spend your own money far better than the government — and that will help grow the economy,” he said.

After the announcement, Walker will blitz the early-voting 2016 primary states, beginning in Nevada and hopscotching to South Carolina and New Hampshire before flying to Iowa — the state where he’s the acknowledged front-runner — for three full days of events this weekend. There, he’ll rack up road miles with stops between Davenport on the state’s eastern edge and Sioux City on the border of Nebraska.

How his message resonates in western Iowa, especially among social conservatives who have questioned his commitment to their causes, could be a harbinger of his fortunes. Bob Vander Plaats, president of the influential Iowa social conservative group The Family Leader, said many conservatives in Iowa have “a soft hesitancy” with Walker, pointing to his shifting positions — at least rhetorically — on same-sex marriage and abortion.

“What we’re looking for is a consistency of convictions,” he said. Though it’s reminiscent of similar doubts the right held about Romney in 2012, Vander Plaats said he “wouldn’t put Walker in the Romney camp. “I don’t think Walker’s got the Romney issue, he just has to make sure that he does not even get a scent of the Romney issue.”

Walker’s speech was stuffed with coded language intended to reassure those conservatives, promising to be “someone who will stand up for our religious rights and all of our other constitutional rights” and vowing to be a fighter for the “born or unborn.”

He also took pains to shore up his foreign policy credentials, which took a hit in the spring when he made a handful of head-scratching comments — from comparing union protesters to terrorists, to describing the most important foreign policy decision in his lifetime as Reagan’s decision to fire air traffic controllers.

In his speech, Walker ridiculed the Obama-Clinton foreign policy as “years of mush.”

“The United States needs a foreign policy that puts steel in front of our enemies,” he said.

But Walker’s feisty rhetoric will get him only so far. He’s going to have to compete with rivals swimming in campaign and super PAC cash. He’s expected to post a more modest haul than Bush, who blew away the field with a $103-million quarter, and even Ted Cruz’s $51 million and Marco Rubio’s $44 million. Their hauls, revealed on the eve of Walker’s official campaign launch, come as Walker steps back into the foreground after months of low-key campaigning.

One of Walker’s financial backers said the governor will succeed if he can tap into the “economic anxiety” confronting the nation — a role he argues no one has filled yet.

“He’s one of the few candidates out there who can effectively and credibly speak to middle-class issues,” said John Jordan, a California wine magnate.

Jordan said he’s not concerned about Walker’s quiet few months or a perception that Walker has been coasting on the winds of a powerful January speech in Iowa that first powered him to front-runner status there.

“None of these campaigns have been really tested yet. Walker’s name ID, of the top-tier candidates, is still the lowest,” he said. “So I don’t think they know what they’re dealing with yet.”

Walker’s path to the nomination runs through the Midwest, beginning with Iowa, where he spent part of his childhood. New Hampshire is a tougher prospect — he hasn’t visited there much and it shows in the polls: According to the most recent CNN/WMUR poll, Walker is in fourth place.