In this Aug. 8 photo, Democratic presidential candidate Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt. listens at right as Marissa Johnson speaks at left, accompanied by Mara Jacqueline Willaford, as the two women take over the microphone at a rally in downtown Seattle. (Photo: AP)

WASHINGTON Sen. Bernie Sanders discussed racial justice issues on Wednesday with a prominent supporter of the Black Lives Matter movement that disrupted two of the Vermont independent’s presidential campaign events with protests.

DeRay McKesson, part of the Campaign Zero effort to end police violence in America, tweeted after the hour-long meeting that he and others told Sanders “community policing” is “code for surveillance in some communities of color.”

Sanders has pushed for investments in community policing and increased civilian oversight of police departments as part of his approach to addressing racial justice issues and physical violence.

“In the end, I think he got it,” McKesson tweeted.

McKesson, who also has met with officials from Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton’s campaign, lauded Sanders for his “candor” and “willingness to be pushed” on his policy and approach. He said he and others also asked Sanders to address police abuse of civil asset forfeiture and said he anticipates Sanders will address that issue in his platform.

McKesson wrote that there were moments during the meeting where they didn’t agree.

“Importantly, he was willing to be pushed and he was,” tweeted McKesson, founder and co-editor of the Ferguson Protestor Newsletter.

Sanders said in a statement he looks forward to continuing a dialogue with Campaign Zero and other communities of color to address “deeply entrenched racial and economic problems in our country.” On Thursday, he plans to introduce legislation to ban private prisons, reinstate the federal parole system and reduce the number of immigrants held in detention.

We just finished the hour-long meeting w/ @BernieSanders re: #CampaignZero, his racial justice plan, & #AskBernie. pic.twitter.com/Lb9HiYPCW3 — dr.* deray mckesson (@deray) September 16, 2015

“There is no doubt in my mind that our country must be aggressive in addressing institutional racism and a broken criminal justice system,” he said.

Sanders has increased his focus on racial justice and the need to combat poverty among African Americans as he attempts to connect with black and Hispanic voters. Last weekend, he made his second trip as a candidate to South Carolina, the first southern primary state, where the Democratic primary electorate is made up largely of African Americans.

He campaigned with author and civil rights activist Cornel West, another Black Lives Matter supporter. West said disruptions from the group will stop as people realize Sanders is committed to racial justice.

Rep. Jim Clyburn, South Carolina’s only Democrat in Congress, said during a recent interview that Black Lives Matter protesters were “unfair” to Sanders and wouldn’t have targeted him had they known his record.

“Nobody did more on their matters in the (Affordable Care Act) than Bernie Sanders did,” Clyburn said. “The tremendous increase in community health centers — that was Bernie’s bill in the Senate and my bill in the house. We worked together on it for years.”

Clyburn said he and Sanders also worked together to get funding for community health centers in the economic stimulus package.

“He’s got that kind of a record,” Clyburn said. “If you don’t know, you just don’t know.”

Contact Nicole Gaudiano at ngaudiano@gannett.com. Follow @ngaudiano.

Read or Share this story: http://bfpne.ws/1iQ6mQo