WASHINGTON -- A massive international trade deal currently being negotiated would raise drug prices in the U.S. and abroad, said two House Democrats during a conference call with reporters. The legislators emphasized that American negotiators, not foreign stakeholders, are the ones pushing hardest to promote the interests of brand-name drug companies at the risk of endangering public health.

Rep. Jan Schakowsky (D-Ill.) said the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), President Obama's controversial free-trade agreement, would make therapies for serious illnesses such as AIDS and cancer unaffordable to patients.

"[B]y lowering competition from generic drugs and by allowing brand-name pharmaceuticals to challenge cost-saving measures at home and abroad, essential medicine prices would rise even higher," said Schakowsky. "And the result would be devastating."

Reps. Rosa DeLauro (D-Conn.) and Schakowsky join the AARP and Doctors Without Borders in rejecting the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a massive trade deal involving 12 Pacific Rim countries including Canada, Japan, Peru, Singapore, Vietnam, and others.

While members of Congress are allowed to read the bill in a private room, the specific details of the agreement are confidential. However, Politico recently published a leaked chapter of the agreement as it appeared on May 11, giving DeLauro and Schakowsky some freedom to comment on aspects of those parts of the proposed deal that have been made public.

"What the TPP is doing is setting a precedent that can't be rolled back,"said Brian Honermann, JD, senior research advisor for the Foundation for AIDS Research (amfAR).

To highlight just how damaging the agreement was Honermann explained that if the intellectual property standards currently being negotiated had been implemented in 2002 and 2003, countries such as India and Thailand would have been prevented from accessing the kinds of generic drugs that helped stanch the AIDS epidemic by making treatment affordable.

To echo Honermann's point, Schakowsky quoted Gregorio "Greg" Millett, MPH, vice president and director of public policy for amfAR, who said in a press statement, "If the door starts to close on generic production of antiretrovirals, any hope of ending the global AIDS epidemic in our lifetime will quickly evaporate."

She said, "When I read that, I thought this is a bad deal."

In May, amfAR released a report detailing the foundation's concerns regarding the trade agreement including:

More opportunities for "evergreening" patents or extending the term of a patent without having to establish therapeutic benefit.

A 12-year data exclusivity period for biologics, a new class of drugs which include vaccines, blood, blood components used in treating disease. Under the Affordable Care Act, the U.S. already has a 12-year exclusivity period, but the agreement would expand these terms to other TPP countries, and extinguish any chance the U.S. might have had to lower such standards to 7 years -- a move the administration had contemplated under its new budget.

Expanding data exclusivity would prevent regulators such as the FDA from granting generic drug manufacturers approval based on the use of previous clinical trial data. The catch is that generics would also be prohibited from pursuing their own safety and efficacy research because such efforts might be considered unethical "where existing clinical trials have already established the benefits of a new treatment."

An "investor state dispute system" that would give pharmaceutical companies the right to contest both federal and state safeguards aimed at lowering drug prices.

"This [deal] is an example of how our trade policy has been co-opted by corporate special interests," said DeLauro.

She argued that the new bill would allow brand-name drug companies to enforce monopolies, causing drug costs to surge, and putting Medicare and Medicaid patients at risk. Seniors, who already struggle with exceedingly high medical costs, would be forced to shoulder an even greater burden, she said.

DeLauro, a survivor of ovarian cancer, said she understands the importance of biomedical research, "but generics are essential to millions of people's access to life saving medicine. Instead of keeping them out of the market longer we should be expanding access."

Nonprofits, patient advocacy groups, and generic drugmakers are also fighting to prevent passage of the bill.

Nawel Rojkjaer, senior director of international affairs for Mylan, a generic pharmaceutical company, said the "most dangerous provision" included in the new trade agreement is patent linkage.

"In a nutshell, patent linkage says that we can't get our [generic] drugs approved by the health authority if there are any patent disputes," she said. The provision is illegal in Europe she said because it's "anti-competitive" and forcibly sidelines generic drugs.

While some forms of patent linkage already exist in the U.S., certain safeguards limit when such provisions are allowed. The new trade agreement -- according to the leaked text -- has no such safeguards.

One area where patent linkage is most harmful is around the regulation of biosimilars, drugs that are copied after but not precise duplicates of branded biologics.

"Biologics can have hundreds of patents. If health authorities were automatically blocked from approving biosimilars until all of the patent disputes were resolved, no biosimilars would ever be available," Rojkjaer said.

Paul Howard, PhD, a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute, a conservative think tank based in New York, who was not on the press call, told MedPage Today that striking a balance between innovation and access to medicines is important.

"With the high costs and long timeline and high failure rates [of bringing a new drug to market] there's got to be some kind of trade-offs for the investors and the companies who are willing to make those extraordinary long-term and expensive bets."

Intellectual property rights encourage the type of long-term investments that actually benefit global health, Howard said.

"If you don't have those incentives to make those investments initially you don't have that payoff later in terms of cheaper generic medicines or biosimilars. If you don't make them up front, you don't get them later."

In developing nations, contrary to what critics of the trade deal have said, companies will not block access to these medicines, Howard asserted.

There's a greater emphasis on in-licensing and out-licensing in poorer countries, he said. Gilead licenses Sovaldi (sofosbuvir) -- the famed ultra-expensive hepatitis C drug -- at cost or less than the cost of licensing, through domestic manufacturers in poor countries. In March, Bloomberg Business News reported a generic of sofosbuvir -- which costs $1,000 per pill in the U.S. -- being sold in Bangladesh for $10 a pill.

"It's a bit like flying an airplane for them. Once they build the airplane, they are going to charge some people first-class, but anybody who can fill up the plane is going to be paying coach. So it's rational for companies, even when they do have patent protection or data exclusivity, to try and charge a wide variety of prices."

Stakeholders are expected to meet to negotiate the final terms of the agreement in Maui at the end of the month. Schakowsky told reporters, "We will do whatever we can to prevent these changes."