Almost every school superintendent in the area has joined the chorus of educators calling for Illinois to delay implementation of the new standardized test designed to complement Common Core State Standards.

More than 40 school superintendents from Peoria, Tazewell, Mason and Woodford counties signed a letter to State Schools Superintendent Chris Koch listing “growing and serious concerns” about the test, known as PARCC, which Illinois’ public school students are scheduled to begin taking in March.

In a reform climate known for winners and losers, whether in high-stakes testing or school funding, the superintendents represent a broad cross-section of public school districts — from large to small, rural to urban and affluent to poor. Their scores on previous standardized tests rank them from the highest- to lowest-performing schools in the state.

For instance, in Peoria County, signers included Grenita Lathan of Peoria School District 150, the area’s largest district; Lisa Parker of Dunlap Community Unit District 323; and Shannon Dudek of Pleasant Hill District 69, one of the area’s smallest districts.

But they all hit the same note in their concerns about the launch of PARCC, or Partnership for Assessment of Readiness for College and Career.

Technological problems on practice tests, even among schools with adequate infrastructure and bandwidth, have been so significant that one superintendent predicts the rollout will repeat the trouble-plagued launch of the Affordable Care Act’s health care marketplace in 2013.

“Kids are going to find out once they submit their final answers a screen is going to pop up telling them they’ve just signed up for a $500 deductible health care plan,” said Tim Dotson, superintendent of Limestone Walters School District 316.

Superintendents blame the testmaker, NCS Pearson Education Inc., for many of the interface and software problems they’re already seeing during practice sessions. According to published reports, Pearson has a four-year contract, worth up to $160 million, with Illinois.

The test will be given to students in third-to-eighth grades and some high school students.

Like Common Core, the PARCC exam is meant to develop critical thinking skills. Instead of the old fill-in the bubble multiple choice questions, the test includes written essays and multi-media components.

Even without technology problems, superintendents say schools have not had enough time to prepare students to use the tools of a new computerized test; many schools don’t have adequate infrastructure; and most importantly, schools have lost valuable instructional time while trying to prepare for the test that doesn’t work.

“Our fear is that this is just a small indication of what is to come when the March testing window opens for all school districts in the state,” the letter says. “We ask, ‘How can test data be valid under testing conditions like this?’”

Koch had heard the concerns before area superintendents sent him the letter, dated Jan. 30.

Illinois is one of only 10 states, plus Washington, D.C, implementing the PARCC assessment, which is aligned with the new Common Core learning standards. More than a dozen states have pulled out of PARCC in part of a nationwide backlash to either PARCC, the Common Core or both.

Many school superintendents, including the superintendent of Chicago Public Schools, are not opposed to Common Core. But CPS Superintendent Barbara Byrd-Bennett has taken the boldest stands against implementing PARCC.

Both the Illinois State Board of Education and the U.S. Department of Education have said school districts are subject to the loss of federal and state funding if they fail to administer the test to all students who are not exempt from taking the test. But Byrd-Bennett has pushed ahead with plans not to give the test at a majority of Chicago’s schools because many schools do not have the necessary infrastructure.

“We’re going to do what the state asks us to do,” said Bob Bardwell, superintendent of Congerville-Eureka-Goodfield District 140, who initiated the letter among his colleagues in the Central Illinois Valley District of Illinois Association of School Administrators. “But we wanted to be on record sharing our concerns.”

PARCC Letter to ISBE

US DOE Response Letter

All District PARCC Letter 1 -30-15

Pam Adams can be reached at 686-3245 and padams@pjstar.com. Follow her on Twitter @padamspam.