Talks between Fortress Investment Group and Fenway Partners over a potential recapitalization of Fenway’s second and third funds ended in recent months without leading to a deal, said people with knowledge of the matter.

However, a settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission by Fenway and four of its executives may raise hopes for the firm’s efforts to reach a recapitalization deal for the two funds, now that the regulator’s actions are clear.

The discontinued talks with Fortress marked the latest turn in the firm’s attempt to restructure the private equity funds, Fenway Partners Capital Fund II LP, launched in 1998, and Fenway Partners Capital Fund III LP, formed in 2006. If successful, a recapitalization deal could give the remaining portfolio companies in the Fenway funds a new lease of life and fresh capital following lukewarm performance by the funds.

Moelis & Co. is the intermediary advising Fenway on options for the funds.

Fund recapitalizations, which allow existing fund investors to sell their stakes to new investors that provide fresh capital for deals, typically involve the transfer of investments from older funds into new vehicles with reset economics. However, even for better performing funds, such deals are tough to pull off. They tend to be complex, often involving multiple parties who disagree on how to deal with older funds.

A key factor to success is getting all parties involved to agree on a pricing for the assets remaining in the portfolio, a challenge that is compounded when more than one fund is involved.

The SEC settlement could remove some of the ambiguity that surrounded the future of the firm and its principals, two of the people said.

Fenway and four of its executives settled charges over disclosure lapses, the SEC said this week.

They agreed to pay about $10.2 million to settle SEC charges that assets and fee income associated with the firm’s third fund had been rerouted from the fund without investors’ knowledge. The settlement payments will be placed in a fund for harmed investors, the SEC said.

“We are pleased that the matter has been resolved,” a Fenway spokesman said in response to the settlement, without addressing queries on the status of its continuing effort to restructure the funds.

Fenway, Principals Peter Lamm and William Gregory Smart, former Principal Timothy Mayhew Jr. and Chief Financial Officer Walter Wiacek will bear the payments, the SEC said. The parties, which neither admitted nor denied the allegations, weren’t barred from the industry.

This could make it possible for parties involved in a potential recap deal to consider whether the current general partner should continue to manage the second and third funds. Fenway could consider working with investors to decide on a reset in the partnership’s economics while keeping the GP in place, said two people with knowledge of the matter.

Lukewarm returns from the firm’s two funds could make investors resistant to backing that proposal, however.

Fenway Partners Capital Fund III launched in 2006 with $680 million in commitments. As of June 30, the fund delivered a 2% net internal rate of return and 1.11 times net multiple, according to data from the Oregon Investment Council, a pension fund investor that had committed $50 million to the fund.

Fenway Partners Capital Fund II, launched in 1998, delivered 5.2% net internal rate of return and 1.26 times net multiple in that data. The returns of both funds lagged behind pooled returns from private equity funds of their respective vintage years, Cambridge Associates benchmarking data shows.

For more on how limited partners including the Florida State Board of Administration are investing their capital, check out LBO Wire. For a trial subscription, visit our homepage, scroll to the bottom and click “try for free.”