Reaching a two-thirds threshold to pass a tax in the California Legislature is never easy -- but approving Gov. Jerry Brown's revised tax on managed care providers ought to be.

The companies that will pay the tax support it. The amount of revenue will be roughly the same as the state currently receives.

But -- and here's why this is so important -- if the revision doesn't pass, the state will lose $1.1 billion in federal matching dollars for health care programs covering 13.5 million Californians -- roughly one out of every three -- under Medi-Cal.

Republicans never want to be seen voting for a tax, even if it's essentially revenue-neutral. Many aren't fans of the Affordable Care Act to begin with.

Get over it. Get it done. California has to capture those federal dollars or further cut services and provider rates, which already are so low that many doctors refuse to accept Medi-Cal patients.

Federal officials told Brown last summer that California would lose the $1.1 billion in matching funds under the Affordable Care Act because the state's tax on only Medi-Cal managed care providers didn't meet federal guidelines. The feds require including all managed care insurers.

The governor and legislators spent months trying to do what seemed impossible: Convince the insurers to sign onto the tax, and convince enough Republicans to hit the two-thirds threshold to pass it. The resulting deal isn't pretty, but it appears to be enough of a win-win-win for the state, insurance providers and Republicans to merit support.

Advertisement

The strategy is to reduce the gross premiums tax that insurers pay on every premium they collect. The governor wants to cut this tax by enough to make it worthwhile for insurers to support in exchange for paying a broader Medi-Cal managed care provider tax. They argue that the deal is not a tax increase, which is true, and it solves what threatens to be a $1.1 billion budget nightmare affecting the state's neediest residents.

The key may be a handful of Republicans who have been arguing for additional funding for developmentally disabled residents -- a very worthy cause. Sweetening that pot could win enough votes for the tax compromise.

The Affordable Care Act continues to be a California success story. The rate of uninsured has dropped from 21 percent in 2010 to 12.45 percent in 2014. The state's three largest health insurers are showing a profit from selling ACA policies, and the average rate increase for plans in the state was a reasonable 4 percent in 2016, defying projections.

But to truly succeed, including attracting enough doctors to provide quality services to Medi-Cal patients, requires a steady, reliable source of revenue aside from premiums. The revised managed care tax, leveraging the $1.1 billion in federal funding, can help accomplish this.