Booklets show health insurance options. (Photo: AFP/Getty Images)

Changes in health care laws mean many people have insurance for the first time. But they’re far from the only ones left scratching their heads by the complexities of choosing and using insurance.

Don’t leave yourself scrambling when disaster strikes. Study up now to understand your policy, which will be critical to make a smart choice when insurance enrollment comes around.

What are the key components to insurance?

You need to know what your deductible is. That tells you how much health care you have to pay for before insurance starts taking on a significant share.

A high-deductible plan is less expensive but leaves patients on the hook for $5,000, $10,000 and more of their own health care costs in a year before insurance kicks in.

You may have a co-pay, which is typically a fixed amount you pay for a service, such as $25 for a doctor’s visit.

Co-insurance is a split payment. Once you meet your deductible, then co-insurance kicks in. You could have a 90-10 split, with the insurance company paying 90 percent of a charge and you paying 10 percent. More often the splits are 80-20 to 60-40, said John Doran of Blue Cross Blue Shield of Montana.

“The higher the deductible, the lower the monthly premium; the higher the co–pay, the lower the monthly premium; the higher the co–insurance, the lower the monthly premium and the higher the maximum, the lower the monthly,” Doran said.

The maximum level is the cap on what customers pay in a year.

A health insurance account can help mute the blow of a doctor’s bill, especially for those with a high-deductible plan. Check to see if the money rolls over year to year. You put a certain amount in the account every month, and that money is earmarked for health care costs.

“Some plans with a higher premium and co-pay are better for people, and other times a higher deductible and a health savings account is better,” Doran said. “There are a lot of choices to find the right plan.”

An Affordable Care Act health insurance marketplace navigator helps a consumer get information to re-enroll in a health insurance plan. Choosing a plan with the right deductible, copay, coinsurance and maximum level is critical to financial health. (Photo: AP)

What is the difference between “in-network” or “out-of-network”?

Insurance companies work out deals with health care providers for discounted rates. Those health care providers — hospitals, doctors, etc. — are then “in-network.” That means it’s cheaper, often significantly, to visit in-network providers.

Some insurance plans also have a different maximum set on what patients have to pay for in-network versus out-of-network services. That could mean you’d pay a maximum of, say, $5,000 for in-network care in a year yourself but, say, $20,000 for out-of-network care before you’d have hit the cap on what you’d be expected to pay.

“Make sure to pick a plan — if you get to pick a plan — that your preferred provider is in-network,” Doran said. “You want to make sure you have a network that works for you. You might want one that includes your local doctor, or you might want one that if you travel around the state or world, you have in-network access you need in those places.”

Or, there could be no maximum level to cap your costs if you had out-of-network service, Doran said.

Let’s say Jane has a $50,000 charge, he outlined. BCBS has worked out an in-network rate of $40,000 with the doctor. Jane has an 80-20 coinsurance rate, so she would have to pay 20 percent of the negotiated rate, or $8,000. However, her maximum is set at $5,000 for the year, so that is as much as she pays.

For out-of-network service in this scenario, BCBS will still only pay $40,000. The doctor will make her pay the $10,000 difference. Insurance won’t pay as high a percent, and she doesn’t have a cap on her maximum payments for the year.

“She’s up to owing $21,000 already,” Doran said. “That’s why it’s critically important to know your network.”

Insurance customers enroll in health plans. Heathcare.gov has open enrollment starting Oct. 1. (Photo: AP)

How do I tell who is in or out of insurance company’s network?

“It’s harder than you think,” said John Goodnow, CEO at Benefis Health System. “Theoretically you could ask your doctor, are you in-network for such and such plan. I bet most doctors would have no clue because they don’t deal with that. You can’t look in your plan document because they are always changing.”

What you can and should do is go online to your insurance company’s provider or call the company. The difference can be thousands of dollars.

“It can be a ten-fold difference,” Goodnow said.

“The only reliable source you can go by 100 percent is your insurance plan,” he said. “That’s not the most fun thing to do, to call them. Online most of the plans would list who is in and out.”

BlueCrossBlue Shield has a mobile and online portal called “provider finder” so you can type in a service such as knee replacement in Great Falls to find out if who is in network or type in your doctor and see if he or she is in-network.

So if I’m having a heart attack at the lake or elsewhere on vacation, what do I do to stay in network?

The exception to in-network and out-of-network is emergencies.

You can again look at the insurance company’s website to see who is in-network for what you need if you’re on vacation and need to see a doctor.

“If it’s not an emergency, look online. With BCBS, if you were in New York, you could type in what you need and it would provide you with the information to schedule an appointment,” Doran said. “If you don’t take that step, you run the risk of going to an out-of-network provider and shouldering an excessive bill.”

Anything but a true emergency means checking ahead of time, Goodnow said.

“If you, say, cut yourself and have to go to a doctor, you’d be smart to check who is in-network,” he said.

Goodnow said one of the challenges in some places in Montana has been for-profit helicopter companies that aren’t in-network for anyone. Air ambulances can be an insurance gray area in terms of constituting a emergency necessity. That could mean a huge air ambulance charge for a rescue.

“Insurance companies are saying, we’ll pay the going rate but not their charges. That makes the rest your responsibility,” he said.

Blue Cross Blue Shield is trying to give customers more information before they make health care decisions instead of afterward. (Photo: AP)

What do I do if the insurance my company offers isn’t in Benefis’ or my favorite doctor’s network?

“Then you are up against a choice,” Goodnow said. “A lot of people will say I would never change my doctor. I’ve seen national studies that say a $10 difference is usually all it takes to get someone to change doctors.”

Patients have to decide if they like a doctor well enough to pay the out-of-network price to visit her or him. The price difference can vary hugely. There’s no real standard prices among hospitals and physicians in private practice.

“Most insurance plans are narrowing their networks and getting rid of higher cost providers,” Goodnow said. “They want the doctor who is willing to take what they say they’re willing to pay.”

If you reject employer-offered insurance, you can buy your own policy but you don’t qualify for a subsidy on the insurance exchange, Duran said.

“You’d want to talk to your employer about whether there was the opportunity to add your provider to the network,” he said.

Do I need some advanced degree to figure out insurance fine print?

Most people never read their insurance policies because of their complexity. To better understand the policy, look at the glossary. Review the summary of benefits. Talk to your human resources department if you have employer-provided insurance. Call your insurance company.

“You have to take the time, understand the lingo and be willing to go through the stuff,” Goodnow said.

The contracts between insurance companies and health care providers are even more inscrutable, 30-100 pages long outlining what is paid at what rate, who has the right to decide who is right and other questions.

Doran said most insurers provide tutorials to figure out coverage and to call insurance companies with questions. Have your group number and member ID from your insurance card ready. Usually the customer service number is on the back of the card.

You won’t be the only one asking.

“More and more, we’re finding people take ownership of their healthcare plans and want to know how they can make the best possible choice for health and financial outcomes,” Doran said.

Consumers often are baffled by medical bills and insurance policies. Unwieldy insurance and hospital statements leave them uncertain as to how much money they owe, the deadline for payment and which organization should be paid. (Photo: AP)

If I have a deductible I never meet, does having insurance even matter at that point?

Having insurance can still knock money off a doctor visit or other treatment because of in-network pricing.

I used to get charity care at the emergency room, and now I am paying every month for insurance and when I needed the emergency room, I got a huge bill. Why get insurance?

If you don’t have insurance, you can always go to a nonprofit hospital’s emergency room for care, regardless of your ability to pay.

“It’s a tough way to get your health care, to rely on the ER,” Goodnow said.

Outside of an ER, it’s really hard to get a lot of different services you need without insurance. You also are assuming you’ll qualify for charity care, if you decide to rely on that instead of insurance. That safety net could disappear without you realizing.

Insurance puts a cap on your responsibility. If you have an emergency visit and don’t have insurance, you’re going to spend more than your deductible, Goodnow said.

If you qualify for Medicaid, you’re no doubt better off with that than high deductible plan. There’s a limited number who qualify even under the expansion.

Do I still need to negotiate on price when I have insurance?

Health care isn’t like buying a car. Instead of the customer negotiating, insurance companies negotiate with healthcare providers.

One of the few things a patient can do to control costs is use in-network providers.

However, you can call the billing office and have them review the bill if there are costs you disagree with.

Benefis had a consultant review 68,000 different charges to make sure they met the common sense test.

“If you went through every line item at most places, you’d see something like $22 for aspirin that costs a penny,” Goodnow said. “As an individual, you can’t do a lot. The insurance company can be your buffer. They can say, no, we’re not paying $100 for a bedpan. You get the rate they negotiate.”

You can work the deductible, as well. If you need a new knee, for example, but already had met your deductible, it would be better to have the procedure in December instead of in January when the deductible level resets.

Is there a way to find out what I will have to pay for something before I have it done?

“With everything in our lives, we’re consumers. You don’t buy milk without looking at the price. But healthcare, it seems like it’s treated like a whole different animal,” Goodnow said. “You need to know that stuff, but with health care it’s hard to price shop.”

Ideally, if one needed knee surgery or had a baby on the way, one could call different places and get price quotes.

“Really, they say it depends on complications, blah, blah, blah,” Goodnow said. “We’re trying to make it simpler to price shop, but that’s not how American health care works.”

The range is often large with many variables, but patients can call around. It helps to know when calling how close you are to meeting your deductible, if the healthcare provider is in or out of network and your co-pay.

“You’d have to do some homework, and you could get that information from your insurance company,” Goodnow said.

Benefis is launching a new initiative to make prices clear up front with estimated payments to prevent unfortunate surprises.

Your insurance company also may help with price comparison.

BCBS’s online/mobile service also compares expected costs from in-network providers based on your coverage.

“You can access information to help you make the right decisions and analyze the costs at different locations,” Doran said. “There’s sometimes a wide discrepancy among locations, and then it’s up to the member to make the decision based on quality and cost.”

I haven’t filed an insurance claim in a decade. Wouldn’t I be money ahead taking the tax penalty?

Past history doesn’t indicate future health care use, Goodnow said.

“Most people who have something major go wrong weren’t expecting it, especially when you’re young,” he said.

Goodnow was in a motorcycle wreck, had to have a helicopter rescue and went to the OR.

“It’s that piece of mind and protection,” he said. “You could pay the tax penalty if you absolutely knew nothing was going to happen. That’s a hard prediction to make.

“If you got hit by a car, it could be millions of dollars,” he said.

Say you got hit by a bus in Havre, Goodnow said.

“You’d been healthy, but now you have to go the local hospital, get flown here (Great Falls), get flown to a rehab hospital in Denver and stay there for weeks,” he said. “We’re talking medical bills in the millions. Bills can get really high, really fast.”

Insurance often includes incentives for preventative care, which is cheaper than treating conditions down the road. Goodnow said Benefis employees’ insurance has done five years of biometric testing for employees. Some employees who thought they were healthy and felt fine had outlandishly high cholesterol levels and blood pressure — a ticking time bomb.

Benefis has seen a person come in with a month-long infection that could have been treated by a doctor but instead became an in-patient visit costing tens of thousands of dollars — one case among many similar.

I’ve been in the insurance gap. When can I sign up for coverage?

You’ve got a bit of a wait remaining, according to Gov. Steve Bullock’s administration.

“This administration is doing everything we can to ensure folks in the insurance gap can sign up for coverage as soon as possible,” said Mike Wessler, deputy communications director for the governor. “However, ultimately the timing on signing up for coverage depends on when the federal government approves Montana’s waiver.”

The Montana Legislature passed a new kind of program for implementing expansion of health care to people who make too much for Medicare and too little to qualify for subsidized insurance on the insurance exchange at healthcare.gov.

The state is submitting the request for a waiver to the federal government after the state’s comment period ends in September and then the federal government will have their own 30-day public comment period.

Open enrollment for those who do qualify for the exchange begins Oct. 1.

I’m on Medicare. Is my health insurance going to change with the Medicaid expansion that the Legislature passed this year?

“No,” Wessler says.

I have insurance, and I just got a bill a year later and found out I had to pay $5,000. I don’t have it. What can I do?

Exasperating is Goodnow’s word for that not-too-uncommon experience.

“We’ve tried to get our billing cycle way faster,” he said. “It goes to an insurance company, and they might reject the bill. We appeal. Months go by. We give people a discount for prompt payment once they get their bill, for payment within 30 days.”

Ask your health care provider to work with you on payment options instead of racking up credit card debt or other desperate measures.

Benefis also will help people with their bills depending on income, up to 400 percent of the federal poverty level. Patients also can spread out payments on a payment schedule.

Doran said it’s atypical to get a bill a year later but the back-and-forth between providers and insurers can delay customers getting bills. He recommended talking with an insurance company’s customer advocates if there are problems.

Reach Tribune Staff Writer Kristen Inbody at kinbody@greatfallstribune.com. Follow her on Twitter at @GFTrib_KInbody.

Read or Share this story: http://gftrib.com/1URa1ZP