ColaDaily.com is your source for free news and information in Columbia and the Midlands.

A Sumter-based hospital is in negotiations with Palmetto Health to shore up its financial future and expand services.

Tuomey Healthcare System on Friday announced its board of trustees has approved negotiations for a partnership with Palmetto Health. The system provides care through the 301-bed Tuomey Regional Medical Center, Tuomey Medical Park, a cancer treatment center, an outpatient surgery center and the Bell Women and Infants Pavilion.

Administrators and trustees at Tuomey Healthcare System have been looking for a partner during recent months. Criteria included “high standards of quality, access to additional capital, helping increase the number of local physicians and specialties, and the ability to handle the changes associated with the Affordable Care Act,” according a news release from Tuomey.

“We are working hard to make sure we do what is in the best interest of Sumter, our employees and our physicians,” said Tuomey Board Chairman John Brabham.

Healthcare officials from Tuomey Healthcare System said they think the merger will improve care for patients at both hospital systems.

“We wanted to find a culturally compatible, healthy South Carolina system. The employees of Tuomey care about their neighbors and families, and we wanted a similar system. One who could meet our financial needs, but also someone who cared about the employees and families we serve,” said President and CEO Michael Schwartz. “This partnership will help Tuomey enter its next century, stronger than ever.”

Charles Beaman Jr., CEO for Palmetto Health, said the proposed partnership will echo the two systems’ existing ties.

“We believe that Tuomey Healthcare System would be an excellent partner for Palmetto Health. First and foremost, our cultures are highly complementary, with a shared focus on the patient and commitment to providing high-quality care … We have enjoyed a strong relationship with the Tuomey staff and physicians through the years,” he said.

Expenses and changes related the Affordable Care Act have led smaller healthcare systems across South Carolina to seek a partner for the future. Tuomey Healthcare System is also in the midst of appealing a judgement handed down in a Medicare fraud case in which it was issued a penalty of approximately $238 million.

“Tuomey is continuing to pursue a settlement with the government, and we have also appealed the penalty to the Fourth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, which is expected to rule soon,” said Brenda Chase, director of public relations for Tuomey.

Palmetto Health officials declined to comment on the fraud case.

Laurens County Health Care System went through a similar affiliation process in 2013 and eventually partnered with Greenville Hospital System to manage ACA costs and expand services.

Final approval of the Palmetto Health-Tuomey merger will require regulatory approval as well as approval by both systems’ boards of trustees.

Comments