On Jan. 1, the key provisions of the Affordable Care Act took effect. Americans gained access to new health plans subsidized by federal dollars. Insurers no longer can turn away people with existing conditions. Millions are now eligible for new Medicaid benefits.

But the federal law also upended existing health-insurance arrangements for millions of people. Companies worry about the expense of providing new policies, some hospitals aren’t seeing the influx of new patients they expected to balance new costs and entrepreneurs say they may hire more part-time workers to avoid offering more coverage.

Throughout 2014, The Wall Street Journal will follow stories of people affected by the health law, from industry executives to consumers to care providers. See photos of those individuals below. (Read the related article and see the interactive).

Benjamin Lowy for The Wall Street Journal Alfred Chavis | The Striver. Working part time at a McDonald’s while he pursues a college degree, the Philadelphia resident is seeking insurance under the health law.

Benjamin Lowy for The Wall Street Journal Mr. Chavis at his home.

Philip Montgomery for The Wall Street Journal Douglas Olson | The Doctor. The chief medical officer of Norwalk Community Health Center in Connecticut says the health law will allow his low-income patients to get the drugs and tests they need.

Philip Montgomery for The Wall Street Journal Dr. Olson examines the hand of a patient at the of Norwalk Community Health Center.

Benjamin Lowy for The Wall Street Journal Mike Beuoy | The Policy Pricer. The actuary at Blue Shield of California worries whether the policy prices he helped set will cover the costs of new patients under the health law.

Benjamin Lowy for The Wall Street Journal Mr. Beuoy at his office at Blue Shield of California.

Benjamin Lowy for The Wall Street Journal Jaime Hood | The Newly Insured. The social-media coordinator, who has hemophilia, hopes she now can get a health policy because insurers no longer can exclude people with existing conditions.

Benjamin Lowy for The Wall Street Journal Ms. Hood, left, and her son, Devyn Snyder, at their home.

Benjamin Lowy for The Wall Street Journal John Lavey | The Skeptic. The 60-year-old property-and-casualty insurance broker is faced with buying a costlier ACA-compliant policy to replace his canceled family plan.

Benjamin Lowy for The Wall Street Journal Tom Daly | The ‘Young Invincible’. The operator of a bike-repair shop in Portland, Ore., has put off the decision on buying insurance because he’s relatively young and healthy.

Benjamin Lowy for The Wall Street Journal Jon Hager | Running an Exchange. The 39-year-old former Navy pilot heads the Nevada health-insurance exchange.

Benjamin Lowy for The Wall Street Journal Mr. Hager at his office.

William Widmer for the Wall Street Journal Tommy Cain | The Small-Business Owner. The owner of T. Cain Grocery Inc., a Fairhope, Ala.-based chain of five Piggly Wiggly stores with about 230 employees, worries about the cost of insuring more of them.

Benjamin Lowy for The Wall Street Journal John W. Bluford III | The Hospital Administrator. The chief executive of Truman Medical Centers, a safety-net hospital system in Kansas City, Mo., isn’t seeing the rise in Medicaid patients he counted on.

Benjamin Lowy for The Wall Street Journal Mr. Bluford, at the Truman Medical Center Hospital Hill.