Capriza, the leader in business application modernization, will help employees of behavioral healthcare and child welfare leader KVC Health Systems save approximately 75 minutes a day each by enabling HIPAA-compliant mobile reporting capabilities. Simplifying common workflows by deploying easy-to-use mobile apps will free nearly 17,500 hours a month that can be invested into the children and families they serve.

KVC provides in-home family support, foster care, adoption, behavioral healthcare and other services that touch the lives of nearly 60,000 children and families each year across four states. Due to KVC’s commitment to providing therapy and other support in the family’s home as opposed to in an office setting, 92 percent of its workforce is mobile, currently using multiple methods to capture client data, including paper forms or digital applications, that is then oftentimes required to be reentered into the company’s digital databases.

Recent healthcare reforms, including the Affordable Care Act’s Meaningful Use requirements, are putting increased pressure on healthcare organizations to minimize the amount of resources devoted to administrative tasks. To meet this challenge while remaining HIPAA compliant, KVC employees can now submit reports in real time and on-the-go on mobile devices, no longer needing to return to the office at the end of the day to manually enter all reports. This allows both direct service staff and managers to focus more energy and resources providing customer care instead of focusing on administrative tasks and approval processes.

“The vast majority of our team is mobile and needs to be able to collect data on-the-go in a HIPAA and state compliant manner. However, current reporting methods are very resource intensive and often require more steps than necessary,” said Lonnie Johnson, Vice President of Business Information Technology at KVC Health Systems. “Another important consideration is the time it takes for data collected in the field to be entered and acted upon. Capriza mobilizes our workflows, allowing employees to enter client information in real time and enabling managers to make decisions before staff have even returned to the office.”

This mobile transformation functions on existing systems, adding new capabilities to legacy infrastructure. Capriza combines multiple workflows into a single interface, and can alert workers through proactive push notifications. These and additional features can be customized through Capriza’s no-code platform.

“Developer resources are limited, so it’s essential we have a platform that nearly everyone can customize to their particular uses,” added Johnson. “With Capriza, we can easily build Zapps that are fully compliant with state and federal requirements that enable our workers to complete their tasks with a single touch. By modernizing, simplifying and expediting existing digital applications, we expect to see an increase in productivity of up to 20 percent during the next 12 months, which means better care for the individuals we serve.”

Capriza expects these mobile capabilities to become the standard for any government-regulated industry. Companies using a range of source applications, from custom built to SAP, Oracle and Salesforce, can simplify tasks to a single click.

“By simplifying processes that usually require a computer to something that can be done in a few seconds through a mobile app, we’re helping companies like KVC to spend more time with the families and children they serve,” said Yuval Scarlat, CEO and co-founder of Capriza. “By enabling employees to enter data in real time, we are streamlining the process and ultimately increasing the quality of care, proving that an increase in productivity can truly change lives.”

About Capriza

Capriza modernizes your business by simplifying and mobilizing your critical workflows. Capriza's end-to-end simplification platform enables IT and lines of business to mobile-enable

critical business workflows in a matter of days without any coding, APIs or integration. The solution is applicable for packaged applications such as SAP, Oracle, Salesforce as well as custom built solutions. Capriza disrupts the speed and economics of the journey by extending the capability of legacy applications, in a simple and useable way, onto any smartphone, tablet or desktop. Founded in 2011 by former executives of Mercury Interactive, Capriza is headquartered in Palo Alto, CA and is funded by Andreessen Horowitz, CRV, Tenaya Capital,

Harmony Partners and Allen & Company. For more information, visit http://www.capriza.com.

About KVC Health Systems, Inc.

KVC Health Systems, headquartered in the greater Kansas City area, is a private, nonprofit 501(c)3 organization and a national leader in behavioral healthcare and child welfare. The organization is committed to its mission of enriching and enhancing the lives of children and families by providing medical and behavioral healthcare, social services, and education. KVC’s services include in-home support to keep families together, foster care, adoption, mental/behavioral healthcare, youth substance abuse treatment and psychiatric hospitals. The organization also indirectly benefits tens of thousands of people through its KVC Institute for Health Systems Innovation, which conducts research, training and consultation. In its 45-year history, KVC has grown since from a single home founded by volunteers to a comprehensive organization with 33 locations in Kansas, Nebraska, Kentucky, and West Virginia and training that occurs around the world. KVC is accredited by The Joint Commission, considered the gold standard in healthcare, and endorsed by the Annie E. Casey Foundation as a national best practice organization. Learn more at http://www.kvc.org.