Employment benefits lawyer Thomas Christina in his Greenville, S.C., office. Tami Chappell for The Wall Street Journal

Months after the Affordable Care Act became law, employment benefits lawyer Thomas Christina paced in his Greenville, S.C., office with its oil portrait of a greenhouse. He was reading the statute to learn its impact on clients.

By his reading, the wording only allowed health insurance subsidies to be provided through state exchanges. It began to dawn on him that he’d stumbled on something big.

His 2010 discovery ultimately spurred a legal battle that on Tuesday resulted in two conflicting rulings from U.S. Appeals courts regarding the government’s authority to provide consumers with subsidies on the federal insurance exchange. The continuing legal dispute now threatens the subsidies provided to more than four million Americans.

“It wasn’t like lightning struck,” said Mr. Christina, 59, a shareholder at the labor and employment law firm Ogletree Deakins. “It was a gradual process. But I knew this was a significant enough issue that it would end up in the courts.”

The bearded and bespectacled Mr. Christina, an avid gardener and father of three grown children, is a relatively obscure figure behind the litigation. But the Harvard University graduate has been a central figure in a legal standoff that is likely to wind up at the U.S. Supreme Court.

“He’s the person who came up with this,” said Thomas Miller, a resident fellow at the conservative American Enterprise Institute. “He deserves full credit.”

On Tuesday, a panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit struck down the authority for the subsidies on the federal exchange used by up to 36 states. It held that a regulation by the Internal Revenue Service allowing the subsidies nationwide wasn’t a permissible interpretation.

But that same day, a panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit in Richmond, Va. came to the opposite conclusion, ruling that consumers in states using the federal marketplace could get subsidies.

Mr. Christina is reluctant to discuss his reasons for scouring the law. “It’s not really that I was looking for anything in particular,” he said. “My role at the firm was to be the person keeping up with the statute.”

He also declined to discuss his view of this week’s contrasting opinions, saying diplomatically that “each opinion explains its own reason for reaching the opposite conclusion.

Mr. Christina had previously played a role in other conservative causes. He submitted an amicus brief to the Eleventh Circuit for the South Carolina Chamber of Commerce in Florida, v. the Department of Health and Human Services, urging the court to invalidate the individual mandate. Asked if he’s opposed to the health law, Mr. Christina says it is so vast that he’s not sure anyone can say they are for or against it.

Continue reading at WSJ.com.