When Aetna Inc. CEO Mark Bertolini recently spoke about a new delivery and care management model that links private exchanges to accountable care organizations (ACOs), he brought up a subject that industry insiders say could become a way for carriers to offer ACO-based products on private exchanges to contain costs and build membership. While not certain on how Aetna plans to follow through on Bertolini’s briefly explained vision, these insurance consultants say some carriers have already begun moving forward on the model.

What the Aetna leader said during an April earnings conference call with analysts is that the insurer is planning to launch “very soon” a model wherein “private exchanges [are] bolted onto the front of our ACO models.” The associated provider system and insurer can then sign up individual small groups “and participate in what we will create as a national ACO chain where we have private exchanges on the front of ACOs that can address large employer populations in specific markets, potentially disrupting the national account business by making their purchases more local.”

Will ACOs Bolster Value of Exchanges?

In fleshing out Bertolini’s comments, Aetna spokesperson Sherry Sanderford says the carrier is actively working to put its existing ACO products on its private exchanges in the near future. Aetna has been active in the ACO arena for some time, and has its branded Aetna Whole Health line that ties ACOs to its insurance products. Sanderford says the point of putting ACOs and private exchanges together is that the ACO products will further strengthen the value proposition. “ACOs can bring very attractive value propositions (cost and quality) in their market where the ACO provider partner has strong local market recognition. Aetna can offer ACOs in addition to other products on our proprietary private exchanges to expand choice and support our national accounts customers,” she says.

Providers will be attracted, Sanderford says, to the model because it creates economic sustainability for them, helping to ensure profitability as the payment models change to reward value rather than volume of care. “Payment models are increasingly focused on reducing unnecessary hospital admissions, emergency room visits and readmissions. At the same time, providers are struggling with high fixed costs in facilities and equipment,” she says. “Through plan designs that encourage patients to see providers in the ACO network, ACO-based products, such as Aetna Whole Health, offer providers a way to co-market with Aetna to attract a larger portion of patient share in their market. These products also allow them to obtain a larger portion of the patient’s medical spend that today may be going to other providers who aren’t part of the ACO network.”

Aetna Whole Health has unveiled partnerships across the country, like in Roanoke, Va., with the provider Carilion Clinic where it offers commercial PPO and managed choice plans for employers with two to 100 employees, as well as individual plans. Aetna also has a relationship with Inova Health, a northern Virginia health system, under the Innovation Health Plan banner that provides members with commercial and Medicare Advantage HMO and PPO plans.

ACOs Make Mark in Exchange World

Without commenting directly on Aetna, Howard Lapsley, a partner in the Health & Life Sciences practice at The Oliver Wyman Group in Boston, says ACOs are very much part of the private exchange equation. “And for a company like Medica, for example, they created a proprietary private exchange where they are offering essentially five products. One of them is an open-network PPO product and they have four ACO products where they have partnered with four separate ACOs. And that is what they offer on their exchange to their group business,” he says.

Essentially, the Minneapolis-based insurer Medica has “productized” its ACO relationships, Lapsley adds. “And so I can imagine what Bertolini was referring to, that kind of a mode where a carrier has its own private exchange and they are putting those relationships with ACOs and putting it on a private exchange. You would see that especially in regional markets….You will see ACOs working with providers or with insurance companies, white labeling with them or cobranding with them, offering products on exchanges. Absolutely that is in the cards — it is happening already.”

But rather than disrupting the existing insurance market, Lapsley says these changes are simply part of the continuing evolution of the risk transfer from the traditional insurance carrier to a value-based ACO model. “It is a reflection of that risk shift that is going on in the marketplace where you now have providers taking more and more risk and sharing in gains based on value-based care. This is a natural reflection of that,” Lapsley says.

Medica’s My Plan private exchange first offered an ACO on the exchange in April 2012. The other three ACOs came on board late in 2012. The ACOs that work with Medica agree to reduced fees and improved quality standards. They also pledge to provide an improved consumer experience — for example, members can contact a shared call center and have both medical and insurance questions answered in the same phone call. Each ACO offers different benefits designed to lure different types of customers, such as one focusing on a free “meet and greet” for a member choosing a new primary care physician and another on wellness. The My Plan exchange uses a defined-contribution financing model with employers contributing a fixed amount — usually about 75% of total costs — and then employees take that amount to shop for coverage on the exchange.

Erik Johnson, senior vice president, Avalere Health LLC, while applauding Bertolini for the way he has been “fairly innovative in trying to reposition Aetna,” has concerns that the insurer is “trying to do a bunch of things that I am not sure are going to fly.”

For instance, Johnson asks, is Aetna trying to be a network manager by setting up the ACO? An exchange operator? An actual health insurance plan? “And there are all sorts of potential conflicts of interest at work there, I think,” he says.

The model would also require a lot of trust on the part of Aetna’s provider partners to hand the keys over not just for the network management side but to essentially drive traffic into different plans that may have relationships with those providers, Johnson says. “I think that Aetna has made a lot of investments over the last five to seven years to try to be a better collaborator with providers. But still, at the end of the day they are an insurance plan and that relationship is inherently antagonistic,” he adds. There is also the risk of cannibalizing the national accounts business. “I think it would. I get the national ACO plan. Conceptually I get it, operationally I am not sure I do, but I understand what he is trying to make happen here,” Johnson says.

Insurers Increasingly Turn to ACOs

Still, beyond the specifics of what Aetna may be devising, Chris Condeluci, of counsel at the law firm Venable LLP in Washington, D.C., and former tax and benefits counsel to the U.S. Senate Finance Committee, says ACOs in the private insurance market are going to become more attractive because of the melding of private exchanges and ACOs. “You have ACOs in Medicare that are being promoted by the Affordable Care Act (ACA), and now that idea is being adopted in the private insurance space like a managed care type of model, where you simply use an integrated health care system through a hospital health system,” he says.

If ACO-linked health plans can leverage the narrower network to reduce premiums, “the cheaper cost is going to attract employers who are offering coverage to their employees,” Condeluci says. “Now note, an employer might not want to just offer a narrow-network ACO plan. Instead they might want to offer a couple of different arrangements, like an unrestricted network, a PPO, a high-deductible health plan with a PPO or an ACO…and an employer can do that. But when you’re offering various choices of plan designs and running them through a private exchange or offering them through a private exchange or distributing them through a private exchange, it is appealing.”

That’s because a private exchange can more easily display varying plan designs on its electronic portal and provide education tools that move the policy selection process forward from the current method where typically a human resources coordinator from an employer or a carrier rep conducts a presentation. “It is not a silver bullet, but distributing these products through a private exchange is a good thing,” he says. “Then you couple that with a defined contribution, fixed contribution funding strategy, a decision support system and voilà — you have in my opinion the future of distributing health insurance products to employees….There are some health systems out there looking into utilizing a private exchange to distribute their medical services in the form of a product,” he adds.

This article was reprinted from AIS’s weekly newsletter Health Plan Week. For more information or to order, please call (800) 521-4323 or visit http://aishealth.com/marketplace/health-plan-week.

© 2014 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.