Please consider disabling it for our site, or supporting our work in one of these ways

Why the protests in Kiev could deal a major blow to official corruption in Russia

The latest threat to Vladimir Putin's autocratic rule may be coming not from the Russian opposition but from the Ukrainian street. As tens of thousands continue to protest in Kiev against Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych's decision to scuttle a pact with the European Union in favor of closer ties with Moscow, and with mass rallies scheduled this weekend, many in the Russian opposition seem to get this. "We support Ukraine's course toward European integration," Boris Nemtsov told Interfax recently. "By supporting Ukraine, we also support ourselves." Nemtsov was among the handful of protesters detained on December 1 outside the Ukrainian Embassy in Moscow. They had gathered under the banner "Ukraine, We Are With You" to show solidarity with those taking to the streets in Kyiv. A day earlier, 30 prominent Russian writers and poets penned an open letter in support of the Ukrainian protesters.

"Your struggle for the right to choose your own path is going to be difficult—but we hope you are successful," they wrote. "This would be a sign that in Russia we too can defend our rights and freedoms. We are with you!" Putin, who also grasps the significance of the Ukrainian uprising for Russia, was predictably less positive in his assessment. The protests, he said, resembled "a pogrom." And it was perhaps with the events in Ukraine on his mind that the Kremlin leader announced this week that he would not be granting amnesties to the defendants in the so-called "Bolotnaya case" against those detained during anti-Kremlin demonstrations that turned violent on May 6, 2012. The mass protests in Kiev are taking on additional symbolic value because they are taking place almost exactly two years after Russians staged the largest anti-government protests since the fall of the Soviet Union—also on Bolotnaya Square—on December 11, 2011. Nemtsov noted the mass nature of the Kiev protests, which dwarfed even the largest Moscow demonstrations. "What we saw in Kiev last weekend, when by various estimates between 400,000 and 800,000 people came out, speaks for itself," Nemtsov said. "And by the way, the population of Kiev is four times less than that of Moscow." In a sarcastic post on Slon.ru, blogger Arkady Babchenko implored the Ukrainian opposition not to repeat the "success" of their Russian counterparts. "The success of any human endeavor depends at least in part on the ability to imagine an outcome. The Westernizers in Russia have had so few successes in the last decade—or the last century—that they have a hard time imagining anything but failure," Moscow-based journalist and author Masha Gessen wrote in The New York Times. "But now the Ukrainians are showing the Russians that there might be another way. If they succeed, they may change the future of not one but two of the largest countries in Europe." But the significance of the events in Kiev, of the Maydan, is larger than the lessons they offer to Russia's Bolotnaya opposition. They are larger than the precedent that a democratic revolution in culturally similar Ukraine could set for Russia.