A measure limiting government surveillance must move quickly to have a chance of being passed by Congress during a busy election season, but it’s gaining valuable momentum with new support from Attorney General Eric Holder and Director of National Intelligence James Clapper.

[READ: Privacy-Boosted Freedom Act Introduced in Senate]

The two Obama administration officials sent a letter this week to Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., voicing their support for the USA Freedom Act, which would end the automatic bulk collection of phone records by the National Security Agency. The letter, which says the bill “preserves essential intelligence community capabilities,” may help Leahy and Rep. Jim Sensenbrenner – the Wisconsin Republican who drafted the House version of the measure – navigate the proposal past critics who say it may weaken spying efforts.

Sensenbrenner compromised some privacy protections to secure the bill’s passage in the House, where those critics are more numerous.

“The Department of Justice and the Office of the Director of National Intelligence support your bill and believe that it is a reasonable compromise that enhances privacy and civil liberties and increases transparency," Holder and Clapper wrote in the letter.

The letter also indicates that telecom companies might not have to retain data for a longer period so it can be accessed by the government, which the Obama administration has considered as an option to replace metadata collection by the NSA.

“Based on communications providers’ existing practices in retaining metadata, the bill will retain the essential operational capabilities of the existing bulk telephone metadata program while eliminating bulk collection,” the two officials wrote.

[ALSO: NSA Restrictions Pass House by Large Margin]

The Freedom Act’s chief obstacle to passage remains in the House, even though the bill passed the chamber in May by a vote of 302-121. If the Senate bill passes, some House members may be reluctant to support a version that has stronger privacy and transparency rules than they originally approved.

The Senate version of the Freedom Act has been praised by privacy advocates such as the Center for Democracy and Technology, and the White House has urged the Senate to pass the bill.

Sensenbrenner has warned Congress may let Section 215 of the Patriot Act expire if the Freedom Act does not become law, which could undercut the NSA’s legal authority to conduct its phone record collection.