Death rates among working-aged women are increasing, according to a recent report from the Urban Institute.

After years of enjoying longer life expectancy than men, women’s health is getting worse. Stress is largely to blame: Causes of death that are soaring include suicide, obesity- and smoking-related diseases, and painkiller overdose.

As a mother of twin toddlers, I’m not surprised. On many days, I think being a working parent might just kill me. Sleep deprivation will be partly to blame, with stress and lack of time for self-care lending a hand as well. Somehow, I am expected to be a “supermom,” to handle it all with grace and ease while others look on in wonder.

But there is nothing graceful about this: Working full-time outside the home while raising two young children feels nearly impossible.

In the U.S., increasing numbers of women share the breadwinning responsibilities in the household. Pew reports that roughly 40 percent of working mothers are either the sole or primary earner in their household. Among married couples, one-quarter of wives earn more than their husbands.

Two incomes are often essential in ensuring that household needs are met, and two-earner households are still the norm: Today, more than 70 percent of households with young children have two parents who work outside the home.

Women’s participation in the workforce is both common and necessary, and yet we are still the primary caregivers in our families. From childbirth to the care of aging parents, women are tapped when a family member needs us. I experienced this firsthand when my son was hospitalized with pneumonia last month. No one asked whether I could afford to take the time off of work. It was assumed I would be there until he was released.

Kids get sick. So do parents and spouses. And, sometimes, so do we — especially as sleep deprivation and stress take their toll. Unfortunately, though, there are few supports for working mothers, daughters and spouses when caregiving responsibilities arise.

Nearly 40 million workers in the U.S. do not receive paid sick leave, and still more receive it only when they are ill, not when a family member needs care. Only 11 percent of private-sector workers are eligible for leave under the federal Family and Medical Leave Act and, for many, this leave is not paid. As a result, working women face heartbreaking choices every day: Do I work, or hold my pre-term infant in the hospital? Do I take a pay cut to help my mother recover from hip-replacement surgery? Can I afford to lose my job to care for my husband with cancer?

A few states have stepped up to the challenge of supporting working parents through paid leave insurance programs, and this year, Colorado has the chance to do the same. The FAMLI Act (House Bill 1258) passed its first committee hurdle on March 19 and is now before the House Finance Committee. It would work much like a short-term disability insurance policy. Funded through small payroll deductions, this program would allow workers to take up to 12 weeks of paid leave to care for a sick family member (or themselves). Similar programs in other states have improved employee retention, reduced dependence on public assistance, and led to increases in mothers’ incomes after childbirth. And while the data is not yet in, paid family leave may also reduce stress and improve health among working women.

Often, as I push the double stroller through the grocery store, strangers stop me with inevitable comments like, “You’ve got our hands full!” or “I don’t know how you do it!” Usually, my response is a vague smile and a muttered, “Neither do I.” Millions of working women in the U.S. are pulled in too many directions at once and, if leave policies are not changed soon, more of us are going to suffer.

Jennifer C. Greenfield is an assistant professor at the University of Denver’s Graduate School of Social Work.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.