To the person who ranted that Gov. Rick Scott did not get 51 percent of the vote, remember Bill Clinton served two terms as president and never received 50 percent of the vote.

Now the Republicans want to shut down the government to prevent immigration reform. Again, they prefer gridlock to solutions.

Martin Luther King Jr. must be turning over in his grave. He did not lose his life so future generations could loot and burn their own neighborhoods.

Now that the congressional-districts "mapgate" scandal has been exposed, what will the state of Florida do to correct this and restore the will of the people before the November 2016 national elections?

Oh my, what a surprise in the court-ordered-released emails on the redistricting process. It appears the districts were actually gerrymandered to benefit one party.

The rioters and community leaders in and around Ferguson, Mo., aren't interested in the truth. They're only interested in fanning the flames of racism.

A new verb in our vocabulary: If your Obamacare insurance premium and deductible just went up, and your doctor isn't in your network, you've just been "grubered."

Every legal immigrant of the past 25 years should sue the Obama administration for their money back, plus compensation for time spent waiting.

Better keep quiet about the airport's charging taxis to drop off and pick up passengers. This idea may encourage private businesses to think about charging for parking.

When will President Obama through executive order declare himself president for life?

I think Republicans in Florida are trying to punish people by not expanding Medicaid because they voted for Barack Obama. That's going to work real well in 2016 when we don't vote for Republicans.

I know we have free speech in this country, but Al Sharpton should not be allowed to say anything. He's a rabble-rouser. Why doesn't he condemn the people who are burning down the shops in Ferguson, Mo.?

Volusia County has a new School Board. Perhaps it can finally get a new superintendent and more effective, less wasteful leaders in all departments.

The rioters and looters in Ferguson and elsewhere are following President Obama's lead — a total disrespect for the rule of law.

An eighth committee has convened to investigate Benghazi. Would it be too much to ask the Republicans to spend less time on witch hunts and more time on governing?