Christmas has Elf on the Shelf. Now Hanukkah has Mensch on a Bench — not to mention Maccabee on the Mantel. Christmas has gingerbread houses; Manischewitz now sells Chanukah House kits, using cookie dough with blue-and-white icing.

These are just a few of the Hanukkah-themed products inspired by Christmas traditions and toys. Pinterest and Etsy are loaded with blue-and-white Hanukkah crafts like wreaths and stockings. There are Hanukkah greeting cards, cookie cutters and even tree ornaments shaped like the three symbols — Stars of David, menorahs and dreidels.

Some may say “Oy vey!” to all this kitschy retooling of Christmas stuff. But others, like Rabbi Evan Moffic of Congregation Solel in suburban Chicago, ask, “Why not?” He sees the crossover trend as part of how Jews “embrace the larger culture.”

“What most of us think of as Jewish food was borrowed from all the different countries Jews lived in in Eastern Europe,” said Ted Merwin, a Dickinson College professor who’s writing a book about the history of Jewish delis called “Pastrami on Rye.” “I don’t know why people think that when Jews come to America we would stop taking from the surrounding culture.”

Merwin says the products are “driven by high rates of intermarriage between Jews and Christians, but some of it is simply the reality” of living as a minority in a multicultural society.

Dianne Ashton, a Rowan University professor and author of “Hanukkah in America,” says Jews began giving gifts at Hanukkah to show they had joined America’s consumer culture.

“For immigrants in the early 20th century on the Lower East Side, buying presents for your kids showed you weren’t a greenhorn, and it also showed that you had earned enough money.”

Neal Hoffman created Mensch on a Bench last year after his son asked for Elf on the Shelf, the doll that watches kids’ behavior so Santa knows whether they deserve Christmas presents. Hoffman is Jewish, his wife is Catholic, but they’re raising their children Jewish. He raised $22,000 on Kickstarter for a prototype Mensch last year and is producing 50,000 units for sale this year in retailers like Target and Toys R Us.

But Mensch on a Bench is different from Elf on the Shelf: Kids can’t touch the elf, but the mensch “is an old Jewish guy” designed to be played with like any doll, Hoffman said. Other Hanukkah toys that echo Elf on the Shelf include Kippah Kantor and Maccabee on the Mantel.

The Manischewitz Company launched Chanukah House kits in 2012. Manischewitz hosts a competition on Facebook for the best-decorated house, with a $2,000 first prize.

One of Merwin’s favorite examples is a children’s book, “How Murray Saved Christmas,” a rhyming spoof of “‘Twas the Night Before Christmas.” Murray, a deli owner, fills in for Santa and gets the toys delivered even though he smells like pickles and can’t remember the reindeer names.

“It’s a brilliant parody,” said Merwin.