Jeff Wilson says his story is exactly why men need accountability

Longmont residents Jeff Wilson, left, and Ed Nava are helping organize a Promise Keepers rally July 25-26 at the Budweiser Events Center in Loveland. ( Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call )

Promise Keeper staffer Jeff Wilson today freely shares the story of how he came to cherish a Porta Potty as a prayer closet when he lived behind bars in an overcrowded prison.

A 2005 arrest in California for igniting materials in a hotel dumpster after over-imbibing on alcohol that evening led to his felony arson conviction.

Consequently, for the next six years, nine months, and 21 days, he lived a life of 7-minute meals, 3-minute showers, and precious few annual visits from his wife and three kids trying to make it back in Longmont without him — the breadwinner and rock of the family.

But in his disgrace, Wilson, 51, found a fresh sense of God's grace and a calling on his life to offer hope to other men who make mistakes.

"My story is in part the reason men need PK," he said of the Denver-based Christian men's ministry co-founded in 1990 by then University of Colorado football coach Bill McCartney and noteworthy for hosting stadium-size conferences nationwide in the 1990s.

If you go What: Promise Keepers: Men of Integrity conference, "Unleashing the Warrior." Featuring nine speakers including PK cofounder, Bill McCartney, and Big Daddy Weave in concert. When: Friday, July 25, and Saturday, July 26 Where: Budweiser Events Center, 5290 Arena Circle, Loveland Cost: $89 adult ($69 discounted ticket if registered with promotional code, LOVELAND69); $79 per group of 2 to 9 adults; $69 per group of 10 or more adults; $69 per "Legacy" partner (monthly PK supporters); $69 per pastors, students and military personnel. More info or to register: Visit PromiseKeepers.org or call 866-776-6473.

"Part of the organization's DNA is to challenge and equip men to come to God with the things in their lives that they want to change — biblically being a better dad, a better husband, a better supporter of his church and pastor and being better at reaching across racial and denominational lines to display the power of biblical unity," Wilson said.

"Our pride gets in the way. But in the nearly 25 years since PK began, the challenge has not changed," he continued. "We know every man needs relationships with other men to help him stay accountable and keep promises in those areas."

Brotherhood matters

Looking back, Wilson is convinced that being transparent in a men's group about his midlife crisis would have curtailed the drinking that led to his crime.

But after PK laid him off the year before as its national development director, he fell out of such fellowship and into what he calls "a dark place" as he traveled as a development consultant.

"It's quite a cycle to go from Promise Keepers to prison and back to Promise Keepers again," Wilson said.

Yet, that is exactly what he did after his Sept. 13, 2012, release from the California State Prison in Corcoran, where he volunteered as a chaplain and baptized inmates, some of them gang members tatooed from head to toe and in prison for life.

PK rehired him as its conference services manager in early 2013, and he began planning the upcoming PK conference, "Unleashing the Warrior," at the Budweiser Events Center in Loveland July 25 -26.

To pull it off, Wilson reached out to former PK staffer Ed Navva — now the volunteer men's ministry leader at New Creation Church in Longmont and volunteer cofounder of Men's Ministry Alliance of Northern Colorado — to serve as the PK Loveland conference volunteer coordinator.

"But it was not just about networking and who knows who," Wilson said. "It's about the heart of this man."

PK hired both men in January 1996, when it hosted a record 22 conferences.

Compared to those days before email and Google docs — during the late 1990s, when they used phones and fax machines to mobilize thousands of volunteers to work stadium crowds — the Loveland conference at the 5,000-seat arena with 200 volunteers seems easy.

Yet, Navva, 64, explained that he and Wilson's ongoing call to men's ministry comes from a very personal place of brokenness.

"And I want men to experience the 'more' of God, not just the 'enough' of God,'" he said.

The comeback trail

Wilson says he experienced that gift about 100 feet from the main prison gate when he met his wife and daughter with hugs and sobs in the parking lot after his emancipation.

For the first time in nearly seven years he wore civilian clothes and sensed no one watching him — until his daughter said, "Turn around, Dad," he recalled.

There stood his oldest son, a Marine in fatigues.

Ben Wilson got back with his unit from Afghanistan at 10 p.m. the previous day and drove through the night on special leave in a borrowed car from Camp Pendleton in San Diego to meet him.

"Because of what I did, I didn't deserve that," Wilson said. "I felt like the prodigal's son who had come home, and he's my son."

When his short leave ended, Ben Wilson drove back to the base, and the rest of the family drove home to reunite with the youngest family member then studying at Colorado State University in Fort Collins.

Along the way, the trio took pictures at the Utah border by the "Welcome to Colorful Colorado" sign.

Wilson also gratefully noted the Longmont city limit sign.

Then, a bittersweetness washed over him when he walked through their front door.

Besides lost years with his family, his incarceration forced his wife to sell their new house on a cul-du-sac and move into an apartment.

It did not feel like home at first.

"But in every mess, there is a message. In every test, a testimony. ... (PK) conferences remind men that they are not alone in their struggles," Wilson said. " ... And the direct beneficiary of a changed man is his wife and family, church and community."

Pam Mellskog can be reached at Mellskog@msn.com or 303-746-0942.