Senate Democrats are looking to crack down on payday lenders.

The Stopping Abuse and Fraud in Electronic (SAFE) Lending Act introduced Thursday by Sen. Jeff Merkley Jeff MerkleyHonor Frank Lautenberg by protecting our kids Dems discuss dropping Wasserman Schultz Sanders pans chemical safety reform deal MORE (D-Ore.) would deliver a blow to payday lenders that critics say charge dangerously high interest rates and fees on short-term loans.

The SAFE Act would block payday lenders from taking money out of borrowers’ bank accounts without their permission through what is known as a “remote check.” It also targets a number of fees charged by payday lenders.

“These payday loans pull families into a vortex of debt,” Merkley told reporters.

“Once they have the checking account number, they can reach in with checks they generate and take money out of a consumer’s checking account at will,” he said.

“It’s online, and it’s very difficult to track these folks down and hold them accountable,” he added.

The legislation also targets the prepaid cards that many payday lenders use to deliver the money to borrowers. Often times, these prepaid cards come with fees to look up the balance or even use the card, Merkley said.

Merkley’s bill would specifically prohibit overdraft fees on these cards and encourage federal regulators to crack down on some of the other fees.

The legislation has 10 co-sponsors, including Sens. Tom Udall Tom UdallHonor Frank Lautenberg by protecting our kids House, Senate roll out chemical safety compromise Overnight Energy: Lawmakers closing in on chemical safety deal MORE (D-N.M.), Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersWhy superdelegates shouldn't support Sanders Young Turks host offers million for Trump, Sanders debate Puerto Rico debt relief faces serious challenges in Senate MORE (I-Vt.), Patty Murray Patty MurraySenate backs equal pay for female soccer players Feds can learn lessons from states about using data to inform policy Lawmakers blast poultry, meat industries over worker injuries MORE (D-Wash.), Dick Durbin Dick DurbinPuerto Rico debt relief faces serious challenges in Senate Funding boost for TSA sails through committee Senate panel passes 4.5B defense bill MORE (D-Ill.), Richard Blumenthal Richard BlumenthalSenate amendments could sink email privacy compromise Groups urge Senate to oppose defense language on for-profit colleges Lawmakers push to elevate Cyber Command in Senate defense bill MORE (D-Conn.), Elizabeth Warren Elizabeth WarrenAn all-female ticket? Not in 2016 Trump sticks by 'Pocahontas' nickname after being challenged Trump: Warren ‘as Native American as I am’ MORE (D-Mass.), Tammy Baldwin Tammy BaldwinSenate panel passes 4.5B defense bill Dem introduces bill to block new government hacking powers The Trail 2016: The campaign that never sleeps MORE (D-Wis.), Edward J. Markey (D-Mass.), Ron Wyden Ron WydenPuerto Rico debt relief faces serious challenges in Senate Senate panel delays email privacy vote amid concerns Overnight Finance: Puerto Rico bill clears panel | IRS chief vows to finish term | Bill would require nominees to release tax returns MORE (D-Ore.) and Cory Booker (D-N.J.).

But the legislation is unlikely to pass in a Republican-controlled Congress, where many Republican argue that payday loans provide low-income borrowers who can’t get loans elsewhere with much-needed cash to pay their bills.