SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — The Rockies ruined Rex Brothers.

I’ve heard that lament from plenty of fans over the last two years as Brothers’ delivery changed and his career went into a downward spiral. The Chicago Cubs released Brothers on Thursday, choosing to pay a $232,000 termination fee after initially giving the left-handed reliever a $1.42 million contract.

The theory — espoused by fans, as well as some major-league scouts I’ve talked to — states that the Rockies tinkered with Brothers’ mechanics so much that he lost direction on the mound. His natural feel for pitching got lost in a jumble of directives from upper management and pitching coaches.

Given the Rockies’ poor track record in developing homegrown pitching, it seems like a plausible theory. But it’s not that simple and it’s not really true.

Brothers’ decline was more about injury, and what an injury can do to a pitcher’s psyche. It’s a shame, how- ever, that the Rockies were unable to fix Brothers, a supplemental first-round draft choice in 2009 and one of the hardest workers to ever wear a Rockies uniform.

In 2013, Brothers was one of the best lefty relievers in baseball. Aggressive and fearless on the mound, he posted a 1.74 ERA and notched 19 saves in 21 chances when he took over as the closer in the second half of the season. He was penciled in as Colorado’s future closer, but he struggled in 2014, his ERA skyrocketing to 5.58. His mechanics were clearly off, either bouncing pitches in front of the plate or leaving grapefruits hanging over the plate.

Brothers spent much of the 2015 season with Triple-A Albuquerque, searching for his command. He never quite found it, but his velocity returned, his fastball occasionally touching 97 mph.

Still, Rockies general manager Jeff Bridich ran out of patience. In November, Brothers was designated for assignment and a few days later was traded to the Cubs for minor-league lefty Wander Cabrera.

Even in 2013 when Brothers was at his best and his strikeout rate was 10.2 per nine innings, he walked too many batters, averaging 4.8 walks. So, yes, the Rockies did adjust his mechanics, but not to the extent that it ruined him as a pitcher.

I’ve asked Brothers — on and off the record — if he thinks the Rockies messed him up. He has consistently told me that was simply not the case. He admitted he had some shoulder issues that he tried to work through and it affected him more than he anticipated.

“I got to a spot where I was laboring a little bit physically, had a couple of bad outings and started searching for the success I had,” Brothers told me in November when the Rockies designated him for assignment. “I think I got away from the athleticism that helped my success. I got away from that aggressiveness.

“But that was not because of a pitching coach or anybody else. Looking back on it, I think I backed myself into a corner and I had to start back from square one. I think, now, I’ve got that competitive fire back. I think I was showing that again this past season.”

Now, clearly, Brothers is still searching. Pitching in three Cactus League games for the Cubs, he allowed three runs over 2 ⅔ innings for a 10.13 ERA. Worst of all, he threw four wild pitches in one inning against the Arizona Diamondbacks last Sunday.

I asked Rockies manager Walt Weiss if he thought Brothers’ problems were mechanical or physical.

“Probably a mixture of both,” Weiss answered. “It’s a little perplexing.”

Then I asked Weiss whether Brothers was tinkered with too much.

“I don’t think so. I don’t think that was the case,” Weiss said.

The bottom line: Brothers is not the pitcher he was, but at age 28 he still has a chance to resurrect his career.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders @denverpost.com or @psaundersdp