Following the Supreme Court's decision to sustain President Obama's Affordable Care Act, allowing subsidies for poor and low-income people everywhere, the country is taking fewer wobbly steps as a comprehensive health care nation, while little-known parts of the ACA still teeter to find balance.

Sponsored by former U.S. Sen. Tom Harkin (D-IA), Section 2706 is the "nondiscrimination clause" of the ACA, which ensures broad-spectrum complementary and alternative medical (CAM) care to non-subsidized health insurance plan members, without discrimination. Yet in most states, including Colorado, insurance commissioners have taken little initiative to mandate Sec. 2706, which is why many Americans continue to pay out of pocket for massage therapy or acupuncture services, on top of their monthly premiums.

Ten or so years ago, insurance company trailblazers, largely in response to consumer demand, set up in-house member access to CAM and integrative health care. Kaiser Permanente is a good example. Today, Kaiser members pay monthly premiums as well as ponying up for massage and acupuncture services — a version of double dipping, it would seem, under Sec. 2706. With King v. Burwell settled, state commissioners can get down to the business of full implementation of this historic law and its subsections. We consumers, too, can focus more on the details.

Advertisement

Colorado HealthOP, a nonprofit cooperative with still-affordable health care plans that provide CAM services to gold- and silver-tier members, announced this month a raise in premiums by 22 percent in 2016. As a bronze-plan member, one step up from catastrophic, I'm happy to have monthly premiums under $300, pay our trusted acupuncturist out of pocket, and be part of a co-op network with $3 discounts for Film on the Rocks — but a 22 percent increase seems a large year-over-year miscalculation by the CO HealthOP board.

Last month, signatures for Colorado ballot initiative No. 20 started up. If it goes to the voters and passes, the initiative would set into play an entirely new and more affordable co-op health care model. The ColoradoCare initiative hinges on Sec. 1332 of the ACA, which, under the Wyden waivers, permits states to waive all coverage components of the ACA, including exchanges, benefits packages, and employer mandates in favor of innovating state-run plans that, in our case, reduce costs and bureaucracy. This proposed comprehensive health care plan is akin to universal health care and could save residents $1.6 billion and businesses $1.3 billion — all without deductibles. Yes we CAM, Colorado.

Heather Shannon is a massage therapist in Denver.