Presidents have discretion in deciding what laws to enforce or who to deport. That basic principle of constitutional law has been overlooked in the heated rhetoric accusing President Barack Obama of lawlessness and of acting like an “emperor.”

On Nov. 20, Obama announced new priorities for immigration enforcement. Under his policy, those who have been in the United States for at least five years will not be deported, even though they are not lawfully in this country, if they are parents of children who are citizens. Obama is not extending citizenship to these individuals; only Congress can do that. Rather, the president is using his prosecutorial discretion to keep families together. It is estimated that about 5 million people will be allowed to remain.

Not coincidentally, the next day, Nov. 21, the House of Representatives retaliated by filing a lawsuit against President Obama for choosing to not enforce for a year a provision of the Affordable Care Act that required businesses to provide insurance for their employees. The suit had been authorized by the House on July 30, but House Republicans waited to file it until right after Obama’s immigration announcement so as to maximize their claims that Obama is acting improperly.

The Republican criticism of Obama misunderstands constitutional law; the president has discretion to set enforcement priorities, including to allow some laws to go unenforced.

No government brings prosecutions against all who violate the law. Resources make that impossible, and there are laws that should not be enforced.

Nor has any administration, Democratic or Republican, sought to deport every person who is illegally in the United States. For humanitarian reasons or because of foreign policy considerations or for lack of resources, the government often chooses not to bring deportation actions.

The overblown Republican rhetoric fails to recognize that what President Obama announced concerning immigration was enforcement priorities. He has instructed the executive branch to prioritize deportation proceedings against felons and those who pose a public danger, but not to deport parents of young children who are United States citizens and who present no threat. There are approximately 11 million people who are in the United States illegally. The federal government brings deportation proceedings against only about 400,000 a year.

It is the president’s power and duty to set enforcement priorities. Likewise, President Obama had the authority to instruct the executive branch that some provisions of the Affordable Care Act would not be enforced this year. It is ironic to see House Republicans, who repeatedly have voted to repeal the ACA, now suing on the ground that there was a delay in its implementation.

Of course, the fact that President Obama’s action is lawful does not establish that it is desirable. But here, too, Republican rhetoric misses the reality: A key aspect of Obama’s order is to allow parents to remain with their children. Children without parents are much more likely to end up in foster care or on the streets or worse. Obama’s order is based on basic human decency in allowing families to stay together.

There have been many Supreme Court cases where the president has been challenged for acting unconstitutionally, such as in seizing steel mills or rescinding a treaty. But no case ever has found that the president acted unconstitutionally by choosing not to enforce a law. There certainly can be debates about the desirability of the president’s actions, but there is no doubt that he has acted constitutionally and within the scope of his powers.

Erwin Chemerinsky is dean of the UCI School of Law.