It can be a jungle out there when one tries to find just the right Christmas tree. ( Jenny Sparks / A&E Spotlight )

Related Looking for holiday activities? Here's your guide

Thanksgiving might be over, but the flurry of holiday events, decorations and tree-procuring is just beginning.

Kevin Weakland, owner of the Loveland Garden Center, received 150 Christmas trees on Nov. 19 and sheltered them with a frost blanket until sales start Saturday.

Mike Weakland, manager of The Flower Bin Garden Center & Nursery in Longmont, said trees for the Christmas season arrived Nov. 16 and staff members had a busy few days unwrapping, setting them up and pricing them.

The brothers offered their tips to folks looking for the best Christmas tree.

"First of all, all of our trees are November cuts, they're not from August or September," said Mike Weakland, of The Flower Bin. "The big box stores — they get August or September cuts and put them in cold storage until they ship them to the store sites. Because ours are November cuts, they're as fresh as you can get."

The Longmont store gets about 600 trees for the season and they are all specimen trees, Mike said.

"We don't do the cheapies. They're groomed for years to that perfect shape," he said. "They probably cut them last week."

He said the store carries a lot of popular species such as Balsam Fir, Douglas Fir, Frasier Fir, Noble Fir and Nordmann Fir.

"The very best tree is the Frasier Fir from North Carolina," said Kevin Weakland, of the Loveland Garden Center. "It lasts the longest. It's soft, has sort of a blue gray bottom side to the needles and a dark green top. When you're looking at the tree from below it has two different colors in it. Especially when you put lights on it, it looks really cool."

He said firs last longer than pines.

The next one he likes is the Noble Fir, which is dark green and lasts a long time and has a "nice thick shape."

The Douglas Fir is also a nice tree, although if it is exposed to weather 15 degrees or below and is then brought inside, it can lose its needles quickly.

If that happens, Kevin advises, leave it outside until just a few days before Christmas.

Scotch Pines have a nice shape and are relatively inexpensive. The needles are actually painted green so they don't turn brown too quickly.

Kevin said the most fragrant of the trees is the Balsam Fir.

If price is an object, the Loveland Garden Center offers some inexpensive trees, which Kevin calls Charlie Brown trees. They are forest cut rather than grown on a plantation, they're never shaped or pruned and cost only $15-$30.

The brothers pointed out that most trees come from Oregon, although some do come from other places such as Michigan.

Kevin believes the ones from Michigan last longer than those from Oregon, possibly because Michigan trees are more acclimated to the cold weather.

"Sometimes when Oregon has a drought the trees are awful, but this is not one of those years," Mike added.