With the 2016 presidential election on the horizon, the Republican Party just secured itself a big win. Kentucky Republicans beat out Democratic voters to elect tea partier Matt Bevin as governor in a state that has historically favored Democratic governors – 40 of the last 44 years.

Greg Sargent at The Washington Post calls Bevin's victory "a stark reminder of how deep a hole Democrats have dug for themselves at the state level." Take the Affordable Care Act, for example. Steve Beshear, the state's former governor, championed President Barack Obama's signature health care law, setting up a state exchange and opting in to Medicaid expansion, with largely good results. (The state had the second largest drop in its uninsured of any other state.) Yet, Bevin ran against all that; he wants to shut down Kentucky's Medicaid expansion and the state exchange. "The loss challenges Democrats' assumption," Sargent writes, "that they can win on hostile political turf by successfully demonstrating how government programs can help people and pointing out that Republicans will take all that away from them." He goes on, "[T]here are serious policy consequences to the profound deficit Democrats face on the level of the states."



[READ: What Kentucky Governor-Elect Matt Bevin's Win Means for 2016]

Philip Elliott at Time agrees with Sargent that the threat to Obama's health care law is real; Bevin could end the state exchange and pave the way for a national repeal if Republicans win the White House. But he'd also be taking away health care from 50,000 Kentucky residents. Bevin, "perhaps sensing the political trouble" he'd be in for, backed away from a full repeal in the final weeks of his campaign, notes Elliott.

Still, says Elliott, Bevin's win should warrant "plenty of ballyhoo" among the GOP's crop of politically inexperienced 2016 hopefuls. "Outsiders are in. Pedigrees are out," he writes.

But the pain for Democrats didn't end with Bevin. Tuesday night also saw Virginia Republicans holding fast to their state Senate control, and saw Houston Republicans overturn an anti-discrimination ordinance in a huge blow to progressives. Democrats did hang on to Mississippi's attorney general post and won three open state Supreme Court seats in Pennsylvania, wresting control of that court from Republicans.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]