How the Surgeon General plans to fight the opioid crisis

HOW THE SURGEON GENERAL PLANS TO COMBAT OPIOID CRISIS — Surgeon General Vivek Murthy is launching an ambitious effort to raise awareness and change prescribing practices, and he's pledged to release the first-ever surgeon general’s report on substance misuse and addiction later this year.

Speaking to the Association of Health Care Journalists on Saturday, Murthy said that his office will soon send a letter to more than a million providers that lays out the surgeon general’s goal and urges doctors, dentists, and other caregivers to reduce opioid prescriptions.

Story Continued Below

According to Murthy, cultural stigma has contributed to the current epidemic, with more than 2 million Americans currently addicted to opioids. "It's important to help people understand that addiction isn't a moral failing" but a medical issue, he told journalists on Saturday.

More on Murthy's plans from POLITICO's Joanne Kenen, who caught up with the surgeon general for an exclusive Q&A last week: http://politi.co/1PZU4gP

HOUSE WILL TAKE UP OPIOID BILLS — The series of bills will make their way to the floor in the coming weeks, and will give several lawmakers — including those in tough reelection fights or districts where opioids are an outsized problem — the opportunity to spearhead legislation, Pro's Jennifer Haberkorn reports. The final package is expected to look somewhat similar to the Senate's recently approved opioid legislation. The story for Pros: http://politico.pro/1RNrNQ6

GOOD MORNING — IT's MONDAY PULSE. And after spending more than a week in icy Cleveland, your author is thrilled that there's snow place like home. Tips to ddiamond@politico.com or @ddiamond on Twitter.

With help today from Joanne Kenen (@JoanneKenen) and Rachana Pradhan (@RachanaDixit).

DRIVING THE DAY: HOW WHAT WE EARN AFFECTS WHEN WE DIE — A new JAMA study today offers the strongest evidence yet that income predicts life expectancy, with a nearly 15-year gap between the richest 1 percent and poorest 1 percent of male U.S. residents and a corresponding 10-year gap for the richest and poorest female U.S. residents.

One key conclusion for policymakers: While the poorest Americans die earlier, their life expectancy substantially varies by region. The poorest residents of California, New York and Vermont, for instance, live several years longer than similarly poor residents of Nevada, Indiana and Oklahoma. And that suggests that local policies and public health initiatives can make a difference in blunting the effects of poverty, the researchers conclude.

Read the JAMA study: http://bit.ly/1SrFn7L

— Angus Deaton. "It seems unlikely that another study of income, location, and mortality will ever have more or better data," the Nobel laureate writes in a critique. However, Deaton points out that researchers may have overestimated the current gap in life expectancy but underestimated the pace at which it's widening: http://bit.ly/25TYLUV

— The local angle. A New York Times interactive allows users to compare income and life expectancy at the county level across the United States. http://nyti.ms/1YoxIve

87.3 years: The mean life expectancy among the richest 1 percent of American men

72.7 years: The mean life expectancy among the poorest 1 percent of American men

88.9 years: The mean life expectancy among the richest 1 percent of American women

78.8 years: The mean life expectancy among the poorest 1 percent of American women

CAP PUSHES BROADER STATE ACTIONS TO CONTROL HEALTH COSTS — The Center for American Progress is out with a report today documenting how states can improve health care quality and lower costs, arguing that they're best positioned to enact reforms in the near-term because of gridlock at the federal level.

CAP broadly outlines more than a dozen options for state governments to consider and examples of states that have already pioneered some of them. As Pro's Rachana Pradhan reports, those ideas include:

1) Setting a cap on the growth on per capita health care spending. Massachusetts and Maryland have done this, while negotiating agreements with the federal government to share the savings that resulted.

2) Implementing bundled payments for all payers. To expedite this idea, states should build off of bundles that have been developed in other places or for Medicare, including for hip replacements, knee replacements, prenatal care and delivery, asthma hospitalizations and stent placement.

3) Improving long-term care delivery such as by relying more on home- and community-based services, offering health homes to patients with several chronic conditions, and encouraging individuals to buy long-term care insurance by offering them refundable tax credits.

Read the full report here: http://ampr.gs/1RZRBFa

AHIP CEO POINTS OUT PROBLEMS IN THE MARKETPLACE — Speaking at the Association for Health Care Journalists conference, AHIP CEO Marilyn Tavenner said she feels patients' pain over “surprise bills” — which result, for instance, when a patient goes to an in-network hospital but is treated by an out-of-network provider. Health systems and insurers must do more to educate patients, to help them avoid the nasty surprises, she said.

Addressing some consumer or advocate concerns about health insurance will make it more expensive, she said, and the ACA exchange business so far is only profitable in three states: California, Vermont and Washington. “The market is still finding its way to stability," Tavenner said.

She also noted the obstacles to getting more young and healthy people to sign up — and shared a personal experience. According to Tavenner, she tried to get her uninsured waiter to get covered the night before. She failed; he’s going bare until it’s cheaper to get covered than to pay the fine.

ANOTHER PROBLEM: SHORT-TERM INSURANCE POLICIES ARE SURGING — That's according to the Wall Street Journal, which notes that the temporary policies aren't compliant with ACA regulations but are gaining popularity because they're significantly cheaper than marketplace plans and sold year-round. One company said short-term sales in 2015 were about 150% higher than in 2013.

— Advocates are worried that consumers don't understand the risks. Short-term plans don't exempt customers from the ACA's individual mandate penalty and tend to offer limited services, like refusing to cover pre-existing conditions. "This is exactly the kind of coverage the ACA was designed to get rid of," said Larry Levitt of the Kaiser Family Foundation.

Read the story: http://on.wsj.com/20tSj2X

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): More transparency is needed into generic drug pricing and reimbursement rates set by drug plan middlemen. Bipartisan legislation (H.R. 244) would enhance oversight of federal health programs and help ensure pharmacy reimbursement for generic drugs reflects market fluctuations. Visit www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **

UNITED HEALTH PULLS OUT OF TWO STATE EXCHANGES — UnitedHealth Group is pulling out of the Obamacare exchanges in Georgia and Arkansas in 2017, state insurance officials said on Friday. More for Pros: http://politico.pro/1XpRbvA

MORE TIME FOR MEDICAID ACCESS — States will have three more months to submit initial plans to the federal government for monitoring Medicaid enrollees' access to health care services, CMS said in a final rule published on Friday.

MEDICARE's HOSPITAL STAR RATINGS APPEAR TO BE WORKING — That's according to a new JAMA study led by Harvard researchers, which found that a higher CMS star rating was associated with lower patient mortality and readmissions. Read the study: http://bit.ly/1SYr3qo

SENATE MAY HOLD VALEANT IN CONTEMPT — The Senate Aging Committee will consider holding Michael Pearson, the embattled CEO of Valeant Pharmaceuticals, in contempt for flouting a subpoena to appear at a committee deposition Friday.

— More bad news for Valeant: The company's Addyi drug was expected to be a blockbuster. Instead, doctors had prescribed it less than 4,000 times as of February. http://nyti.ms/1Xqb45I

It was another busy weekend on the campaign trail:

TRUMP's HEALTH CARE IDEAS BASHED AGAIN — This time in a cover story in Saturday's New York Times, with Democrats and Republicans both saying they're bewildered by Donald Trump's health policy proposals.

The identity of Trump's health advisers has been an ongoing mystery — POLITICO's Paul Demko had a good investigation last month — but the Times offers a number, if not a name: At least half a dozen “very prominent people" are advising Trump on health policy, according to a campaign official. But they "are not ready to have their support of the Trump campaign known," Trump's chief policy adviser Sam Clovis told the Times.

IS CRUZ TOO CONSERVATIVE TO WIN THE NOMINATION? — Pro’s Nancy Cook looked at just how conservative Sen. Ted Cruz’s policy proposals are — far, far to the right of Trump. In fact, he would be the most conservative GOP nominee since Barry Goldwater ... who got clobbered in 1964 by Lyndon Johnson. Cruz opposes abortion even in cases of rape and incest — views that are out of sync with those of the majority of Americans, Nancy reports. More on where Cruz stands here: http://politi.co/25TCNkX

And here's what we heard on the Sunday shows:

CLINTON: CRIMINAL JUSTICE REFORM IS ALSO MENTAL HEALTH REFORM — On CNN's State of the Union, Hillary Clinton said that tough crime laws enacted in the 1990s (that is, during her husband's presidency, though she didn't say so) have led to over-incarceration, which has negatively affected the mentally ill.

"We have to deal with the consequences," Clinton said. Many incarcerated people "have an addiction problem [or] a mental health problem." She added that she wants "to do more" to help these individuals re-enter society.

OBAMA: POLARIZED MEDIA HELPS CREATE HEALTH CARE MYTHS — Appearing on Fox News Sunday, President Barack Obama said that the growth of cable TV and slanted media contribute to unwarranted cynicism about health reform.

"When Republicans promise to repeal Obamacare, and it doesn’t get repealed, [viewers are] outraged," Obama said. "It must be because Republicans were corrupt or unresponsive, or big money got involved. [And] if Democrats get frustrated, they say, 'Well, why didn’t we have a public option in our healthcare system? Or have a single payer system?'"

— Obama added that most Americans are happy with the state of employer-based health care and that's why neither liberals nor conservatives have achieved everything they've wanted with health reform. "It wasn’t necessarily because there was ... corruption, or venality," the president said. "People disagree."

STATE WEEK: BIGGER HURDLE AHEAD FOR ARKANSAS EXPANSION — The Arkansas state legislature this week kicks off its fiscal session, in which lawmakers will give final consideration to the governor's Arkansas Works proposal to extend Medicaid expansion. That story and more for Pros: http://politico.pro/1SIZyyu

WHY CAN'T NEW YORK REGULATE ITS FASTEST-GROWING INSURERS? — New York State’s medical malpractice market is undergoing a paradigm shift as local players struggle to compete with out-of-state companies taking advantage of a Reagan-era law to gobble up market share, POLITICO's Dan Goldberg writes.

The upheaval may leave physicians far more exposed to — and in some cases personally liable for — malpractice claims than they might realize, and lead to increases in insurance rates that are passed onto patients. More here: http://politi.co/1SIfS2v

WHAT WE'RE READING by Jennifer Haberkorn

Oncologists are demanding the Obama administration stop a new Medicare payment proposal that changed the way providers were reimbursed for certain high-cost drugs, according to the Associated Press and ABC News. http://abcn.ws/1WmzJJS

Hospitals are looking to community health workers to help making their communities healthier — and help the bottom line, according to Kaiser Health News and USA Today. http://usat.ly/1Q2rvPD

The coroner who was in office during the World Trade Center attacks on September 11, 2001, has died. http://nyti.ms/1SYxg5F

In Delaware, the number of female Medicaid enrollees outnumber men on a 2:1 basis, which state officials call a troubling trend on the number of women in poverty in the state, according to the News Journal. http://delonline.us/1SaVGfb

In rural areas, senior citizens have a hard time accessing health care, The New York Times reports. http://nyti.ms/1SaWOzp

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **