Topics: AlterNet, Fox News, Obama, Rush Limbaugh, Sarah Palin, Video, News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

1. Fox Newsian: Fifty Shades of Grey is a sign of the end times

Pastor Robert Jeffress, a paid Fox contributor, went on Alan Colmes’ radio show this week, and thankfully, he didn’t forget to bring the crazy with him. Jeffers is pretty sure there are three telltale signs that Armageddon is coming, including: the gays getting married, “radical Islam” and most logically, Fifty Shades of Grey.

Not that he’s read the book, mind you. But he’s heard things. Dirty things. Quoting scripture (2 Timothy 1), Jeffers says the end of days will be terrible, and by “terrible” he means filled with a “lack of moral restraint.” He goes on from there: “I think we’re seeing that everywhere, whether it is the attempt to change the most basic unit of society, the family and marriage by redefinition of marriage, or the acceptance of perversion. You know, this Fifty Shades of Grey, or fifty shades of perversion. I think that’s symptomatic of what is happening.”

And he kept going, because it’s awful hard to turn off the loony when it’s on full blast, to compare gay marriage with incest.

Jeffers was basically there to promote his new book titled — what else? — Countdown to the Apocalypse: Why ISIS and Ebola Are Only the Beginning, which should, at the very least, earn him a medal for cramming the most scary words into a single book title.

Watch the segment in its entirety:

2. Rush Limbaugh makes rape jokes; says liberal American colleges create ISIS members

Bloviating asshole and former drug addict Rush Limbaugh took to the airwaves this week to do what he loves, which is basically arguing that rape isn’t a real thing.

Limbaugh kicked things off by complaining about Obama’s anti-domestic violence PSA at the Grammy Awards last Sunday, rhetorically asking if the President mentioned “ISIS or Al-Qaeda at all?” You know, because why even open your mouth — especially if you’re going to be talking about violence — if you’re not going to find a way to blame it all on Muslims?

He went on to accuse Obama of “making up statistics about the number of women who are sexually assaulted,” and trotted out his own figures, which (suprise!) suggest women are sexually assaulted at far lower rates. In fact, Obama’s stats came from a September 2014 Centers for Disease Controlreport, but never mind that. Let’s instead get our numbers from Limbaugh, because if there’s anything Rush Limbaugh is known for being, it’s trustworthy. (Forward Progressives explains in painstaking detail exactly how wrong Rush’s numbers are, here.)

Then a couple of days ago, Limbaugh doubled down and offered some unsolicited advice to college dropout and probable presidential candidate Scott Walker. When asked why he left school, Limbaugh — himself a college dropout, so he oughta know — suggests Walker should respond that he “left college because [he] didn’t want to be accused of rape someday.”

“Just ram it right down their throats!” said Limbaugh. “They’re trying to create this ‘rape culture’ on the campus…it seems like any man who goes to college could randomly be accused of committing rape.”

Can you believe this one is taken, ladies?

We don’t even have space to get into Limbaugh saying that liberal colleges are essentially driving young American students to join up with ISIS. That’s right: there is literally not enough space here to cover a whole week of Limbaugh crazy. Oh well. We tried.