Venin Royale contains king cobra venom, which the company says can reduce wrinkles by 70 percent or more. ( Courtesy photo )

I've got poison ivy on my elbow and king cobra venom on my face.

I put them there, and I'm feeling pretty good.

You've heard people do crazy things for beauty, and I guess this one is a new record for me.

As a fashion writer, I've tried all kinds of unusual products. You've probably put mica on your eyelids (many mineral makeups use it for the sheen), and if you've used Burt's Bees Radiance Day Cream from any drugstore, you've smeared bees' "royal jelly" on your skin.

Many products contain unusual ingredients, from seaweed to sheep grease (in lipstick, yum) to the even weirder, unpronounceable stuff that is made in a lab. Hopefully, you avoid those science experiments. Even the natural "sports gel" I got at Natural Grocers to help my injured elbow contains Rhus toxicodendron, aka poison ivy.

As innovations continue in beauty and skin care and companies try to stand out in a competitive market, the ingredients continue to surprise me.

Take Orogold Cosmetics. When my friend sent me a bottle of Orogold's 24K Caviar Micro-Beads Cream, I legitimately considered pawning it. This face cream contained actual 24-karat gold flakes, caviar extract (which Orogold claims helps reduce the look of aging skin) and, er, a bunch of other ingredients that you can't pawn, so I don't remember them.

Then I learned it retailed at $400. I had to try it. Just a smear. I would probably never have $400 face cream again.

One smear turned into an empty container and a possibly but not markedly more youthful face.

Six months later, I sat across the table from my mom holding a sample of a Boulder-based product called Venin Royale (veninroyale.com). This made caviar and gold look boring. It contained king cobra venom.

Real snake venom. The only product out there with access to sustainably and humanely extracted cobra venom, the company claims.

Surely, the product was safe. It had been discovered by Paul Reid, a peptide biologics expert and internationally known neuroscientist who has spent more than two decades studying cobra venom.

David and Anna Isserman, of Boulder, co-founders of Venin Royale. (Courtesy photo)

Surely, he knew more about cobra venom than I did, which was basically that I did not want to touch it.

Didn't Cleopatra die of a snake bite?

This serum wasn't injectable, though. Not like Kate Middleton and her bee venom facial.

But, cobras.

Surely, surely, surely it was safe, I repeated while still not putting it on my face.

So I talked with Venin Royale's co-founder and president, Boulder's David Isserman. He explained that the benefit of cobra venom topically was discovered during research to determine its effectiveness as a treatment for muscular sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis and infectious diseases. Scientists learned a small, safe amount could improve a dull and uneven complexion and that king cobra venom's natural "cocktail" of positively charged, cell-penetrating peptides and neuropeptides helped improve the delivery of other ingredients in the serum.

After two weeks, Isserman says, his studies show Venin Royale can reduce visible wrinkles by 70 percent or more.

The claims were interesting, but I still wanted to know how this was not going to paralyze me and lead to my utter demise.

Isserman explained, "If a king cobra bites you, they are designed to inject a toxic dose of cobra venom into your bloodstream, to paralyze the prey so they can eat it."

Lord.

"We use a very specific dosing," he said. "Over the course of 20 years, we know the effective dose, but if you go over it, there is no additional benefit. You don't need much, but you need enough."

He wouldn't tell me how much, but he assured me it was nontoxic and safe. It's not paralyzing, it's soothing, he said.

Now I was starting to feel silly.

I'm a sucker for awards, so Venin Royale's nomination for the 2015 Edison Awards, which recognize the world's most innovative new products, services and businesses, pushed me to give it a squirt.

Alas, I'm alive.

I've always found it hard to say whether a product definitively works or not, because it's difficult to isolate influence from the outside world. Maybe I'm drinking more water or getting more sleep or scowling less. But I can say the crooked, scowl wrinkle between my eyes is less prominent since I started using Venin Royale a few weeks ago.

Maybe it's the secret of the snakes.

Maybe that's why Cleopatra was famous for her beauty. Too bad she had the dosing-off issue.

Venin Royale's serum costs $97 for one ounce and $150 for 1.7 ounces. The advanced dark spot corrector is $72 for one ounce.

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay