The Buffalo Bills are rumored to be trying to land one of the most talented, but also controversial, players to come out of the college ranks, with coach Rex Ryan reportedly flying to Baton Rouge to meet with former LSU lineman La’el Collins.

Once viewed as a lock for the first round, La’el instead fell out of the draft entirely after police in Baton Rouge linked him to a murder investigation. Police have said that Collins is not a suspect, but said they want to bring him in for questioning regarding the murder of 29-year-old Brittany Mills, with whom he had a previous relationship.

La’el Collins tried to avoid the NFL Draft, with his agent trying to have La’el pulled so he could re-enter next year, when the investigation would presumably be completed. But the NFL rejected the bid, leading La’el’s agent to try another tactic.

NFL.com reported as follows.

“Collins’ representatives had told clubs that Collins would refuse to sign with a team that drafted him outside the third round and that Collins would simply re-enter the draft in 2016. However, that is not an option according to NFL rules, NFL Media Insider Ian Rapoport reported Saturday. Teams were wary of drafting Collins until they know more information. The opinion across football has been relatively simple: Wait until the investigation process runs its course.”

La’el Collins ended up going undrafted, but he has already attracted quite a bit of attention in free agency. Both the Miami Dolphins and Buffalo Bills are rumored to be making a run at Collins, with the Bills taking the more aggressive path.

On Monday, Bills coach Rex Ryan met with La’el Collins for dinner in Baton Rouge. It’s not known whether the Bills have offered a contract, but Collins was reportedly upbeat after the meeting.

Just talked with #laelcollins who told me “God is good” he left with @buffalobills head coach. Neither saying anything about meeting @WBRZ — Brett Buffington (@BrettBuffington) May 5, 2015

Collins may actually have helped his own career by going undrafted. As a rookie free agent, he would be able to sign a shorter contract, allowing him to prove himself in the league and erase concerns about his character, then get an earlier shot at a big contract.

Signing La’el Collins would not be entirely out of character for the new Buffalo Bills. Under Rex Ryan, the team has taken a number of chances on players with previous character concerns. Ryan signed guard Richie Incognito after he spent a year away from football, and later signed Percy Harvin, who has reportedly caused strife in the locker room in previous stints.

[Image via Getty Images/Al Messerschmidt]