CLEVELAND, Ohio-- University Hospitals and UnitedHealthcare, one of the country’s largest health insurers, will soon collaborate on a new accountable care organization, or ACO, designed to coordinate care and reduce costs for participants enrolled in the insurer’s employer-sponsored health plans.

The ACO, which will launch Feb. 1, will cover 19,000 participants who currently receive care from UH providers. It will be UH’s fifth and UnitedHealthcare’s second ACO in the state.

One of the most talked-about provisions of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, ACOs are a cost-saving method of delivering care by a network of doctors and hospitals. The main goal of an ACO is to promote efficiency by improving communication between all the doctors involved in a patient’s care, improving quality, outcomes and patient experience, and advocating wellness and preventive care.

Under the UH and UnitedHealthcare ACO, UH’s staff will work to better coordinate the care for UnitedHealthcare plan participants by increasing communication, providing monthly updates on patients, and maintaining a secure patient registry, among other changes.

“It’s exciting. We’re truly some of the market leaders in this across the country,” said Dr. Eric Bieber, UH’s chief medical officer. “For us, this is how we think care should be delivered.”

Bieber said that patients would see more focus on prevention and wellness, as well as more screening for diseases such as breast and colon cancer.

“It’s about trying to keep people well, not about acute episodic illness, which has been the real focus of American healthcare for the last century,” he said. “We try to limit the amount of real disruption, but if we don’t do anything any different, we shouldn’t expect a different outcome.”

UH now has 170,000 patients in its pediatric, employee, commercial and Medicare ACOs. The largest of these programs manages about 65,000 pediatric patients through a $12.7 million grant from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation. About 25,000 employees are part of the University Hospitals Accountable Care Organization, or UHACO, and an additional 42,000 Medicare patients are managed under University Hospitals Coordinated Care, which rolled out in 2012. Another 10,000 patients are part of a collaboration with health insurer Cigna, announced in November.

Tom Sullivan, UnitedHealthcare’s executive director for Northern Ohio, said the ACO model makes good business sense.

“We’re pursuing these discussions throughout the state because we really think it makes all the sense in the world,” he said, because of the payoffs in quality improvement, better patient experience, and cost savings. “The employer community has really been calling for this for some time.”

In August, UnitedHealthcare also formed an ACO with Mount Carmel Health Partners, a physician hospital organization jointly owned by Columbus, Ohio-based Mount Carmel Health System and 1,500 physicians. That ACO covers more than 20,000 plan participants. The insurer is also part of 13 other ACO collaborations across the country.

“What I think we’re all driving towards is improved quality of care, but also a reduction in overall cost,” Sullivan said.

Bieber emphasized that the model does not mean skimping on care. Ideally, better preventive and primary care saves money over the long term.

“If you’re finding these care gaps and filling them, then the magic is that health care costs actually are then reduced,” he said. “We think this is what healthcare is going to look like for everyone in the future.”