More Stories

Ingham County puts renewal of Health Services Millage on November Ballot

Ingham County Commissioners are asking voters to renew a $3 million millage this November to support the Ingham Health Plan -- even though they say the plan has a nearly $10 million surplus from the last year.

"I think the millage is necessary because there's still going to be some need in Ingham County for these kinds of services," said Ingham County Deputy Controller Jared Cypher. "There needs to be a safety net of services that are available for those that don't qualify for insurance or for Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act."

The Affordable Care Act may be the thing that's responsible for that surplus. County commissioners say once the ACA took effect last year, the independent, non-profit Ingham Health Plan pushed its low-income users to expanded Medicaid or federal marketplace programs.

Ingham Health Plan Director Robin Reynolds says 30 percent of people were enrolled in another plan. Commissioner Todd Tennis says that move saved the IHP money -- for now.

"A reduced population created a temporary surplus," said Tennis. "We don't expect it to be around for very long ... There's always going to be a need in our community for those who fall through the cracks."

Tennis says the millage is designed for the long-term. Voters will be asked to renew a 0.52 mill tax, which could potentially bring in more than $3 million.

"We expect there still to be several thousand residents of Ingham County, families in Ingham County who are not going to qualify for either expanded Medicaid or the Exchange," said Tennis. "And that's who we can target with these resources."

Tennis says the IHP may use the extra money to expand its current benefits or even add a dental plan.

County commissioners put the millage on the ballot on a party-line vote in July.

Republican Commissioner Don Vickers says he isn't necessarily in favor of the millage, but he does agree public health should be a priority.

If passed, the millage will take effect in the 2016 fiscal year.

County commissioners will have the ability to lower the millage if they see fit.