Share 0

BY JON CRONIN

Staff Writer

Of the 2.1 million New Yorkers signed up for the Affordable Care Act through the New York State of Health website, 44 percent of them live in the five boroughs with an unspecified large quantity residing within Queens, according to a NYSOH press release.

The Affordable Care Act has been in effect for almost two years. Its launch was seen with as much dismay by its constituents as it was by its creators and detractors. Time has passed and although Republican-controlled Congress continues to attempt to vote it down the ACA continues.

According to New York State of Health, New York’s federally funded portal in to the ACA, applications have almost doubled since the open enrollment on the New York State of Health website in October 2013.

In a press release on the New York State of Health website from late July, the website reports, “more than 2.1 million New Yorkers who enrolled in a health plan through the Marketplace through Feb. 28, 2015, the end of the open enrollment period. The data shows that enrollment through the Marketplace increased more than two-fold and more than 89 percent of enrollees reported being uninsured at the time of application.”

New York State of Health Director Donna Frescatore said in the release, “Year two of NY State of Health was nothing short of an overwhelming success. We built upon our first year’s solid foundation with significant increases in enrollment and high satisfaction rates across the board. As we move closer to the third open enrollment period slated to begin on Nov. 1, this data will inform our efforts to reach more New Yorkers. ”

NYSOH reports that 86 percent of those enrolled plan to re-enroll in the coming period in the late fall. They also reported “nearly three-quarters of individuals and families enrolled in a Quality Health Plan received financial assistance to reduce the cost of their insurance. The average tax credit was $220 per month, up slightly from 2014.”

They also noted that 60 percent of those enrolled in the marketplace were under the age of 30, 18 percent between 18 and 35, 23 percent are between ages 45 and 54, and 25 percent are between ages 55 and 64.

According to the website that 2.1 million New Yorkers are 10 percent of the state’s entire population, which is a significant increase over the 970, 762 that signed up in the first open enrollment at the end of 2014.

According to the U.S. Health and Human Services website, “On March 31, 2015 about 10.2 million Americans had paid their premiums and had active coverage through the Health Insurance Marketplace.”

The Health and Human Services website also boasts, “Since the passage of the Affordable Care Act five years ago, about 16.4 million uninsured people have gained health coverage.” They state that those improvements come from the marketplace created by the ACA, Medicaid expansions and the stipulation that young adults can continue to stay on their parents’ plans until 26.

Reach Reporter Jon Cronin at (718) 357-7400 x125, jcronin@queenstribune.com or @JonathanSCronin