The parents of the model shot dead by Oscar Pistorius have attacked the 'volatile' and 'trigger-happy' athlete saying 'sooner or later he would have killed someone'.

They have sat through an agonising seven-month trial, but June and Barry Steenkamp said justice for their daughter Reeva, 29, has not been served as the 'Blade Runner' could be out in 10 months.

Mrs Steenkamp, 68, said she did not believe the athlete's story, describing him as 'vague, evasive and shifty' after he claimed he shot Reeva thinking she was an intruder.

'It was Reeva's bad luck that she met him, because sooner or later he would have killed someone. I do believe that,' she said in an interview with The Times Magazine.

Scroll down for video

June and Barry Steenkamp said justice for their daughter Reeva, 29, has not been served as Pistorius could be out in 10 months

'I wasn't happy with the sentence at all. I don't think that was justice for Reeva at all.'

They have a recurring image of Reeva, terrified and alone in the small toilet cubicle, pleading for her life or screaming in agony once she had been shot.

'Both of us are haunted by the same nightmare. The vision of Reeva suffering this terrible trauma. Her terror and helplessness. Her yells for help piercing the silent night air,' said Mrs Steenkamp.

Her husband imagines her begging for her life. 'He agonises over what was going through her mind: 'Where is anyone? Who is going to save me?' '

Mrs Steenkamp said she he did not believe Oscar Pistorius' story, describing him as 'vague, evasive and shifty' after he claimed he shot Reeva (left) thinking she was an intruder

Pistorius told the court they were planning a life together, but Mrs Steenkamp thinks Reeva had 'nagging doubts about their compatibility'.

'She had confided to me that she hadn't slept with him. They'd shared a bed, but she was scared to take the relationship to that level … She wouldn't want to sleep with Oscar if she wasn't sure,' she said.

'I believe their relationship was coming to an end. In her heart of hearts, she didn't think it was making either of them happy.'

In her book, titled Reeva: A Mother's Story, Mrs Steenkamp describes Pistorius, 27, as a 'pathetic figure'.

Her parents have a recurring image of Reeva, terrified and alone in the small toilet cubicle, pleading for her life or screaming in agony once she had been shot, pictured as a toddler (left) and during a family Christmas

The extract focuses on the athlete's public apology during the televised trial.

'It was an extraordinary moment. You could cut the atmosphere in the courtroom with a knife: silence, but for the sound of journalists tapping on their screens. It put me in an awkward position.

'Why decide to say sorry to me in a televised trial in front of the whole world? I was unmoved by his apology. I felt if I appeared to be sorry for him at this stage of his trial on the charge of premeditated murder, it would in the eyes of others lessen the awfulness of what he had done.

'He was in the box trying to save his own skin after he had killed my daughter and I was sitting in that courtroom wanting to hear the factual truth.'

The model (centre) with her brother Adam and mother June (right) who has written about her daughter's death in her book titled: Reeva: A Mother's Story

Pistorius told the court they were planning a life together, but Mrs Steenkamp thinks Reeva had 'nagging doubts about their compatibility'

Miss Steenkamp's parents said their daughter's death in the early hours of Valentine's Day last year remained shrouded in mystery, and 'only Oscar knows' the truth

The five-year sentence given to the double amputee athlete has been criticised by some as too lenient.

But Miss Steenkamp's parents told ITV's Good Morning Britain they accepted the sentence and 'don't want revenge'.

They said their daughter's death in the early hours of Valentine's Day last year remained shrouded in mystery, and 'only Oscar knows' the truth.

Judge Thokozile Masipa ruled the state had failed to prove Pistorius knew it was Reeva when he opened fire through the locked toilet door of his apartment in Pretoria.

Throughout the trial, he said he mistook his girlfriend of three months for an intruder.

'He said pulling the trigger was 'an accident'. What? Four times an accident?' Mrs Steenkamp said in her book.

'He said Reeva did not scream, but she would definitely have screamed. I know my daughter and she was very vocal.'

Pistorius, who the court heard has no income and no property after selling it during the trial, was driven away in a police van with barred windows after his sentencing on Tuesday.

He is expected to be held in the hospital section of a prison in Pretoria.

Mrs Steenkamp's book is to be published on November 6.