MARINETTE, Wis. (AP) - Marine manufacturing is a $6 billion industry that’s critical to the economic landscape of Wisconsin, according to experts.

About 3,200 people, with two-thirds located in the northeastern part of the state, hold jobs in marine manufacturing. The industry has grown locally and has largely remained local, with most of the money staying in the area, said Jeffrey Sachse, a state labor economist. The average salary of a marine manufacturing worker is between $46,000 and $58,000 per year, he said.

“If you are a first-class welder, you could make $70,000 to $80,000. If you are a finish welder at Marinette Marine, you can make closer to $90,000,” Sachse said.

Many Wisconsin boat makers either share ownership or are in separate markets so there is little competitive overlap, Press-Gazette Media (http://gbpg.net/1tBwekS ) reported.

“It’s really been an industry, as is the case with a lot of manufacturing sectors in the state, where they benefited from attrition elsewhere,” Sachse said. “It’s down to two or three companies nationally that do what they do. We can meet a lot of market needs with two or three producers, and we have them.”

Long-term orders and contracts are commonplace and help keep the industry stable. Luxury yacht contracts are one of the most appealing because they often entail a year to two years of work, according to Curt Prokash at Manitowoc-based yacht builder Burger Boat.

Marinette Marine Corp. is the largest marine employer in the state, with six U.S. Navy Littoral Combat Ships currently under construction. Two more of the ships are slated to begin being built next year, and other related work will continue through 2019.

“We hire a lot of our workforce in the regional area,” said Jan Allman, president and CEO of Marinette Marine Corp. “We have about 2,000 people in our yard daily, and since 2009 we’ve hired, directly, more than 600 workers . We are one of the key economic development players for this area.”

Wisconsin marine companies have joined together to form North Coast Marine Manufacturing Alliance. The goal is to produce a larger pool of laborers who are recruited from high schools and technical colleges.

___

Information from: Press-Gazette Media, http://www.greenbaypressgazette.com