Q: There are so many photo sharing services I already can't keep track, and now Google's introduced a new one called Google Photos. Is it any good?

A: It's hard for me to offer a subjective opinion of whether a specific program or service is going to be good for you when I don't know your use case, but let's have a look at Google Photos and hopefully you can draw your own conclusions.

Google has tried three times to dethrone Facebook as the social media destination of choice, and its latest iteration, known as Google Plus, has produced some really useful tools and innovations. In a lot of ways I actually prefer Google Plus to Facebook, including its far more elegant user interface, and one reason for that is because it's very photo-friendly. In fact, as photos in your stream become popular, they can be displayed larger on the screen, which means that really striking pictures can be shown much larger than anything you'd ever see on Facebook.

Dave Taylor For the Camera

It's the photo management and display portion of Google Plus that is the heart of the new Google Photos service, including its ability to auto-enhance uploaded photographs.

The real selling point of Google Photos, however, is that it offers unlimited photo and video storage for free.

Yes, you read that right. Unlimited media storage without charge. Hard to argue with that sort of deal, particularly given that there are already Google Photos apps available for both Android and Apple smartphones, too, so keeping an archive of every single photo you ever take with your phone is now easily done.

Before pro photographers get too excited, however, a tiny caveat: free storage is only for photo files of 16MP or less and video files of 1080p or lower resolution. Got 4K video you're shooting or have a 32MP camera? You can pay for the additional storage required or just let Google Photos autosample them down for archival purposes.

Once your photos are in the system, it automatically organizes them by people, places and things, along with by date taken. Turns out that the EXIF information included in your photos and geolocation data from the smartphone are both very, very useful in taming the wild photo beast!

The system also creates automatic montages and animation sequences from clusters of similar photos, along with "stories" that are a sort of automated attempt to create a photo book. My experience with the 10,000-plus images I've uploaded is that these all need more work, but they're certainly interesting to view, and the ability to identify photos by people even as they grow from children to adults is quite remarkable.

I'm impressed with Google Photos and am already using it on my tablets, smartphones and both Mac and PC computers. It's still a 1.0 release, but I expect lots of refinements in the next few months.

Learn more: http://photos.google.com/

Dave Taylor has been involved with the online world for long enough to remember dialup modems and floppy disks. When he's not stuck in U.S. 36 traffic, he covers the tech industry at www.AskDaveTaylor.com and welcomes email from readers.