As Todd Helton emerged from the Rockies’ dugout at Coors Field on Sunday afternoon, theme music from “The Natural” filled the ballpark. Thunder rolled in the distance. Fans wearing No. 17 jerseys filled the stands.

But it was Helton’s 11-year-old daughter, Tierney Faith, wearing a black dress and black, high-top Converse All-Stars, who put the memorable day into sweet perspective.

“My daddy has been a Colorado Rockie my entire life,” Tierney said. “This stadium has been my second home. Thank you for that.

“Now that my daddy has been home with us this season — a lot — I want to ask you one question: Do you want him back?”

“Yes!” screamed the crowd.

“Just kidding, Daddy,” Tierney said. “I love you. We are so proud of you.”

Her words were greeted with cheers, laughter and a few tears from the crowd of 42,310 fans.

“A beautiful moment. What a great way to honor Todd,” said Denverite Ellen Barnes, who proudly wore her decade-old purple Helton jersey.

The Rockies, who hosted the Cincinnati Reds in a split doubleheader Sunday, have played 3,463 regular-season games. Helton took the field for 2,247 of them — 65 percent. He wore No. 17 for each of those games. Now, no Rockies player will ever don No. 17 again.

The Rockies officially retired Helton’s number Sunday, unveiling a No. 17 plaque on the facade of the second deck in right-center field. He became the first player so honored by the franchise, which began play in 1993.

“I am proud to say that I am a Colorado Rockie for life,” said Helton, wearing a dark suit and a light purple tie. “There is no greater honor, for me, than having my number retired from the team that I put my heart and soul into. Thank you, all of Colorado, for making my baseball dreams come true. God bless, and go, Rockies.”

PHOTOS: Colorado Rockies retire Todd Helton’s number 17

Sharing the day with Helton were his wife, Christy, and daughters Tierney and 4-year-old Gentry Grace.

The Rockies, skidding toward perhaps the worst season in franchise history, brought back some Rock- tober memories from the 2007 season with an improbable 10-9 victory. They had a five-run ninth inning, capped by Drew Stubbs’ walk-off, three-run homer.

This game notwithstanding, the Rockies’ overall performance this year has prompted many fans, including Thornton’s J.P. Sampson, to severely cut back on the number of games they attend. Sampson, 35, used to attend about 20 per year. Now he’s down to five. But he wasn’t about to miss Helton’s big day. He brought his 6-year-old son, Brody, with him to Coors Field.

“When I was in high school and at college, I would go to games and Todd was the guy who played every day; gave it his all every day,” said Sampson, a teacher at Thornton High School. “He was such a classy guy, and he seems like a regular guy.”

The only professional jersey Sampson owns is his gray Helton jersey, purchased in 2000 — the year Helton produced one of the greatest seasons in baseball history. Helton hit .372, with 42 home runs, 59 doubles and an OPS (on-base percentage plus slugging percentage) of 1.162.

But his most important number is now displayed next to Jackie Robinson’s No. 42 and a plaque bearing the initials “KSM,” for Keli Scott McGregor, the team president who died in 2010 at age 47.

During his pregame news conference, Helton was asked if there was any significance to wearing No. 17.

“I showed up and it was in my locker, and I certainly wasn’t about to say anything good or bad,” Helton said, looking back to his first spring training. “I just took the number and stuck with it.”

Helton retired from baseball at the end of last season — his 17th in the big leagues, appropriately. His career included five All-Star Games, three Gold Gloves, four Silver Slugger awards, 2,519 hits, 369 home runs and 592 doubles.

Before Helton took his brief turn at the podium, former teammates Brad Hawpe and Matt Belisle spoke about their good friend.

Hawpe, who played with Helton on the 2007 World Series team, spoke affectionately about Helton and also told a telling anecdote.

“I was a first baseman for my whole life,” Hawpe said. “My first day in my first big-league camp, I was terribly nervous. I strolled over to first base to take a few groundballs with Todd Helton.

“After a few groundballs, he looked at me and said: ‘You look good over here at first. And I hear you can hit a little.’

“I was about to respond to him, but I look over at him and he’s staring a hole right through me. He said, ‘You better find a new position.’ “

Before the ceremony, Helton described what having his number retired will mean to him in the coming years.

“I think when I look back on it, the enormity will kick in,” he said. “And probably anytime I walk into the stadium and see my number up there, the number ‘one seven’ up there, it will be incredible for me.

“My girls are old enough now where they’re going to see some things. They’re going to hear the crowd clapping for Dad. I think, to me, that’s cool.”

Helton, a native of Knoxville, Tenn., who was drafted from the University of Tennessee in the first round in 1995, said Colorado will always be his home.

“When I came here from Tennessee, I always said that Tennessee had the nicest people and the greatest people,” he recalled. “Well, they said, ‘What do you like about Colorado?’ Well, the people are the same type of people. Just the same regular people you enjoy spending time with. I call this place home now. I’ve raised my kids here, and I plan on staying here a long time. I could pretty much go anywhere I want, but at this point, I’ll never leave Colorado.”

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp