BERKELEY, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Health care is in the midst of rapid transformation. From the Affordable Care Act to changes in HIPAA to ongoing initiatives to control costs, health policy and health law are central issues nationwide.

These changes are creating new opportunities for professionals looking to make a dramatic impact at the intersection of health policy and law. Developed by world-renowned institutions UCSF and UC Hastings College of Law, the new Masters of Science in Health Policy and Law prepares students to serve as industry leaders through a unique interdisciplinary education. The courses—which interweave the best elements of health policy and legal education—span economics, finance, policy analysis and legal reform.

“To really improve peoples’ live, evidence from laboratory, clinical or social research needs to be translated into real-world terms, into policy and practice,” says Dan Dohan, Ph.D., co-director of the degree and professor at UCSF. “From the UCSF health policy research side comes an ability to analyze and understand evidence. UC Hastings provides a window into the most powerful tool we have for change: the law.”

“We take the amazing research performed at UCSF and bring it to life,” adds Jaime King, J.D., Ph.D., co-director of the degree and professor at UC Hastings. “When you have interdisciplinary education and research, that’s how you get progress. By combining brilliant expertise from two great institutions, this degree will train people to bring those minds together to solve the policy problems and practical dilemmas that our health care system faces every day.”

Join the national movement to make our health care system better and create healthier communities.

Applications are now being accepted for the fall 2016 cohort.

Visit hpl.ucsf.edu to learn more about this innovative new degree.

Founded in 1873, the University of California, San Francisco is the only UC campus devoted solely to health science. Its four schools (Dentistry, Medicine, Nursing and Pharmacy) consistently top the rankings in education, research, patient care and NIH funding support, with patients traveling from across the state, country and globe for care at UCSF’s medical centers.

The University of California, Hastings College of the Law was founded in 1878 as the first law school in the University of California public university system. As a top-ranked law school, UC Hastings educates students in cutting-edge areas of the law and provides opportunities for students and practitioners to work together at the school and in the community. Hastings alumni are leaders in law, policy, government and business.

As law and health care continue to intertwine, lawyers, researchers and medical professionals must be able to navigate both worlds fluently. Founded with this vision in mind, the Consortium bridges two leading institutions through joint initiatives by utilizing education, research, and clinical training and service. Established in 2008, the Consortium develops and supports collaborative educational and professional opportunities for students, faculty and the community.