Spots open in many grade levels

PEETZ — The Peetz Plateau Board of Education heard an update on enrollment during a regular meeting on Tuesday. Enrollment at the school is down several students from the end of last school year.

Three families with children have moved away from the area, which Superintendent Mark Collard said has "quite an impact" for a school the size of Peetz.

"We're trying to put the word out that if (families) are looking for something a little bit different, they like the smaller school size, we have openings here at Peetz," he said, noting that there are spots available in almost all grade levels.

In other business, Collard gave an update on the vocational business teacher position left open after Tammy Fehringer resigned. Traci Davenport, a native of Peetz, has been hired to fill the position; she will start Sept. 2.

Additionally, under discussion items the board talked about roof repairs. The gym and ag shop roofs sustained some wind damage, which has caused a big portion of the north side of the gym roof to continue "lifting up," Collard said. As a result, the district has field a claim with the insurance company and is in discussions with Blue SKY to do the repairs. The company recently came out to the school to do a preliminary engineering study, before they submit the final plans.

The district is also looking at installing ventilation equipment for the ag shop, for when students are doing welding.

Tuesday's meeting included an update on the bus barn as well. The project is now finished and the final inspection is complete.

Advertisement

The board also discussed the policy review that the Colorado Association of School Boards is currently doing for the district. CASB has sent back a short report to the district with issues they found in the policies that they think need to be addressed. The board will be addressing those in the coming months.

Contact Journal-Advocate staff writer Callie Jones at 970-526-9286 or cjones@journal-advocate.com