Officials tout health insurance exchanges

When the health care exchanges set up by "Obamacare" launched last winter, newspapers reported that very few people enrolled at first because the process was so hard.

So the news that 462,125 people enrolled in the exchanges during the first week of open enrollment this time came as a relief to Obama administration officials.

Open enrollment began on Nov. 15 and will continue until Feb. 15.

Officials who held a press conference Friday at the Erie County Health Department are trying to get the word out that open enrollment has resumed, and that there's help for people who are worried they can't figure out how to buy health insurance.

Shari Greene, director of Clinic Services at the health department, said when people call the health department, the agency can help them figure out if they qualify for Medicaid or if they need to buy health insurance from the exchanges at healthcare.gov, where subsidies are available for many customers.

Kathleen Falk, Chicago regional director for Region 5 of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, said that thanks to health care reform, 10 million few Americans are uninsured.

And those who still lack health insurance will find that the health insurance exchanges are working better this year, she said.

"We tried to make the process simpler and easier," she said.

She said that while two states in her region have not expanded Medicaid, Ohio did, and thus has the full range of options for people who need health care.

Ohio has 16 insurance providers in the health care exchange, one of the largest numbers in the country, so Ohio residents have plenty of options, she said.

U.S. Rep. Marcy Kaptur, D-Toledo, told a story about a woman who ran across the street and hugged her to thank Kaptur for supporting health care reform.

Kaptur said the woman told her, "I just want you to know I have epilepsy. I am insured for the first time in my life."

Kaptur said several groups still have large numbers of uninsured people, including single women, people from 50 to 65 and people who work for themselves or for very small businesses.

Pete Schade told the crowd that from May 2011 to May 2014, the number of people with private insurance treated at the health department's clinic rose from 145 to 239. The number of people on Medicaid rose from 483 to 521, while self-pay patients declined from 354 to 159. This suggests that health care reform is taking hold, he said.

BOX: Need help buying health insurance?

Anyone who wants to explore the health insurance exchange set up under the Affordable Care Act can go to healthcare.gov, but local counselors also are available for people who don't have a computer or who need help.

Local residents may call the Erie County Health Department at 419-626-5623. They also may call Family Health Services of Erie County, 419-557-7189.

The national hotline to seek information is 1-800-318-2596. It's available 24 hours a day.