Crain’s asked dozens of experts for innovative ways Mayor-elect Bill de Blasio could make New York City a better place to work and play. The result is our list of more than 40 bright ideas, which can be viewed by category: Land Use, Transportation, Public Safety, Social and Health Services, Government and Labor, Technology, Education, Infrastructure and Environment and Taxes. If you have a social and health services idea for Bill de Blasio please leave your suggestion in the comments tab of this article.

—Don't waste time doing studies to identify locales where New Yorkers are struggling the most. Just help them: Bushwick, Inwood, Washington Heights, Melrose, Mott Haven and Port Morris. “We all know where these neighborhoods are, but somehow what we know doesn't match up with what we do about it,” said Margarette Purvis, president and CEO of Food Bank for New York City. “[Mr. de Blasio] can be the mayor that closes the gaps. He should force his commissioners to come up with a plan about how they are going to focus on the poorest and neediest communities in the city.”



—City advertising dollars could be used to promote small arts organizations in the boroughs so out-of-towners are aware of them. These organizations have not benefited as much from the 50 million-plus tourists flocking to the city. “We have such a diversity of arts, so let's promote it,” said Linda Shelton, executive director of the Joyce Theater Foundation Inc.



—Close money-losing Brooklyn hospitals (there are at least four of them). The savings could be used to fund community health centers. And don't be afraid to let private money fund health care. “We have to get new ways of drawing new funds to Brooklyn, including private capital,” said Stephen Berger, chairman of the Health Systems Redesign's Brooklyn Work Group, at a recent Crain's health care forum. “We can't assume that we can support all our needs through public money or borrowing.”



—Let cops mentor kids. “I think the mayor needs to take a look at what mentoring can do for kids,” said Hector Batista, CEO of Big Brothers Big Sisters of New York City. Kids would get role models and support. Mentors could help the police mend frayed community relationships.

Theresa Agovino, Matthew Flamm, Irina Ivanova, Thornton McEnery and Nicholas Wells contributed reporting. Ideas are based on public information and interviews. Ideas without attribution came from multiple sources or individuals who did not want to be named.

Sign Up for Health Pulse Brought to you by Crain's New York Business, Health Pulse is a subscription-only website focused on the business of health care. The site is updated every day with breaking news, research and unique information. Subscribe today and receive access to the site and the daily emails. Plus, twice a week we release a special report called Extra, featuring data and statistics. Subscribe Today

Comments