Clemson defensive end Kevin Dodd tackles Miami quarterback Brad Kaaya (15) as he passes during the first half of an NCAA College football game, Saturday, Oct. 24, 2015 in Miami Gardens, Fla. (AP Photo/Wilfredo Lee)

Maybe the fan flying overhead will get his wish.

Before host Miami suffered a 58-0 obliteration at the hands of No. 6 Clemson, someone again commissioned a private jet to send a message to the University of Miami brass, an act which has become as customary as the Cuban sandwiches at Sun Life Stadium.

The plane dragged a banner through sunny skies before kickoff, proclaiming “Our pilot has as many Top 25 wins #FireAlGolden.”

Unless the pilot entered Saturday morning with three wins over ranked opponents, the sign is inaccurate — in addition to grammatically unsound. Golden dropped to 3-15 in his coaching career against ranked opponents, and 3-10 with Miami.

The spirit of the sign lingers over Miami, which is still seeking its first ACC championship in its 12th year in the league. Fans chanted “Fire Golden” starting in the second quarter Saturday.

Golden is now 32-25, and 17-18 in ACC play, in his fifth season coaching the Hurricanes.

The day was an all-around disaster for Miami, on and off the field. Fans were fighting amongst themselves in the first half Saturday, arrested and escorted from the stadium.

The Hurricanes did honor multiple alumni on the field Saturday, including former NFL players Willis McGahee, Kellen Winslow Jr., Santana Moss, Reggie Wayne and Vinny Testaverde.

Miami athletic director Blake James told the Sun-Sentinel after Saturday’s game the loss was “disappointing,” but would not make a coaching change and “we’ll go and get ready to play Duke” next weekend.

Kaaya out

Making matters worse for Miami: sophomore quarterback Brad Kaaya, the ACC’s leader in passing yards, was knocked out with concussion symptoms in the second quarter.

When Clemson defensive end Shaq Lawson slammed Kaaya to the ground for his second sack of the day, that marked the end of the afternoon for Kaaya. The Tigers only brought two rushers on that particular third-down sack.

“Probably the best hit I’ve had since I started playing football,” Lawson said. “Put my mind on that (Jadeveon) Clowney hit a little bit.”

Kaaya finished 6 of 10 for 51 yards and an interception.

Leggett sets record

On the visitor’s sideline, tight end Jordan Leggett got the party started with a nifty 34-yard touchdown reception on a throwback play from Deshaun Watson.

That marked Leggett’s sixth touchdown catch, and his fifth straight game with a score, which sets an all-time record among Clemson tight ends. The Tigers’ entire arsenal of tight ends totaled six touchdown catches in the 2013-14 seasons combined.

Reader returns

Senior defensive tackle D.J. Reader checked into the game with 18 seconds remaining in the first quarter, making his season debut after missing the first six games due to undisclosed personal reasons.

Reader recorded a tackle early in the second quarter.

“I feel fresh,” Reader said afterward. “I’m not going to try to rush myself into anything, just go out and take advantage of the time I’ve got left.”

Cain unable

Wide receiver Deon Cain, a true freshman from Tampa, entered Saturday as the team’s No. 2 receiver with 263 yards this season. He did not play due to a coach’s decision.

“I needed to get his attention. A little attitude adjustment, really,” Clemson coach Dabo Swinney said.

“Sometimes it’s good for some of these guys to stand over there and realize you can win without them. But he handled it the right way.”

Senior wideout Charone Peake led the Tigers with five receptions and 44 yards.