Former Va. attorney general Ken Cuccinell , right, talks with convention delegate Kenny Golden, during the Virginia State Republican Convention in Harrisonburg, Va. (Steve Helber/AP)

Donald Trump spent part of last weekend wooing former Virginia attorney general Ken Cuccinelli II, but the conservative heartthrob wasn’t ready to commit.

Cuccinelli had spent months on end campaigning across the country for another GOP presidential hopeful, Sen. Ted Cruz (Texas).

He got a call from Trump’s campaign manager about a week ago, about the time Cruz suspended his campaign and Trump became the presumptive nominee. A long round of phone tag ensued. Cuccinelli and Trump’s campaign manager Corey Lewandowski finally connected over the weekend — at a moment when the manager was at Trump’s side.

“He happened to be with Donald Trump. He put him on briefly,” Cuccinelli told The Washington Post on Wednesday.

And what did The Donald say to Cooch?

“Kind of a, ‘Rah, Rah. We want you on the team,’ ” Cuccinelli said. “That was nice of him. But I’m still waiting for the reason [to support Trump]. . . . Ted Cruz has fought and bled for the things l believe.

“I haven’t seen Donald Trump lay out and stick to a set of policy issues that reflect the core beliefs that I hold. Now, he’s got time to do that. But given his history of flopping all over the place, he’s gonna have to have a way to convince people like me that even when he lays out his positions on something, we can have confidence he can stick to it when the going gets rough.”

That said, Cuccinelli said that he appreciated the outreach and that he expects to vote for Trump.

“I anticipate voting for him,” Cuccinelli said. “But I am gonna spend the next two months before the convention . . . watching and listening.”

Cuccinelli, who won conservative hearts as attorney general for brash legal action against “Obamacare” and other forms of perceived federal overreach, is more than just a high-profile Cruz surrogate. Since that campaign folded, he has tried to rally Cruz supporters to a new cause: ensuring that the party platform reflects their conservative views.

Cuccinelli spent Monday night at Cruz’s Houston campaign headquarters, where he spoke via conference call to state leadership teams and supporters who had been elected delegates to the Republican National Convention in July. He encouraged them to make their presence felt at the gathering.

He said Cruz supporters are under no illusions that he could emerge as the nominee, a scenario that seemed possible when it looked like Trump might not lock up the nomination before the convention.

“This is not some sneaky, ‘We’re-gonna-nominate-Ted-Cruz, ha-ha’ kind of play,” Cuccinelli said.

But they do have the power to shape the platform, he said.

“In this stage of the contest, we have elected more hard-core conservative delegates to go to the convention than would have ever happened in previous cycles at this point,” he said. “Why not keep the conservative piece of this going, even though it isn’t going to have anything to do with the nomination, and try to achieve some of the goals we’ve had?”

Chief among those goals: Getting rid of an RNC rule that could make it possible for the establishment to install a “savior” candidate over a grass-roots favorite.

[Cruz talks up an RNC rule that would keep Kasich out of the convention]

Rule 40b requires that candidates win total delegate majorities in eight states or more in order to be nominated. The RNC hastily came up with it in 2012, after then-Rep. Ron Paul of Texas nearly racked up enough wins to be nominated.

Cuccinelli said his goal is to “move the rules of the Republican Party away from RNC- centric power and toward the grass roots.”