STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- Each year, tax season brings out con artists who will try to scam taxpayers out of their money.

Over the past several weeks, taxpayers, as well as tax preparers, have received calls from scammers claiming to be from the U.S. and New York State Treasury Departments, according to Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo's office.

"Our administration is committed to protecting consumers from scammers who seek to prey on hard-working New Yorkers," Cuomo said. "New Yorkers need to remain vigilant, be skeptical of anyone seeking to solicit personal information, and report any suspicious activity to the appropriate authorities."

SCAMS TARGETING TAXPAYERS Cuomo urged taxpayers to be wary of three new scams emerging early in the tax season:

Scammers posing as NYS or U.S. Treasury representatives – Callers posing as New York State Treasury agents encourage victims to turn over their bank account information along with $250 in return for a larger sum of cash to come at a later date. To make themselves appear more convincing, the scammers provide the victim with a phone number, address, and confirmation code specific to the transaction. New Yorkers have also received calls from individuals posing as U.S. Treasury agents.

Pocketing Affordable Care Act penalties – Uninsured New Yorkers may face another tax scam involving penalties under the Affordable Care Act. In some cases, untrustworthy tax preparers tell clients to pay the penalties directly to them, and they keep the money. Taxpayers should never make a tax payment directly to an individual or tax preparer. Payments should be made only with a tax return or in response to a letter from the IRS.

Recent scams are targeting the preparers via phone calls demanding client information. In these cases, scammers pretend to be from the IRS in hopes of gaining user-names and passwords to taxpayer accounts.

TIPS TO PROTECT AGAINST SCAMMERS

To help New Yorkers protect themselves, Cuomo offered the following tips:

Don't be fooled by callers who threaten you or ask for personal information. Be sure you only give your personal information -- including your social security number -- to someone you trust. Remember, the NYS Tax Department and the IRS will always send you a letter before contacting you by phone or email about a tax debt.

Beware of "phishing" emails. Taxpayers may receive emails that bear fictitious government logos that offer assistance in settling fake tax issues. The NYS Tax Department and IRS will never request personal or financial information by email.

Avoid identity theft. Your tax return contains personal information, including your social security number, that identity thieves and scammers seek. To prevent your sensitive information from being compromised, only give it to a tax preparer you trust and regularly monitor your bank account for suspicious activity.

Report it. If you believe that you've been contacted by someone attempting a scam, have been the victim of fraud or identity theft, or suspect a tax preparer is engaging in illegal activities, visit the Tax Department's new fraud webpage to learn how to report it.

The governor also announced the launch of a new website for New Yorkers to report scams, fraudulent activity, and identity theft.

FOLLOW Tracey Porpora on FACEBOOK