Topics: From the Wires, News, Politics News

NEW YORK (AP) — He sported a rainbow tie for the Gay Pride Parade. He wore an “I Love LA” shirt and warbled that song on national TV to pay off a bet. He even donned a pirate outfit — puffy shirt and all — to join his equally outlandishly costumed family for a hipster parade in Brooklyn.

New York Mayor Bill de Blasio is not afraid to be bold — and, at times, downright goofy — in his appearance and manner, creating an approachable persona that is a stark contrast to his predecessor, buttoned-up billionaire Michael Bloomberg. It’s an everyman image that experts say meshes with de Blasio’s populist politics, a liberal call to reach out to poor and working-class New Yorkers who felt left behind by the city’s growing income inequality.

“He’s just a guy from Brooklyn who happened to be elected mayor who likes hanging out with his wife and talking about his kids,” said Hank Sheinkopf, a Democratic political consultant. “People can relate to that, and, for some, it’ll be easier when he has to bear bad news.”

Although anyone with the ambition to lead the nation’s largest city clearly possesses some ego, de Blasio — a Democrat who took office in January — has repeatedly shown that he doesn’t take himself too seriously. He misses few opportunities at what reporters have labeled “dad humor,” such as the time he offered to do a mock strip tease when asked how many layers he was wearing on a snowy day. The 6-foot-5 de Blasio also can’t help but poke fun at the relative shortness of his aides.

After successfully navigating his first city budget negotiations and Albany legislative session, de Blasio has repeatedly embraced the lighter side of his job. When the New York Rangers lost the Stanley Cup Finals to the Los Angeles Kings in June, he made good on a bet he made with his Californian counterpart and appeared on “Jimmy Kimmel Live” singing — badly — the Randy Newman love song to the City of Angels.

Later that month, he donned a bright purple shirt, sunglasses and a rainbow tie to march in the city’s massive gay pride parade alongside his wife, Chirlane McCray. But that outfit, which drew cheers from throngs from onlookers, was far from his most adventurous of the month.

De Blasio’s teenage children, Dante and Chiara, were named King Neptune and Queen Mermaid for the Coney Island Mermaid Parade, an annual rambunctious march attended by thousands of people, many in revealing costumes. Chiara, a 19-year-old college student, sported blue-green body paint, a gold and turquoise dress and a crown adorned with shells. Sixteen-year-old Dante wore blue body paint paired with a fishnet toga-style outfit.