By the Numbers 45- Number of pages in the bill 615,245 - Acres in the National Recreation Area 3 - Years for the various agencies to hammer out a recreation plan 2003 - Year the first bill was introduced to study the proposal $26.75B - Economic activity generated by national parks in 2012

Legislation more than 10 years in the making that places 615,245 acres of Angeles National Forest land, foothills, the San Gabriel and Rio Hondo rivers and the Puente-Chino Hills into a new National Recreation Area was sent to Congress on Thursday.

If approved, the proposal would bring about the most significant change in governance to the forest — often referred to as Los Angeles County’s backyard — since 1892, when President Benjamin Harrison established the San Gabriel Timberland Reserve that later became the Angeles National Forest.

The San Gabriel National Recreation Area Act would draw a line around a large portion of the forest, from Santa Clarita and Acton on the west to Wrightwood and Lytle Creek on the east, roughly reaching the 15 Freeway, according to the bill. The NRA would include a leg down the San Gabriel River to Pico Rivera and extend east to include the ecologically sensitive Whittier Hills.

Almost two-thirds of the acreage that comprise the recreation area would consist of land already designated as part of the federal Angeles National Forest managed by the U.S. Forest Service, a division of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.

Under the bill authored by Rep. Judy Chu, D-Pasadena, the U.S. National Park Service would be brought in to partner with the Forest Service, as well as local and state governments, to add better signage, trails, recreation and interpretive programs.

Estimates vary from 3 million to 5 million as to the number of visitors a year to the Angeles, the largest urban forest in the United States. Critics, including Chu, say the Forest Service does a poor job keeping the vast wild areas clean and managing the swarm of visitors. Some 12,000 commenters signed off on the recreation area idea during public hearings in 2011 and 2012 as a way to increase wilderness access for the county’s minority population and to improve aesthetics.

“Right now, we have trash, graffiti and poor or non-existent signage (in the Angeles),” Chu said in an exclusive interview Wednesday. “We have traffic problems and lack of parking management. We have safety concerns. With this NRA you can have an overall view of the future of the San Gabriel Mountains by drawing on other resources to make that happen.”

Mark Masaoka, the policy director of the Asian Pacific Policy and Planning Council, an umbrella group of 40 Asian-American organizations including the Asian Youth Center and the Chinatown Service Center, said many Asian Americans need a safer forest experience.

Advertisement

He noted the tragic death of 17-year-old Mark Keppel High School student Esther Suen, who fell 200 feet to her death while hiking Eaton Canyon in northeast Pasadena during spring break in March 2013.

“We are involved because we see the potential for increased resources,” Masaoka said Wednesday. “We want to make trails safer and more accessible, like you’d see at national parks.”

A new National Recreation Area — including the San Gabriel Mountains, two riverfronts and Puente-Chino Hills — will show up as a line item in the National Parks Service budget, Chu said. That is not the case with the U.S. Forest Service, she said, because funding is grouped in regions, not specific forests.

“Remember, the main function of the Forest Service is to fight fires. Recreation is last on its priority list. That is why nothing gets done,” Chu said.

The seed money for a new NRA in the San Gabriels would equal between $2 million and $4 million, a small amount. Even the NPS has said they can’t afford to manage a new NRA of this size and had recommended a much smaller NRA that excluded the forest.

“I tell people that the Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area started with one employee and now they have 100,” said Belinda Faustinos, co-chair of San Gabriel Mountains Forever, a group working six years on this bill. Faustinos remembers when the wilderness area west of the 405 Freeway became L.A.’s first NRA — during the term of President Richard Nixon.

Chu has gathered the support of the San Gabriel Valley Council of Governments as well as the cities of Alhambra, Claremont, El Monte, Glendora, Monterey Park, San Gabriel, South El Monte and Rancho Cucamonga.

Some cities are concerned that the NRA’s boundary is too vague. In fact, an exact map is not provided with the bill. “It is like what Nancy Pelosi said about Obamacare: ‘You have to pass the bill so that you can find out what is in it,’” said Margaret Clark, a Rosemead city council member who also serves on the San Gabriel & Lower Los Angeles Rivers and Mountains Conservancy.

Most agree that the bill will be tough sledding in Congress. Faustinos said if the bill were to get a hearing this year she would be surprised. The bill’s first stop would be either the Natural Resources Committee or the Agriculture Committee, Chu said.

Even without a hearing or passage, the bill could help local groups compete for federal environmental grants, Faustinos said. That’s because the Park Service said the region meets the criteria of ecological and historic significance for designation as an NRA.

Specifically, the bill would require the National Park Service, the Department of Agriculture and the Forest Service to develop an “integrated visitor services plan” within three years of passage that would “improve visitor experiences within the recreation area through expanded recreation opportunities,” according to Section 9 of the bill.

This would include an assessment of the demand for hiking, picnicking, horseback riding and the use of motorized and mechanized vehicles.

Faustinos said the bill does not prohibit existing uses, such as off-highway vehicle riding in the designated OHV area in San Gabriel Canyon. Chu said the bill does not transfer private lands to any federal entity.

The Main San Gabriel Basin Watermaster and the San Gabriel Valley Water Association support the bill. Their support came after months of negotiations between Chu and the water agencies that resulted in language that says the NRA nor the Park Service would not interfere with water rights or with management of reservoirs or dams.

However, Monrovia is worried that the city would lose local control over canyon areas purchased by residents through a recent parcel tax. Clark said the author promised cities the option to opt out of the NRA, something not in the bill. Azusa is also concerned about additional traffic up Highway 39 if the Park Service were to beef up access to San Gabriel Canyon.

The effort began in 2003 when then Rep. Hilda Solis, who grew up in Bassett, introduced legislation with Sen. Barbara Boxer to study the concept. It received a huge boost in 2010 under President Barack Obama’s America’s Great Outdoors initiative.