ARLINGTON, Va. & ENGLEWOOD, Colo.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Health Net Federal Services, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Health Net, Inc., and Centura Health, the leading health care provider in Colorado and western Kansas, have signed a new agreement to provide veterans with enhanced access to high-value medical care through the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs’ (VA’s) Patient-Centered Community Care (PC3) and Veterans Choice programs.

“Health Net is delighted to join with Centura Health in support of VA’s effort to provide timely access to community care for our nation’s veterans,” said Thomas Carrato, president of Health Net Federal Services.

“We understand the importance of collaboration and community partnerships to help increase consumers’ access to convenient, high-value care,” said Gary Campbell, president and CEO of Centura Health. “Centura Health is honored to have been selected by Health Net. Our veterans bravely put their lives on the line for us and we are proud to partner with Health Net to ensure their health care needs continue to be met through increased convenience and access to care.”

Health Net has made Centura Health, including its 600 employed primary care physicians and specialists of Centura Health Physician Group in Colorado and Kansas, a major network provider for VA’s PC3 and Veterans Choice programs.

PC3 allows veterans to receive care in their local communities when local VA medical centers cannot readily provide the needed care to veterans due to geographic inaccessibility or limited capacity. Under PC3, eligible veterans with an approved VA authorization have access to community-based primary care, inpatient specialty care, outpatient specialty care, mental health care, limited emergency care and limited newborn care for female veterans following the birth of a child.

The Veterans Choice program was created by the Veterans Access, Choice and Accountability Act of 2014 (VACAA) and allows eligible veterans who live more than 40 miles from a VA facility or are unable to get a VA appointment within 30 days of their preferred date, or within 30 days of the date determined medically necessary by their physician, to obtain approved care in their community instead.

About Centura Health

Centura Health connects individuals, families and neighborhoods across Colorado and western Kansas with more than 6,000 physicians and 18,100 of the best hearts and minds in health care. Through our 15 hospitals, six senior living communities, health neighborhoods, physician practices and clinics, home care and hospice services, and Flight For Life® Colorado, we are making the region’s best health care accessible and affordable in every community we serve. We believe you can inspire the people you care about to live healthier lives by encouraging them to do the little things that can make a big difference. We’re Centura Health, and we’re here for your health. For information on Centura Health or any of the facilities in our network, please visit www.centura.org.

About Health Net Federal Services

Health Net Federal Services has a long history of providing cost-effective, quality managed health care programs for government agencies, including the U.S. Departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs. As the managed care support contractor for the TRICARE North Region, Health Net provides health care services to approximately 2.8 million uniformed services beneficiaries, active and retired, and their families. In addition, Health Net provides quality, cost-effective health care solutions for veterans, as well as behavioral health services for active duty service members, veterans and their families.

Health Net Federal Services also works collaboratively with VA to administer the PC3 program. Health Net Federal Services processes authorizations for health care on behalf of VA for veterans to receive care from authorized community providers, schedules appointments, manages receipt of all required medical documentation for care, and processes claims for payment.

For information about Health Net Federal Services, please visit www.hnfs.com.

About Health Net, Inc.

Health Net, Inc. (NYSE:HNT) is a publicly traded managed care organization that delivers managed health care services through health plans and government-sponsored managed care plans. Its mission is to help people be healthy, secure and comfortable. Health Net provides and administers health benefits to approximately 6.0 million individuals across the country through group, individual, Medicare (including the Medicare prescription drug benefit commonly referred to as “Part D”), Medicaid, dual eligible, U.S. Department of Defense, including TRICARE, and Veterans Affairs programs. Health Net also offers behavioral health, substance abuse and employee assistance programs, managed health care products related to prescription drugs, managed health care product coordination for multi-region employers, and administrative services for medical groups and self-funded benefits programs.

For more information on Health Net, Inc., please visit Health Net’s website at www.healthnet.com.

Cautionary Statements

The Company and its representatives may from time to time make written and oral forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act (“PSLRA”) of 1995, including statements in this and other reports, in presentations, press releases, filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”), and in meetings with investors and analysts. All statements in this report, other than statements of historical information provided herein, may be deemed to be forward-looking statements and as such are intended to be covered by the safe harbor for “forward-looking statements” provided by PSLRA. These statements are based on management’s analysis, judgment, belief and expectation only as of the date hereof, and are subject to changes in circumstances and a number of risks and uncertainties. Without limiting the foregoing, statements including the words “believes,” “anticipates,” “plans,” “expects,” “may,” “should,” “could,” “estimate,” “intend,” “feels,” “will,” “projects” and other similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Actual results could differ materially from those expressed in, or implied or projected by the forward-looking information and statements due to, among other things, health care reform and other increased government participation in and taxation or regulation of health benefits and managed care operations, including but not limited to the implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (collectively, the “ACA”) and related fees, assessments and taxes; the Company’s ability to successfully participate in California’s Coordinated Care Initiative, which is subject to a number of risks inherent in untested health care initiatives and requires the Company to adequately predict the costs of providing benefits to individuals that are generally among the most chronically ill within each of Medicare and Medi-Cal and implement delivery systems for benefits with which the Company has limited operating experience; the Company’s ability to successfully participate in the federal and state health insurance exchanges under the ACA, which involve uncertainties related to the mix and volume of business that could negatively impact the adequacy of the Company’s premium rates and may not be sufficiently offset by the risk apportionment provisions of the ACA; increasing health care costs, including but not limited to costs associated with the introduction of new treatments or therapies; the Company’s ability to reduce administrative expenses while maintaining targeted levels of service and operating performance, including through the Company’s master services agreement with a subsidiary of Cognizant Technology Solutions Corporation (“Cognizant”); whether the Company receives required regulatory approvals for Cognizant’s provision of services to the Company and any conditions imposed in order to obtain such regulatory approvals; the Company’s ability to recognize the intended cost savings and other intended benefits of the Cognizant transaction; the risk that Cognizant may not perform contracted functions and services in a timely, satisfactory and compliant manner; negative prior period claims reserve developments; rate cuts and other risks and uncertainties affecting the Company’s Medicare or Medicaid businesses; trends in medical care ratios; membership declines or negative changes in the Company’s health care product mix; unexpected utilization patterns or unexpectedly severe or widespread illnesses; failure to effectively oversee the Company’s third-party vendors; noncompliance by the Company or the Company’s business associates with any privacy laws or any security breach involving the misappropriation, loss or other unauthorized use or disclosure of confidential information; the timing of collections on amounts receivable from state and federal governments and agencies; litigation costs; regulatory issues with federal and state agencies including, but not limited to, the California Department of Managed Health Care and Department of Health Care Services, the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, the Office of Civil Rights of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and state departments of insurance; operational issues; changes in economic or market conditions; investment portfolio impairment charges; volatility in the financial markets; and general business and market conditions. Additional factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those reflected in the forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, the risks discussed in the “Risk Factors” section included within the Company’s most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC and the other risks discussed in the Company’s filings with the SEC. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. Except as may be required by law, the Company undertakes no obligation to address or publicly update any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances that arise after the date of this report.

This release contains references and links to other websites that may contain content that is not owned or controlled by Health Net. Please be aware that references and links to other websites are provided for the user’s convenience and that Health Net is not responsible for any such content that is not owned or controlled by Health Net. Health Net does not express an opinion on any such content and disclaims any liability in connection therewith.