More options: Share, Mark as favorite

She is, argues, Catherine Rampell in the Washington Post — or at least she is one compared to the remaining GOPers in the presidential race:

Here’s the bottom line for the nation’s bottom line: Clinton’s spending increases and other proposals that cost money have a total price tag of about $1.8 trillion over the next decade. But her offsets, which come mostly from tax hikes, would save an estimated $1.9 trillion over that same period (or closer to $1.6 trillion if you don’t count those as-yet-unspecified business tax proposals). The net fiscal impact of her plans, then, is pretty close to zero. … Donald Trump would cut tax revenue dramatically, while simultaneously raising spending on programs such as veterans’ health care. The Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget ballparks the total cost of his proposals at $11.7 trillion to $15.1 trillion over the next decade, again depending on what underlying assumptions you make. Likewise, Ted Cruz’s various proposals — which include tax cuts, a repeal of Obamacare and a bigger military — would add between $2.7 trillion and $21.3 trillion to the federal debt. John Kasich, who somehow fancies himself the lone fiscal grown-up in the race, remains the only candidate who has released so few details that none of the major budgetary watchdog organizations has even attempted to score his policies. Given that his tax plan looks a lot like Jeb Bush’s, however, we can assume he’d add trillions in red ink, too.

Well, it seems to me there is a difference between being fiscally conservative and a fiscal conservative. The first sounds like you want to balance the budget, which may be done from a right, center, or left perspective. The second gets into views about the proper tax burden and the size and scope of government.

Now Rampell is using a Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget analysis of Clinton’s policy proposals, which also notes that “Secretary Clinton would still allow debt to grow significantly as a share of the economy, from about 74 percent of GDP at the end of last year – already the highest in U.S. history other than around World War II – to 86 percent of GDP by 2026.” Is that fiscally conservative? Perhaps only on a relative basis.