Poop Equality Is Now A Thing

Check Your Potty Privilege

By: Ryan Carrillo

There’s no shortage of mind-numbingly asinine causes and protests but this story has to be among one of the foulest. A Student Union group has decided that the number one issue on campus is going number two.

The Queer Student Union at California Polytechnic University recently staged a three day “shit-in” where the group encouraged students to only use gender-neutral washrooms.

According to the petition, the university currently has seventeen all-gender washrooms, but out of the seventeen, only five are “reasonably accessible, leaving non-cisgender students with a paltry amount of options when it comes to using the bathroom.”

“Put yourself in the shoes of a trans*/gender non-conforming student and take the pledge to use only all gender bathrooms,” states the group’s Facebook page, which also features what looks to be feces, as its main banner.

Students also reportedly created a fake toilet in the middle of campus, which was signed by students and was decorated with several banners. One of the banners read “We’ve got shit to deal with”

They certainly do have “shit to deal with,” does ObamaCare cover mental health?

According to Campus Reform,

Event organizers advised non-transgender students to “check [their] potty privilege” and carried around signs that declared “going to the bathroom shouldn’t be a source of anxiety.” “Gendered bathrooms pose a threat to the emotional and physical well-being of this demographic, and often force awkward and uncomfortable encounters for non-cisgender identifying students,” the group’s petition explained.

The group also handed out flyers asking for the creation of even more all-gender washrooms despite already having seventeen around the campus. Their petition currently has 294 supporters out of 500 required.

Amazingly, this isn’t the first “shit-in” protest, it’s been dung before. QSU co-president Matt Klepfer credits a shit-in hosted by San Diego State University students last year for inspiring them.

Thankfully the University still has students that can smell something’s up. “I don’t believe putting a fake toilet in the center of our quad is the best way for my peers to effectuate the change they’re seeking,” Cal Poly senior Domenic Hjerpe told Campus Reform, adding “For many students, myself included, it’s hard to take something like a ‘shit-in’ very seriously.”