By Bonnie Watson Coleman

As major provisions of the Affordable Care Act face challenges at the Supreme Court, those for and against it have been forced to acknowledge the success of that landmark law. Yet while we've seen great success in many health indicators ― insuring more than 16 million Americans and diagnosing many chronic illnesses at earlier, more treatable stages ― there are still many ways we can improve our health-care system, and the law itself.

We can start with a simple, commonsense improvement: making sure that mothers are given every opportunity to offer their babies a healthy start. That means offering women the opportunity to sign up for health insurance the moment that they find out they're pregnant, getting the prenatal care they need.

Right now, events like the birth or adoption of a child, marriage, divorce, or even moving to a new state all trigger a special, 60-day window allowing individuals to enroll in a new health insurance plan. Yet pregnancy, one of the most life altering events anyone can experience, isn't included on that list.

Without that special window, pregnant women could find themselves in a very serious quandary. If a woman becomes pregnant while uninsured at a time outside of the annual open enrollment period on the federal exchange, or is enrolled in a grandfathered plan that does not cover maternity services, any woman who has fallen into this hole won't be able to access coverage for maternity care. And without that essential prenatal coverage, these women face significant out-of-pocket costs, or forego appointments altogether.

According to a recent report, basic prenatal care and delivery average nearly $20,000 without insurance when there are no complications. The same report notes that women are three to four times more likely to die from pregnancy-related difficulties when they receive no prenatal care. These women are also more likely to have an infant die in the first month after birth. Yet, without insurance, many expectant mothers have little choice but to skip those important doctor's visits, and hope for the best.

Mothers deserve better, and so do their babies. That's why in March, one of my first actions in Congress was to lead a letter to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services requesting the addition of pregnancy to the list of "qualifying life events" that trigger special enrollment periods on the federal health exchange. Of my colleagues in the House of Representatives, 54 agreed and joined my request.

In their response, HHS said that only Congress can make that change. And since it's up to us, we can go even further, protecting mothers and infants beyond just the federal exchange. That's why this week, I'll introduce the Healthy Maternity and Obstetric Medicine (MOM) Act, legislation that would ensure women who have become pregnant get the opportunity to sign up for or change their insurance plan whether it comes from the federal exchange, or their employer.

This isn't a novel concept. New York's state legislature is poised to pass legislation that would modify its state exchange to include pregnancy as a qualifying life event. California is considering a similar bill.

Ensuring every American has access to affordable, quality health care must remain a national priority. That's why preserving the Affordable Care Act is so important; and it's also why we need to continue to strengthen that law. Supporting expecting mothers by extension results in quality healthcare for our nation's youngest Americans. There is no better place to start.

Bonnie Watson Coleman is a Democratic congresswoman representing New Jersey's 12th congressional district.

Follow The Star-Ledger on Twitter @starledger. Find The Star-Ledger on Facebook.