When Dottie Phillips, the healthy 85-year-old mother-in-law of one of us (Amy), broke her elbow, the orthopedist did a wonderful job surgically repairing the injury. Unfortunately, Dottie developed pneumonia in the hospital during her recovery, requiring powerful antibiotics. These led to a subsequent Clostridium difficile (C. diff) infection, which produced debilitating diarrhea. Her prolonged hospital stay caused her to become frail, so she was discharged to a rehab facility with an entirely new care team. A month later she was back home and her care was taken over by her regular doctor, who had little contact with either the hospital or rehab facility.

The people responsible for knitting together and communicating the complete picture were Dottie’s husband as well as her son (Amy’s husband), who lived 2,000 miles away. Her husband tried to relay everything that happened during both stays to her family doctor, but the care was complex and her husband had been afraid to bother the doctors by asking too many questions. Her son, who had power of attorney for her medical care, flew in whenever the next catastrophe occurred.

Using a walker with a broken elbow to get around her home was beyond Dottie’s newly diminished capacity, and she fell, which resulted in a painful compression fracture of her spine. At her follow-up visit, her primary care doctor heard her cough, saw an abnormality on her chest X-ray (both expected after a recent bout of pneumonia), and treated her with antibiotics, thinking it was better to be safe than sorry. They rapidly led to a recurrent C. diff infection. Dottie went back into the hospital suffering from severe back pain and diarrhea and died a short time later.

All the clinicians involved in Dottie’s care did exactly the right things to treat the individual problems they were trained to treat: broken bones, infections, and poor mobility. But they failed to serve Dottie’s collective needs.

Insight Center Innovating for Value in Health Care Sponsored by Medtronic A collaboration of the editors of Harvard Business Review and the New England Journal of Medicine, exploring best practices for improving patient outcomes while reducing costs.

Unfortunately, her experience is still the rule rather than the exception in the United States. This is the result of a system that’s still largely focused on the historic way clinicians deliver care (by sites of care and by specialty) rather than by how people should receive care (centered around each person, their individual conditions, where and how they live, and the family and friends who support them). The Affordable Care Act has done much to expand coverage and spark innovation in the United States, but fundamental challenges of optimizing care delivery across clinicians in independent silos persist.

All too often, having a complex condition still requires the patient, the family, or both to become de facto project managers — a job for which they have no formal training — at a time of incredible emotional and financial stress. Ask almost any cancer survivor who coordinated his or her care — navigating between the primary care physician, surgeon, oncologist, radiation oncologist, nutritionist, and physical therapist, all while organizing rides, meals, and time off from work. The vast majority will answer that they — or their husband, daughter, or best friend — did the job.

There is a better way: integrated care. The pioneers in this realm have proven that it can be achieved:

Integrated multi-specialty care models have been used for the better part of a decade for conditions such as headache, lower-back pain, joint pain, shortness of breath, and chest pain. These models can reduce waiting times, increase delivery of evidence-based practice, improve patients’ experience of care, and reduce costs (mainly by reducing visits and decreasing the use of expensive diagnostic tests). Virginia Mason Health System has regularly deployed these integrated models in conjunction with major employers in Seattle,and has helped these organizations reduce absenteeism due to health problems by up to 50%.

The integration of behavioral-health and chronic-disease expertise where indicated for patients with asthma, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease has also resulted in lower costs and less utilization of emergency services at Group Health in Washington and Intermountain Health in Utah.

Kaiser Permanente (KP), a 60-year-old integrated delivery system that covers almost 10 million members, is a national leader in clinical quality; it improves health outcomes at lower cost than competing health plans.

Integrated breast cancer clinics and palliative care models are growing at numerous institutions throughout the country and are producing better results (e.g., reduced delays in care and improved experience of care for the former and improved symptom management, experience, utilization, and in some cases extended life for the latter).

We believe it is time to optimize the integrated-care model and accelerate its adoption more broadly and deeply across the American health care system. The measures needed to make this happen are clear:

Align payment with integrated care. Systems receiving a lump sum or capitated payment for treatment based on the quality of their transparently reported outcomes would have meaningful incentives to provide high quality, integrated care. In Dottie’s case, the orthopedist, pulmonologist, infectious disease doctor, hospital, and rehab facility were paid separately. Paying a lump sum for an 85-year-old woman with a broken elbow would incent the individual actors to collaborate. The vast majority of clinicians want to provide the best possible care for their patients and would welcome the alignment of payments with this desire and their professional beliefs and ethics. KP physicians frequently cite the capitated-payment model as one of the key reasons they chose to join the system, and is a main reason KP has 10 applicants for every open physician position.

Re-engineer processes. In the 1970s in aviation, pilots were the king of the cockpit; their word was law. Each pilot did things the way he felt was best, which meant each did things in a different way. For plane crews, that variation resulted in unclear expectations and roles. The result: a crash every five days with over 2,300 worldwide deaths in 1973. Standardizing work, clarifying roles, using checklists, and system design has dramatically improved safety and reliability. Major crashes are now rare.

Atul Gawande made an eloquent argument to apply these principles to patient safety in The Checklist Manifesto. Standardized processes (with allowances for patient-driven, individual variation where needed) has been regarded as counter-cultural to medicine. But this is changing. Over 200,000 students have taken over two million courses on the Institute for Healthcare Improvement’s Open School, a virtual online school for these improvement methods. ThedaCare, Mayo, Geisinger, and KP and many others increasingly invest in developing physician and staff capabilities not only in clinical medicine but also in process improvement.

Create universal electronic health records (EHRs). The lack of a single health record for each patient that clinicians from all specialties can access in both inpatient and outpatient settings is an obstacle to integrating care. In addition, patient privacy protections inhibit the sharing of health information, creating both perceived and real hurdles. Back in the 1990s, the U.S. Veterans Administration developed an electronic health record (EHR) that linked information across venues of care and provider specialties. This early work showed that linking clinicians electronically was transformational. If Dottie’s family doctor had known she had recently had C. diff in the hospital and that her pneumonia had already been fully treated, he would not have prescribed a new course of antibiotics. She may still have died but would have likely suffered less.

Kaiser Permanente has an EHR that is shared by primary care doctors and specialists who work in hospitals and offices and is also used by nurses, pharmacists, physical therapists, and nutritionists. Their ability to collaborate electronically with patients in their homes and with each other using tools such as electronic consultation has fundamentally changed the way medicine is practiced at KP. Other medical groups have gone even further, making the entire medical record transparent to their patients through Open Notes. On the horizon are opportunities for patients to help create their medical record by contributing family and social history, allergies, and care goals.

Reduce dependence on specialty care. In the United States, we have more specialists than generalist physicians. While increasing the number of primary care physicians has been linked to lower mortality rates, increasing the supply of specialists has not. The reimbursement system, professional lifestyle, and our beliefs about expertise reward specialty care physicians over primary care, creating a perverse incentive to create more specialists. Creating deep but narrow expertise can lead to health care professionals feeling accountable for a slice of a patient’s individual condition but rarely makes anyone clearly accountable for a whole person’s health. Patient-centered medical homes, accountable care organizations, and integrated delivery systems are all designed specifically to address this issue. Systems such as the Alaskan Native Health Service have reversed this trend, making a conscious decision to invest in generalist care.

Integration is particularly crucial during periods in our lives when we really need health care the most: “health care moments” such as birth, death, the diagnosis of cancer, or the need for surgery. These are moments marked by pain, suffering, excitement, confusion, and concern. They are endured individually and by whole families and communities. They involve frequent visits to hospitals and clinics and interactions with a range of providers. These are the moments when patients and families crave a system where the funders and providers are working together to offer whole-person and whole-family care.

To address this need, all health care systems should work to optimize the health care moment from the “customer’s” perspective. This entails the following:

Recognize and respect the caregivers. The integrated-care model should provide service not just to the patient but to the family and all other caregivers who support that patient as well. If the patient gives permission, they should be included in developing and implementing the care plans.

Make the journey clear. The period leading up to a seminal health event such as a birth, an operation, or death can be lengthy, but in many instances it is predictable. Ensuring the patient, family, and caregivers have clear expectations regarding the clinical care, the impact on life (Will I lose my hair? My appetite? How do I keep up my strength?), and the impact on family finances can make the journey slightly less hard. Making this more predictable for the person living through the health care moment can remove some of the avoidable suffering caused by a reactive health care system. Each individual’s journey can then be customized to meet his or her needs and desires. For example, moms and families can choose where their babies will be born (home, hospital, etc.) and how (with or without an epidural) without compromising care quality or service reliability. This co-production and customization of the care pathway can help organizations provide mass-customized, highly-reliable care.

Minimize disruption to the patient’s life. In the hospital, patients are asked to lie in bed, swallow unidentified pills, eat food that arrives on trays, and ring a call button for assistance to get up and do the most basic of human functions. They are expected to be passive receivers of care and depend on the dedication and hard work of the expert nurses and doctors. It should not be surprising that when patients go home, they are confused about their medications, uncertain about what foods to prepare, and shaky on their feet when they walk to the bathroom. What if we changed all of this by revamping care systems to teach or train patients in hospitals to participate in, rather than passively receive, their care? Being prepared mentally, physically, and socially can help minimize the disruption caused by a health care moment and optimize the patient’s and family’s autonomy, dignity, and respect.

Aim for health: Every system is perfectly designed to get the results it is getting. Our health care system produces health care, not health. If we start to measure and reward health outcomes and health improvements (Did you feel better, have less pain, and enjoy a higher quality of life after your interaction with the health care system?), we can shift the system to focus on what we truly seek from our health care: better health.

Imagine if Dottie’s care had followed these principles. What if the surgeon who just met her, the internist who knew her for years, her husband, and her son all discussed the options for her elbow repair in the context of her health risks and history, her living situation, and her long-term goals? They would have known that she had a long history of allergies and past episodes of pneumonia, and therefore was at high risk for complications. Dottie would have been encouraged to get up and out of bed right after surgery to help minimize her chance of developing pneumonia. Building up her strength and focusing on her balance and nutrition would have been priorities in order to improve her ability to walk with an immobile arm and cane and reduce her chance of falls.

After she was discharged, in-home physical therapy would have helped her get from her bedroom to the kitchen and bathroom on her own. All her treating physicians would have been aware of what happened in the different facilities so that the outpatient doctor wouldn’t prescribe antibiotics for an already treated infection. Her son would have been involved upfront in treatment decisions.

A clear pathway with the arc of treatment known by all may not have changed the ultimate outcome, but it certainly would have felt more caring, compassionate, and responsive to everyone involved. As Dottie’s case demonstrates, providing integrated, personalized care is not a luxury; it’s a necessity.