Ryan Stephan had reason to believe the meeting might not go smoothly.

It was the spring of 2013, days after the end of a “miserable” freshman season with the Colorado Mesa basketball team, and Stephan was headed into the coaching staff’s offices in Grand Junction for an end-of-season evaluation.

Still, the words he heard were jarring.

“My assistant coach looked at me and said, ‘Ryan, at this point, you are a wasted scholarship,’ ” Stephan recalled. “I was like, ‘Oh, wow.’ That was a pivotal moment where I knew it was make-or-break time. I really took that to heart.”

Last month, less than three years after that meeting, the 6-foot-10 Stephan was named the Division II national player of the year. The former Green Mountain High School player was second in the country in scoring average (25.6 points per game) and fourth in rebounding (11.4) while leading the nation in double-doubles (23).

The award marked an impressive evolution for a big man who was just 5-11 when he entered high school and struggled with confidence. He nearly quit basketball during his freshman season at Mesa.

“It shows what kind of character Ryan has,” Colorado Mesa coach Andy Shantz said. “He was pretty down that first year, averaging about four points per game. We had an all-conference post player in front of him, and he got beat up on a little bit. He wasn’t used to that, and that happens with a lot of kids when they transition from high school to college. Some kids respond and figure out what they need to do to get better, and some kids either don’t respond or don’t put the work in they need to get better.”

Stephan decided he had come too far to not answer the bell. He had discovered after his sophomore season at Green Mountain — while playing for a now-defunct club team called Colorado Icon, coached by Kyle Bollers — an ability he believed could help him play college basketball.

“Coach Bollers gave me so much confidence,” Stephan said. “He made me play inside-outside at the time. I played almost all five positions and would play anywhere depending on what our matchups were. So the way he made me look at the game and expand my game, that helped me figure out how good I could be.”

As a result, as Stephan rocketed in size, growing to almost 6-9 the summer entering his senior season, he maintained the versatile skills of a player who could affect the game in multiple ways.

“I wanted him to have a complete game and not be limited to one spot on the floor,” said Bollers, now the coach at Strasburg High School. “I knew his size would make him a great inside player, but I knew if he could add those other parts to his game, that stuff would put him above the other big kids in his class.”

Those skills caught Shantz’s eyes in the summer of 2011, when Stephan was playing with Green Mountain at a team camp on the Colorado Mesa campus.

“I walk into the rec center where they are playing the games, and Ryan hits two 3-pointers to start the game, at 6-9,” said Shantz, then an assistant on the Mesa staff. “There was an obvious skill set.”

It was enough for Mesa to offer Stephan a scholarship on the spot. When he left for Grand Junction a year later, Stephan planned to redshirt and slowly grow into the college game. But injuries to a frontcourt player forced Stephan into the lineup, although his biggest memories were the beatings he took in practice from all-conference big man Colton Burgon.

“I had a miserable year,” Stephan said. “I was just really unhappy as a freshman thinking I was going to redshirt and have this easy path to adapt. I just got thrown into the mix and got my butt kicked every day in practice.”

The tough love of the meeting at the end of that season lit a fire under Stephan. He reported to summer workouts 15 pounds lighter and in the best shape of his career.

Shantz thought Stephan would be in a battle for a starting job. Instead, Stephan made it clear with the first week of practices he was a go-to player, ending his sophomore season with all-RMAC honors.

“I just went to work, they started trusting me and getting me the ball, it started going through the net and the rest is history,” Stephan said.

It culminated with his career year at Mesa that earned him the title of the best Division II player in the country.

Stephan has turned his attention to a pro career after signing last week with the agent whose clients include former Metro State star Mitch McCarron, now playing professionally in Spain.

Stephan hopes to earn a workout with the Nuggets and other NBA teams, but he predicts he will be playing in Europe by the fall.

“I’d be lying if I said I wasn’t nervous about the future,” Stephan said. “But I’m excited. I’ve put a lot of work in to get here.”

Nick Kosmider: 303-954-1516, nkosmider@denverpost.com or @nickkosmider