Several ads on billboards around Nashville are prompting people to urge House Speaker Beth Harwell to bring Insure Tennessee to a floor vote. (Photo: Submitted)

Rhetoric in support of Insure Tennessee hasn't emerged in the legislature to the degree that would bring Gov. Bill Haslam back into active campaigning for the plan.

A day after a citizen-funded campaign unveiled 20 billboards around the state imploring people to call Speaker Beth Harwell to bring Insure Tennessee — Haslam's insurance expansion plan using Medicaid funding — to the floor of the House, Haslam's office said that despite the ongoing need for the plan, support isn't there.

"The need still exists, and Insure Tennessee is the right idea," said Jennifer Donnals, Haslam's press secretary. "The governor always said something would have to change for that to happen this legislative session, and we haven't seen that opening."

Buy Photo House Speaker Beth Harwell and Gov. Bill Haslam plan to make a healthcare announcement Tuesday afternoon. (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins / File / The Tennessean)

Donnals' comment was in response to inquiries from The Tennessean about Haslam's position now that renowned philanthropist Martha Ingram is involved with a privately funded billboard campaign, whether he asked Harwell to table the proposal and what it would take for the governor to bring back the plan.

Harwell said Monday she can't "unilaterally" bring the proposal to a vote, particularly since Haslam decided "not to pursue implementation."

Insure Tennessee was pitched to the legislature ahead of a special session, as well as heard in regular session, in 2015, but Senate committees blocked the proposal over concerns with a variety of issues, including trusting the federal government to keep funding obligations, the program's roots in the Affordable Care Act and questions over whether the next president would keep the federal health law in place.

Buy Photo Gov. Bill Haslam (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins / The Tennessean)

The House took up the proposal indirectly last week when a joint resolution to empower the governor to implement the program by any measure and a referendum gauging voter support were pitched. Rep. Larry Miller, D-Memphis, the lawmaker behind the resolution, pulled the measure before the committee could vote, citing a lack of leadership and support for Insure Tennessee in the legislature.

The referendum was sent to summer study on a successful motion pitched by Rep. Jeremy Durham, R-Franklin.

Despite multiple committee defeats, grassroots campaigns for the program continue to try to educate citizens on the tenets of the program or urge lawmakers to give the proposal a shot at passage by bringing it to a floor vote. Hospitals around the state remain in support of the program, which would bring more people under the umbrella of insurance coverage.

Citizens for Insure Tennessee insist that Harwell's leadership and influence are "essential to finding a solution" and urge her to find a way to move the plan forward or make sure that an alternative solution — to which she alluded in comments about the billboard campaign — is available for a vote in the legislature before adjournment in April.

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 or on Twitter @hollyfletcher.Reach Joel Ebert at 615-772-1681 and on Twitter @joelebert29.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1RjCxSH