Scooplet: Ogilvy adds GDS Strategies team — Harvie joins BurtonKamins — ML Strategies lays out 2014 outlook — Rockstar inks ACG

With Andrea Drusch

SCOOPLET … OGILVY ADDS GDS STRATEGIES TEAM: The bipartisan government relations firm Ogilvy Government Relations has officially hired Jim Gould, Tucker Shumack and Tom Dwyer. All three were principals of the boutique tax firm GDS Strategies. Gould is a former chief tax counsel of the Senate Finance Committee and is a tax policy expert. Shumack and Dwyer also previously worked for members of the S enate Finance Committee.

Story Continued Below

Ogilvy and GDS have been working together in a strategic alliance for the last year, and found that the full merger made sense from a business perspective. "With the addition of the GDS tax practice, Ogilvy Government Relations is bringing on three of the top tax professionals in Washington. Our broad legislative reach and their tax policy depth will enable us to offer our clients a comprehensive capability to lobby on the most complex tax matters," said Gordon Taylor, a principal at Ogilvy, in a statement. Ogilvy will acquire GDS clients, including Deltic Timber Corporation, the General Aviation Manufacturers Association, the National Association of Water Companies, Oaktree Capital Management, L.P. and two clients registered through Capitol Counsel.

Ogilvy had a tough 2012, with top lobbyists like John O’Neill, Elena Tompkins, Drew Maloney, Justin Daly and others leaving the shop. But the firm is once again growing in terms of both personnel and clients. At the end of 2013, the firm reported more than 40 clients, including heavy hitters like Verizon, Viacom, the Grocery Manufacturers Association and Nike.

GOOD TUESDAY AFTERNOON where it’s been 375 years since the adoption of the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut — a document that some consider the first written constitution. The Connecticut Colony council adopted the orders on Jan. 14, 1639. Send your lobbying news, gossip, tips and scoops to btau@politico.com. And keep up with PI on Twitter by following @ ByronTau or @ PoliticoPI.

HARVIE JOINS BURTON KAMINS: Bruce Harvie, communications director to Rep. Michael Burgess (R-Texas), is joining Burton Kamins Advocacy. In a note to colleagues and reporters, Harvie writes: “At BKA, I’ll be working as a general consultant for campaigns and Super PACs ... as well as providing communications and grassroots counsel for trade association and corporate clients.” Added Harvie: “I have had an incredible time working for Congressman Burgess this year, and I’m very thankful for the opportunity and will miss working here a lot. I’m very thankful for the opportunity and will miss working here, and with all of you."

ML STRATEGIES LAYS OUT 2014 OUTLOOK: ML Strategies is out with a look at the 2014 agenda in Congress and the administration for clients and friends of the firm. According to the memo, obtained by PI, the firm believes the farm bill, the Water Resources Development Act and the omnibus appropriations bill and debt ceiling are the most pressing matters on Congress’s agenda. Later in the year, it's expecting interest in the Satellite Television Extension and Localism Act, the National Defense Authorization Act, a tax extenders package, extension of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, repeal of the Sustainable Growth Rate and possible Affordable Care Act revisions. See ML Strategies’ memo here: http://bit.ly/KgYKo9

ROCKSTAR INKS ACG: Rockstar IP, an intellectual property licensing company, has hired its first lobbyist in American Continental Group. The Texas-based company is seeking help with patent litigation reform. Former U.S. Coordinator for International IP Enforcement Chris Israel, former Senate Judiciary Committee Staff Director Manus Cooney and former Deputy Undersecretary of Commerce for IP Stephen Pinkos will lobby for ACG.

COMPETE AMERICA PLOTS 2014 PATH: The pro-immigration reform initiative Compete America is hosting its annual retreat this week. Representatives from more than 60 tech companies, universities and associations are meeting to discuss immigration-reform legislative strategy for 2014. On Tuesday, Oracle is hosting a reception that will be attended by more than 120 lobbyists, Hill staffers and Members.

MEETINGS MEAN BUSINESS LAUNCHES: A campaign to promote the value of face-to-face interactions launched Tuesday. Backed by a coalition of meetings, events and travel associations, Meetings Mean Business is a proactive campaign to promote the value of in-person meetings. The launch event was held at the Professional Convention Management Association’s Conveying Leaders Conference in Boston. It included Roger Dow of the U.S. Travel Association, Deborah Sexton of PCMA, Paul Van Deventer of Meeting Professionals International, John Graham of American Society of Association Executives, David Dubois of International Association of Exhibitions and Events, Michael Gehrisch of Destination Marketing Association International, David Peckinpaugh of Maritz Travel and Larry Luteran of Hilton.

3D SYSTEMS HIRES ORRINGER: 3D Systems has hired Neal Orringer as vice president of alliances and partnerships. In his new job, he will have responsibilities over government business and regulatory affairs as well as forging strategic alliances with corporate, research and educational partners. “I couldn’t be more thrilled to have Neal on our team,” said Avi Reichental, president and CEO of 3DS. “Neal brings with him a truly impressive record in public policy, coalition-building, and technology investment. But more importantly, his boundless energy and commitment to American innovation through 3D printing and additive manufacturing make him a perfect match for our company.”

NFTC CELEBRATES 100 YEARS: The National Foreign Trade Council turns 100 this year and will be hosting a private reception Tuesday for its members at the the historic President Woodrow Wilson House in Dupont Circle. In 1914, Wilson instructed his Secretary of Commerce William Redfield to convene the first-ever National Foreign Trade Convention — where the NFTC was born. To commemorate its 100th anniversary, the NFTC will convene a nationwide series of activities and programs throughout the year to examine the future of trade in the context of key industries, regions and issues.

BROWNER JOINS OCEAN COMMISSION: Via POLITICO’s Alex Guillén: Former EPA Administrator and Obama climate adviser Carol Browner is joining the Global Ocean Commission, an international program focused on issues like climate change, acidification and overfishing. Browner, now a fellow at the Center for American Progress, is replacing John Podesta, CAP’s founder and chairman, who is joining the White House as an adviser to the president. “Few issues need our attention as much as the ocean, given its many crucial roles including feeding the world’s population, carrying 90 percent of international trade and regulating the climate,” Browner said in a statement. “The commission has the potential to cut through the barriers obstructing the ocean reforms that most of the world’s governments want and most of its citizens demand, and I’m looking forward to working with other commissioners from around the world to realize that potential.”

THE OPPO RESEARCH BOOK ON GILLISPIE: POLITICO’s James Hohmann has a look at Ed Gillespie’s tough slog in his bid to join the Senate. He co-founded the bipartisan lobbying firm Quinn Gillespie & Associates in 2000. Enron, the energy company that collapsed in scandal, was among his clients. He has not been a registered lobbyist since entering the Bush administration in 2007, but he continues to have corporate clients at his private firm. The Democratic Party of Virginia has been pressing for him to disclose his current clients and who paid him speaking fees in recent years. One lobbying client that Gillespie will likely face fire over is a coalition, funded by insurance companies, that suggested in 2007 the possibility of an individual health care mandate as part of a broader health care solution. Gillespie is adamant that he never personally supported such a mandate and notes that he has consistently opposed Obamacare. Republican allies of Gillespie respond that the new governor, McAuliffe, also founded a lobbying firm and prevailed in November despite that firm’s work for tobacco companies, the lead industry and companies that wanted to dump waste. http://politi.co/1eGe21w

ALSO: A K Streeter faces the voters tonight. Alex Isenstadt has a curtain-raiser about the Florida primary election that pits lobbyist David Jolly against the rest of the GOP field. http://politi.co/1fuGUg6

ELSEWHERE IN THE INFLUENCE WORD:

OPEN SECRETS REVAMPS LOBBYING DATABASE: From OpenSecrets: “We've expanded our lobbying disclosure resources to show connections between lobbyists and bills, issues and the agencies they target when lobbying. Now, we can show which lobbyists specialize in issues like health care or financial reform, as well as which federal agencies receive the most attention from lobbyists.” http://bit.ly/1akVZMM

KATZENBERG FUNDRAISES FOR GRIMES: The Hill: “Hollywood megadonor and DreamWorks CEO Jeffrey Katzenberg is co-hosting a fundraiser for Kentucky Democratic Senate candidate Alison Lundergan Grimes on Monday night, his second such effort on behalf of Sen. Mitch McConnell’s (R-Ky.) likely opponent.” http://bit.ly/JYBgVh

DEPARTMENT OF INFLUENCE PEDDLING: Rich donor — upset at Wisconsin’s child support formula — finds a state legislator willing to try to rewrite the law. http://bit.ly/1eBLuDW

NEW POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEE REGISTRATIONS:

None

NEW LOBBYING REGISTRATIONS: (Firm: Client)

American Continental Group: Rockstar (not the drink, patent litigation reform)

American Defense International: Kratos Defense & Security Solution, Inc.

Brownstein Hyatt Farber Schreck: Municipality of Ponce

Brownstein Hyatt Farber Schreck: Spotted Hawk Development, LLC

Elmendorf Ryan: CIT Group, Inc.

Ford & Huff: National Postal Policy Council

Grau & Associates: National Job Corps Association Appropriations and Workforce Policy

Husch Blackwell: Alliance of U.S. Startups and Inventors for Jobs

McDermott Will & Emery: Western Montana Clinic

McKenna, Long & Aldridge: Primerica Life Insurance Company

McKenna, Long & Aldridge: Purdue Pharma

Network Branded Prepaid Card Association: Network Branded Prepaid Card Association

Ogilvy Government Relations: Capitol Counsel LLC on behalf of State Fund Congressional Action Group

Ogilvy Government Relations: Capitol Counsel LLC on behalf of Workers Compensation Fund

Ogilvy Government Relations: Deltic Timber Corporation

Ogilvy Government Relations: General Aviation Manufacturers Association

Ogilvy Government Relations: National Association of Water Companies

Ogilvy Government Relations: Oaktree Capital Management

Van Scoyoc Associates: FSP — South Flower Street Associates, LLC

NEW LOBBYING TERMINATIONS (Firm: Client (Type of Termination))

Alcalde & Fay : City of Ovideo Florida (Q4 termination)

** A message from the National Retail Federation: Retail is more than great products, the sound of a cash register, a storefront or a website. Across all states and districts, retail represents a lifetime of opportunities, from first jobs to lasting careers. That’s just one of the reasons why when retail thrives, communities thrive. Whether or not you work in the industry, there’s no doubt that retail impacts everyone, everywhere, every single day. How well do you know retail? http://bit.ly/this_is_retail #thisisretail **