If you are used to high-powered medical specialists only half listening, their attention obviously elsewhere — well, you will be amazed at the generous, personal and friendly people at Shohet Ear Associates. From Dr. Joni Doherty and Dr. Jack Shohet through medical support staff members to front and back office support staff, everyone treats you as though you are the most important person in the world to their full-spectrum ear, nose, and throat (ENT) medical practice. Diagnosis to surgery to hearing aid battery dispensing — Shohet offers complete ENT services.

In addition to Dr. Shohet — who splits his week between an original office in Newport Beach and a new office in Seal Beach — and Dr. Doherty, the new office has one-and-a-half full-time audiologists available to perform comprehensive hearing exams on all new patients.

Comprehensive care

Shohet Ear Associates offers comprehensive care for all disorders of the ear, including but not limited to balance, tinnatus tinnitus (ringing), and hearing. Each patient is treated as an individual, and the best solution is found for each patient. Children are welcome!

Both Dr. Shohet and Dr. Doherty are doubly board-certified. The services they offer include surgery through the ear canal, rather than the more prosaic (and invasive) incision behind a patient’s ear.

Many of their patients suffer from “surfer’s ear” caused by prolonged exposure to cold water and wind. (This is a special case of “extosis,” a spur or bony growth that can occur many places in the body.) In some cases, the growth can grow so large that it entirely blocks the ear canal.

Shohet Ear Associates can provide the surgery needed to remove the bony growths — and assistance with ear plugs that will prevent the growths from growing back.

(Skiers and sailors are also vulnerable to surfer’s ear!)

New services anticipated

With the new year will come new services, including weekly seminars on Saturday mornings to help keep patients informed about the latest in basic and more advanced understanding of hearing problems and their solutions. Support groups will be organized through to allow patients a regular venue for passing along their own experience and learning from others.

A new surgical theater will allow, among other procedures, local non-invasive (through the ear canal) implantation of extended-wear devices such as the Lyric.

Health care uncertainty

Both Dr. Shohet and Dr. Doherty are asked by patients about what impact the Affordable Care Act (ACA) will have.

“We just don’t know,” Dr. Shohet admits.

They do know that reimbursement for care given to Medicaid patients has been cut back.

The two doctors have themselves been personally stung — their own individual insurance policies have been cancelled.

“We will continue to provide university-level high quality care to our patients,” he adds.

Shohet’s new Seal Beach office at 770 Pacific Coast Highway has its own ample parking lot, and is open weekends for hearing aid dispensing. (Walk-ins welcome!)

For more information, call 949-631-4327 or visit www.eardoctor.org.

Featured photo

Pictured back row left to right: MaryKay Bishop, Cheryl Tanita, Au.D, Arineh Khachatoorians, Au.D. Front row left to right: Jack Shohet, MD and Joni Doherty, MD, PhD. Courtesy photo.