I’m breathing deeply and trying not to channel my inner Denzel too much.

But it’s tough because the great Denzel Washington’s “John Q” character and movie keep popping into my mind. In the film, he was a truck driver with a sick son who needed life-saving surgery and he couldn’t get it because he lost his job and thus, his insurance.

That was so 1990s.

Now, I’m a working stiff in the middle of the second decade of the 21st century who just needs a new CPAP machine. If you’re a longtime reader, you know of my sleep apnea and how I think the CPAP is a miraculous time machine that makes me feel 18 by blowing pressurized air up my schnozz and keeping my throat open, thus keeping me breathing through the night and keeping my stupid brain from doing what it does in not sending me the "You're not breathing. Wake up!" signal.

During the 15 or so years I’ve been dealing with sleep apnea, I’ve been through countless masks that I usually buy out of my own pocket instead of dealing with the red tape and increased costs associated with the insurance scamdustry’s handling of the situation. I’m blessed with work and the convenience and lower cost of ordering from one of the on-line apnea warehouses works great for me.

So, I’ve tapped into the insurance exactly twice for my apnea supplies. The first time, 15 years ago, came after diagnosis, when a big basic machine was delivered and paid in part by the insurance and the other part by convenient installments from my wallet.

The second time came about seven years ago when it was time to replace the first machine.

Fast forward to 2015. That second machine is experiencing a sticky on-off switch, which got me to thinking it was time to replace the machine with something more modern. Except you need a prescription to buy a new CPAP from anyone, even the online warehouses.

Did the meth-heads and heroin shooters figure out a way to use CPAPs for some illegal purpose? Because I cannot imagine anyone willfully strapping on a mask and turning on a machine to go to sleep. It’s life-saving, but it’s not exactly natural, and it squishes any shot I have at cuddling with the wife that may remain after 30 years of marriage. So, why the prescription?

Anyway, my local supplier (yes, I have a medical “guy” for CPAPs) says, that indeed I’m due, but due to new regulations, I need a new sleep study.

Buhwah? My machine’s switch is bad. My switch is not bad.

So, it’s off to the doctor. Who then says that yes, thanks to more modern awareness of sleep apnea, it’s advisable to get a new sleep study and get the need for air pressure adjusted to new poundage. Every change in weight and age affects apnea.

Except.

They make these wonderful automatic CPAP machines now that read your need and hone in on the necessary air pressure to be blown up your schnozz with every breath. Seems to me that obliterates the need for more study. I'm not sick, I feel fine, my switch needs replaced, so why spend a few thousand extra dollars to study what a $800 to $1,000 or so machine can do and would do for another several years? By the way, what I've read says these machines adjust for weight gains and losses and even allergies and stuffy noses and colds. No damned hospital sleep study will be able to do that on a day to day basis.

So all that seems to matter here is the system wanting me to get an unnecessary study at a cost to somebody (me and whoever else has my insurance). Wasn't that what Obamacare was supposed to fix?

Here's where John Q. starts boiling in me.

The insurers say you need a sleep study to get a new machine and it’s been too long without a sleep study for me. The health goods providers say maybe they can get me a machine, but I should go see the doc. Then they say I’ve been a customer for 15 years, and an automated CPAP can do the job. But the insurer, after my doc’s wonderful staff fights for a week, gets a sleep study approved.

Meanwhile, the supplier, apparently, has found something that says I can get an APAP, no problem.

And so now, the question is, with all that in my health record (the doc had to emphasize my need for a sleep study assessing my air pressure needs because it was believed that was what would be needed to get a new CPAP machine) can I really turn down the sleep study and get a new machine?’

Or will Barry’s healthcare minions be upset and come to take away my machines, fine the doctor, the insurer, the healthcare provider and “House M.D.”? (“House” is what I watch when I want to really take an afternoon nap.)

The late U.S. Rep. Charlie Wilson of Ohio used to say humorously that nobody ever accepts the statement, “I’m from the federal government and I’m here to help.” He got that.

But then he voted in favor of Obamacare and now I can’t figure out how to replace a machine that’s simply a blowdryer with a few circuit boards attached.

I’m not committing a federal crime. I just need to replace my CPAP because my switch went bad. Logically, I’d like to do that and save myself a bunch of deductible payments, as well as not cost the system a gazillion extra dollars for a machine that costs about as much as a good TV, which I’m blessed enough to be able to afford, at least for now.

Stay tuned. You’re all potential witnesses now.