Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders faced off Sunday night in a Democratic debate in Flint, Michigan.

9:58 p.m. Closing statements. Sanders says he believes that it is "too late" for establishment politics and establishment economics.

"We need in this country a political revolution where ordinary people stand up and reclaim the government that men and women fought and died for," Sanders says.

Clinton reiterates she's running for president to knock down every barrier that Americans face. She says there are barriers to gaining affordable healthcare, overcoming systemic racism and high-quality education.

"I don't intend to get into the gutter with whoever they nominate," Clinton says about GOP presidential candidates.

9:55 p.m. A voter asks Sanders if God is relevant and Anderson Cooper asks him if it's true that he keeps his Judaism in the background.

Sanders says that he is proud of being Jewish and says that his father's family was wiped out during the Holocaust under Hitler.

Clinton is asked "to whom and for whom do you pray." She says she prays for the "will of God to be known."

9:50 p.m. Anderson Cooper asks how the candidates would take on Donald Trump in the general election.

"There's only one candidate in either party that has more votes than him and that's me," says Clinton, who adds she's building a broad, diverse coalition across the country.

Clinton says his bigotry and bullying "are not going to wear well on the American people."

Sanders argues that polls show he would perform better against Trump than Clinton.

9:43 p.m. Clinton says, "Compare the substance of this debate with what you saw on the Republican stage last week."

Sanders adds, "When you watch these Republican debates, you know why we need to invest in mental health."

9:37 p.m. Clinton and Sanders are asked whether they would support hydraulic fracturing or fracking. Clinton says she wouldn't support it when any locality or state is against it and when the release of methane or contamination of water is present, among other things.

She says by the time her conditions are met, she says, "I do not think there are many places in America where fracking can continue to take place.

Sanders says his answer is much shorter: "No."

9:25 p.m. Candidates are asked how they would immediately help children in broken schools such as Detroit's public school system.

"We should be ashamed of how we treat our kids and senior citizens," says Sanders, who then blasted Republicans for not prioritizing federal funding for schools.

Clinton says she would want to reinstate funding to prepare and modernize public schools and use every legal means at her disposal to try to force the governor to return schools to the people of Detroit, ending emergency management.

"If you look at the data, the situation has only gotten worse with emergency manager," she says.

9:18 p.m. Clinton is asked whether her use of the term super predators was wrong.

"I think it was a poor choice of words...I would not use it again," she says.

9:11 p.m. Candidates are asked about their "racial blind spots."

Clinton admits that as a white person, she has never had the same experiences as black people in the U.S. and said it's incumbent upon her and other white people to understand what their communities go through.

Sanders says when white people don't know what it's like to be living in a ghetto and being poor.

"We must be firm in making it clear, we will end institutional racism and reform a broken criminal justice system," he says.

9:03 p.m. Clinton is asked about her support for the 1994 crime bill. She said there were some positive aspects including the violence against women provisions.

"Other aspects were a mistake," she says, adding that Sanders voted for that bill and that she intends to fight "systemic racism."

9:00 p.m. Anderson Cooper brought up the lawsuit families of those shot and killed in the 2012 Newtown massacre against the maker of the gun used in the shooting. Sanders says gun manufacturers should not be held liable for people who use their guns to carry out shootings.

8:51 p.m.The father of a teenage girl who survived the recent shooting rampage committed by an Uber driver in Kalamazoo, Michigan asks both candidates about how they will address the epidemic of mass shootings.

Clinton says criminal background checks should be improved, and says she supports closing the gun show loophole, an online loophole. She says giving immunity to gunmakers and sellers "was a terrible mistake."

Sanders recalls what President Obama said after the mass shooting last fall at a community college in Oregon. Just as the president said, Sanders says "nobody has a magic solution to this problem," but adds the U.S. should do "everything we possibly can" to minimize gun violence. He adds that he has a D- rating from the NRA.

8:38 p.m. Clinton brings up the Export-Import Bank, which she says has created many jobs in Michigan and has helped small businesses. She points out that Sanders opposes Ex-Im.

Sanders argues that a majority of Ex-Im's funds have gone to large, profitable corporations in the U.S., including Boeing.

Asked how he could have the same position on Ex-Im as Sen. Ted Cruz, Sanders says, "Democrats are not always right."

8:33 p.m. Sanders again calls for Clinton to release transcripts of her speeches to Wall Street. Clinton says she would release them if all of the other candidates, including Republicans, do.

Clinton argues she has been tough on Wall Street and hit back at Sanders, saying, "Let's have some facts instead of some rhetoric for a change."

8:23 p.m. A Flint resident asks the candidates what they will do to prevent U.S. factory jobs from being moved overseas.

"We're going to have a very clear set of proposals and incentives for manufacturing," Clinton says, adding that she wants to help small businesses.

Speaking about Clinton's opposition to the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade deal, Sanders says, "I am very glad that Secretary Clinton has discovered religion on this issue...but it's a little bit too late."

Clinton goes after Sanders, arguing that she voted to save the auto industry while she says Sanders voted against the money that ultimately saved the auto industry.

Sanders responds and Clinton tried to interject. "Excuse me, I'm talking," Sanders says.

8:17 p.m. Both candidates are asked whether people involved in the Flint water crisis should go to jail. Clinton and Sanders agree they can't judge whether people committed crimes, but also say people should be held accountable.

"People should be held accountable wherever that leads," Clinton says, adding that that could include civil penalties or criminal charges.

8:13 p.m. Clinton says Flint is not the only city in the U.S. affected by lead exposure and poor infrastructure. She says there are "a lot of communities in this country" where the levels of lead in drinking water is "way above what anybody should tolerate."

"I want to tackle this problem across the board," she says.

8:09 p.m. Clinton is asked how she would address the Flint water crisis as president. Among other things, she says she supports a new program that will pay people in the city to deliver the water that residents need while their pipes are being fixed.

"I would concentrate resources on this city," Clinton says.

Sanders says that if local government doesn't have the resources, and the state refuses to act, then the federal government should step in and take action.

8:02 p.m. The candidates are asked for their opening statements. Sanders says he has met with residents of Flint over the last several weeks.

"What i heard and what I saw literally shattered me and it was beyond belief that children in Flint, Michigan, in the United States of America, are being poisoned," he says, referring to the water crisis that has plagued the city since 2014 and has left residents with health effects associated with lead exposure.

Sanders says Gov. Rick Snyder should resign.

Clinton says, "Amen to that," and added, "I agree the governor should resign or should be recalled."

7:45 p.m. ET Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders face off in their seventh presidential debate in Flint, Michigan, at 8 p.m. ET on the heels of several caucuses and primaries Saturday night. Maine caucuses Sunday evening and just days before several more on Tuesday, including Michigan.

Clinton now has 1,100 delegates and Sanders has picked up 456. On Saturday night, the Vermont senator won the Nebraska and Kansas caucuses while Clinton won in Louisiana.

In Michigan, a CBS News battleground tracker poll shows Clinton with an 11-percentage-point advantage. Among likely Democratic primary voters, Clinton leads 55 percent to Sanders' 44 percent, according to the poll released Sunday.

CNN's Anderson Cooper will moderate the debate. The two candidates' next debate will take place in Miami on Wednesday.

© 2016 CBS Interactive Inc. All Rights Reserved.