One sign we’re a few years out from the financial crisis: investors acknowledging how tough 2008 was.

At Wednesday’s Delivering Alpha conference, Citadel LLC founder Ken Griffin talked about his firm’s near-death experience in 2008 and its comeback since, thanks to what he said were loyal investors and employees, plus a switch into liquid, transparent markets for their investments.

Larry Robbins of Glenview Capital Management sounded a similar theme in his mid-year investor letter dated July 15, noting that Glenview’s assets under management, which had fallen from about $9 billion going into 2008 to less than $3 billion the following year because of investment losses and client defections, now stand at about $9.2 billion.

He mentioned a few other things in his letter, too. The flagship gained about 9.6% for the year through June after fees, thanks in part to Monsanto, Humana and Tenet Healthcare

He likes children’s clothing company Carter’s, saying it’s wrongly viewed as a typical retailer by the market when it’s “of much higher quality”—and that as consumers gain more confidence in the economy recovery, we should see some “deferred births” start to happen, helping Carter’s sales. Glenview started buying shares in 2013 when the price was $60, the letter said. (It was north of $79 per share in April, but closed Wednesday at $68.13.)

In some ways, the thesis on Carter’s is the corollary to Glenview’s views that the aging population will benefit the stock of healthcare companies, the letter said.

Glenview took new stakes in National Oilwell Varco and Cadence Design Systems, and increased a position in private company Genia Technologies, which was bought by Roche in June.

A larger point Robbins made in his letter, which he studded with basketball references, was that the team is more important than the individual. “For the San Antonio Spurs, no player finished in the top 25 in points per game. So how did San Antonio walk away with the big gold trophy? Team beats individual.”

While valuations aren’t as attractive as they were a few years ago, Mr. Robbins said he believed in higher-than-average exposure to stocks.

Factors he cited for his bullishness included companies’ ability to borrow money cheaply, the willingness of boards and management to work with shareholders, controlled systemic risks and Glenview’s “constructive” read on the economy.