See who's been arrested, accused, convicted or released in Southern Arizona this month. An arrest is not a presumption of guilt.

See who's been arrested, accused, convicted or released in Southern Arizona this month. An arrest is not a presumption of guilt.

Tucson police said a man stabbed his stepfather in the chest with a large hunting knife at a home on the east side Friday morning. (Source: Tucson News Now)

Authorities said a man fatally stabbed his stepfather early Friday morning at a home on the east side.

Sgt. Pete Dugan, spokesman for the Tucson Police Department, said James L. Mason Jr. stabbed Alan Nielsen in the chest with a large hunting knife. The 72-year-old Nielsen was pronounced dead at a local hospital. The 43-year-old Mason, who is facing a charge of domestic violence first-degree murder, was taken into custody without incident.

Authorities said they believe alcohol was a factor in the incident, which happened around 8 a.m. at a home in the 6000 block of East Hampton Street.

"Detectives were able to determine that a verbal altercation had taken place between a stepfather and stepson," the TPD said in a news release. "During the argument, the stepson stabbed his stepfather in the chest with the knife."

Authorities said Nielsen's spouse and Mason's nephew were in the home but were not injured.

Neighbors told Tucson News Now they've never seen a police presence like this before. One neighbor, who was hosting a yard sale, said she's lived here for decades and there's never been trouble.

"One police car came flying and then another and then another," said Beverly Cox. "The yard sale people were getting nervous so I said well we will open the door and go in, but I was happy to see the police on premise taking care of the situation."

Cox said she hadn’t seen much of the family living at the home lately, but she still prayed for the best when police arrived.

"This was a nice family,” she said. “He was a nice man, nice lady, nice everything, and bad things happen to good people."

Even though the crime happened the day after Thanksgiving, Dugan said it is not connected to the holiday. He said no one inside was visiting or from out of town. He said it’s a case of domestic violence.

Copyright 2015 Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.