Peyton Manning once had a neck injury so severe, it required four surgeries and sitting out the entire 2011 regular season before it began to heal.

Yet, the last game Manning played in 2011 was the NFL Pro Bowl in late January.

Even with more Pro Bowl berths than any quarterback in NFL history, Manning has never taken the honor for granted. The Broncos’ star quarterback was hoping to play in this year’s Pro Bowl, too, but a late-season quad injury wouldn’t allow him.

Manning notified the NFL office Sunday morning that he will not be able to participate in the Pro Bowl next Sunday in Glendale, Ariz. because of the quad that bothered him through the final month of the season and clearly affected his performance.

“It’s a great honor to be selected to the Pro Bowl, and I’ve always taken the obligation to play in it very seriously,” Manning told the Denver Post. “I’ve believed that, if healthy, it’s a player’s responsibility to play in the game because of what it means to be voted in by your peers and the fans.

“I’m disappointed that I’m just not healthy enough this year to be part of it. It’s going to be tough not being down there with the other guys, but it hasn’t had enough time to heal.”

The Broncos had a league-most 10 players named to the Pro Bowl this season, although that number is dwindling. Besides Manning, star receiver Demaryius Thomas has also opted out. Thomas is eligible for free agency which makes the Pro Bowl a dangerous proposition, but he also played through ankle and finger injuries in the final weeks of the regular season.

It also wouldn’t be a surprise if Broncos tight end Julius Thomas, another free agent who hobbled through an ankle injury in the second half of the season, had second thoughts about playing in his second consecutive Pro Bowl.

Manning has proven that if he is able, he will play. He has been named to 14 Pro Bowls, two more than the second-most honored quarterback, Brett Favre, and tied with center Bruce Matthews and tight end Tony Gonzalez for the most among players at any position.

Manning had played in 11 previous games, missing only the Pro Bowls in 2010 and 2014 when he was in conflict with the following week’s Super Bowl.

Manning sustained his quad injury late in the first half of the Broncos’ 22-10 win at San Diego on Dec. 14. Despite the injury, Manning missed only the last four snaps of the half, returned for the second half and didn’t miss a play in the final 3 ½ games of the season due to the quad (backup Brock Osweiler played the final series in a blowout win against Oakland in the season finale).

Manning earned his latest Pro Bowl nomination after he finished second in the NFL this season with 39 touchdown passes, fourth with 4,727 passing yards and fourth with a 101.5 passer rating.

Now that he’s dealt with the Pro Bowl, Manning must now decide whether to return for his fourth season with the Broncos, 18th overall in the league. He is expected to make his decision before the 2015 free-agent market opens March 10, which is two weeks before his 39th birthday.

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikeklis