Celebrity chef and The Chew star Carla Hall discusses how to cook with healthy ingredients and love at Robert Wood Johnson Somerset’s annual heart health event in Bridgewater on Feb. 17.

Celebrity chef Carla Hall fields questions from interview moderator Susan Bloom at RWJ Somerset’s heart health event in Bridgewater on Tuesday. (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF SUSAN BLOOM) Story Highlights Carla Hall appeared on Bravo’s Top Chef and co-host ABC’s The Chew

Hall prepared Cucumber-Carrot Slaw with Crunchy Rice Noodles from her cookbook

Though temperatures plunged into the teens in Bridgewater on Tuesday evening, an audience of more than 350 flocked to Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital Somerset’s annual heart health event at The Bridgewater Manor, where keynote speaker and celebrity chef Carla Hall engaged them in chanting her signature catch phrase of “Hootie Hoo!” when she took the stage.

A finalist on Bravo network’s Top Chef in 2008 and currently one of five hosts (alongside Mario Batali, Clinton Kelly, Daphne Oz, and Michael Symon) on the popular ABC weekday foodie show The Chew, Hall was excited to keynote this year’s community event to promote heart-healthy recipes, ingredients and cooking tips, which are detailed in her two cookbooks — Cooking With Love: Comfort Food That Hugs You (2012) and Carla’s Comfort Foods: Favorite Dishes From Around the World (2014). A Nashville, Tennessee native whose family has a history of high cholesterol and heart disease and whose grandfather died of a heart attack, “cooking for me is all about substituting food that’s healthier but retains all the flavor,” Hall said.

During a moderated interview with New Jersey-based freelance writer and Courier News Correspondent Susan Bloom, Hall, 50, discussed her past stints as a model and caterer as well as her big break on Top Chef, where the L’Academie de Cuisine graduate wowed the likes of renowned chefs Jacques Pepin and Emeril Lagasse with her gumbo and pea dishes, respectively, and was invited back three seasons later to participate in the “Top Chef: All Stars” episode and was voted Fan Favorite. Though a highly competitive challenge, Hall said that the experience prepared her for her next big opportunity on The Chew, now in its fifth season. “All five of us on the show really like and respect each other and I’m so grateful every day for the way the universe has taken care of me through the opportunities it’s presented,” she said.

In addition to noting how different spices can influence a basic dish, Hall discussed the similarities between many world cuisines and the ways in which food can bring people together, especially when it’s prepared with love. “I always say, ‘if you’re not in a good mood, the only thing you should make is a restaurant reservation,’ ” she joked. The yoga devotée also touted the benefits of exercise, encouraging audience members to participate in any form of activity they enjoy and can commit to. “The only way to remain active and sustain our lives as we age is through our health, and food is medicine,” she said of the greens, vegetables, lean proteins and heart-healthy spices she recommends everyone opt for. “With the levels of hypertension and diabetes in our communities today, I feel that it’s our job as chefs to show people how to eat responsibly without giving up great flavor,” she said.

Hall then demonstrated the preparation of a cucumber-carrot slaw with crunchy rice noodles from her cookbook and engaged in a question-and-answer session with audience members before signing books for hundreds of attendees. The warm and inviting speaker, who resides in Washington, District of Columbia with husband Matthew and stepson Noah, is an active advocate on behalf of many charitable, environmental, and nutrition-based initiatives and revealed plans for the launch of her own restaurant, Carla Hall’s Southern Kitchen, in New York City.

“Carla simply radiates joy and the audience enjoyed her upbeat, healthy, and loving approach to the art of cooking,” shared Bloom of her interview with Hall. “When it comes to serving up food with true heart and soul, I think the secret ingredient is Carla.”

The event opened with a heart-healthy dinner and introductory comments by Anthony Cava, chief administration officer at RWJ Somerset, as well as hospital cardiologist Ranjita Sengupta, M.D., who discussed the heart-healthy benefits of engaging in regular exercise, eating more fruits and vegetables, reducing sodium and sugar intake, and opting for the high protein and fiber offered by nuts, seeds and grains such as quinoa over high-carb foods like rice and bread. “You don’t need to cut out everything — everything in moderation,” Sengupta said. “But heart disease is preventable, so we need to be proactive about taking care of ourselves.”

An annual event conducted by RWJ Somerset for more than 20 years, “our heart-healthy community program each February helps promote greater awareness of heart disease and educates individuals on how to recognize the different signs and symptoms of heart attacks in men and women,” said Serena Collado, director of community health at RWJ Somerset and the event’s coordinator. “Adopting healthy lifestyles and diets is essential to reducing risks for heart disease and prevention is key.” Collado said that the selection of celebrity speakers at RWJ Somerset events is based on their stature in the field and ability to elevate and create awareness for different health issues. “We were delighted to welcome Carla Hall as the keynote speaker for our 2015 heart health program and know that her presence greatly assisted in promoting the role of a healthy diet in the prevention of heart disease,” Collado said.

The event was one of 75-100 community outreach programs a year offered by RWJ Somerset, which has recently featured programs on nutrition with celebrity fruit and vegetable guru “Produce Pete” Napolitano, concussion management with hockey player Ken Daneyko of the New Jersey Devils, stroke prevention with actor Kevin Sorbo, healthful aging with Martha Stewart, and active lifestyles with Dancing With the Stars’ Cheryl Burke. “We’re dedicated to promoting awareness and to keeping our community healthy in a creative, engaging, and affordable way,” Collado said. “Audience feedback both at the events and afterwards has been very positive and if the information provided can help save a life, then we’ve achieved our goal.”

“I thought tonight’s event was fabulous,” confirmed Bridgewater resident and event attendee Nancy Cullinan, who was excited to meet Hall during the book-signing session. “My family and I have been big fans of Carla’s since her Top Chef days and the whole event was very entertaining and a lot of fun. It’s also so important to raise community consciousness about heart health,” she added, “and we learned a lot.”

For more information on the events offered through Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital Somerset (located at 110 Rehill Ave., Somerville), call 908- 685-2200 or visit www.rwjuh.edu.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1A6eKjI