Giuliani says he's received death threats over Obama remarks

Rudy Giuliani says he is getting death threats at his office in the wake of controversial comments that President Barack Obama doesn’t love America.

The former New York mayor told CNN on Friday that the majority of the calls about his remarks have been supportive, including from Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, a likely 2016 Republican presidential candidate.

Story Continued Below

But Giuliani also said that his office secretary had reported receiving death threats since POLITICO first published his remarks late Wednesday night. Giuliani didn’t tell CNN whether he had alerted police to those calls, and a New York Police Department spokeswoman contacted Saturday said it is department policy not to release any information about potential victims.

Giuliani’s remarks about Obama, made during a private dinner in midtown Manhattan featuring Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, have put the entire 2016 Republican field on the spot. Walker didn’t address the former mayor’s comments during the event in New York and on Saturday told the Associated Press he didn’t know whether Obama loved the country.

“You should ask the president what he thinks about America,” Walker said during a visit to Washington, where he is attending the National Governors Association’s winter meeting. “I’ve never asked him, so I don’t know.”

Jeb Bush spokeswoman Kristy Campbell issued a statement late Friday putting a slight bit of distance between the former Florida governor and Giuliani. “Gov. Bush doesn’t question President Obama’s motives. He does question President Obama’s disastrous policies,” she said.

Speaking with NBC affiliate WAVE in Louisville, Kentucky, Sen. Rand Paul said, “I think it’s a mistake to question people’s motives. … I don’t question his motives. And I try not to question the president’s motives as being a good American or a bad American.”

At the NGA meeting, Republican governors distanced themselves from Giuliani’s remarks, with Utah Gov. Gary Herbert calling them “ill-advised.”

“I think it’s always hard to say what’s inside somebody’s heart or in their mind, and I think the better thing to judge is what the president has done or what he has not done, rather than the motivation he may have,” said Wyoming Gov. Matt Mead.

“I wouldn’t characterize any of that that way,” said former Mississippi Gov. Haley Barbour of Giuliani’s choice of words.

“I think everybody in elected office loves their country,” said independent Alaska Gov. Bill Walker, who was a Republican until 2013.

Meanwhile, Democratic Gov. Dan Malloy of Connecticut, speaking at the White House on Friday afternoon, defended the president. “For the number of hours to go by without Rudy Giuliani having called the president to apologize for what is a despicable statement is really quite amazing. Quite frankly, no one in their right mind could question that the president loves his country.

“For candidates for president, or possible candidates for president, who have not rejected outright what Mr. Giuliani said about our president I think speaks volumes about them as well.”

Obama aides have been more than willing to weigh in on the Giuliani comments. On Thursday, the White House featured the hashtag #ObamaLovesAmerica in a tweet about the designation of three national monuments. And at a Democratic National Committee winter meeting on Friday, Obama concluded his speech listing a series of party priorities by noting: “It’s about making this nation we love more perfect.”

Edward-Isaac Dovere contributed to this report.

Authors: