City council will vote Wednesday on a plan to redevelop the former City Centre Airport land.

Council will debate a capital profile and funding strategy for the Blatchford Redevelopment project near downtown, which carries a $632-million price tag over 25 years and will house up to 30,000 people.

The plan calls for a "walkable, transit-oriented and sustainable community" on the 217-hectare space.

The plan includes 20% affordable housing and urban agriculture plots, and aims to use 100% renewable energy.

Housing would be medium-density residential, with high density in direct proximity to the LRT station.

Schools, shops and restaurants are included in the plan, as well as all-season walkways and bikeways. Park space would take up 19% of the area, with most residents being within a two-minute walk of green space.

City administration's report states the development will generate profit for environmentally sustainable infrastructure and other municipal initiatives, providing a "world-leading example of a sustainable neighbourhood."

The report emphasizes the need for balance between social, ecological and economic sustainability.

The first 10 years of redevelopment would be spent on removing airport infrastructure, as well as roadway design and construction, open space features, agriculture spots and seven hectares of stormwater management facilities.

Recycling and reducing waste would be a priority during construction. Airport runways would be ground up and used for roads, and earth dug up for stormwater ponds would be used to make a hill.

The report also stresses the need to expand the LRT from the NAIT station to the two planned Blatchford stations.

Council voted in 2009 to redevelop and close the city centre airport after heated debate, and approved a redevelopment plan in 2012 after design firm Perkins and Will was chosen via international competition.

The plan was scaled down in June to reduce costs, which had some calling the development "watered down." The initial plan called for 25% park space and more high-rise buildings, as well as a pneumatic tube to transport garbage.

The $632 million would be funded through project revenues and borrowings of $81 million.

The airport closed for good in November 2013.