Weekend event features includes carolers and lights

Carol Olsen and Rebekah Lind, a mother-daughter caroling pair called Merrily on High, perform Christmas carols at the Christmas Walk in the Woods on Sunday ( Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

If you go What: Christmas Walk in the Woods. When: 4-8 p.m. Saturday and Sunday, Dec. 19 and 20. Where: 1750 Savage Road, Loveland. Cost: $12 per person. Children under 5 are free. $8 with a donation to Toys for Tots or Stuff the Stocking campaigns. More info: 970-667-3002, TheSavageWoods@gmail.com or christmaswalkinthewoods.com.

"Wow, it looks amazing!" said Angela Eckert on Sunday as she, her children and her parents walked through the new Christmas Walk in the Woods.

She was looking at a Christmas stocking as big as a house decked out with white trim and red paint.

That shoe/stocking was repurposed from the "Old Woman in the Shoe" prop in the fall "Creepy Walk in the Woods."

Christmas trees and twinkly lights have replaced chain saws and scary creatures at the new Christmas Walk in the Woods this season. The new cheery and festive walk, run by the organizers of the Creepy Walk in the Woods, takes families on a merry and comfortable 20-minute walk past carolers, a canopy of lights, a giant red stocking as big as a house, a forest of Christmas trees and Santa at the end.

Eckert and her clan are part of the group that have executed the Creepy Walk for the last seven years, so they were excited to see the change.

Advertisement

"We've never seen it so pretty," Eckert said. "Have you heard of those star lights?" she added as she pointed at the canopy of trees above the walkway where thousands of tiny lights hit the trees just right from laser lights on the ground.

"We have been talking about this since the inception of the creepy walk," said Kitty Wild, owner of The Savage Woods west of Loveland. "It was all those bargain pages in December of where to go see lights and Santa. We thought, 'We could totally do this.'"

Members of the Larimer Chorale Society and a mother-daughter caroling pair, Carol Olsen and Rebekah Lind, called Merrily on High, performed this last Saturday and Sunday near the beginning and end of the little tour. The Original Dickens Carolers from Denver will be on hand this next weekend on the walk.

The caroling area includes chairs and outdoor warmers to listen to the music.

Tiffany and Gary Holesovsky stopped for a few minutes to listen to the music with their son, Keegan, age 2.

"Clapping!" Keegan announced after the carolers finished a song.

"He's having fun," his mother said. "You never get to just sit and listen to carolers anymore."

Kitty Wild and her family redecorated their "Savage Woods" to look like a Christmas wonderland for the holidays. Families can take a little tour of lights and mystery again next weekend. (Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"We have built what we think is a pretty incredible manger scene with a full nativity," Wild said. "We have angels on high and everything."

She added that there are a bunch of snowmen, eight reindeer led by Rudolph and an 18-foot Christmas tree at the end. Those reindeer took some doing to procure, but they managed to get all eight.

Santa is also on hand at the completion of the tour, surrounded by lights for photo opportunities.

Cupcake Libations, a local cupcake shop, has a concession stand with sweet treats for sale. Hot chocolate is also available at the beginning and end of the tour.

The evening walks start at 4 p.m. Saturday and Sunday and runs through 8 p.m. each night, although next year, Wild plans to start later so it's a little darker out when people start.

"It will definitely get you in the Christmas mood. We're really proud of it," Wild said. "And there's nothing creepy in it. We've put all the chain saws away."

The cost is $12 per person and free for children 5 and under. The location is also an official Toys for Tots and Stuff the Stocking campaign dropoffs. Visitors can pay $8 for admission if they donate a new, unwrapped toy for Toys for Tots or socks, undergarments or diapers for Stuff the Stocking.

"We had the cutest thing (Saturday) where a grandparent came through with her three grandchildren on a sleigh. They pulled them all the way through on a sleigh!" Wild said. She said that worked yesterday because it was still so snowy but didn't work as well Sunday since the snow melted and Wild mulched the path to keep it from getting muddy.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.