Graduate students at the University of Missouri who have been demanding better pay, a long-term insurance solution and full tuition waivers for all graduate assistants, among other things, are a step closer to unionizing.

Organizers of the Forum on Graduate Rights, a non-university-affiliated student group, voted to affiliate the Coalition of Graduate Workers — the prospective graduate student union — with the Missouri National Education Association and the National Education Association, the largest teaching unions in Missouri and the United States.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

The Forum on Graduate Rights hosted an open forum for students Wednesday night, which drew a crowd of about 30 people.

A committee led by graduate students Connor Lewis and Eric Scott has been gauging interest in a potential graduate student union since late August. The group shared its plans to pursue unionization during the Wednesday forum at Keller Auditorium. Scott and Lewis said they were optimistic they could gather about 2,000 signatures necessary to hold a vote this year and have a contract in place by 2016.

Lewis said similar conversations about graduate student worker benefits are happening at colleges and universities across the country. “We’re part of a bigger movement,” he said. “We’re at a pivotal moment within graduate education in this country.”

The Forum on Graduate Rights formed in August after MU gave graduate assistants 24-hour notice that they would no longer receive health insurance subsidies because of an IRS interpretation of the Affordable Care Act. The university later rescinded that decision, but the process sparked a campuswide discussion about graduate student employee benefits. Graduate students with assistantships conduct research for the university and teach undergraduate classes.

Organizers of the Coalition of Graduate Workers said about 220 graduate students had expressed interest in serving as their departments’ union representatives and answering questions from fellow graduate student employees.

The Forum on Graduate Rights began recording videos of graduate students sharing their stories during the Wednesday event. The videos will be part of a campaign to share those stories, which feature graduate students discussing the positive and negative aspects of working at MU.

Ronnie LaCombe, a graduate student and MU committee member of the Forum on Graduate Rights, filmed her story during Wednesday’s meeting. LaCombe said she would like to see the university focus on rebuilding trust with students.