The Eye

'Benched' USA Spoilers: Nina Choosing Trent Instead Of Phil? Season Finale Details [WATCH PROMO]

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Facebook/'Benched' Official Page) Benched is a new a lawyer comedy on USA Network. It stars Eliza Coupe as Nina Whitley.

Next week is the season finale of "Benched," with a full hour of two back-to-back episodes. Someone in the office is on the short list for Public Defender of the Year, and hint — it's not Boring Larry or Sheryl.

In "Campaign Contributions," Nina will insist on helping after it's discovered that Phil is up for the award. Also, Trent will let his 10-year-old "little brother" accompany him to court for a week.

The finale is titled "Brief Encounters" and will feature Nina apparently "reuniting" with Trent, and she will face a difficult choice regarding the situation. Also, Phil will examine his own relationships.

Will Nina and Phil's examinations and tough decisions have to do with them both ignoring the obvious attraction they have for each other, which was brought to light in the previous episode?

Last week, a double date didn't go as planned, and Nina and Phil's dates ended up together by the end of the night. This left Nina and Phil in an awkward situation, and although it wasn't spelled out, we could tell they'd come to the realization that they liked each other. Of course, both were too afraid to act on those feelings. Will it happen next week?

There's still no word yet on whether the show has been renewed for a second season or not. On Twitter, when someone asked show creator Michaela Watkins what the status was, she replied that there's still no word on a renewal.:

“@bigman7000: @michaelaWat season finale next week of my fav show #benched nooooooo. Any word on being picked up for season 2????” Nope — Michaela Watkins (@michaelaWat) December 24, 2014

Eliza Coupe, star of the series, got married Christmas Eve in New Zealand to Darin Olien. Just last month, Coupe announced her engagement. Coupe posted a pic of her and Olien's fingers entertwined while both wearing their wedding rings.

Olien is an exotic superfoods hunter, supplement formulator and environmental activist through his lifestyle brand, SuperLife.

The actress was previously married to Randall Whittinghill after six years of marriage. He filed for divorce in 2013, just two months after the cancelation of Coupe's show "Happy Endings."

The last two episodes of "Benched" air Tuesday, Dec. 30 at 10 p.m. and 10:30 p.m. on USA Network.

Someone’s on the short list for public defender of the year. Don't miss the Benched Season Finale Tuesday at 10/9c. https://t.co/CFrhP1iK5J — Benched USA (@BenchedUSA) December 27, 2014

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.