Topics: Barack Obama, Bush Tax Cuts, Chained CPI, Editor's Picks, Entitlement cuts, Entitlement reform, Entitlements, Social Security, Tax cuts, Taxes, Politics News

Back in November 2012, with the Bush tax cuts scheduled to expire and sequestration looming, liberals were divided among two and a half significant schools of strategic thought.

One (mine) was that President Obama should let all of the cuts expire, allow sequestration to kick in, then return from a restful Christmas break with an “Obama tax cut” bill in hand. As a gesture of goodwill to Republicans, that bill would have reinstated all of the Bush tax cuts for the first big chunk of everyone’s income, but in return they’d have to agree to rescind sequestration entirely, and partially offset the cost of all this new spending and tax cutting with a cap on tax expenditures for high earners.

The other (and a half) was that Obama should cut a deal of some kind before the New Year’s “cliff.” Some of the people in this camp believed Obama should pocket the expiration of the Bush tax cuts for top earners and call it a day, fight sequestration separately (which is essentially what happened). Others, including Obama, believed the best option was to reach a big fiscal accord, built up from the baseline of higher taxes on rich people, from which he’d agree to some entitlement cuts, Republicans would agree to close some tax loopholes, and the parties could put sequestration and budget brinkmanship behind them for years.

This is how a Democratic president ended up supporting a Social Security cut called Chained Consumer Price Index, which reduces spending by indexing benefits to a less generous measure of inflation. One of the White House’s most poorly kept secrets is that many of Obama’s economic advisers support Chained CPI on the merits, or believe it to be the least-bad benefit cut Obama could offer Republicans. It’s how Chained CPI ended up in Obama’s budget last year as a partial sequestration replacement. And if the metaphysics of conservative tax policy hadn’t prohibited further budget wheeling and dealing between the White House and GOP, Republicans could’ve pocketed a big win.