Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal said Thursday he plans to make his decision on seeking a presidential campaign shortly after his state's legislative session ends next month, but meanwhile, large changes are needed to stop President Barack Obama's agenda of "turning the American dream into the European nightmare."'"I think this is the most important election of my lifetime," the Republican governor told MSNBC's "Morning Joe" program, as instead of opportunity and growth, Obama is turning the nation into one marked by "government dependence, government spending, government taxing and government borrowing."But as Jindal has not decided officially on a candidacy, he's also not yet decided to be in the Iowa Straw Poll in August.Donald Trump, who also has not officially declared, has already said he'll be in the poll, but two former governors, Mike Huckabee and Jeb Bush, do not plan to participate.Jindal, though, said he likes the idea of a large Republican field of candidates, and has no problem with having so many potential challengers for the nomination."A lot of Republican leaders like to complain or moan about how many candidates we have running, but I think that's a great thing," said Jindal. "I think the more the better, and I think the Democrats are making a mistake simply by crowning Hillary [Clinton]."But "democracy is messy," said Jindal, who thinks voters want to make their own decisions."Any sense that donors or party leaders are trying to hand-pick a candidate, I think, would backfire," Jindal said. "I think competition is a great thing.Jindal said the one thing he thinks he has done to differentiate himself from others has been to organize his thinking and planning for a potential campaign."We spent the last year and a half ... coming up with detailed ideas on healthcare, on energy, on education, on foreign policy," said the governor. "I think we need the next president to do something, not just somebody who wants to be somebody."As one example, I'm the only potential candidate with a detailed plan, how do you repeal and replace Obamacare? Every Republican talks about it, we've written down how to do it. If I were to run that would set me apart."And Jindal repeated a statement from 2012 that the party can't be the "stupid party" and has to stand for something and not against everything."My plans aren't a reaction to President [Barack] Obama, but, for example, we have a detailed plan on healthcare. How do we lower [the] cost for the average American trying to buy and afford healthcare? ... We put specific ideas of how to move the country forward."Jindal also said Thursday he's has sympathy for Sen. Rand Paul, who staged a nearly 11-hour marathon of a speech on the floor of the Senate Wednesday against the Patriot Act and renewing the National Security Agency's right to the bulk collection of metadata."We need the tools to hunt down terrorists and protect ourselves from them," said Jindal, "but where we need to draw the line is this mass collection of data of Americans. Our agencies should be able to get a court order to seek those that want to do us harm."But, absolutely, this is a good debate to have. We can't simply give powers to the federal government that weren't really intended in the original Patriot Act."Jindal did not address, nor was he asked about, the controversial decision he made Wednesday to issue an executive order that seeks to enact the provisions of a religious objections bill , after the bill was rejected by a state House legal committee.