Buy Photo Keel Hunt is a Tennessean columnist. Reach him at Keel@TSGNashville.com/ (Photo: File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

The extreme weather of the past week has been a testing time.

As surely as a deep freeze stresses plumbing systems, grocery shelves and heat pumps, it tests the capacity of a city to pull together for survival in hardship. It reminds us that the needs of our neighbors who live in hardship extend well beyond our own cozy households. It reminds us that policy is important.

Just as snow on the far hills puts the near trees in fresh relief, stripped bare of their leaves in winter, the harsh time reveals more of the city than we normally see — the struggles and loss, and also the heroism.

The young mother and her son who died on Monday night helping accident victims on a frozen expressway.

Congregations who stretch beyond their capacity to help shelter our homeless.

NES and public works crews, MTA and police and fire employees who spring into action to protect and serve others.

Numberless neighbors who shovel a neighbor's sidewalk.

"We will get through this, as a community," Mayor Karl Dean said of the current storm last Monday evening, reminding us that survival requires the whole city to pull together. On his emergency action agenda this past week, along with urging us to stay home and off the streets, was his admonition to remember the folks on the street and under the bridges who have no homes.

A blizzard has a way like that of reminding us of the whole city — of homeless individuals and families, of the volunteers who rescue them, of churches that take them in.

The mayor is more than the CEO of the city government. He (or she) is a leader of the whole community — not the only leader, but the most visible. What is our next mayor prepared to do?

Dean's comment reminded me of Phil Bredesen in 1998 on the afternoon of the tornadoes, Bill Purcell in the anxious aftermath of 9/11, and how Dean himself stood in the eyes of two earlier storms.

One was against the forces of nature with the 2010 flood. The other, months before that, was against the forces of darkness in the "English only" fight — a reminder that important tests are not always about the weather.

A flood or blizzard will pass, but the thousands who struggle year-round on the edge of life will abide. Even in this time of bounding prosperity — construction cranes twirling on the skyline, new comfortable office towers of the "it" city downtown — the experts say that as many as one in five Nashvillians live in certain poverty. It is a hard place to live.

Let's call them the Other City.

What a lot of folks want to hear now is how the next mayor intends to confront their harsh realities, the less-visible web of conditions that beset the working poor, their children and their prospects, and that put our city of harmony at risk.

What will the next mayor do for the Other City? How clearly do candidates see the connections — not just transit or housing or schools, but the seamless need for modern transit from affordable housing to good jobs and great schools?

What of the Barnes Housing Fund and the Financial Empowerment Center program (the Bloomberg initiative that may expire come December)? How about the "after-school zones" that have been a policy breakthrough? Which of these should be scaled up?

An special event could provide answers. At 3 p.m., on Sunday, Feb. 22, the 15th Avenue Baptist Church, 1203 9th Ave. North, will host a candidate forum. How sharp will the questions be? How responsive will the candidates be?

I have read all their kickoff speeches. They are well-polished words, but who now will push past the smooth rhetoric of the stump speech? Which one will let voters hear some gritty detail?

I am ready to hear a lot less about the "it" city and a lot more now about the Whole City.

Are you?

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1Af6X3n