Christine A. Stearns, vice president for health & legal affairs at the New Jersey Business & Industry Association, is joining the government affairs practice at Newark-based Gibbons law firm.

Stearns, who will work out of the firm’s Trenton office, gained a reputation in the capital city as a strong advocate on health care issues facing the business community during her 11 years at NJBIA.

Stearns, who will start at Gibbons next Tuesday, said leaving the NJBIA was tough.

“Serving as a health care advocate for the business community for the past decade has been a tremendous honor, so it was hard to make the decision,” she told NJBIZ.

Stearns said she was drawn by the opportunity to join the Gibbons’ team, whose government affairs practice has a strong health care focus.

“What is so exciting is that I will continue to work on health care issues,” she said.

The health care industry, spurred by the Affordable Care Act, continues to evolve. Stearns is the second power player in New Jersey to switch jobs this week as Jennifer Velez, the commissioner of the Department of Human Services, announced Tuesday that she will be taking a job at Barnabas Health.

Stearns said the ACA will keep her busy in her new role.

“As health care continues to evolve so rapidly, I will be part of that dialogue,” she said. “We see tremendous differences in health compared to two or three years ago, in terms of how health care is being purchased and how it is being delivered. And policy makers are trying to decide whether to get involved in a larger way.”

Stearns cited looming policy issues such as the high cost of out-of-network care, and efforts to improve health care delivery through patient-centered care.

“There will continue to be dialogue at the statehouse about the changes in health care,” she said.

Stearns has been a power player in the industry for some time.

In 2014, she ranked No. 36 on the NJBIZ Power 50 Health Care list. She also was named one of the Top 10 health care lobbyists in the state by NJ Spotlight.

Stearns currently serves on several state boards that regulate New Jersey’s health care system, including the Health Care Administration Board, Individual Health Coverage Program, and Small Employer Health Benefits Program, as well as on the board of the New Jersey Health Care Quality Institute, a nonprofit foundation working to ensure quality, accountability, and cost containment.

A graduate of Douglass College, Stearns earned her law degree from Rutgers Camden School of Law and a master’s degree from the Eagleton Institute of Politics.

ALSO ON NJBIZ:

Exclusive: Wells Fargo names Larisa Perry region president for New Jersey, New York and Connecticut

Velez to step down as Department of Human Services commissioner

Drugmaker's expansion could bring 300 new jobs to East Windsor