MODERN MEDICINE SAYS IT'S TIME TO DIE

By Dr. Carolyn Dean, MD, ND

October 4, 2014

NewsWithViews.com

Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel is one of the chief architects of Obamacare. But instead of extending life, according to an article in WND Health, he wants us to die at 75. “'Die At 75' Advocate's Political Motives Hidden.” That’s right, Emanuel advises us to curb our life expectancy in a system of limited resources. This system is substituting moral decisions concerning who will receive health care and who will not with a recipe for death.

Emanuel writes a column in The Atlantic where he argues that improvements in health care that extend life expectancies through vaccines, antibiotics and technological innovations end up “stretching out old age,” resulting in “a progressive erosion of physical functioning.”

The point is that modern medicine doesn’t work to keep us healthy. In spite of vaccines, antibiotics and technological innovations, people are not cured of their diseases so they live longer but are increasingly physically disabled. Thus, productivity is lost and health care costs rise. People are still alive but they have tubes running into every orifice and everyone just accepts this scenario as inevitable.

Instead of fixing a system that doesn’t work, everyone has given up because the mandate of modern medicine is not to keep us healthy – just medicated. The solution says Emanuel is to quit being a burden to society and just die. This ridiculous cost/benefit analysis of life leaves NO room for people to be healthy and productive as long as they desire.

When I was in medical school in the mid 70s we had one hour of nutrition and absolutely no ethics classes. The lack of both has created the failure of the present health care system, which is really a disease-care system.

In first year medicine another student and I started an Ethics Club, which forced the school to come up with a program the following year. Unfortunately medicine’s idea of ethics as espoused by Emanuel, the director of the Clinical Bioethics Department at the U.S. National Institutes of Health and head of the Department of Medical Ethics & Health Policy at the University of Pennsylvania is to advise the sick and elderly to Just Go Ahead and Die for the good of society! Damn inconvenient for people who don’t want to die or for families who don’t want to let go of their loved ones.

The lack of nutrition training is the second huge failure. Because doctors do not learn about the necessity for vitamins and minerals that support the structure and function of the body, we are faced with a system that applies layers of Band-Aid drugs to our symptoms with ever increasing side effects.

Here’s a recognizable scenario that has 70% of Americans taking at least one prescription drug, and more than half on two. Most people can relate to what I’m about to say. Eighty percent of the population is magnesium deficient so it’s very common for a magnesium-deficient, stressed-out patient on an annual physical, to have a high blood pressure reading. Stress alone is enough to cause magnesium deficiency and high BP.

Calcium causes contraction and magnesium relaxes the tiny muscles in the arteries, so when magnesium is deficient, the muscles contract under the influence of calcium and cause high BP. Instead of telling you to take magnesium (because it wasn’t taught in medical school) the doctor prescribes a diuretic, which further depletes your magnesium. And you willingly take that medication thinking the doctor must have your best interests at heart.

A month later you come back to the doctor and your BP is worse because your magnesium deficiency is worse. The doctor comments that “We caught your BP just in time, here are two more drugs.” You walk out the door with a calcium channel blocker and an ACE inhibitor. Blocking calcium from causing contraction of the blood vessels makes sense but the doctor never learned that magnesium is a natural calcium channel blocker with no side effects. You are now on 3 drugs, all of which cause magnesium deficiency. And you are beginning to worry but don’t even ask your doctor about diet or exercise or something to take other than 3 drugs.

Two months later when you go to the lab for blood tests to see if the drugs are harming your liver, they discover high cholesterol and high blood sugar. Yet, they don’t even test for magnesium. The doctor again says “We caught your cholesterol and blood sugar just in time,” not having a clue that these readings are caused by magnesium deficiency. Then you are given a statin drug and a diabetic drug, which further lower your magnesium.

In fact, the statin drug you are given may have a fluoride molecule attached to make it more powerful. But an even worse problem is that fluoride binds with magnesium to make an insoluble, brittle magnesium fluoride compound that deposits in your muscles and joints potentially causing pain and disability. Those of you on statin drugs know what I’m talking about. You may even have gone to your doctor to say the statin drug is causing pain and the doctor disagrees and says, oh, you’re developing arthritis – take this arthritis drug. By the way, Cipro is an antibiotic with a fluoride molecule and a black box warning that it can cause tendon rupture.

All this time you just think the doctor knows best, everyone else is on medications and it’s just your time and you don't question your doctor. Or if you do, your doctor gets a bit defensive and warns you that you could have a stroke or heart attack if you don’t take your medication.

The way I’ve describe this scenario as magnesium deficiency makes it obvious that the solution is to take magnesium but doctors don’t even do routine magnesium blood testing to know there is a problem. In my book, The Magnesium Miracle, I talk about the serum magnesium test, which is very inaccurate. I recommend a better test – Magnesium RBC, which you can order yourself, without a doctor’s script, from Request A Test. But you must aim for the optimum level of 6.0-6.5 in a range of 4.2-6.8mg/dL. You can read more about that in two free eBooks under the FAQs at RnAReSet.

Even when you take magnesium and feel better and go to your doctor asking to be weaned off your medications, your doctor will scare you into thinking you have to take these drugs for life because they say diabetes, high cholesterol and high blood pressure are incurable. But the distressing irony is that the drugs you are taking can be causing and worsening all these conditions. And that’s because doctors see the statistics that nobody gets better and therefore continue to demand you take their drugs.

Alternative medicine doctors have adopted the safer “treat symptoms with supplements not drugs” approach. However, patients end up with a long list of supplements that often minimizes the vast importance of magnesium. On one website I saw at least a dozen supplements for heart disease recommended by one doctor and the only magnesium was in his multiple vitamin/mineral formula. Even worse, it was 250 mg of magnesium oxide (which is only 4% absorbed) and magnesium aspartate, (which is contraindicated for the brain). The multi vitamin/mineral formula included 500mg of calcium, which can increase the incidence of heart disease.

Analyzing the current system of disease-care might want to make you pull the plug on life, but it doesn't have to be that way. On my Dr. Carolyn Dean Live radio show on Mondays at 4pm PST and in my Dr. Carolyn Dean Live Archives I often talk about heart disease and many other conditions and how to take the fewest supplements for the most impact.

On my show I recommend products that I developed over the past two years after 45 years of research. ReMag is a magnesium liquid that is 100% absorbed at the cellular level with no side effects. It is even superior to intravenous magnesium. ReLyte is a multiple mineral that is also 100% absorbed. These minerals provide the basic structure and function for the body. The highest level of magnesium in the body is found in the heart, so it is mighty important. Magnesium activates between 700-800 enzyme systems from making energy to digesting sugars.

My ReAline has the amino acid taurine for your heart and methionine as the precursor to glutathione along with methyl groups and sulfur to support liver detoxification. The fourth important product is RnA Drops, which helps create perfect cells in the body and has engendered quite remarkable testimonials. In my blog, Dr. Dean’s Supplement Recommendations, I add food-based vitamin B and vitamin C and Blue Ice Royal for a food-based source of vitamin D, K2 and A.

Note: If you take supplements and your heart condition improves, try to involve your doctor in weaning you off your medications. Do not go off them cold-turkey.

Another concern that arises from talk about “curbing our life expectancy in a system of limited resources” is that Emanuel actually thinks that “a physician’s duty includes working for the greater good of society instead of focusing only on a patient’s needs.” And since this man has access to the media and can influence thought, doctors are going to listen and think he’s right and begin withholding treatment from people they think are taking resources away from more productive members of society. That’s already happening in HMOs where insurance companies deny patients surgery and expensive drugs and doctors aren’t even in the loop on those decisions.

What will become of our basic rights and freedoms in a disease-care system that doesn’t have much regard for the Hippocratic Oath? One statement in the Oath reads: “Whatsoever house I may enter, my visit shall be for the convenience and advantage of the patient; and I will willingly refrain from doing any injury or wrong from falsehood.” This means to me that doctors are beholding to the individual in front of them for care and not society as a whole. However, in the June 18, 2008, issue of JAMA Emanuel blamed the Hippocratic Oath and its warning to “use my power to help the sick to the best of my ability and judgment” for the “overuse” of medical care!

Another statement has been mostly ignored: “With regard to healing the sick, I will devise and order for them the best diet, according to my judgement and means; and I will take care that they suffer no hurt or damage.” You can read my recently updated book Death by Modern Medicine: Seeking Safe Solutions – 3rd Edition and see just how much we are hurting and damaging patients with our current system of disease-care. In fact, the total number of deaths brought on by modern medicine soared past one million annually in 2013. Death by Modern Medicine is an incredible eye opener that helps you face the fact that you have to assume responsibility for your own health and not leave it up to any medical or government organization

ï¿½ 2014 Dr. Carolyn Dean MD, ND - All Rights Reserved

Dr. Carolyn Dean is a Medical Doctor and Naturopathic Doctor on the cutting edge of the natural medicine revolution since 1979. She is working on several patents for novel health products including the iCell, the basic ingredient of RnA Drops. She also produces aunique magnesium: ReMag and a multiple mineral product: ReLyte that are 100% absorbed at the cellular level. Dr. Dean is the author/coauthor of 33 health books (print and eBooks) including The Magnesium Miracle, Invisible Minerals Part I and Part II, Death by Modern Medicine, IBS for Dummies, The Yeast Connection and Women’s Health, Future Health Now Encyclopedia, Everything Alzheimers, and Hormone Balance and over 110 Kindle books! Dr. Dean is on the Medical Advisory Board of the non-profit educational site - Nutritional Magnesium Association, Her magnesium outreach has won her an award from the Heart Rhythm Society in the UK for “Outstanding Medical Contribution to Cardiac Rhythm Management-2012.” She was also awarded the Excellence in Integrative Medicine Award at the Sacred Fire of Liberty in Washington. Dr Dean has a free online newsletter and a valuable online 2-year wellness program called Completement Now! and runs a busy telephone consulting practice. Find out more at Dr. Dean’s Website and her RnAReSet website .

To subscribe or find out more go to:

Website: www.drcarolyndean.com

Follow Dr. Dean on Twitter: http://twitter.com/DrCarolynDean

E-Mail: help@drcarolyndean.com