SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Republican presidential candidate and former Arkansas Governor Mike Huckabee said that President Obama “always sort of lifts his head, puts his nose up in the air, and tells us that we’re just not as strong morally, and we just don’t have the same virtue and character that he does” on Saturday’s “Fox & Friends” on the Fox News Channel.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Huckabee said, “That’s one of the frustrating things about this president. He always tries to make it that he has the moral authority, and everybody else is wrong, not just wrong in terms of an opinion, or a point of view, but wrong morally. And I just find that arrogant, and I find it troubling, and I also find it a very sort of cheap way to keep from having a legitimate discussion about proper policy of dealing with radical jihadism. You don’t have a discussion when you say, look, I’m right, you’re wrong, end of discussion. And it’s not just on this issue, but whether it’s Obamacare, or whether it’s gun control, this is a president who always sort of lifts his head, puts his nose up in the air, and tells us that we’re just not as strong morally, and we just don’t have the same virtue and character that he does when it comes to assessing these issues, and I think a lot of Americans truly resent that.”

Huckabee also responded to comparisons between Syrian refugees and the Pilgrims with, “it’s one thing to come to America because you’re escaping tyranny. It’s another to come to America because you want to create a tyranny of a caliphate. And we have every right, you know what, we have a responsibility to make sure that we know the difference between people who want to come here because they love America, they love freedom, and they want to live the American Dream, and people who want to come here and take us back to the 7th century, and blow up our children, our neighborhoods, our schools, and our shopping malls. You know, the Boston Marathon bombers came here. They even became citizens. We hear about assimilation. But, you know, after they got assimilated, they did not lose that basic fanaticism that caused them to wreak the carnage that they did at the Boston Marathon. That’s what we’re trying to prevent. I think we have every right to do that, Tucker.”

Follow Ian Hanchett on Twitter @IanHanchett