ISTOCK

ELEANOR BLAYNEY: In the 1980s, I put aside a Ph.D. thesis on the unfinished works of the poet William Wordsworth, and began an M.B.A. program at the University of Chicago. The next two years were like drinking from a fire hose as I imbibed nonstop discussions of capital market theory and statistical proofs of the “efficient market hypothesis” (EMH).

By the time I was ready to graduate and take a good-paying job beyond the wildest dreams of a former English major, I was a complete EMH disciple. Convinced that you couldn’t beat “Mr. Market,” I was ready to advise all future clients that they should invest in index funds, and stop bothering with brokers or stock reports.

But during my last semester, I registered for a course that was outside the University of Chicago’s renowned finance department. It was titled “Behavioral Decision-Making.” I decided to take it pass-fail in case I felt like skipping a few classes during these final beautiful spring days on campus.

In short, I did not expect to find it very relevant to what I eventually would do as a financial planner and investment adviser. I had already learned how people made financial decisions: They optimized return subject to a given level of risk, or optimized risk subject to a given level of return. Their decision-making was perforce rational and efficient.

From the very first class, the tight, logical thinking of the EMH world was shattered, leaving the messy, unruly reality of human behavior. I learned that most individuals respond asymmetrically to loss and gain. They see the possibility of a dollar of loss as worse than the foregone opportunity of a dollar of gain, even if the two are mathematically equivalent. They rarely optimize decisions on all important factors, but stop after just two or three factors have been considered. (Did you know that the size of the cup holder in the front-seat console of a car is a major determinant in the car-purchase decision?)

The list goes on. Humans make decisions about the future based on what just happened in the past, thereby assuming that both bull and bear markets go on forever. They confuse availability with probability, buying more life insurance after learning of plane crashes.

Most confounding of all: They buy lottery tickets, but avoid the stock market as a total crap shoot.

It’s now years later, and I am really glad I found my way into that decision-making class, which was offered well before behavioral economics went mainstream in business-school curriculums. At the same time, I am grateful, too, for all the rigorous EMH training. The two approaches seem, on the surface, to quarrel with one another, in terms of their diametrically opposed conclusions about investor behavior. But in my view, they have provided sturdy book-ends to my approach to investing, both for myself and for my clients.

I still believe that market rationality and efficiency prevails over the longer term, and thus counsel the wisdom, simplicity and cost-effectiveness of passive investing. But I also acknowledge the power of human emotion to shape the short term. Greed and fear are just as “real” as mean reversion when it comes to investing. The successful professional must address both realities.

Eleanor Blayney (@EleanorBlayney) is consumer advocate of the Certified Financial Planner Board of Standards.

Read the latest Wealth Management Report.