Congress approved a year-end budget deal Friday that contains no apparent surprises for military and defense interests in Hampton Roads.

That's good news for some of the area's major employers.

The plan, which funds federal agencies through September 2016, provides a stable flow of dollars for shipbuilding and ship repair, avoiding the funding hiccups that have interrupted work flow at area shipyards and contributed to layoffs.

It continues funding for the Gerald R. Ford-class aircraft carrier program and Virginia-class submarines that are crucial to Newport News Shipbuilding. It also adds $50 million for the Navy to conduct shock trials on the Gerald R. Ford after the shipyard delivers the ship next year.

The Newport News yard, a division of Huntington Ingalls Industries, has announced more than 1,200 layoffs this year due to a temporary lull in work. Company officials partly blamed that on congressional gridlock of past years. It led to unpredictable funding and the delay of a major project, the midlife overhaul of the USS George Washington.

The Navy also received its full request for ship repair work, around $7.8 billion. Past delays of maintenance and modernization work were one reason why BAE Systems cut about 400 jobs at its Norfolk shipyard this year. It performs work on amphibious warships, cruisers and destroyers.

Virginia Sens. Mark R. Warner and Tim Kaine supported the bill. Although they had concerns, both noted it addressed the needs of the shipping industry.

Warner said the bill "provides certainty to our military and to Virginia shipyards," while Kaine said it "invests in Virginia's shipbuilders so they have certainty and stability."

Rep. Rob Wittman, R-Westmoreland, voted against the bill and took to Facebook to explain his reasoning.

"The bill, weighing in at more than 2,000 pages, was released early Wednesday morning, scarcely giving members time to read it, much less weigh its merits," he wrote. "This legislation does include some measures that I have fought for and believe in, like funding for our military, but it also includes policy measures that I have adamantly opposed and requires compromise that wouldn't have been necessary if Congress weren't forced to act against the clock."

Rep. Randy Forbes, R-Chesapeake, voted no for several reasons: concerns over screening of Syrian refugees, lack of provisions that would enforce current immigration law, his desire to dismantle the Affordable Care Act and curb the Environmental Protection Agency, which he felt the bill did not address, and the general level of spending, which he sees as unsustainable.

However, like Wittman, he supported measures sought by the Navy and shipyards.

Rep. Scott Rigell, R-Virginia Beach, supported the bill, saying it averted cuts to the defense budget and supported important initiatives for Virginia, such as $7 million in improvements to NASA Wallops Flight Facility on the Eastern Shore, which he strongly supported.

Rep. Robert C "Bobby" Scott, D-Newport News, supported the spending plan and cited nonmilitary priorities, including support for job training and apprenticeship programs, and "significant increases in federal education programs, especially for those benefiting low-income students."

Scott is the ranking Democrat on the House Education and Workforce Committee.

Lessig can be reached by phone at 757-247-7821.