The best part? 'We get to eat it'

Sid Markell, left, and Olive Tromey, prepare to plant lettuce with help from Diana Mercer. First-graders at Whittier International Elementary School in Boulder are planting lettuce in their garden for the garden to table program. For a video, go to www.dailycamera.com. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

Whittier Elementary first-graders clustered around a small raised bed garden last week as they got a lesson on lettuce and planting.

Undeterred by the falling snow and chilly temperature, they used small shovels to dig holes and plant the bed with rows of green and red lettuce starts, four varieties in all. Rulers helped with spacing.

Whittier's garden is one of 18 at Boulder Valley elementary schools planted through the Growe Foundation, which developed the Garden to Table program.

"It brings in lessons of where food comes from and really connects the kids to healthy eating," said Bryce Brown, who founded the Growe Foundation.

The program reaches about 8,000 students a year. Along with helping schools plant gardens and providing seeds and plants, the foundation partnered with teachers to write curriculum that meshes with state standards.

Garden to Table is a community effort, with principals and teachers leading the garden efforts at each school, parents volunteering their time, Cure Farm growing the seedlings and businesses providing both monetary support and volunteers.

At Whittier, the first-graders collected seeds from previously planted lettuce in the fall, setting the stage for the spring planting.

Later this spring, second-graders will harvest the lettuce crop, which will be served as part of a school lunch highlighting salad bar veggies.

Advertisement

On planting day, first-grader Luca Coakley said he learned that "there are many kinds of lettuce" and liked getting to dig in the garden.

First-grader Sophia Hultquist said she learned about caring for plants.

"You need to water it, or else it could die," she said. "Sometimes when they're cold, they die. You can put a blanket on them if it's cold."

The best part of a garden, added classmate Olive Tromey, is "we get to eat it."

Their teacher, Erin Cameron, said the garden to table program fits well with Whittier's International Baccalaureate program.

"We teach what it means to be a human," she said. "Taking care of the Earth and planting vegetables is a human need. And planting is hands on. They're doing something with their knowledge. Kids who plant the lettuce are a lot more invested in taking care of the garden."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa