White House Obama criticizes violence in Ferguson

CHICAGO — President Barack Obama, seeking to calm roiling tensions in Ferguson, Missouri, told those behind violent protests in the St. Louis suburb Tuesday that discontent with a grand jury’s decision does not justify their behavior. He did, however, underscore that concerns some African Americans have about their treatment at the hands of police are legitimate, and indicated he was looking ahead to working on the root cause of the conflict in the racially charged case.

“Burning buildings, torching cars, destroying property, putting people at risk – that’s destructive and there’s no excuse for it. Those are criminal acts,” he said at the start of an early evening speech here focusing on immigration just as the sun set in Missouri and another night of potentially violent protests loomed.

Story Continued Below

“Nothing of significance, nothing of benefit results from destructive acts,” Obama said. The achievements of the civil rights movement or the passage of the Affordable Care Act “happened because people vote, because people organize … that’s how you actually move something forward.”

( Also on POLITICO: Ferguson's trial)

Next week, Obama said, he will convene state and local officials, faith and community leaders, and others “to start identifying very specific steps that we can take to make sure that law enforcement is fair.”

When it comes to policing and race, “the problem is not just a Ferguson problem, it is an American problem,” he said.

Attorney General Eric Holder, who met with Obama earlier in the day at the White House, told reporters in Washington he was “disappointed” by the violence that followed the decision and declared that “these acts of violence cannot, and will not, be condoned.”

Holder said the Justice Department would take more steps to prevent violence in the coming days, like developing strategies for “isolating the criminal elements from the peaceful protesters,” and encouraged peaceful demonstrators to keep trying to discourage violence.

( Also on POLITICO: King: Obama should invite Wilson to White House)

He also pledged that the department would continue working to educate police departments about the best way to handle demonstrations and promised more discussions around the country to ease the concerns of African Americans and other minority communities who feel singled out by police officers.

“The reality is that what we see in Ferguson is not restricted to Ferguson,” Holder said. “There are other communities around the country that have those same issues that have to be dealt with.”

Holder added, “This isn’t just about talking. We want to make sure that concrete steps are taken to address these underlying barriers to trust.”

While looking ahead, Obama and his top aides are also closely monitoring the unrest spurred by the grand jury’s decision. Senior adviser Valerie Jarrett spoke with Missouri Gov. Jay Nixon on Monday night and again Tuesday morning, getting updates on the conditions on the ground and agreeing to stay in close contact. Jarrett, in turn, has been keeping the president updated.

( Also on POLITICO: Paul's take on Ferguson)

Nixon, for his part, held a combative news conference Tuesday that focused mostly on the violence rather than the community’s concerns over the grand jury decision. He said Missouri was calling up hundreds of additional National Guard troops to police Ferguson, declaring that “what they’ve gone through is unacceptable.” He continued, “This community deserves to have peace.”

The White House also hosted calls with the Missouri congressional delegation and with mayors from across the country. In addition, Jarrett and Holder also spoke late Monday with a group of civil rights leaders with whom “we’ve been working closely with them for the past few months leading up to this point to make sure responses to this moment would be appropriate and productive,” Schultz said.

As Holder prepares to announce next steps for his agency, the Justice Department is continuing its separate investigations of the August shooting and the Ferguson Police Department and redoubling federal efforts to improve often icy police-community relations.

“This grand jury decision is just one step in what’s going to be a continuing legal process,” said National Urban League President Marc Morial, who arrived in St. Louis midday Tuesday. “I think that the Justice Department has done the right thing by quickly coming down here, quickly conducting their own investigation, not simply waiting.”

The president has for weeks been privately voicing concern about the potential for unrest following the grand jury’s decision on whether to indict Ferguson police officer Darren Wilson in the shooting death of unarmed 18-year-old Michael Brown, but he’s limited in what he can say and do. He can’t be seen as speaking in favor of either side of the case, and the power to respond to protests that get out of hand lies with state and local authorities.

“We need to recognize that this is not just an issue for Ferguson, this is an issue for America,” Obama said Monday. “These are real issues. And we have to lift them up and not deny them or try to tamp them down. What we need to do is to understand them and figure out how do we make more progress. And that can be done.”

Obama can use his bully pulpit to speak out on the issue and use the power of his office to convene conversations about criminal justice reform.

Beyond that, much of the work is coming from the Justice Department which, with no indictment coming from Missouri, now takes the lead in investigating the August incident.

Holder said the Justice Department’s dual investigations stemming from the Brown shooting remain ongoing.

The department offered new guidance last week aimed at helping law enforcement agencies begin tackling their challenges, issuing a 10-page document that includes links to various in-person and online training programs, as well as resources to help law enforcement plan for large events and to help repair frayed community relations.