A sale pending sign in front of a home on Wednesday in San Anselmo, Calif. Justin Sullivan/Getty Images

Home prices are at all-time high, but buyers may be growing weary of record-high home prices and start pulling back on purchases later this summer, according to a new report by a national real-estate brokerage.

The number of homes sold in July is expected to grow by 14.3% over the previous year in July, according to Redfin. In contrast, it anticipates that home sales will grow by 4.6% compared to the previous year in August.

According to Redfin, the median sales price will grow by 4.3% in July and by 2.2% in August.

Redfin has created a forward-looking read on the housing market that it plans to issue monthly. It looks at the number of people viewing listings on its website, customers requesting tours and those writing offers in the 15 major metro areas in which it has a large presence.

Many economists make predictions about the annual rate of sales and price growth and the National Association of Realtors puts out a pending home-sales index based on contract signings. But Redfin said their index will help act as a more immediate guide for people trying to decide whether now is a good time to buy or sell a home because it looks at very early indicators, such as home tours and online listings.

“So many people buying a house worry that it’s the wrong time, that prices are going to go down the moment you get into contract,” said Glenn Kelman, chief executive of Redfin, a real-estate brokerage.

Redfin’s predictions would constitute an unusually sharp slowdown in the final months of summer, especially coming off of two months of sharply improving home sales numbers. The National Association of Realtors said on Wednesday that the pace of existing-home sales across the country was up 3.2% last month from May to a seasonally adjusted rate of 5.49 million, the strongest since February 2007. Year-over-year they were up 9.6%, according to the realtor association.

NAR’s data measures a much broader swath of the country than Redfin, which is primarily focused on some of the largest markets.

This is the first time that Redfin has released the index, but it has looked at data going back to January 2013. In June, it showed year-over-year price growth of 5.7% and growth in sales of 14.2%.

Brokers said that they are starting to see prices keep clients out of the market, who are deciding to stay renters because they can’t afford homes or don’t want to get into a bidding war.

Mr. Kelman said that six months ago if a buyer saw a home they were lukewarm on he would have told them to buy before interest rates rose.

“I think now time is more on your side that you can hold out for a house you like better,” he said.

Heather Ladd spent six months looking for a home in Denver’s tight housing market. She toured more than 25 and put offers on four, losing three to higher bidders and dropping the fourth after an inspection revealed the need for costly repairs. This month, she finally prevailed, agreeing to pay $415,000 for a four-bedroom ranch that was listed for $389,000 in the suburb of Littleton, Colo. She waived the requirement for an inspection.

Denver’s lofty prices “were very hard to stomach,” said Ms. Ladd, a single, 40-year-old human-resources director. “I was just shocked by the list prices, what homes would end up actually going for and what buyers were willing to do, like waiving inspections and appraisals. It seems to me that we’re reliving what caused the housing bubble to start with.”

Ms. Ladd’s Realtor, Lee McCue of Keller Williams Denver Tech Center in Centennial, Colo., said most would-be buyers new to the Denver market as well as those who haven’t yet braved the housing market in many other U.S. cities this year are in for a shock.

“After losing five or six homes [to higher bidders], they finally understand it,” Ms. McCue said. “A light bulb goes off and they understand that they need to get more competitive. People line up for showings. The whole stream of buyers is looking at these homes, and there are multiple offers.”