Topics: Editor's Picks, Homeless, Homelessness, Millennial Generation, millennials, U.S. Politics, Washington, Life News, News

This article has been clarified since it was originally published.

Circling D.C. General, the district’s largest homeless shelter, it’s painful to imagine anyone sleeping inside. Plywood boards up the windows. Over the door, the word “hospital” looks as though it has been chipped away to disguise the building’s previous life.

Out front in the cold, mothers with small children stood huddled together outside the family shelter. They have babies on their hips and toddlers at their feet. One little boy peeked up at me from beneath his dinosaur stocking cap.

He is one of the 600 children living in this shelter, down the road from a morgue, stuck between a jail and a detox clinic. His mother, whose name I didn’t catch, looked to be around my age. Experts like to call us “millennials,” 20-somethings sorting out the world. She is one of the thousands of homeless peers most of us never consider when grumbling about dead end jobs, skyrocketing rent or lack of fulfillment.

She’s literally been pushed out of sight, in southeast, D.C., a part of town rarely visited by the roughly 12,500 young adults who move to D.C. each year.

I am one of those transplants. I landed here two years ago and lamented about sleeping in a friend’s laundry room for a week. It seemed like a real war story and I recounted it to fellow millennials at bars and dinner parties.

Entering through a single metal detector into the shelter, a line of young women my age filing in behind me, I couldn’t help feeling ashamed by the fact I’d seldom considered their lives here, without their own apartments. For months they sleep in spaces not much bigger than that laundry room.

The reality set in. The hallways reek of syrup, pepper and urine covered in bleach. Laminated signs hang on the walls, alerting residents to eat meals in the cafeteria to keep the roaches under control. Inside each room, scratched oak dressers and black bed frames with thin sleeping pads sit atop cold, white linoleum. Some of the women said there was no hot water that day.

“Having this experience makes you very humble. It makes you see life way out of the box,” Helena Pannell said.

She stares straight ahead toward a mural on the wall. “It’s always impossible until it’s done,” it reads. She wore purple jeans and argyle socks with plastic slip-on sandals. She covered her hair with a black shower cap. At 23, her soft brown eyes are heavy and tired. She’s married with four kids, ages 6, 4, 2 and 3 weeks. Bringing a new baby back home to a shelter “is disappointing,” she said.

“I try as much to keep a smile on my face instead of just crying about everything,” Pannell said scooting toward me. “I try to find a way out.”

She’s in school to be a nurse. Pannell has lived at D.C. General for eight months. The shelter’s $13.8 million-a-year operating budget provides her with three meals a day, a caseworker and a health clinic. Pannell says she rarely eats the food. Instead, she feeds her kids non-perishables she keeps in her room. Sometimes she and her kids get meals at families’ houses to give everyone a break from the shelter.

Pannell keeps to herself. She worries her neighbors aren’t the best influences. “When you come in here, you have to be mentally strong enough. If you are not, you will slip and fall between the cracks and just be down and out with a lot of other people.”

Pannell moved into the shelter after she lost her job. Her student loans from a medical training program piled up, and she found herself pregnant with her fourth child. She lost her apartment and lived with family until she and her husband decided a dilapidated shelter, 20 blocks east of the Capitol, was their best chance at getting a fresh start.