Sculpture in the Park, Art in the Park organizers look to a future without Invitational

Elizabeth Pendleton of Loveland sits Thursday next to a bronze sculpture by artist Robert McDermott while showing off Benson Park Sculpture Garden in Loveland to her brother and daughter, who are visiting from out of town. They joked that the sculpture was whispering sweet nothings in her ear. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Organizers of Art in the Park and Sculpture in the Park have new challenges to face as they look at ramifications of the Loveland Sculpture Invitational ending after 23 years.

More about the shows Sculpture in the Park: Visit sculptureinthepark.org or call 663-2940. Art in the Park: Visit http://artintheparkloveland.com or call the Lincoln Gallery at 663-2407. Loveland Sculpture Invitational: It ended its run this year after 23 years.

The three shows have been a highlight of Loveland events in early August for more than two decades. It was announced in late November that the Invitational, which normally takes place south of Loveland High School, will not continue in 2015.

The other two shows, Art in the Park (at North Lake Park) and Sculpture in the Park (at Benson Park Sculpture Garden), will go on.

Shared expenses

Committees and subcommittees will meet in coming months to hammer out how to handle shared payments like shuttles and road closures, said Polly Juneau with the Loveland High Plains Arts Council and organizer of Sculpture in the Park.

Advertisement

"We're planning to meet with the people who have organized the Invitational in the past to do a debriefing, understand the issues and talk about shared expenses we had and how they worked so we have a better idea of how we'll do it," Juneau said.

They also will work with the Thompson Valley Art League, which runs Art in the Park.

"Our first goal is to reduce costs," said Carolyn Pearce, president of the League. "Some of the costs were split three ways like the busing. We also want to reduce the police presence, which will save a tremendous amount of money."

Loveland resident Jeremy Schmid, 15, listens on as sculptor Jeff Bates explains some of the subtle details that make his found-object sculptures so unique in 2013 at the Loveland Sculpture Invitational held just south of Loveland High School. (Timothy Hurst / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

All of this will be discussed at a meeting in January.

"We're really sorry they (the Invitational) had to close the doors," Juneau said. "We always felt their show was a good complement to our show. It provided a lot of variety, a lot of opportunities for different artists and different skill levels."

Different fee structures

Sculpture in the Park accepts 160 sculptors into its show at Benson Park Sculpture Garden through a juried process and invitation. Artists pay a $100 booth fee and a commission to the show organizers at one-third the price of each sale.

They model the financial structure like a gallery that is just outdoors.

"From a gallery perspective, that's a low commission to take," Juneau said. "There are few galleries that you could go to that would have 20,000 people come through to see the work in a short period of time."

Visitors 12 years and older also pay a $7 entry fee to view the show.

Despite tough economic times, Juneau said they were able to make around $1 million in gross sales in each of the last few years — $1.4 million in 2014 — and donate several pieces each year to the park, as is the Loveland High Plains mission.

"We have done things over the last few years as we've recognized issues in the economy and the impact that would have on buyers," Juneau said. "We've changed ways we set up the show. We reduced the number of artists by a bit and gave each artist a larger display area to allow them to bring more pieces."

Loveland resident Kennedy Starr-Gray, 8, carves a piece of butternut as Don Woodard, a wood carving artist from Denver, looks on in 2014 at the Loveland Sculpture Invitational. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Juneau said the council also requires artwork to have been produced in the last three years or never shown at the gallery before, to keep the pieces new and fresh.

The ending Sculpture Invitational had a different structure, according to Isis DiLoreti.

The core premise by the Loveland Sculpture Group was to allow up-and-coming sculptors the opportunity to show their work without being long-time, established artists. The Sculpture Group asked for a $585 booth fee for a 10-foot-by-10-foot booth at the Invitational and did not take a commission on sold work.

The Sculpture Invitational earned money through the booth fee, the $7 entry fees, sponsorships and a silent auction.

In recent years, the Invitational has relied heavily on sponsorships.

The expense of setting up the field south of Loveland High School for electricity, tents and other logistics has gotten more and more prohibitive, DiLoreti said.

All net profits were donated each year to Thompson schools for art programs. The group has donated around $10,000 to Thompson schools in each of the last few years. In 2013, that number dropped to $5,000.

DiLoreti said the Invitational board discussed changing the fee structure to lower the booth fee and take commission on sold pieces, but rejected this concept in the end because it went against the core values on which the Invitational had originally been based.

Another option was to add two-dimensional art to the exhibits. However that, again, went against the original premise of it being a sculpture show.

"They wanted to stick to their roots and not compromise that," DiLoreti said.

In the end, she said the board decided to be socially and financially responsible by ending the show on a high note, based on their financial analysis of the future.

The Loveland Sculpture Group will remain a nonprofit and DiLoreti said they are open to opportunities in the future.

New opportunities

The deadline for submissions to Sculpture in the Park is the end of January.

"We are trying to reach out to artists from the other show; we don't have the database on those artists," Juneau said. "We welcome their application to the show."

She expects to see many more applicants than normal to this year's Sculpture in the Park. They usually receive around 200 applicants.

"I think it is very positive," Juneau said. "The more we have to choose from, the more it will have a real impact on the quality of the work."

Pearce said her first panic moment after learning about the Invitational not coming back was those shared expenses. Then she started realizing it could change a lot of other things about Art in the Park.

"There is a good possibility that there will be some artists who want to have a booth at Art in the Park," Pearce said.

The Thompson Valley Art League may set aside a certain area in the park on the north area specifically for sculptors where artwork can be set up outside the booths.

Details will be finalized in early 2015.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com