They were afraid of his intellect. They could not control him. So they ran him away.

By Giles Perkins, an attorney in Birmingham. He served as executive director of the Alabama Democratic Party from 1997 to 1999, and is a former candidate for the Attorney General office in Alabama.

I told Artur Davis three years ago that his relocation to the Republican Party would be a short stay. It just wasn't his fit. He wants to figure out how to give everyone the oppurtunity he realized. Not a chance he could do that there. And now he wants to come home. People see this as complicated. I do not. I think we should spend more time on his coming home than his going away. We should take him back.

I have not forgotten Artur's failings. His vote on the Affordable Care Act was boneheaded at best. His thin skin at losing pained me. His flirtation with the Republican leadership, who treated him like a mascot, was sad to watch. I will not forget that he let us down.

I will also not forget his brilliance and grace. When he came on the scene, he was the voice of the future. He is an honest man. He is a complex thinker, thoughtful and nuanced.

My favorite speech of his just deals with his childhood. He was in a hotel in 1988, just him and his mom. They had lost their place to live. As he says, "the Davis family was facing their own housing crisis." In that space he was watching television and he watched a speech given by Jessie Jackson. He found hope and ambition. It changed his life.

I see that little boy in a cheap hotel room. It's hard not to think he was an unfinished work then, and he remains one today. He is still finding his way in politics. He won in spite of his discomfort with the game. He never understood party bosses, and they never understood him.

Ultimately they ran him off. They did not want his independence. They were afraid of his intellect. They could not control him. So they ran him away. On the theory that nobody could work with him. These guys are friends of mine, but I think they will each own that they did not want Artur around then.

And they don't want him now. And you can be sure they will try and prevent his return. They will use an arcane party rule to try and keep him off the ballot. It's called the Radney rule. It basically says if you supported a Republican last election, you cannot be a Democrat now.

Tom Radney was a friend and mentor to me. The rule that bears his name made sense when it was passed thirty years ago. It protected the Alabama Democratic Party from those who did not share our views. It makes little sense now. It is no longer a tool of progress, but instead one used to wield power and to disenfranchise. I do not know how any Democrat looking at our situation could maintain that we should keep people out of the party.

But that's a different conversation. This one is about Artur. He has made us all angry. I understand why. He is not one to kiss rings. He walked away while we toiled in the fields. I appreciate the power brokers wanting to protect those who have been loyal. But democracy does not rest with the power brokers. It is in the hands of the voters. Let's let him win or lose at the ballot box. He should not be sunk in one of those smoke-filled rooms he so hates.

We as a party in decline should take talent where we can find it. It is incredible that any Democrat would have the audacity to think we should turn people away. I would take a yellow dog's qualifying fee.

But Artur is much more than that. He was once the best we had. He has immeasurable talent. Thinking about him, I leave the practical and follow my faith. I am glad he is coming home. Let us go and kill the fatted calf.