Open letter to the President

Brooklyn: Dear President Obama, I am a woman who has worked my whole life in America. I’ve taken one week off in 15 years. My father and six of his brothers fought for this country in World War II. I earn $30,000 a year, and support myself and my college student daughter. Please explain a few things to me:

I recently filed my taxes and was told that even after having my employer take the maximum amount from my weekly salary, that it is still not enough and I have to pay an additional thousand dollars. I am also being fined because I don’t have health insurance. I inquired about Obamacare and, I am sorry, but I simply cannot afford to pay the quotes I was given as a monthly payment. It would leave me a choice as to whether I put food on the table or pay for health care.

I don’t live the high life. I rent a small apartment and don’t have a vehicle. My brother is a senior citizen and disabled and nets a little over $1,000 a month, with which he is supposed to rent an apartment, pay utilities, deductibles on his doctor visits and prescriptions. There are weeks when he cannot stretch his money to buy food, yet he was told he is not eligible for food stamps. Have you added up the cost of living? Do you know that you can’t rent a studio apartment here in Brooklyn for under $1,000?

The worst part of it is that every time I go into a local supermarket, I see young, able-bodied people using foods stamps to purchase items that I, as a hard-working individual, can’t afford. Where is the compensation and incentive to be a hard-working American? Free medical care, food stamps and government assistance seem to be available only to people not born in this country or those playing the system.

With all due respect, I would love to know how you think this is justified .Kathie Dunn

Of workers and whiners

Lyndhurst, N.J.: Don’t try to work harder to get out of your low-paying job, or even wonder why you’re there in the first place. Instead, blame everybody else. This has become such an issue since President Obama has been in office. What a role model he has been to us all. Penalize those who bust their behinds to be successful and hand out to those who just want it because they think they deserve it. Chris Perry

Free riders

Flushing: I just happened to read the entry rules for a box-top contest and noticed that it was “open to only legal residents of the 50 United States and Washington, D.C.” This is just a waste of space on the package. Think about it: Why would an illegal resident even want to win a box-top contest, when they can get everything from the government free, like food stamps, health care, education and all of life’s other necessities? Does the contest company really investigate if an entrant is a legal resident? I thought it was now illegal to ask someone if they are legal. God forbid if you ask a person for identification before they can vote! James J. Moglia

Every dollar counts

Newark, Calif.: While I believe Gwyneth Paltrow trying the SNAP budget diet brought attention to an important subject, I think it also diminished how difficult budgeting for groceries on the program is. While tips to maximize the SNAP budget are helpful, many families do not have time to break down a whole chicken or to do comparison shopping to get the week’s best deals while providing meals for a family on such a low budget (the average household receives only $275 a month). Yes, things like buying from a bulk grocery store can be useful, but Paltrow makes living on the SNAP budget seem a lot easier than it really is. Michelle Luu

Fair pay for all

Stamford, Conn.: It is a shame that states like New York are not willing to increase the minimum wage to $15, as people are requesting. That would still not be enough for all the work of janitors, fast-food workers and especially medical helpers who work with the public, feed adults, change their diapers, give them medication, change beds and clothing and on and on. The people they care for are our parents, aunts, uncles and neighbors — people who deserve decency and respect in their final days on earth. I truly believe this, because my mother is a nursing home resident and getting the good care she deserves. And people earning less than $15 an hour is a crime! Mahatma Gandhi once wrote: “A nation’s greatness is measured by how it treats its weakest members.” We are doing an injustice to these individuals by not taking care of those who care for us. Nelson Jimenez

Blinding emeralds

Danbury, Conn.: We know that charlatans tend to follow the money, so why would an esteemed physician like Dr. Mehmet Oz compromise his reputation to sell weight-loss potions that have absolutely no scientific credibility (“Sack this quack!” April 17)? Is his pursuit of money so blinding that he has somehow rationalized the sale of products he has to know are pure fantasy in terms of their effectiveness? Medicine is a very serious pursuit. Oz is becoming the wizard of phony weight loss. All we need is Dorothy to make the fairy tale complete. Richard D. Glehan

The wonderful wizard

Nanuet, N.Y.: I cannot speak to the efficacy, or lack thereof, of the natural remedies and diets presented on Dr. Mehmet Oz’s TV show. I can, however, speak from very personal experience about Oz’s great gifts as a heart surgeon. I owe my past 12 years of life, the gift of my presence to raise my children from toddlers to teenagers, to the fact that this brilliant and kind man stepped up and performed a surgery that other surgeons deemed a little too dicey to attempt. Throughout this ordeal, he treated me with honesty, compassion, confidence and humor. “You can ask me anything,” he said, and he meant it. He is truly a remarkable human being and a great healer, and I simply cannot sit idly by while he is smeared as a quack. Oz’s presence as a surgeon and teacher at Columbia is certainly far more valuable to the hospital than the “endowment from Oprah” that this Dr. Henry Miller suggests they hope he will deliver. The very high regard in which Oz is held was very evident well before he was a TV star. Deborah Van Ness

Short term, we hope

Ithaca: Should we be worried about Mayor de Blasio’s apparent short-term memory loss (“Hoof and mouth,” April 17)? While in Omaha, he was asked about the apparent contradiction in a progressive mayor arbitrarily putting NYC’s carriage drivers out of work. In response, de Blasio touted the electric touring car idea. Did he forget that his own bill proposes giving the drivers green cab permits, not electric cars in Central Park? Kathryn Baker

Get on with it

Long Beach, L.I.: To Voicer Robert Neglia: Please don’t align your vision with that of America, as you obviously don’t see clearly. Your blatant sexism reveals nothing about Hillary Clinton but a lot about you. Republicans like yourself should take the advice that Katharine Hepburn gave to Henry Fonda in “On Golden Pond”: “You have a great big chip on your shoulder. . . . I suggest you get on with it.” Dana Fuchs

Rubber and glue

Milford, Conn.: Charles Krauthammer’s latest column was titled “The predictable Hillary show” (April 17). Of course, his title each week could be “The predictable Charles Krauthammer column.” Clifford Silvers

Christie crossover

Alexandria, Va.: Since he’s proposed income-tested confiscation and redistribution of monies paid into Social Security, why doesn’t Chris Christie just change political parties? It would certainly liven the Democratic primary process up, and since he’s already considered a moderate Republican in a very crowded field, it would probably improve his chances of becoming President. Clinton’s performance so far shows she’s far from a given. Karen Ann DeLuca

Space is the place

Bronx: If Voicer Rose Johnson had been keeping up with things since President Obama was first elected in 2008, she would know that the reason he has not released his school records, financial records or passport has nothing to do with arrogance. The proven facts are he never went to school and snuck into this country under the cover of darkness when his spaceship landed from Mars after refueling in Kenya. Jonathan Kleid

The force is with him

Astoria: Joe Neumaier’s review of the new “Star Wars” trailer was spot on (“Skywalker’s the limit in an epic peek,” April 17). Nice job. Anthony Garcia