Grassroots Commentary Gender Agenda Masks Failed Leadership

“The Democrats have created gender confusion… [In New York City], you can be fined for not calling people ‘ze’ or ‘hir’ if that’s the pronoun they demand to use… It’s speech crimes and thought crimes… This is… Mr. Orwell (knock, knock), Mr. Orwell, you’re breakfast is ready.” —WMAL’s conservative encyclopedia Chris Plante

“And it’s all to keep you excited, keep you watching, like you watch … a car wreck or a… wrestling match. That’s just what it’s like — professional wrestling. It’s staged and it’s fake and it doesn’t mean anything.” —Florida governor Fred Picker played by Larry Hagman in “Primary Colors” (1998)

Can all not agree that 2016 is shaping up as the pettiest, most small-ball and juvenile presidential contest in modern times? Voters must see TV like mindless cotton candy entertainment: sugar, some color and spin with little substance — and no worth. Thankfully, we are beyond the undercard, the freak show phase of Donald Trump’s orange spray tan and Marco Rubio’s small hands. Now we’re rapidly progressing to the red meat in the contest: Hillary’s bold-faced lies and obvious corruption (read: Charity-gate and Server-gate). However, Hillary’s “damn emails” are not something socialist Bernie Sanders will ever address. (Rest assured, Mr. Trump will not be so reticent.) Meanwhile, the real shocker here is not the unconventional Republican nomination of Donald Trump, it is the disappointment hoodwinked “feel the Bern” millennial supporters will experience when their aged Bolshevik anti-hero meekly withdraws from the race. Then, two truths will be painfully apparent to them. First, he was just in the race to promote his hard leftist, anti-American agenda. Second, he was only a stooge to make inevitable front-runner Hillary appear to be more mainstream (read: more palatable to the electorate). Unfortunately, Mrs. Clinton has neither her husband’s good ol' boy roguish charm nor Mr. Obama’s superficial shiny, fresh-faced newness to carry her to victory.

Yet Mrs. Clinton, same as Mr. Obama, can always depend on the propagandist Fourth Estate. Indeed, facts and/or reality are never an impediment to the habitual Kool-Aid-drinking MSM that is always at the ready to spread disjointed political spin. One prime example is the pure fiction of America’s economic “recovery” under Mr. Obama. Still, he’ll keep claiming illusory successes (read: the bureaucratic waste that is Obamacare; the “deal” soon to make Iran a nuclear state; his worldwide, bowing “apology tour”, etc.). For their part, the sycophantic press will dutifully, and unquestioningly, transmit the White House’s talking points as dictated. The actuality that this de facto emperor has no clothes doesn’t seem to matter to this small circle fest (read: Obama advisor Ben Rhodes' brother, David, is CBS News President) of elitist powers-brokers. Meanwhile, Mr. Obama runs out the clock on his presidential term as a Tiger Woods wannabe. From his caustic fundamental transformation, what remains of our culture is so much the better.

With chaotic cities like Ferguson and Baltimore periodically erupting in mob violence and Black Lives Matter anarchy; with 93 million Americans out of work; with our nation in the mire of 19 trillion dollar debt; and establishment politicians of both parties not heeding the Constitution or the Bill of Rights, our society is literally falling apart by its seams. Why then the progressive myopic obsession with the trivial, the politics of gender and sexuality? Specifically, why the sudden urgency in the Obama years for gay marriage? Or its latest iteration, unisex locker and shower rooms, and gender-neutral bathrooms? Why do those now “in charge” go so far as not only to punish free speech, but also to promote a new set of pronouns that appropriate — and neuter — the English language itself?

This formula of semantic control is quite elegant in its simplicity: those who mold, modify, and impose themselves on the language of others determine the political discourse that shapes the country. In retrospect, word-burning political correctness makes certain communication (and their related thoughts) taboo. As an example, Facebook’s ever-expanding list of progressive gender options, now at 71, is a case and point. Keep the oblivious masses distracted from the big picture: lawless, anti-American crazies, at every level of government, running the country literally into the ground. As evidence to any clear-thinking person, their soup to nuts failures at home and abroad. How is this feat accomplished? By the MSM’s relentless focus on minutia like gender-bending labels or who uses which bathroom stalls. Worse, in New York City there is a new set of unnecessary pronouns to decode and master under threat of civil penalty. It’s all the metaphorical equivalent of rearranging the deck chairs on Titanic: America with Big Government, word-obscuring fascists at her helm. Mr. Orwell’s dystopian “1984” nightmare realized with entitled Big Sister Hillary waiting impatiently in the wings. Yet the scramble on Mr. Orwell’s breakfast plate isn’t an omelet, it’s the heaping mess of America mangled unrecognizable from within.

Trump’s tonic is truth-telling. A quality most essential to our 45th commander-in-chief.

David L. Hunter is on Twitter and blogs at davidlhunter.blogspot.com. He is published in The Washington Post, The Washington Times, Patriot Post, FrontPage Mag, and extensively in Canada Free Press and American Thinker.