IRVING, Texas--(BUSINESS WIRE)--VHA Inc. and UHC, which recently combined to form the largest member-owned health care company in the country, is one of 39 health care collaborative networks selected to participate in the Transforming Clinical Practice Initiative (TCPI), announced today by Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell. VHA and UHC will provide technical assistance support to help equip clinicians in their national network with tools, information, and support needed to improve quality of care, increase patients’ access to information, and spend health care dollars more wisely.

“Supporting doctors and other health care professionals change the way they work is critical to improving quality and spending our health care dollars more wisely,” said Secretary Burwell. “These awards will give patients more of the information they need to make informed decisions about their care and give clinicians access to information and support to improve care coordination and quality outcomes.”

As a national Practice Transformation Network, VHA-UHC will work with approximately 26,000 clinicians to help expand their quality improvement capacity, learn from one another, and achieve common goals of improved care, better health, and reduced cost.

More specifically, the VHA-UHC network will focus on improving access to care, quality of care, efficiency, patient satisfaction, and outcomes across all participating organizations through a multi-pronged strategy that includes:

Development of policies and use of guidelines, checklists, and assessment resources with clear action steps and tracking tools to measure progress

Oversight and advisory services with individual organization coaching and facilitation

Facilitation of leader engagement in improvement projects

Use of data for decision-making and evaluation

Introduction to a collaborative change management model to improve outcomes

“We are extremely pleased to have been selected by Health and Human Services to establish a national network as part of the Transforming Clinical Practice Initiative. We firmly believe collaborative networks like these will help speed improvements in the quality and value of the care delivered across clinical settings,” said Curt Nonomaque, president and chief executive officer.

These awards are part of a comprehensive strategy advanced by the Affordable Care Act that enables new levels of coordination, continuity, and integration of care, while transitioning volume-driven systems to value-based, patient-centered, health care services. It builds upon successful models and programs such as the Hospital Value-Based Purchasing Organization Program, Partnership for Patients with Hospital Engagement Networks, and Accountable Care Organizations.

For more information about the VHA-UHC Practice Transformation Network contact Cindy Abel at Abel@uhc.edu. For more information on the Transforming Clinical Practice Initiative, please visit: http://innovation.cms.gov/initiatives/Transforming-Clinical-Practices/.

Click to Tweet

About the Combined Organization

Effective April 1, 2015, VHA, the national health care network of not-for-profit hospitals, and UHC, the alliance of the nation’s leading academic medical centers, combined into a single organization. The combined organization includes Novation, the health care services company they already jointly own. The new entity is the largest member-owned health care company in the country and is dedicated to leading health care innovation, creating knowledge and fostering collaboration to help our members thrive. The company serves more than 5,200 health system members and affiliates as well as 118,000 non-acute health care customers. Members range from independent, community-based health care organizations to large, integrated systems and academic medical centers, and it represents more than $50 billion in annual purchasing volume. Headquarters are in Irving, Texas, with locations in Chicago and other cities across the United States. A new name for the combined organization will be announced in Jan. 2016.

For more information, visit vha.com, uhc.edu and novationco.com. Follow us on Twitter (@VHAInc, @UHC_edu and @NovationNews).