Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump delivers a speech in the T. Ed Garrison Arena on Wednesday.

By Kirk Brown of the Independent Mail

PENDLETON — Seeking to build momentum after a decisive victory in the New Hampshire primary, Donald Trump fired up nearly 5,000 boisterous supporters during a rally Wednesday night at Clemson University's T. Ed Garrison Livestock Arena.

Looking ahead to South Carolina's Feb. 20 presidential primary, Trump said, "If we win here, we're going to run the table."

The event marked Trump's second campaign visit to Anderson County. He came to the Civic Center of Anderson in October, but that facility was booked Wednesday night, forcing him to choose another location.

"What the hell kind of building is this?" asked Trump after he took the stage in the chilly arena, which features a dirt floor that is often used for rodeos and other equestrian events.

Trump hit on his key issues during an unscripted 50-minute speech. He vowed to improve trade, repeal the Affordable Care Act and improve care for military veterans as part of his effort to "make America great again."

Trump also repeated his pledge to build a wall on the nation's southern border to stop illegal immigrants from entering the U.S.

"We have 179,000 criminal illegal immigrants," he said.

The Manhattan real estate mogul spent considerable time berating one of his rivals, former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, calling him a "schlepper." The term of Yiddish origin refers to someone who is inept or stupid.

"The last thing we need is another Bush," he said.

Many of the people arrived at the arena two hours before the rally started. They passed the time munching on popcorn and listening to music playing on elevated speakers.

Jim Yates, 69, of Laurens, was wearing a large sombrero while attending his ninth Trump rally. He said the sombrero signifies his support for Trump's views on illegal immigration.

"Mr. Trump believes in being here legally," Yates said.

Retired teacher Rick Bassett, 60, came to the rally with his wife.

"We love the fact that he says what he wants to say," said Bassett, who taught physics and chemistry at Easley High School.

Brittany Testa, a 20-year-old sophomore at Clemson University, said she admires Trump because "he's bold and he speaks from his heart."

Cassie Simpson, a real estate agent who lives on Lake Secession, came to the event wearing a Trump T-shirt. She said she wore the shirt while showing houses on Wednesday.

"I think he's awesome," she said. ""He doesn't have anyone pushing his buttons financially."

Trump has built a reputation for drawing large crowds to his rallies. More than 5,000 people came to see him at the Civic Center last year, breaking the facility's all-time attendance record.

The director of Trump's campaign in South Carolina says he also has prepared an impressive ground game in the state that includes field offices in Columbia, Greenville, Myrtle Beach and a satellite office in Charleston.

"We've had offices on the ground longer than any other candidates," said state Rep. James Merrill, a Republican from Charleston.

Merrill said Trump has had between eight and 12 paid campaign staffers working in South Carolina for months. He also said the campaign has thousands of eager volunteers, many of whom are knocking on doors and calling voters.

Polls indicated that Trump had a lead in Iowa before that state's presidential caucus earlier this month, but pundits have said that Texas Sen. Ted Cruz won the contest largely because he had a better campaign operation than Trump.

Although polls show Trump has maintained a healthy lead in South Carolina in the Republican race for the White House, the effectiveness of his campaign apparatus will be put to the test in the state's "First in the South" primary.

Trump wasn't the only Republican White House hopeful in South Carolina on Wednesday. Bush, Cruz, Florida Sen. Marco Rubio and Ohio Gov. John Kasich also held events in the state.

Meanwhile, the GOP field continued to shrink with Wednesday's decisions by Carly Fiorina and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie to end their campaigns.

Trump decided to hold his first campaign rally after the New Hampshire primary in Anderson County, Merrill said, because "we all know that neck of the woods is going to be crucial" in the upcoming primary.

Follow Kirk Brown on Twitter @KirkBrown_AIM