The Massachusetts Health Connector will pay another $35 million to CGI, the company that created its problematic health insurance exchange website, as part of an agreement allowing the state to sever ties with CGI.

"This transition agreement allows us to close a difficult chapter in the (health insurance exchange) project and move us forward," said Maydad Cohen, a special assistant to Gov. Deval Patrick overseeing the fixes to the health insurance system.

Patrick said in a statement, "This is a pragmatic way to wind up a frustrating relationship. CGI has been a disappointing partner. This agreement resolves intellectual property issues so that we can move forward in building a website that works."

The state announced in March that it was severing ties with CGI after the new health insurance exchange, required by the Affordable Care Act, was plagued by serious glitches that left individuals unable to use the website to enroll in subsidized health insurance plans. The state has been managing the problems with a mix of temporary coverage that has cost the state millions of dollars, coverage extensions for existing public programs and labor-intensive manual workarounds. The state is now working to have a functioning system by the next open enrollment period in November. Massachusetts could join the federal healthcare.gov website, if it cannot get its own system working in time.

Since March, the state has been finalizing a transition agreement, which would allow CGI to transfer its knowledge and its ownership of the computer code to the state and its new technology contractor.

The state's original contract with CGI was for $89 million with payments due as parts of the project were completed. Until now, the state had paid just $17 million. The agreement signed Friday will cost the state another $35 million.

Cohen said $20 million of that will cover services that CGI and its subcontractors have already provided, including components of the system that the state is using successfully. Cohen said the state has not paid CGI for its work since November. "They've been working for free for nearly 8 months," he said.

The remaining $15 million will cover the continuing cost of operating and maintaining the system as well as the cost of sharing CGI's knowledge of the system and its staff with the state and its new technology vendor, Optum. CGI will remain involved in the transition for up to 12 weeks, after which the ties will be severed.

Massachusetts also reserves the right to sue CGI to recoup up to $12 million. Cohen said Attorney General Martha Coakley's office has begun an investigation under the False Claims Act to determine whether there are grounds for a lawsuit. The False Claims Act lets the attorney general sue a company that submits false claims for payment to the state government related to contracting or purchasing issues.

Brad Puffer, a spokesman for Coakley, said in a statement, "The failings of the CGI-developed web site have been unacceptable, and we are conducting an investigation into their actions to seek to recover money back for taxpayers. As that investigation is ongoing, we have no further comment at this time."

Both the state and CGI agreed not to pursue any litigation beyond that.

CGI spokeswoman Linda Odorisio said in a statement, "This agreement recognizes the important contributions made by CGI throughout the project and during the past three months, when hundreds of CGI professionals stayed on the job to help the Commonwealth clear its backlog, improve functionality, and prepare for a new deployment plan." She said the 12-week transition period will allow the state and the company "to best utilize the capabilities already in place and minimize the loss of knowledge and expertise."

Odosorio said CGI "will offer its full cooperation during the course of any examination of the Connector."

The federal government originally gave Massachusetts a $174 million grant to develop the new health insurance system. Given the technological problems, the state does not yet have a full analysis of the final cost.

The Health Connector is current employing the technology company Optum to pursue two separate tracks to get a working site. It is customizing off-the-shelf software called hCentive, and it is also looking at joining the federal health exchange website if it cannot get hCentive working in time. Cohen said Friday that the state appears to be "on track" to get the hCentive software up and running by the open enrollment period.

State officials have estimated the cost of the "dual-track" plan at $120 million. But Secretary of Administration and Finance Glen Shor said the state is still negotiating its contract with Optum and is also looking at the availability of other federal grants for the Affordable Care Act that can be directed toward the project.

"Because there's still a number of moving parts, we're not able to say here's the cost of the project moving forward," Shor said. "We're moving very expeditiously to resolving that."

The agreement is unlikely to blunt criticism of the project. Republican gubernatorial candidate Charlie Baker has used the website debacle to criticize the Patrick administration and Coakley, who is a Democratic candidate for governor. "The Massachusetts Health Connector disaster was completely avoidable, as administrators knew the system was not ready, yet decided to launch it anyway last fall," Baker said in a statement. "The botched implementation of the Health Connector website has left thousands in health care limbo while wasting hundreds of millions of taxpayer dollars. Investigations cannot undo the taxpayer dollars wasted and the disruption of families' access to health care."

Josh Archambault, director of health care policy at the conservative-leaning Pioneer Institute, pointed out that the latest money is being taken from U.S. taxpayers not to fund health care or health insurance, but to fund information technology infrastructure.

"If this amount of money was spent in the private sector with little to show for it, it would be tied to some form of accountability for those that failed in their oversight role," Archambault said in an email. "Unfortunately for taxpayers, that has not been the case in the Commonwealth."

This story has been updated to include Archambault's comments.

CGI Transition Agreement