Topics: CIA, drug war, GlobalPost, Mexican Drug War, Mexico, narcotics, U.S. State Department, Video, War on Drugs, News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on GlobalPost

In December 2009, Mexican marines acting on US intelligence stormed an apartment block in the Mexican spa-town of Cuernavaca and shot dead the drug lord Arturo Beltran Leyva, “The Beard,” during a ferocious firefight.

A marine who died in the operation was given a hero’s ceremony before his body was taken back to his village in the swampy state of Tabasco. Gunmen entered his candlelit wake and killed his mother, brother, aunt and sister in an apparent revenge attack ordered by the cartel.

Even in a drug war that has claimed more than 70,000 lives, such cold-blooded murder of an entire family shocked this nation.

On Wednesday, Mexican soldiers arrested the man who headed this cartel, Hector Beltran Leyva, alias “The H,” brother of the deceased Arturo. Unlike the Beard however, Hector was nabbed without a shot when he was in a seafood restaurant in San Miguel de Allende, the haunt of retired Americans and bohemian Hollywood stars.

This latest arrest under President Enrique Peña Nieto brings down a dynasty that has been at the very heart of Mexico’s drug war and tears apart a web of subterfuge stretching through Mexican and US security agencies. Wanted on both sides of the border, Hector Beltran Leyva is linked to widespread corruption networks and possibly to an attack on US government agents.

Arturo and Hector were the elder and senior partners of four Beltran Leyva brothers, controlling billion dollar cocaine, marijuana, heroin and crystal meth routes from their native Sinaloa state.

A July 2009 grand jury indictment in New York names Hector and Arturo Beltran Leyva as being behind tons of cocaine hitting American streets over two decades.

“Through a network of corrupt police and political contacts, [they] directed a large-scale narcotics transportation network involving the use of land, air, and sea transportation assets,” the indictment states. They “employed ‘sicarios,’ or hit men, who carried out hundreds of acts of violence, including murders, kidnappings, tortures and violent collections of drug debts.”

The US put out $5 million bounties on both brothers through its narcotics rewards program.

An informant responded to give vital information that led to marines shooting dead Arturo in 2009. This source was duly paid his $5 million reward, although it took almost two years for him to receive the money, a senior US law enforcement officer told GlobalPost following that payment.

“We pay up on our promises,” the official said. “To capture these guys you need good human intelligence and that costs money.”

Paying vast sums of money to confidential informants has come under criticism, as some have been found to themselves be criminals, such as one Homeland Security informant who carried out murders in Ciudad Juarez.

US Drug Enforcement Administration agents had originally tried to work with the Mexican army to take down Arturo. However, the soldiers refused to move on US intelligence, raising suspicions of corruption in Mexico’s army. The Americans turned to the Mexican marines, run by different leadership.

Former US Ambassador to Mexico Carlos Pascual detailed this frustration in a cable to Washington later revealed by WikiLeaks.

The marine unit “is well trained, well-equipped, and has shown itself capable of responding quickly to actionable intelligence. Its success puts the army in the difficult position of explaining why it has been reluctant to act on good intelligence and conduct operations against high-level targets.”