de•con•struc•tion/ˌdēkənˈstrəkSHən/noun a method of critical analysis of philosophical and literary language that emphasizes the internal workings of language and conceptual systems, the relational quality of meaning, and the assumptions implicit in forms of expression.

Of course, one wouldn't expect Donny to understand that notion even though he's very, very smart, but one really needs to explore the elaborate, if not labyrinthine, Trumpian discourse that Trump is so very fond of using since, in fact, it consists of some of the most intricate rhetorical tools ever used. So, perhaps, the best thing to do is begin with a few of Donny's discourses and try as best as possible (without the help of Derrida) to see what, in fact, Donny is talking about.

Trump on health insurance:

"...I want everyone to have coverage. I do want people to have coverage. I think that a great form could be, and I love the free market, I love the way it works. But we never had a free market. Even before Obamacare, was it really free market? As an example, we are in New York right now, and when I wanted to bid out my health insurance and all sorts of things, we had boundaries. I could only go in New York. If I wanted to bid it out to a company from California, New Jersey, anywhere, and I was getting no bids. I've evolved on that issue. I've evolved on numerous issues."

This particular example of Trompian discourse owes a lot to Samuel Beckett since Beckett was a master of iteration, poetic iteration. One sees that homage clearly in this excerpt in which Trump (getting in touch with his inner Beckett) truly shows his mastery of anaphora (repetition of the same word or group of words at the beginning of successive clauses, sentences, or lines) when he states and then restates "want everyone to have coverage." A brilliant rhetorical opening device tantamount to The Stonewall attack in chess. Trump then brilliantly maneuvers from that opening and shifts to how that coverage could be accomplished; namely, through the free market which he initially establishes as "a great form" that alludes to the "free market" that he states clearly then reinforces with the how he loves the "way it (free market) works. Taking the negative approach by saying there never was a "free market" (in Trumpian terms) even before Obamacare, he suggests, in a brilliant tautological maneuver, that a free market didn't exist. As only Trump can do, in a brilliant rhetorical example of expolitio (repetition of the same idea, changing either its words, its delivery, or the general treatment it is given) he then goes on to give an example of bidding out his health insurance in New York, but was precluded from doing so in California, New Jersey or "anywhere" he couldn't. He then concludes by harkening back to his inner Beckett by using anaphora again by stating "I've evolved on that issue. I've evolved on numerous issues." Just this segmented discourse alone shows Trump's rhetorical mastery and by the end of that segment we clearly understand his keen and innovative approach to the issue of health care in the United States.

Trump on immigration:

"Well the way, look, Mexico has not treated us well. Mexico treats us as though we are stupid people, which of course our leaders are. I don't blame Mexico. China is even worse. ...you force them because we give Mexico a fortune. Mexico makes a fortune because of us a wall is a tiny little peanut compared to the kind of money... I would do something very severe unless they contributed or gave us the money to build the wall. I'd build it, I'd build it very nicely, I'm very good at building things."

Trump opens with the classic use of aposiopesis (a sudden breaking off in the middle of a sentence as if unable or unwilling to proceed) which is one his rhetorical hallmarks. But before he brilliantly shifts to using synecdoche (a figure of speech in which a term for a part of something refers to the whole of something, or vice versa) by homogenizing all of Mexico he uses metonymy (a rhetorical or stylistic device in which one thing is named or referred to by the name of another) in which "we are stupid people" is the equivalent of "the people of the United States" while, at the same time, brilliantly using syncrisis (a rhetorical device that emphasizes the comparison of opposites) to distinguish the United States as a whole to "our leaders." This is a refrain from his famous Trump Tower Escalator Speech (June 16, 2015) in which he said: "When Mexico sends its people, they're not sending their best. They're not sending you. They're not sending you. They're sending people that have lots of problems, and they're bringing those problems with us. They're bringing drugs. They're bringing crime. They're rapists. And some, I assume, are good people." However, in this speech he doesn't blame Mexico as he did in his earlier speech, but deftly shifts to using apostrophism (a manner of speech in which the speaker continually interrupts his train of thought and continuity of subject by interjecting subordinate ideas and comments) by shifting the attention to China only to return to Mexico through the use of both aposiopesis and paradox (anomalous juxtaposition of incongruous ideas for the sake of striking exposition or unexpected insight) based on a previously unremarked remark on "fortune." The notion of fortune is reiterated in the next sentence and through a masterful use of apostrophism shifts and interjects the subject of the "wall" which, metonymically becomes the "tiny peanut" before returning to his classic use of aposiopesis again before shifting to stating he would do something "severe" (presumably to the Mexicans) unless they "contributed" or "gave us money" (a brilliant use of redundancy) to "build the wall." Resorting to his favorite us of anaphora, Trump concludes by using the time honored rhetorical device of symbloce (the combination of anaphora and epistrophe: beginning a series of lines, clauses, or sentences with the same word or phrase while simultaneously repeating a different word or phrase at the end of each element in this series) by stating "I'd build it, I'd build it very nicely, I'm very good at building things." Sheer rhetorical genius and a clear plan on how to deal with the eleven million undocumented immigrants living in the United States today.

Lastly, Trump on global warming and the Chinese:

"Well of course I'm being sarcastic you know... (but) it's a little bit serious, there's a little bit of seriousness there. Look, we are restricting our factories much more than China, I go to China. They have factories that are much more competitive, I'm not saying friendly, but they're certainly not environmentally friendly. I'm a huge believer in clean air, I'm not a huge believer in the global warming phenomenon...This very expensive GLOBAL WARMING b******* has got to stop. Our planet is freezing, record low temps, and our GW scientists are stuck in ice."

Trump begins with a beautiful refutation by stating he was being "sarcastic," and following it with his masterful use of anaphora in repeating "little bit serious" and a "little bit of seriousness." What Trump does better than any other politician (except for Lincoln) is how he can make someone think he's talking about one thing, but is talking about something else. For example, he states that he's being "sarcastic" (a rhetorical device to mock with a purpose to amuse and hurt someone or some section of society) when, in fact, he was actually being "ironic" (the intended meaning is different from the actual meaning of the words). He begins by stating he's going to be satirical, but is ironic which casts a completely different tone to what he's saying before he goes on to talk about China. Instead of continuing along the lines of China and global warming, Trump returns to his classic use of aposiopesis before returning to the relationship between China's unfriendly attitude towards the environment and their manufacturing. By privileging his belief in "clean air," he can then follow that with not being a believer in "global warming." For Trump, these things are mutually exclusive and his rhetoric is quite clear about that since he contends global warming is "b*******" and has to stop. The reason for that is global warming is not the culprit, but weather is and his proof is in the cold winters and scientists being stuck in ice in Antarctica. It's patently clear, or should be, that no other Republican hopeful for the nomination to be the GOP nominee for the POTUS has the rhetorical acumen and persuasive rhetorical skills that Trump has and for that reason America has reason to believe that a Trump Presidency will, in fact, make America great again.