Please join me for a National Black HIV/AIDS Awareness Day (NBHAAD) Twitter chat/”town hall meeting” on Friday, February 7, at 12:00 p.m. Eastern Time.

The Twitter town hall is co-sponsored by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and AIDSVu , along with the NBHAAD Strategic Leadership Committee and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) . The theme is, “How do we end the HIV epidemic in Black America?” and it promises to be an interesting and lively discussion about this very important topic!

I will serve as a co-host of the chat, using my Twitter handle @DrDeanCDC , along with Dr. Patrick Sullivan (Twitter: @AIDSVu ), Professor of Epidemiology at the Rollins School of Public Health at Emory University and Principal Researcher for AIDSVu, a compilation of interactive online maps that visualize the domestic HIV epidemic presented in partnership by Emory University and Gilead Sciences, Inc. Dr. Sullivan and I are pleased to bring together leaders from the public health sector, as well as from faith and business communities, to discuss the role that we all can play in increasing HIV testing, prevention, treatment, and care for African Americans at risk for and living with HIV.

The online event will be opened by CDC Director Dr. Tom Frieden (Twitter:@DrFriedenCDC ). We also will be joined by the staff of Dr. J. Nadine Gracia, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority Health and the Director of the Office of Minority Health (Twitter: @MinorityHealth ), who will share information about how the Affordable Care Act impacts people at risk for and living with HIV; Dr. Jonathan Mermin (Twitter: @DrMerminCDC ), Director of CDC’s National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD and TB Prevention, will provide the latest information on how African Americans are navigating the HIV Continuum of Care; and staff from AIDS.gov (Twitter: @AIDSgov ), will provide information on the President’s HIV Care Continuum Initiative.

To join the NBHAAD Twitter town hall, simply go to Twitter at the designated time and follow hashtag #NBHAADchat . I look forward to reading your thoughtful comments and questions as together we observe National Black HIV/AIDS Awareness Day.