Mike Lucas for Dow Jones

From this morning’s LBO Wire:

Webster Capital has received an early Christmas present. The firm held a final close on $400 million for its latest consumer- and health care-focused fund, Hillary Canada reports. While the closing comes in the last days of holiday-related consumer frenzy, it was actually Webster’s other focus that bolstered the fund. Webster Capital III LP comes as the dust is finally starting to settle from the roll-out of the Affordable Care Act, which has been beneficial to Webster’s health-care investments, said Managing Partner and co-founder Donald Steiner.

More stories available to LBO Wire subscribers: H.I.G. Capital buys a majority of the assets from Ferro’s polymer additives division for about $154 million…High Road Capital Partners exits its investment in Handi Quilter Inc., a consumer quilting machine maker, selling the company to Blue Point Capital Partners…and Riverside Co. invests in a U.K.-based financial services company after exiting a provider of dietary supplements.

(LBO Wire is a daily newsletter with comprehensive analysis of all the investments, deals, fundraisings and personnel moves involving private equity firms. For a two-week trial, visit our homepage, scroll to the bottom and click “try for free.”)

Elsewhere on the Web:

Chinese firm Hopu Investment Management Co. is among the investors putting a total of just over $1 billion into Xiaomi Corp. in a deal valuing the smartphone maker at more than $45 billion, Rick Carew and Juro Osawa report for The Wall Street Journal.

Caesars Entertainment, backed in part by Apollo Global Management and TPG Capital, agreed to acquire affiliate Caesars Acquisition in a stock-for-stock merger that will better position the $18.4 billion debt load of its largest unit, Matt Jarzemsky and Liz Hoffman report for the Journal.

Private equity firms have been boosting investments in Caribbean resorts as the region’s traditional lenders scale back operations, according to Bloomberg News.

Also from Bloomberg: More than a dozen firms, including Apollo, Carlyle Group, Warburg Pincus and Blackstone Group, since June have lost a combined $11.7 billion in 27 publicly traded oil producers.

Write to Thomas Dunford at thomas.dunford@wsj.com