In my Lot Lines column in today’s Journal Record, I talked about the rise of crowd funding in commercial real estate and some of the online companies attempting to facilitate crowd-sourced commercial deals. There is another company that can be added to the list in the form of GROUNDFLOOR, which is based in Raleigh, N.C.

The company, which is described as a progressive real estate crowd-funding startup, announced this week that it has closed its initial first round of funding led by investors Bandwidth Labs and the American Underground. Harnessing the breadth and scale of the Web, the company connects independent real estate entrepreneurs with early-stage loans funded online by mass-market savers and investors. The seed capital will allow GROUNDFLOOR to bring a series of pilot projects to market in late 2013 and early 2014.

“The Web has a message for Wall Street,” says Brian Dally, co-founder and CEO of GROUNDFLOOR. “Real estate innovators and doers frustrated with the bank underwriting status quo are ready to be unleashed. Banding together, depositors and self-directed investors can do everything traditional lenders do, but better—to the benefit of a broader base of people well beyond accredited investors and powerful incumbent financial institutions.”

Co-founders Dally and Nick Bhargava built GROUNDFLOOR on a common interest in commercializing radical technologies designed to disrupt entrenched incumbents. John Austin introduced the duo in October 2012 through NC IDEA’s Groundwork Labs. Dally, a 15-year veteran of technology startups based in Silicon Valley, Boston and London, most recently engineered the launch of Bandwidth.com’s Republic Wireless, a provider that successfully battled the big four cellphone carriers to enter the smartphone service market. Bhargava lends expertise in securities law innovation earned during his role in developing Title III of the JOBS Act, in which he fought to ease securities regulations for unaccredited investors and bring the concept of equity crowd funding to the mainstream.