by

You may ask why is she writing about bees. Well, bees are important to our lives. Plus, it could be a hobby that you might consider considering when you finish reading this blog.

I could honestly say, that the one thing I knew for sure about bees is I am allergic to bee stings from any type of bee. I began to look at bees differently after reading an article in Time—and talking with a friend of mine. He and his wife have taken up beekeeping as a hobby, which has grown into a small business.

The TIME cover reads World without bees. The article The Plight of the Honeybee states, “You can thank the ‘Apis mellifera,’ better known as the Western honeybee, for 1 in every 3 mouthfuls you’ll eat today. Honeybees — which pollinate crops like apples, blueberries and cucumbers — are the “glue that holds our agricultural system together,” as the journalist Hannah Nordhaus put it in her 2011 book The Beekeeper’s Lament. But that glue is failing. Bee hives are dying off or disappearing thanks to a still-unsolved malady called colony collapse disorder (CCD), so much so that commercial beekeepers are being pushed out of the business.”

Farmers rely on the honeybee to pollinate their crops. Without the pollination, fruits and or seeds will not form. The honeybees are not the only pollinator, but are very important to the process.

A friend of mine helped to educate me about the honeybee. Rick Blanchard says–“Honeybees are under a lot of stress, and it’s good that Time is getting the word out, but by no means are Honeybees going extinct. They will not disappear from this planet. The resurgence in beekeeping as a hobby (even in urban locations) has led to an increase in the number of honeybee colonies in this country. Please support your local beekeepers. My hives had a tremendous year, we just took over 40 pounds of beautiful, light amber honey from 3 hives.”

Rick’s hobby has turned into a small business for he and his wife. You can contact them at REBLANCHARD@gmail.com.

As I researched the beekeepers in urban areas, itwas interesting to know that the practice has just recently become legal in many states. The resurgence of beekeeping has seen a huge increase.

This article was very interesting and informative…Bees all the buzz: Backyard beekeeping on the rise in Santa Cruz County… “One of the prime environmental bonuses of backyard beekeeping is that it makes people — beekeepers, their children, their friends and their communities — more aware of the delicate interactions between different animals and plants and species on the planet…That the fate of honey bees and humans could be inextricably linked is an idea that has backyard beekeepers abuzz.”

How fascinating! It sounds like a great family and or community project—if you aren’t allergic to bees.

Next time you eat and apple, berry or cucumber, you may look at it with a new appreciation. I know I have.

Sharon Cecil, RN

Thanks to Rick Blanchard for the great pictures.