It turns out that Speaker Boehner lied about his struggles to sign up for Obamacare. The Speaker wasn’t having trouble with the website. He put the ACA rep on hold for 35 minutes.

Boehner described signing up for the ACA as, “Earlier this afternoon, I sat down to try and enroll in the DC exchange under the president’s health care law. Like many Americans, my experience was pretty frustrating. After putting in my personal information, I received an error message. I was able to work past that, but when I went to actually sign up for coverage, I got this “internal server error” screen. Despite multiple attempts, I was unable to get past that point and sign up for a health plan. We’ve got a call into the help desk. Guess I’ll just have to keep trying…Updated (5:35 pm ET:) Kept at it, and called the DC Health Link help line. They called back a few hours later, and after re-starting the process on the website two more times, I just heard from DC Health Link that I have been successfully enrolled.”

Lies, lies, and even more lies.

The truth according to Washington, DC NBC affiliate reporter Scott MacFarlane:

DC health exchange spokesman says Speaker Boehner office kept DC representative on hold 35 minutes, "lots of patriotic hold music", hung up — Scott MacFarlane (@MacFarlaneNews) November 21, 2013

It turns out that it took Boehner so long to sign up, because he left the ACA rep who called him on hold for 35 minutes. That is a little fact that the Speaker left out of the story posted on his website. The Republican propaganda campaign to smear the ACA knows no boundaries. Boehner was more than happy to fake a bad experience, because his sign up was designed to be a publicity stunt to discredit the Affordable Care Act.

Republicans can keep lying about the ACA, because the mainstream media has been such a willing accomplice. If you watch cable news for any amount of time, you will see talking heads wondering with bated breath if the ACA website will be fixed. What they aren’t telling viewers is that the website is already fixed for most users.

A fixed website isn’t a good news story for a media that seems to be rooting for the ACA to fail, so they pretend like the status of the website is a big unknown and that nothing has changed since October.

John Boehner has demonstrated an ability to lie about any issue, but this time he got caught.

Boehner’s ACA sign up wasn’t all that frustrating, and what he doesn’t want you to know is that it can be just as easy for you too.