Topics: Barack Obama, Elections 2016, Merrick Garland, New York Times, Orrin Hatch, Senate Judiciary Committee, Senate Republicans, Supreme Court, Supreme Court nomination, Elections News, Politics News

Utah senator Orrin Hatch has emerged as the point person for defending the Senate GOP’s strategy of blocking President Obama’s Supreme Court nominees, and in that role he’s grown adept at inventing new and increasingly exotic justifications for blanket obstructionism. Over the past few weeks, Hatch has explained that the Republican-controlled Senate can’t move forward on any nomination to replace the late Antonin Scalia because: there’s a “well-established rule” that “lame duck presidents” don’t get to make nominations, people are “going to get very, very upset” if a nomination is considered, and it wouldn’t be “fair to both sides.” Just last week he argued that Senate obstruction must proceed because protesters with “professionally printed signs” disrupted his fancy lunch meeting in Washington, DC.

In a Monday Op-Ed for The New York Times, Hatch tosses out yet another reason for delaying action on a Supreme Court nominee until after the 2016 election – let’s call it the Rock-Paper-Scissor principle of judicial nominations:

Given that the American people have elected a president and a Senate majority with drastically different views on the nature of legitimate constitutional government – a split decision of sorts – it seems appropriate to let 2016 voters decide which of the two very different paths the Supreme Court should take.

Voters sent Obama back to the White House in 2012 and then elected a Republican Senate majority in 2014, so 2016 will be the tie-breaker. Best two of out three! Winner gets to pick Scalia’s replacement.

This is some hot garbage and also a far more expansive justification for obstructionism than we’ve seen to date. First off, there’s the tendentious argument that the Republicans’ 2014 Senate victories carry the same mandate as the two national victories Obama won. Up to this point, the Republicans’ case for obstructing has generally just assumed that Obama’s national mandates didn’t matter, but now Hatch is trying to argue that they were actually canceled out by the 34 states that voted for senators on Election Day 2014. But even if you buy that argument, why does the product of divided government have to be a total shutdown of the nominating process? One could just as easily argue that outcome should be the selection of a “consensus nominee” – the precise term Orrin Hatch once used to describe current nominee Merrick Garland before he began discovering new reasons to oppose his nomination.