Update: Grayson dismisses ‘erratic’ wife after abuse allegation

posted at 5:19 pm on March 4, 2014 by Guy Benson

Weird. He’s always seemed like such a nice, non-crazy guy:

A judge has granted a temporary protective injunction against U.S. Rep. Alan Grayson, after his wife filed paperwork accusing the Orlando congressman of shoving and injuring her during an incident this weekend. Lolita Grayson’s petition for the injunction, dated Monday, says her husband pushed her against a door, causing her to fall to the ground, during a confrontation Saturday at their home on Oak Park Road, near Windermere. In a statement, Alan Grayson’s press secretary Lauren Doney wrote that the allegations “are absolutely false, completely unfounded, and clearly designed to vilify and harm Congressman Grayson.” The incident comes just less than two months after Lolita Grayson filed a divorce petition stating that their marriage of nearly 24 years was “irretrievably broken.”

“Completely unfounded,” huh?

Photos filed by Lolita Grayson’s attorneys with the petition show large bruises to her left leg and left shoulder. Her complaint alleges that, “from time to time” in the past, her husband “has battered [her] and the parties’ minor children,” though she has not previously sought an injunction against him…Grayson told his wife, in the presence of their children, that she “would receive nothing” in their divorce and would be left “in the gutter.”

Perhaps Grayson can commiserate with this charmer. War on women, etc.

UPDATE – Oh my:

Grayson’s office: Ms. Grayson’s behavior has become increasingly erratic, and she has demonstrated an alarming disconnect from reality. — Chad Pergram (@ChadPergram) March 4, 2014

Attacking the victim for erratic, unhinged behavior. Consider the source.

UPDATE II – Of course:

Headline: "Florida chapter of National Organization for Women endorses Alan Grayson." http://t.co/CG51m53IiO — Gabriel Malor (@gabrielmalor) March 4, 2014

He may beat his wife, but at least he supports late-term abortion! Let’s see if this old endorsement survives the current cycle. Allahpundit now has more on the homepage, including a must-see flashback clip of the man himself railing against Republican misogyny.

Recently in the Green Room: