SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Dr. Kelli Ward weighed in following President Barack Obama’s Tuesday evening State of the Union address and highlighted the Obama presidency’s “lack of basic leadership.”

Ward released the following statement to Breitbart News:

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

President Obama believes pretending to be a leader in his last year in office will make up for his multiple failures during his tenure. His history of failed policies and broken promises overshadow his attempt to rewrite the narrative on his presidency’s lack of basic leadership. Instead of working with Congress or the states, he tried to dictate.

Obama’s dictates to Congress included, “If this Congress is serious about winning this war, and wants to send a message to our troops and the world, you should finally authorize the use of military force against ISIL. Take a vote.”

He went on to suggest that he will do what he wants with or without Congress. Obama then insinuated that he should be credited for the death of Osama Bin Laden, the death of the al-Qaeda leader in Yemen last year, and the capture of just one perpetrator of the September 11, 2012, Islamic terror attacks on Americans in Yemen.

He pushed for the closure of the prison at Guantanamo, a campaign promise made to his own supporters that he is now rushing to make happen nearing the end of his presidency.

Breitbart News’s Joel Pollak detailed the top 10 lies in Obama’s State of the Union address. Obama claimed falsely that he had cut deficits by “almost three-quarters” when he has doubled the national debt. Obama claimed the Affordable Care Act, a.k.a. Obamacare, was about filling the gaps in employer-based care when the more accurate picture is that “Obamacare cancelled insurance coverage for millions of Americans.” Pollak goes on to list several more Obama State of the Union fallacies on climate change, national security, ISIS, and Cuba.

Pollak’s list displays just a few of the “multiple failures” and “broken promises” Ward is referring to before noting the president’s “attempt to rewrite the narrative on his presidency’s lack of basic leadership.”

Ward resigned from her seat in the Arizona State Senate in December to campaign full time. She is dedicated to replacing entrenched Sen. John McCain in the U.S. Senate.

Ward, a practicing medical doctor, affirmed to Breitbart News:

I will not drop out of this race under any circumstances. I am running to win and represent Arizona in the U.S. Senate. Anyone who convinces themselves otherwise has mistakenly confused me for a politician.

Follow Michelle Moons on Twitter @MichelleDiana.