Transcript for Iran Nuclear Negotiations: Deal or No Deal?

Let's go to "The roundtable." I'm joined by bill kristol, ed dor of the beakly standard. Welcome back to Fareed zakaria. Jennifer Granholm, the former governor of Michigan, and ABC news political analyst Matthew dowd. Fareed, let me begin with you. We're fighting on the same side as Iran against Iraq. We're trying to get nuclear restrictions with them in Switzerland. In some places, you have a greater enemy like Isis, should not be surprising. What's happened is from Libya to Syria, the entire middle east, has become fragile and unstable. Every regime has cracked. Beneath the regime, there was nothing. There were no state institutions. No civil society. There was no country. That people have withdrawn to their oldest identities. Nobody is fighting and dying for Iraq, Syria, Libya. They're fighting and dying because they're shia, kurds. This that kind of a chaotic world, one of the things the administration is arguing is that this deal with Iran could be a game-changer. Could transform the middle east. Do you buy that? I think it certainly would help. What is the alternative? The alternative to the deal is either a major escalation militarily. It would not be like the Iraq strike. Iran has a huge nuclear facility. It would take weeks and weeks of bombing. The Iranians would respond in all the countries they're active. Or you have a situation, no deal, you have sanctions. But the Iranians went from 150 centrifuges to 20,000 under sanctions. Bill kristol, I know you met with prime minister netanyahu this week. You and he disagree? He's a little bit more moderate. You disagree with Fareed zakaria. It's a terrible deal. It will legitimate Iran. The middle east is on fire. Deal with Iran that in effect allows them to be nuclear threshold safe. That makes them pay no price for anything they have done in the past, the cheating and the lying. Lets foe go the facility on the hillside. President Obama himself said you can't allow that facility to function. It would be a disastrous deal. It will make things worse. Than what is already a very bad middle east. I want to move on to the politics right now. I was surprised by martin O'Malley, Matthew dowd. It sure sounded like Hillary Clinton has her first challenger, close to official challenger in the race now. Well, finally it made sense to me that somebody has finally having an edge in their conversation as a democrat related to Hillary Clinton. To me, I still think Hillary Clinton is extremely vulnerable in this country right now. Whether it's the general election or the primary. Everything over the last two or three weeks, watching the nature of her campaign and response, to me, would encourage somebody like martin O'Malley or Elizabeth Warren to make steps forward and see if they can beat her. What to you think? She says she welcomes a primary. Do you think she needs it? Is that like inviting your uncle over when you don't really want him to come? She is comfortable enough to withstand a primary. Martin O'Malley is a nice guy. He might make a nice member of a president Clinton administration, so he better watch. I think he and anybody else, she would welcome into the mix. That would be healthy. I think ultimately, she'll be the next president. You also heard that shot, bill kristol, about the two familiesing the presidency back and forth. I think it's a shot from the republicans and the democrats. I think there are a lot of people who don't want a bush-clinton race in 2016. The only way to not have a bush-clinton race in 2016 is to deny one or both of them the nomination. Martin O'Malley worked for Gary hart in 1983. He was nowhere at this point. Mondale was the prohibitive favorite. John glen, a favorite. Hart got 17% of the vote or something in what against Mondale's 50. He won New Hampshire and almost beat Mondale. I think someone like O'Malley could have a shot. You do see this feeling against dynasties bubbling up. Is it something people vote on? I think the really difficult part for Hillary, more than the dynasty, is it's tough for a party to get a third term in the white house. When was the last one? It was bush Sr. After Reagan. Before that, it was fdr after himself. And then Hoover after Coolidge. That's in the last 100 years. Three times. Notice, you have to run as the candidate of continuity. It's tough for Hillary Clinton to be the candidate of continuity after Barack Obama. She has a great case to make for continuity. With respect to economic policy. Will she run that way? I assume she will. Certainly take advantage of the great work with the affordable care act and jobs. Let me say a quick word about dynasties. Dynasties suggest generational passing down. She's not a generation where her father is handing this down. She's a woman. Women are not seen as this dynastic creature. The role has changed? I think it's changed. There is a problem with dynasties in that, if people think you're going to inherit it and not earn it. And that's part of the problem. The other thing, I think, with dynasties, is this a forward-looking campaign? For many people watching what's developed over the last six months, it feels like we're thrown back to the 1990s. I think that is true for Jeb bush. It feels like a throwback for ten years. And I think for Hillary Clinton, it feels like it's thrown back for 20 years. I think the candidate's going to win in 2016 has to be somebody that says, all that's in the past. I'm going forward in the future. I think that's ultimately her problem. We saw a new generation of republicans get in this week. Ted Cruz, the first official candidate, seemed like he had a pretty good launch. He did. I think he's consistently underrated. I think that whole generation, walker, Rubio, Cruz, jindal, are underrated. I was talking to a democrat this week what had seen Rubio give a speech and take Q and a, he said he reminded me of bill Clinton in 2002. Very able. Not quite as prominent nationally. I think they have a real shot. And Fareed, we heard Jennifer talk about Hillary Clinton being a candidate of continuity. On the economy. It seems like the republican candidates are focused right now on national security. Drawing differences. They're wrong in a political term. There's no question that the public's view of the middle east is this is one unholy mess. They're all crazy. They'll suck us dry. Stay out. Bill kristol's father once wrote in the 1965, I think, the job of conservatives in those days was to explain to the American people why they're right and American intellectuals what they're wrong. Obama knows the American people are fund meamentally right about this. The American people don't like to see America humiliated around the world. They know the middle east in flames is dangerous to us. I disagree. Ground troops in Syria and Iraq are not something anyone would support. It would mean the United States would be in the mid one unholy mess. It is an unholy mess, thanks to the fact that we have totally withdrawn. I think our politics in this country today is chaotic. Republicans are thinking that the prime minister of Israel should make our foreign policy. And the democrat administration, the Obama administration doesn't trust republicans enough to tell them what's in the deal. And so we have chaos in the middle east. We have chaos in our politics here. We have a few seconds left. Bottom line, Jennifer, is 2016 a national security election or economy? I think that if you look at all the polls, regarding what Americans are most concerned about, the economy has always come out number one. This year, under the pew charitable trust, terrorism was number one. If you have a candidate strong against terrorism and extremists, as long as that concern is taken care of with somebody who has been there and who understands that fight, I think that concern will be addressed. Have to take a quick break. Thanks to "The roundtable."

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.