According to the Hawai’i Congressional Delegation Friday, the Hawai’i Department of Health is set to receive $9.43 million from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to support pregnant mothers and families with young children.

“The steps we take to support our youngest keiki often create a foundation for success in school and in life,” said Senator Mazie K. Hirono. “These grants will be paid back many time over as families who participate in home-visiting programs enter school better prepared. I was proud the vote to create the Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting grants as part of the Affordable Care Act, and am pleased that Hawai’i families continue to benefit from this valuable program.”

Pregnant women and families with children up to five years old will be supported by the Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting program.

Brian Schatz, who is a member of the Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education Appropriations Subcommittee, said in a statement that “a child’s development is more critical in the first few years of life than at any other time. These funds will provide more Hawai’i families with access to in-home visits from nurses and social workers, ensuring parents have the support they need for their child’s healthy development.”

In 2010, the MIECHV grant was first award to the Hawai’i DOH. Officials used the funds to establish the Hawai’i Home Visiting Network, which is a group of ten community based organizations that offer home visiting programs.

ADVERTISEMENT

“This grant from the Department of Health and Human Services will help working families in Hawai’i by providing the resources necessary to improve child health in a cost-effective way,” said Congresswoman Tulsi Gabbard. “By funding local home-visit programs, we are helping families prevent child injuries, reduce emergency department visits, and improve economic self-sufficiency. The programs sustained by his DHHS grant promote the well-being of our keiki.”

Funds received under the grant will be used to provide voluntary home visits to low-income parents who will learn about health, child development, school readiness, and referrals to other services.

“I am happy to join the other members of Hawai’i’s Federal Delegation in announcing over $9 million in new grants to the State of Hawai’i Department of Health,” said Congressman Mark Takai. “These grants will be directed towards programs that provide for maternal, infant, and early childhood home visiting and education services. These programs have improved the outcomes for many children and families and I look forward to a greater expansion of these services to serve our community here in Hawai’i.”