Tom Atkocaitis, owner of Lowell Street Eatery prepares a private meal for 10 in Manchester on Wednesday. The party later canceled their reservation. (Thomas Roy/Union Leader) Tom Atkocaitis, owner of Lowell Street Eatery prepares a private meal for 10 in Manchester on Wednesday. (Thomas Roy/Union Leader) A large table is set at Lowell Street Eatery for a private meal for 10 in Manchester on Wednesday. The party later canceled their reservation. (Thomas Roy/Union Leader) Elysia Pollman, a waitress cuts limes as Lowell Street Eatery prepares a private meal for 10 in Manchester on Wednesday. The party later canceled their reservation. (Thomas Roy/Union Leader)





THE FAINT sizzle and sweet scent of almonds in a frying pan permeate the Lowell Street Eatery as Tom Atkocaitis prepares for the lunch crowd. It's already 10 o'clock, so he has little time to spare as he toasts the nuts for a mixed green salad...That kind of handcrafted touch is to be expected in a restaurant space best known for the 16 years it was home to Richard's Bistro. Atkocaitis aims to please the foodie crowd, but patrons of the Red Arrow Diner across the street might also feel at home. You can order a burger with fresh-cut fries or Chicago-style hot dogs with a half-sour pickle...The half-pound bacon burger does go a bit uptown, though, with toppings that include purple slaw and bleu cheese dressing. And the pan-fried fish of the day comes with lemon curried rice with spinach and honey-coriander yogurt...It's not bistro. It's not a diner. It's an eatery. And it's the kind of place the New Boston resident has dreamed about opening since he was in his 20s."I want to be known for really, really good food at affordable prices," says Atkocaitis, who spent more than three decades in the high-tech industry, including 17 years with Digital and 12 with Kronos...If that kind of resume sounds a bit familiar, that's because Jeff Dudley, the last owner of the restaurant, also was a tech industry veteran turned restaurateur. Dudley closed his 11Eleven Bistro in April 2014 after about a year-and-a half, and Atkocaitis bought the 36 Lowell St. business in November...Since then, it's been a slow but steady climb, the 53-year-old says. Atkocaitis and his two-person staff opened for lunch only in December - which he acknowledges was the worst time of year to launch a restaurant. In February, they began dinner service featuring steaks, seafood and Italian fare Thursday through Saturday...While Atkocaitis is looking to hire a bartender for the night patrons, his cook Kathryn Fantozzi works a second job at the Hanover Chop House because the restaurant is not yet busy enough. He's and his staff have logged a few lonely nights, when passersby look in and notice they're there but keep walking, though he says the business has gained month to month...The first-generation American, whose parents come from Lithuania, has been cooking with his family since he was 10 years old growing up in Hudson. Their cuisine was influenced by their European heritage, with elements of Russia and Germany..."Numerous meals took many hours to prepare and were all consumed within the first 30 minutes," Atkocaitis said with a laugh.Last year, the timing felt right for the father of four to make the leap into the restaurant business..."We decided collectively that if I don't pursue this passion of mine, I'm never going to do it," he said.While the stakes are high - he financed the business on his own - Atkocaitis spent time making sure he had the right spot. He first considered locations in New Boston and Goffstown after beginning his search last summer. The Goffstown deal fell through; the New Boston site didn't make sense financially..."You can make a business plan say whatever you want it to say, but I like to keep things in reality," said Atkocaitis, whose tech experience included working on Internet startup companies. He created a menu that includes fine dining but also satisfies the comfort-food cravings of Queen City blue-collar folks...Potato kugle, served with apple-maple-bacon-whiskey jam and sour cream, offers a nod to Atkocaitis' Lithuanian heritage. He also talks up his fish tacos, French onion soup and banana-key lime cheesecake, a variety some chefs tell him can't be done because of the consistency of the banana..."I do it all the time," Atkocaitis says. "I've got no fear."He'll need that kind of confidence. The hospitality industry is extremely volatile. Lowell Street Eatery is the third incarnation of the restaurant since Richard's Bistro changed hands in 2011. It takes someone with a long-game view and plenty of stamina to succeed. Atkocaitis says he has to remember to take care of himself, adding that restaurant workers are notorious for forgetting to eat while they toil long hours feeding others. Keeping the restaurant closed on Sunday and Monday gives him some balance...Atkocaitis is just beginning to make his name as a chef and restaurateur, but he already holds national and international rankings in chess, another field where strategy rules. It's a side passion separate from cooking that he once considered as a career path...With the sound of every customer saying, "Waiter, check please," you might hear Atkocaitis whisper "checkmate" to himself.Mike Cote is business editor. Contact him at 668-4321 ext. 324 or mcote@unionleader.com...