The lawsuit claims after a mother removed her daughter from class due to bullying, the district said she would be removed from rolls.

Jacob Biby hopes this lawsuit will be a step in the right direction against bullying.

A recently filed lawsuit claims the district placed a girl in the same class as her bullies.

A Green Country mom said the school that promised to protect her daughter from bullies put her in the classroom with the girls who were making her life miserable.

It led to a suicide attempt, and a lawsuit.

We have decided to not release the name of the victim, but her attorney hopes even if the case doesn't put an end to bullying it will be a step in the right direction.

"It's very important that when these issues are raised that they be taken seriously," said attorney Jacob Biby.

Biby represents a Bixby High School student and her mother. He said the girl is a victim of bullying.

"You get one shot at your high school years and this young lady definitely had hers impaired by what happened," Biby said.

According to a recently filed lawsuit, a group of teens who call themselves the, "Snowbunny 6," bullied Biby's client at school, through Facebook and Twitter, and harassing phone calls.

"In our community, I think all people have been hearing a lot about the effects this can have, especially with the growing social media outlets being used by children," said Biby.

Court documents showed the student's mother removed her from school a week after administrators were notified about the "relentless bullying."

It also said the school's vice principal told the victim's mother her daughter would "be considered truant and dropped from the rolls" if she didn't return to class.

The lawsuit said administrators promised the girl would be placed in a "protected environment."

Biby said his investigation revealed she was "negligently" placed in a class with members of the "Snowbunny 6," and later that night the girl attempted to take her own life.

"There are policies and procedures put in place so that the children are kept safe and if those aren't followed, children aren't kept safe, incidents like this happen," said Biby.

One of those policies Biby is talking about is the state's Bullying Prevention Act, which is included in Bixby's handbook.

A district spokesperson said the school was unaware of the lawsuit until contacted by News On 6 and he couldn't comment on any pending litigation.

The girl's attorney said nothing can make up for the emotional distress his client has faced, but he is asking the district and the members of the "Snowbunny 6" pay damages in excess of $75,000.