Topics: 9/11, Editor's Picks, miss america, nina davuluri, Racism, Twitter, Life News

There’s only one thing dumber than a bigmouthed racist — a bigmouthed racist who can’t even get his racism straight. And Sunday night, that particular brand of stupid was on abundant display after 24-year-old Miss New York, Nina Davuluri, won the Miss America pageant.

Aside from the first, obvious question – who knew anyone still even cared about the Miss America pageant? – the vocal response to the coronation of Ms. Davuluri raises another mystery. How is it possible that individuals who are at least functioning enough to turn on a phone or computer and type words on it can be so brain dead? The new Miss America Davuluri is a former dean’s list student, an aspiring cardiologist and recovering bulimic. She’s also now the pageant’s first Indian-American Miss America, a woman who performed a “Bollywood fusion dance” for the show’s talent competition. And if you expected a deluge of racist trolling to follow because an Indian woman now has the word “America” attached to her name, you weren’t disappointed Sunday night. On Twitter, a Mr. CHEEZ-IT, for example, a man whose bio explains he’d “rather be cummin then stroken” (sic) swiftly declared, “Miss America? You mean Miss 7-11.” And a One Proud Honkie asked, “How can you be Miss AMERICA and look like you should be a gas station clerk or motel owner?”

If you thought the haters would be outraged that a “foreigner” – Davuluri was born in Syracuse — took the crown, you’d also have been correct. But if you expected the bigots to at least get their racism right, you were in for a letdown. As BuzzFeed points out, the dopes were swift to express their disappointment that an “Arab” had won, wailing that her victory was a “slap in the face to the people of 9-11″ (Related: Who are “the people of 9-11″? Are they related to the People of Wal-Mart?) and calling her a “terrorist” whose victory was for al-Qaida. There was also something about “Egypt dancing.” And it wasn’t just the illiterate backwater yokels spewing this nonsense either — Fox News & Commentary host/professional troll huffily tweeted that “The liberal Miss America judges won’t say this – but Miss Kansas lost because she actually represented American values” and then crowned Davuluri “Miss Politically Correct America.”