Town Director of Human Resources Danielle Olson, left, and Kennie Wells, the assistant director, were part of the team that implemented the town's Wellness Program.

By John Nelander

Special to the Daily News

With health care costs on the rise, U.S. employers are looking for ways to promote a healthier workforce with the emphasis on preventive measures rather than waiting for big problems later.

That’s led to a proliferation of wellness programs, a bandwagon the Town of Palm Beach hopped on Jan. 1. About 92 percent of covered employees agreed to have blood tests for common medical issues – high cholesterol or blood sugar, for example – with an option to sign up for health coaching if a problem shows up.

At first, some town employees were alarmed.

“There were a lot of questions about privacy,” said Kennie Wells, the town’s assistant human resources director. “People were concerned that the town would get the results. But we assured them that wasn’t going to happen.”

The incentive was that town employees who signed up receive a 12 percent reduction on their insurance premiums.

Palm Beach is a self-insured municipality, which means that actual claim costs come out of town coffers. That comes to an average of $300,000 per year under the plan that is administered by Florida Blue.

Keeping those claims costs from spiraling is the goal of the program overseen by the town’s human resources department, said Director Danielle Olson.

“We’ve been looking at this for a few years,” she said. “We have a new insurance broker that has had some experience with wellness programs.

They came through with a few different options, along with some of the legal changes that came down the pike with the Affordable Care Act in terms of what you’re allowed to do with wellness incentives. From those two elements we developed the program.”

Employers need to tread carefully in this area, particularly after a program at Pennsylvania State University was botched last fall and generated a lot of negative publicity. The school’s wellness plan levied a $100 “noncompliance fee” aimed at workers who refused to fill out an online questionnaire, according to The New York Times. The form, designed by WebMD Health Services, asked workers about their marriage and finances, and asked female employees whether they planned to become pregnant. The program was scrapped after university employees complained it was an invasion of privacy.

In Palm Beach, the town will see only cumulative data representing the health of the whole workforce. Blood tests are administered by Quest Diagnostics. The employee takes the results and goes online to do a health risk assessment.

They get a report on recommendations for changes they can make to improve their health. Florida Blue may offer them health coaching. Under that scenario, a professional works with them by phone or over the Internet to address dietary or other lifestyle changes. It won’t be mandatory to accept the coaching, however.

The town expects to see the overview of the test results in February.

“I’ve seen places go as far as having penalties, but it’s not our style,” Olson said. “This is going to be handled outside, as private as possible. There’s no organizational benefit to know someone’s personal health information. We get charged based on the experience of the entire group.”

If the group report shows a large percentage of workers have a particular health issue, education programs may be offered. Or, services that address that problem might be offered to people at a reduced cost.

The town won’t know whether workers are getting healthier as a group until they take the same tests next year.

“I don’t predict we’ll start seeing differences until we get to the three- to five-year mark because we have to implement those plan design changes,” said Olson. “That’s not to say positive change isn’t happening. It’s just a matter of calculating the return on investment.”

Have wellness programs brought down health care costs for other employers? Results have been mixed.

In a 2012 survey of employers with wellness features by insurance broker Willis Americas, 29 percent reported that health risks were improving while 46 percent said there was no change. Four percent said health risks were getting worse. Sixteen percent said claim costs were decreasing while 10 percent said they were increasing.

Analysts argued in the report that if the majority of the workforce sees improving health risks, or stable risks, that still helps keep a lid on costs for employers.

A Harvard Business Review article about the wellness program at the pharmaceutical company Johnson & Johnson in December 2010 was more enthusiastic. It said company leaders estimated that wellness saved $250 million health care costs from 2000 to 2009, and the return on investment was $2.71 for every dollar spent.

And in a survey published last month by the Society for Human Resources Management, 71 percent of companies or organizations with wellness initiatives said they were “very effective” or “somewhat effective” in reducing health care costs.

There is a third element to the Palm Beach plan. Participants have to sign an affidavit saying that they do not use tobacco products – or that they stopped using tobacco as of Jan. 1 – in order to qualify for the insurance discounts.

“I further understand that if I use tobacco products after claiming non-tobacco use, the Wellness Incentive will be void retroactive to the first day of the 2014 plan year and I will be responsible to repay any premium discount I received to the town prior to the end of the plan year,” the affidavit says.

Other penalties may include disciplinary action or termination.