By Staff

Editor’s Note: California’s health insurance exchange on Wednesday (3/26) announced the process for people who are trying to enroll, but fail to complete their application for a plan by Monday’s (3/31) deadline. Details here.

The March 31st enrollment deadline for health care coverage under the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) is approaching. The state of California is handling the insurance exchange and enrollment through Covered California. According to the state’s enrollment statistics in February, San Diego has already surpassed its target, reaching 105% of its goal by the end of December.

That doesn’t mean that everyone who is eligible has enrolled. Kaiser Permanente is hosting two events in San Diego, one on Saturday March 22 and the other on Saturday March 29 to assist people who want to enroll.

KPBS recently reported that Covered California Executive Director Peter Lee came to San Diego to provide an update on the local enrollment.

“Here in San Diego over 80 percent of the people signing up are getting a subsidy, which means they’re getting a check sent every month to the private plan they pick to lower the cost of that plan,” Lee said. “For some that make less money, their share is literally 20 bucks, 30 bucks. For others it may be a few hundred dollars, depending on their income, it’s a sliding scale. But the vast majority of people signing up for Covered California are getting a subsidy to lower the cost of that care.”

Kaiser Permanente’s enrollment opportunity on Saturday March 22 will be held from 9am to 3pm at the San Diego Medical Center/Kaiser Foundation Hospital, Classrooms 3 and 4. The address is 4647 Zion Avenue. There is no need to RSVP or reserve a spot. Just stop by.

Enrollees are requested to bring:

Social Security Numbers

Employee and income information

Federal tax returns

Your employers health insurance information, if applicable.

Kaiser Permanente’s enrollment opportunity on March 29 from 9am to 3pm will take place at Otay Mesa Medical Offices, Classrooms 1 and 2. The address of the Otay Mesa Medical Office is 4650 Palm Avenue. No reservations necessary, just stop by.



Certified enrollers will be on hand to assist in English and Spanish with coverage options and answer any questions.