At Lehigh Valley Health Network's annual meeting one year ago, newly appointed CEO Brian Nester said LVHN was focused on the "triple aim" of better health, better care and better cost.

At his second annual meeting as CEO on Wednesday evening, Nester cataloged some of the many steps, some big and some small, that the network has taken toward achieving those goals over the past fiscal year:

For example, it adopted a single health records system, called Epic, that replaced more than two dozen systems. And it formed an alliance with Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York City, the world's oldest and largest cancer research and treatment center.

It also sent a physician assistant into homeless encampments to provide on-site health care.

"The call to reinvent health care is clearly upon us," Nester said, speaking to an audience of about 150 people in an auditorium at Lehigh Valley Hospital-Cedar Crest. "Now we are driven to make everything we do even better, because the better we are at delivering care, the better — and healthier — we make all of you."

The network's 2015 fiscal year — its second full fiscal year under the Affordable Care Act — ended June 30 with good news on multiple fronts.

Revenue during the 12-month period was $1.9 billion, 13 percent higher than the year before.

And operating income, the difference between day-to-day income and expenses, surged $30 million — 72 percent — to $72 million.

Nester also announced a record-high "community benefit" — $402 million worth of patient care, employee education and community outreach that serve as the basis of the network's nonprofit status.

This included the expense of providing nearly 12,000 free flu shots distributed at Dorney Park & Wildwater Kingdom in South Whitehall Township and Coca-Cola Park in Allentown — though such direct care actually represented a tiny fraction of the total dollar amount.

The bulk of what LVHN counted as community benefit resulted from the growing gap between what the network charges and how much Medicaid and Medicare are willing to reimburse. LVHN, like other health care institutions in the state, chalks up this differential as altruism — which means the higher its prices, the more charitable giving it can claim.

Thus, LVHN's Medicaid and Medicare shortfalls, which amounted to $267 million, accounted for two-thirds of the community benefit. And a year-over-year increase in the shortfalls explains the record.

"We are proud of our investment in the health of this community," Nester said.

Word of the biggest-ever community benefit came two days before for a court hearing on the matter. The hearing — in Lehigh County Court's Orphans' Court Division — was prompted by a petition from retired Lehigh County Judge Robert Young.

In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Young presided over a protracted legal battle over the nonprofit status of Lehigh Valley hospitals including Health East, as LVHN was then known.

In the petition filed earlier this year, Young resurrected the dispute, raising new questions about whether LVHN is charitable enough to justify its continued nonprofit tax exemption. He urged the court to require the network to explain its practices, including its use of Medicaid and Medicare shortfalls.

After the state attorney general's office filed its own petition in support of Young's, Judge Brian Johnson scheduled a two-part hearing — the first part on Friday, and the second part on Jan. 27.

LVHN is the Lehigh Valley's biggest employer. Throughout the year, the network continued to grow — its payroll increasing to nearly 14,000 workers. Besides its four hospitals, the network now runs 13 health centers as well as testing and imaging facilities and practices across the region.

skennedy@mcall.com

610-820-6130