ANALYSIS/OPINION:

ObamaCare is the unchangeable Law Of The Land. Fifth Amendment-invoking, Tea Party-hatin’ former senior IRS official Lois Lerner gets a sweet retirement deal. Late-night infomercial king Kevin Trudeau just got sentenced to 10 years in prison for criminal contempt. What is more dangerous to our republic?

On this briefing of The Rusty Humphries Rebellion

Late-night infomercial king Kevin Trudeau was ordered to stop false and misleading advertising for his weight-loss book, but he ignored the court orders about 32,000 times (whoopsy!) and now is going to jail. To be fair … I have spoken to a number of doctors who have actually agreed with much of what Kevin was talking about in his book and infomercials. You can buy versions of the hormone HCG that he was promoting in homeopathic form in your grocery store or you can get a prescription for it from your doctor. By the way, if you’re thinking of trying it, the injectable HCG from a doctor comes from a hormone found in pregnant women’s urine and you can only eat about 500 calories a day for about 14 days … but you’re supposed to lose A LOT of weight. Sounds like fun, doesn’t it!

But I am confused, because the court thought Kevin Trudeau was making false claims, right? And now he’s going to jail, right? I just didn’t realize false advertising was still a crime. Look at Obamacare! Everything the president said about it was false advertising. “You can keep your plan. Period!” “You can keep your doctor.” “You’ll save $2,000 per yea.” — ALL false claims. Where do we go to file our complaints about the false Obamacare advertising?

The court said Kevin Trudeau owes $37 million in damages; and don’t get me wrong, I’m not giving Trudeau a pass. But $37 million dollars is NOTHING compared to Obamacare. Heck, the website alone cost us almost a billion dollars, and its a complete disaster.



Even if Trudeau sucked you in with “The Weight Loss Cure ‘They’ Don’t Want You to Know About,” the book was about $30. I just checked, it’s now on amazon for $11.43 in hardcover new or $1.19 used. When you’re done with it, you might be able to sell it to a used bookstore for a buck or two AND you had a choice if you wanted to buy it or not. But with Obamacare you had better buy right now and, by the way, you’re going to pay for that forever.

Obamacare: Covering more Americans since 2010 more >

Maybe Trudeau should have used the Lois Lerner defense? By all accounts that woman turned the IRS into a political weapon. No one can say for sure how much the IRS crackdown on conservative groups affected the outcome of the 2012 election, but it had a big effect. You can bet if a Republican president got re-elected after the IRS hassled left-leaning groups, everybody would say that election was stolen, and rightfully so.

According to Democrat Congressman Elijah Cummings, you and I are just supposed to take Lois Learner and President Obama’s word that there wasn’t a smidgeon of corruption at the IRS.



So then why not take Kevin Trudeau’s word that he really believed in his diet book, he really didn’t mean to rerun that infomercial 32,000 times and anyway he’s really, REALLY sorry now? The difference … Trudeau is now pretty much broke, completely discredited and he’s off to jail for years. Obama is re-elected and Lois Lerner got to take a long, paid vacation, then got a sweet retirement deal.

I don’t care who the president is — Democrat, Republican, independent, whatever — we can NEVER accept abuses of those powers given to the IRS. Period!

It seems to me like people get in a lot more trouble for lying, making false promises, and abusing the public trust when they work in the private sector. Government officials get away with things that put the rest of us in jail, like closing traffic lanes when someone doesn’t vote the right way or shutting down WWII Veterans Memorials to punish people for disagreeing with someone in power, not to mention all the wasted time and money spent.

I think there is a pretty good argument for privatizing as much of Big Government as we can. That way, we won’t have to spend the rest of our lives paying for a politician’s mistake when we fall for their false promises. Someone could actually be held responsible for financial disasters. The media could go after the scam artists, instead of admiring their skill for spin and getting away with it.

It’s far past time that the statute of limitations on fraud of the American public is limited to the next election.

If you agree or disagree, comment here. If you’re with The IRS, thank you for checking us out. My name is Jimmy Smith and I live in Canada.

This has been “The Jimmy Smith from Canada Show.” A presentation of The Canada Times.