Preparing for the results of a study looking at the diversity of Denver Public Schools’ contractors , the district is drafting a plan to implement diversity quotas for every project if the study shows a biased disparity.

If the study shows the program needs to be implemented, DPS could be the only school district in Colorado, and only among a handful in the country that sets diversity participation requirements.

“We try to ensure that when we’re contracting, it kind of mirrors our community,” said Trena Deane, executive director of facility management for DPS. “We would also like to give back to the community to the degree possible because it is taxpayer money.”

On Monday, staff presented an update to the district board of education about the changes, and what will happen when the full report from consultant MGT of America, Inc. is ready.

Initial raw data should be available by the end of the month. By late October, the full report should include conclusions that explain what’s working well, or what barriers are causing a disparity if there is one. Superintendent Tom Boasberg told the board that preliminary information indicates there is a disparity.

If so, later this year DPS would put together a diversity council made up of community professionals that would evaluate availability of contractors for each project, and determine a realistic goal for how much participation each project should have from minority or women-owned businesses.

Businesses would need to be certified as minority or women owned to count toward the district’s quota.

Board members emphasized the need for public input on the plans before they vote.

“I would like to encourage that we just not hold a public meeting and invite people to it, that we need to be more proactive, that we actually go to groups and schedule updates to their group,” said board member Landri Taylor.

In the meantime, the district is moving forward on other non-race based plans to broaden their pool of contractors, including hosting a mixer, increasing partnerships and requiring letters of intent from contractors to approve subcontractors.

Beginning as early as next month, DPS is also planning to set some smaller projects aside that would only be up for bid by small businesses. The projects would be under $750,000.

“It’s large enough to where it would be of help to the small businesses, but not too large to where they wouldn’t be capable of performing,” Deane said. “This is just a start. We would be re-evaluating how it works.”

Yesenia Robles: 303-954-1372, yrobles@denverpost.com or twitter.com/yeseniarobles