"Until they find out who murdered Julie, I will never know, did this have something to do with gambling," said Teddy Mitchell, a convicted gambler.

The killer walked down a dark hallway, through the couple's bedroom, and apparently cornered Julie Mitchell in the closet.

The brutal murder of a bookie's wife remains a mystery more than three years later. Oklahoma City Police will only tell us the investigation is "ongoing." Still, some question if the case has gone cold, including her husband, Teddy Mitchell, who has been considered a suspect in the killing.

The killer walked down a dark hallway, through the couple's bedroom, and apparently cornered Julie Mitchell in the closet. It's the only path to the crime scene where 34-year-old Julie Mitchell's body was found brutally beaten to death.

An autopsy report indicates Mitchell tried to fight off her killer, evidence by the cuts to her hands and face. She ultimately died from head trauma. Her baby was left to sit next her dead body.

"Somebody out there is a horrible, horrible person," Teddy Mitchell, Julie's husband, has an alibi for the night Julie was murdered in their home near NW 150th St and Western in Nov. 2010.

Mitchell was on an airplane the night of the killing. He can only speculate as to what happened.

"Until they find out who murdered Julie, I will never know, did this have something to do with gambling," said Mitchell, a convicted gambler.

The murder exposed Mitchell's illegal gambling operation. Eventually, he was convicted and sentenced in federal court for illegal gambling and money laundering. He will spend 27 months in a federal prison.

Mitchell maintains he had nothing to do with his wife's death. His stance did not stop investigators from pointing to him as a suspect.

2/6/2014 Related Story: Teddy Mitchell Breaks His Silence

"I don't know how I can be a suspect anymore. I've been under investigation for 3 ½ years for gambling, they've watched everything I have done." Mitchell said.

Mitchell explained whoever did it took $30,000 from a safe in the closet where his wife's body was found. The killer did not empty the safe and missed thousands more in a hidden safe in the same closet.

"The motive was money," said Kyle Eastridge, the private investigator hired by Mitchell explained gamblers frequented the house and knew Mitchell kept cash on hand. "It's possible someone in that world."

"We have given them some very viable suspects," Scott Adams, Mitchell's Attorney, said as their own investigation has generated evidence implicating at least one gambler who owed Mitchell money.

"Mike Thomas is one. He is a prime suspect. He was clearly at the Mitchell residence on the evening of Julie's murder."

Thomas' checkbook was found at the murder scene. Oklahoma City Police detectives have focused on Thomas in the past. His home and office were searched by detectives. No arrest was made. Mike Thomas' attorney, Ed Blau, declined to comment on if Thomas is a suspect.

Blau said he did not want to jeopardize an ongoing investigation. So, the murder is as much a mystery today as it was on Nov. 2, 2010.

"I go to sleep at night praying someone will come forward and help solve Julie's murder," said Mitchell

Mitchell's family and friends are offering a $50,000 reward in the case. To assist in getting pertinent tips to the Oklahoma City Police Department, Mitchell's private investigators with Eastridge Investigation have established a tip line (405) 274-7500.

Emails can be sent to info.eastridgepi@gmail.com

Oklahoma City Police Tip Line (405) 235-7300.