SAN DIEGO — The All-Star Game in Cincinnati is 71 days away, but Rockies third baseman Nolan Arenado is making his bid right now.

The two-time Gold Glove winner hogged the highlight reels with his diamond gems in April, and now his bat is doing damage. He went 3-for-5 with two home runs Sunday in the Rockies’ 8-6 loss to the San Diego Padres. It was the second multihomer game of his career, the previous time coming April 5, 2014, against Arizona at Coors Field.

Both of Arenado’s home runs came off Padres ace James Shields.

“I watched a lot of video of him, and he’s a good pitcher,” Arenado said. “I just went up there and tried to hit the ball hard. He made me look foolish in that first at-bat. He wanted to throw a good changeup on that first homer, but he didn’t put it (where) he wanted, and I took advantage of it.”

Arenado, who boosted his batting average to .314, ranks fifth in the National League with 14 extra-base hits.

Blackmon heating up. Center fielder Charlie Blackmon also hit two homers Sunday, the first a leadoff shot against Shields to open the game, the second a one-out homer off closer Craig Kimbrel in the ninth. It was Blackmon’s second multihomer game of his career. His homer in the first inning was the Rockies’ first leadoff home run this season.

Sunday lineup. Manager Walt Weiss knew first baseman Justin Morneau had hit Shields well in the past — a .320 average (16-for-50) with four home runs. Still, Weiss gave Morneau the day off, as well as shortstop Troy Tulowitzki.

Morneau is not hurt, but he was 0-for-8 in this series and Weiss figured he needed a break.

“There is nothing going on. It’s just a day I targeted for both of them,” Weiss said.

In other words, he’s sticking to his game plan to give veterans such as Morneau and Tulo designated days off.

Roberts debuts. Left-handed reliever Ken Roberts, called up from Triple-A Albuquerque on Saturday, made his major-league debut. He pitched a scoreless eighth, plunking Yonder Alonso but getting Yangervis Solarte to fly out to deep center, inducing Derek Norris to foul out to first baseman Daniel Descalso and finishing the inning by getting Alexi Amarista to ground out to short.

Footnotes. The Padres were not playing well when the Rockies arrived, but they took three games for their first series sweep of the season. … Shields improved to 3-0 despite pitching a season-low 5 innings and allowing a season-high five runs on a season-high nine hits. … Justin Upton hit a two-run homer off slumping Rockies starter Kyle Kendrick in the first. Upton has 21 career homers against the Rockies, his most against any opponent.

Looking ahead

Diamondbacks’ Josh Collmenter (2-3, 2.76 ERA) at Rockies’ Tyler Matzek (2-0, 2.70), 6:40 p.m. Monday, ROOT; 850 AM

It hasn’t always been pretty, but Matzek has been the Rockies’ most dependable starter this year, with the Rockies winning three of his four starts. He will be working on an extra day of rest — a good thing because he left his last start, at Arizona, with a cramp in his hamstring. Matzek has faced the D-backs three times in his career, going 2-1 with a 2.65 ERA. Collmenter dominated the Rockies last Wednesday in Phoenix, allowing just one unearned run in eight innings in Arizona’s 9-1 victory.

Tuesday: Diamondbacks’ Robbie Ray (2015 debut) at Rockies’ Jordan Lyles (2-2, 4.25), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Wednesday: Diamondbacks’ Rubby De La Rosa (2-2, 5.40) at Rockies’ Eddie Butler (2-2, 3.81), 1:10 p.m., no TV

Thursday: Off

Friday: Dodgers’ Brett Anderson (1-1, 4.21) at Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (0-2, 9.00), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Patrick Saunders, The Denver Post