BY: Follow @FBillMcMorris



A union that spent more than $1 million during the 2012 election is calling on Congress to ban big money donations.

The Amalgamated Transit Union, which has more than $100 million at its disposal, according to federal labor filings, wants a constitutional amendment reversing the Citizens United Supreme Court decision that has allowed for greater corporate political spending.

“The Citizens United decision allowed … the elitist rich to lavish far more money than ever before on political candidates who share their goals of crushing working people, and defunding public transit,” ATU International President Larry Hanley said in a Friday release. “It’s time for the Senate to curb money in politics and put America back in the hands of the people.”

Hanley’s statements echo other calls from top labor leaders demanding that Congress crack down on the political speech of business leaders.

However, the Citizens United decision also lifted restrictions on union political spending.

“Under Citizens United, unions can take member dues and spend the money on materials in support or in opposition to a candidate for office. This is problematic because union members are not asked for permission before this money is spent, and it is often difficult to ask for a refund,” labor watchdog Center for Union Facts wrote in the wake of the decision.

The ATU, which represents nearly 200,000 transit workers, spent more than $1.2 million in 2012 and has spent more than $600,000 in the 2014 interims, according to the Center for Responsive Politics. The national union spent more than $2 million on political activities, according to its Labor Department filings—about 10 percent of all money collected from its local members.

The ATU’s political spending pales in comparison to its parent organization, the AFL-CIO.

The union has spent big money on elections with almost all of their money benefitting Democrats. It contributed more than $9 million to liberals, including tens of thousands of dollars for President Barack Obama and Massachusetts Sen. Elizabeth Warren, and spent another $8 million on election efforts, according to the Center for Responsive Politics. Only 20 groups in America spent more during the 2012 cycle.

AFL-CIO is nearly as active in the 2014 election cycle that will determine the Senate majority. It is among the top 15 biggest spenders this year with more than $6 million going to Democrats.

“Right now, the political playing field looks like a long, steep hill with working families at the bottom and big business and the wealthy at the top,” Hanley said. “If we don’t level the playing field, corporations and the uber rich will continue to rule America at the expense of everyone else.”