Firefighters' priorities

Regarding the fire that killed one child and left another seriously hurt: The question that nags this professional firefighter is what was the time between the first arriving firefighters entering the structure and their report of search findings?

Contradicting/conflicting bystander reports are often the case in residential fires, but they should not divert efforts of immediate action to conduct a search of tenable areas where victims may be rescued. Recent national fire-service trends have emphasized firefighter safety over immediate action (search); however, assessing risk versus gain has and will always be the equation for first-arriving fire company officers.

Getting my crew home safely will always be the priority for me, but not until we as paid professional risk takers have confirmed through an aggressive search (twice) that there is not a 5-year-old in every closet, bathroom and bedroom of a residential fire.

Davis D. Odell Jr. Orlando

Right to bear arms gives peace of mind

Wednesday letter-writer Jim Levie needs to research the circumstances that led to our Declaration of Independence, the drafting of the Constitution and the addition of the Bill of Rights.

The 2nd Amendment (right to bear arms) was not added to the Constitution because our Founders were afraid that the government might take away their hunting rifles. It was added because they had just defeated a tyrannical king, and they wanted to ensure that we would always have the ability to do the same in the event that another tyrant came to power.

As to Levie's argument that we no longer need guns because we have police protection: Any law enforcement officer will tell you that his job is not to prevent crime, but rather to respond to calls for assistance after a crime has been committed. Those of us who have taken steps to defend our homes and families will be much more likely to thwart and survive a home invasion than someone who is solely reliant on the police for protection.

In the aftermath of a major hurricane or other disaster, when police are overwhelmed and lawlessness prevails, I will be secure in the knowledge that I can protect my family from those who might wish to do us harm, while Levie waits in vain for the police to show up.

Brian Smith Oviedo

Obama fan should take off blinders

Horse-racing fans have seen them. They're used to keep thoroughbreds focused straight ahead, eliminating the distraction that a broader field of vision allows. They're called blinders.

Tuesday letter-writer Don Pittman illustrates the concept. Here, he blindly supports President Obama's Iran treaty, telling us that anyone with a "shred of intelligence" would do the same.

Note to Pittman: Dozens of world leaders see the agreement as unwise and dangerous. A handful of Democrats have publicly decried it, and others, fearing reprisal, do so in private. Even "security experts" have thumbs down.

And yet, according to Pittman, they're all idiots for not seeing the negotiations as a history-setting victory of "diplomacy." Obama's "diplomacy" has been compared to that of Neville Chamberlain, and we all know what his bargaining skills yielded.

Pittman's approach to analysis smacks of Donald Trump who, when faced with an opposing viewpoint, always resorts to his old strategic standby — ridicule and vilify. Pittman, with this opinion, like Trump, has his blinders on. Obviously an Obama fan, he continues to see the man who won a Nobel Prize just for opening his mouth. He ignores the obvious flaws in the Obama "doctrine," as he rewards the president not for what he does but for what he says. He salutes a great speech while American interests are bartered away.

My mom would be disappointed that I am "short on listening skills, lack basic intelligence [and] do not have any ability to analyze ..."

Noel Smith Casselberry

Planned Parenthood offers affordable care

As a Planned Parenthood volunteer and patient, I'm distressed by the latest series of attacks against an organization that provides high-quality, judgment-free care for millions.

I grew up in a middle-class family in Cincinnati, Ohio. I worked in restaurants through high school before I started my career as an activist and organizer. Everyone working at the restaurants made less than minimum wage, and many had to support families on those wages. For my co-workers, and many other Americans struggling to make ends meet, basic health care is a luxury they could rarely afford.

Planned Parenthood provides that care at affordable prices, and millions of Americans rely on their local Planned Parenthood for services like cancer screening, testing and treatment for sexually transmitted infections, PAP smears, men's health care and much more. When Planned Parenthood started helping enroll people under the Affordable Care Act, I offered to help. I continue to volunteer because I received (and still receive) wonderful, judgment-free care as a patient.

I see the dedication and care the doctors, nurses and entire staff of Planned Parenthood put into their work every day. I believe that we all have a responsibility to take care of our neighbors and communities. That is what Planned Parenthood does.

Scott Kalota Orlando

Questioning trooper

What makes Wednesday letter-writer Mike Fiorito an authority as to whether there was a reason for the Texas state trooper to tell Sandra Bland to get out of the car? Regardless of whether she liked what the officer said, Bland did not have a right to question his authority at that time.

Law enforcement officers are authorized by law to give directions. As in several other recent cases of the public versus the police: If the individuals would have followed the directions the officers gave them, the outcomes might have been different.

Kathryn Smith Winter Park