It has long been a goal of the so-called sovereign citizen movement to create a “people's common law grand jury” so everyday citizens can, on their own, indict government officials for corruption — without any official assistance or oversight.

Charter Review Board members who voted against the motion to create a special committee to study the “people's common law grand jury”: District 1: Anthony “Tony” Sawyer, (R), 2016, vice-chairman, former legal aid attorney and retired Ohio prosecutor, served on the Meadows Community Association board and county Board of Zoning Appeals, elected in 2012 District 2: Richard Dorfman, (R), 2014, held a variety of positions in the entertainment and sports industry, elected in 2014 District 3: Joe Justice, (R), 2018, former chairman of North Port's Charter Review Board, elected in 2014 District 4: James F. Gabbert, (R), 2018, president of Gabbert Investment Group, has also served on the boards of Caldwell Trust Co. and Trust Companies of America, re-elected in 2014 Charter Review Board members who voted for the motion to create a special committee to study the people's common law grand jury: District 1: Steven R. Fields, (R), 2018, Airborne Infantryman, U.S. Army, describes himself as a “politician” on Facebook, re-elected in 2014 District 2: Donna Barcomb, (R), 2016, chairwoman, physical therapist, served on the Sarasota County Public Hospital Board from 1996 to 2008, elected in 2012 District 3: Pat Wayman, (R), 2016, a computer project coordinator, campaigned that the Charter Review Board should provide another level of local government, a “check” on other county offices and officials, elected in 2012 District 5: Bruce Dillon, (R) 2018, retired telecommunications operations manager, elected in 2014 Charter Review Board members who were absent during the May 13 meeting: District 5: John J. Fellin, (R), 2016, chairman of the Sarasota County Planning Commission, elected in 2012

The people's court, the movement claims, would operate outside and independent of the regular grand jury system, which is a function of either the State Attorney's Office or the U.S. Attorney's Office.

So far, efforts to establish people's courts in every Florida county have failed, in no small part because of the baggage associated with the sovereign citizen movement and its supporters.

Sovereign citizens believe that the federal government has no authority to levy taxes or impose laws upon them. Some refuse to pay taxes, use license plates, driver's licenses or Social Security numbers. Others have renounced their American citizenship.

The Anti-Defamation League says sovereign citizens are known for three types of activities: creating fake, quasi-governmental groups like common law grand juries; “paper terrorism,” filing multimillion-dollar frivolous liens against public officials and judges; and violence — killing police officers and federal agents. The FBI considers sovereign citizen extremists to be domestic terrorists. Terry Nichols, the man who helped Timothy McVeigh plan the bombing of the federal building in Oklahoma City, is perhaps the most infamous person to claim the title.

Now there is some evidence that the movement is trying to get a foothold in Southwest Florida.

At the May 13 meeting of Sarasota County's Charter Review Board, Rodger Dowdell, a Bradenton resident with ties to the national sovereign citizen movement, gave a lengthy presentation and proposed amending the county charter to include a people's common law grand jury.

Sarasota County's Charter Review Board — the only one in Florida whose members are elected rather than appointed — usually proposes minor changes to the county charter like eliminating contradictions and inconsistencies, though issues can be more significant, such as qualifications for county administrators, disclosures for county-initiated rezonings and debt limitations. Proposed changes must then be approved by a voter referendum.

Board member Steven Fields moved to create a special committee to study Dowdell's proposed amendment. The board voted 4-4 on Field's motion, which failed because of the tie. One member was absent.

“If someone brings an idea that we can do, that's something we should take a look at,” Fields told the Herald-Tribune. “I've seen the federal government grabbing more rights away from people. They bribe states into federal control. The Charter Review Board should not be acting like the County Commission and protecting the status quo. And I don't think (the people's common law grand jury) has anything to do with sovereign citizens.”

Dowdell had brought around 50 vocal supporters to the meeting — a fact not lost on the eight members of the Charter Review Board or its chairwoman.

“I just thought they mobilized a group of people and that I'd like to learn more about it before making a decision. I felt it was appropriate for them to be heard,” said Donna Barcomb, a physical therapist who chairs the Charter Review Board. “I just felt like they had put time into it. I felt it was appropriate to hear them out a little more. In theory, it sounded like a good idea. I felt like they needed to be able to demonstrate how to apply the concept more directly.”

But the board's close vote created consternation among county officials, who say it is evidence that Sarasota's Charter Review Board is out of control, and trying to usurp power from other elected bodies.

“We have a minority group of citizens who are using the Charter Review Board to try to go around individual elected officials who were elected by a majority,” Sarasota County Commissioner Christine Robinson said. “The Charter Review Board frequently flies under the radar, but this board has the ability to try to place legislative policy in our charter and circumvent the elected County Commission. The Charter Review Board should be a charter caretaker, protecting the document's integrity. The charter is our county constitution.”

Those who have tracked the movement for years were surprised that the measure got so close to being considered.

“The sovereign citizen movement is one of the extremist groups that has a high degree of criminal activity because, theoretically, they believe they can break any law, and they're able to rationalize breaking any law,” said Mark Pitcavage, Director of Fact-Finding for the Anti-Defamation League, a nonprofit dedicated to fighting anti-Semitism and intolerance.

Typically, Pitcavage said, local governments give “short shrift” to sovereign citizen notions.

“Usually, we find one selectman or a councilman who is a sovereign citizen and gets on a board, but as soon as they start spouting ideas they get rejected,” Pitcavage said. “But Dowdell is affiliated with several Tea Parties. If this is done under Tea Party auspices, quite possibly, they might not understand that the whole common law grand jury is tied up with the sovereign citizen movement. They might not realize that.”

Sovereign lite,

Dowdell declined to say whether he is a sovereign citizen. He took issue with the term itself.

“The sovereign citizen label is an oxymoron,” Dowdell told the Herald-Tribune. “'Sovereign' means the highest ranking in the state. 'Citizen' means subject. To be the highest ranking subject makes no sense.”

Dowdell pulls from history when explaining the people's common law grand jury — from the Magna Carta, the Roman Empire, colonial times and a higher power.

“Grand jury powers come from God,” he said. “There are two main types of law: civil law, which came out of Rome, and common law, which came to us from England. Common law says we must look to God or nature and make our laws compatible with God and nature — natural law.”

After the American Revolution, Dowdell said, when there were no standing police departments and judges rode horseback throughout their circuits, groups of 25 citizens would assemble to indict someone for wrongdoing. The same system is viable today, he said, even though we have a modern criminal justice system.

If people's common law grand juries were reconvened, not even the president or the U.S. Supreme Court could overturn their findings, Dowdell said.

“A people's common law grand jury can, without any probable cause, go into any nook or cranny of government — local, state or federal — research anything that's going on and root out corruption,” he said. “We want to government to recognize the contract we call the constitution, and start obeying the law. It's very simple.”

Dowdell is a state coordinator for the New York-based National Liberty Alliance, which has a bold disclaimer on its website: “WE ARE NOT PART OF THE SOVEREIGN CITIZENS MOVEMENT. We do not endorse or entertain the fiction such as bills of exchange, redeeming and/or discharging through trust accounts; nor do we involve ourselves with contracts, commercial liens and the exchanging of an oath of office for a value. We do not encourage or teach people to write declarations, drive without driver's licenses, revoke their voter's application, revoke their birth certificate or their Social Security numbers. The power of the Grand Jury is to write true bills of indictment, true bills of presentments and true bills of information.”

Despite the disclaimer, Pitcavage says the Anti-Defamation League considers the National Liberty Alliance one of the country's largest sovereign citizen organizations.

“I did some preliminary looking into Mr. Dowdell,” Pitcavage said. “I would not describe him as a hardcore sovereign citizen, the way I would describe many National Liberty Alliance activists. He seems to have come to the movement only relatively recently, and I am not sure that he has embraced all of its beliefs, as opposed to just some of them. He still seems to have a foot in mainstream conservative thought.

“He certainly has embraced at least some sovereign citizen beliefs. But he still frames many of his arguments in terms of mainstream political issues such as Obamacare or Common Core, and he doesn't make any explicit references to conspiracies infiltrating and subverting the original government. Whether he will continue further down the path into full sovereign citizen beliefs or stay where he is, I can't speculate.”

Based upon an examination of Dowdell's actions and writings, Pitcavage considers him a “sovereign lite” compared with other NLA activists.

“This may be how he was able to appeal to the Charter Review Board folks, because he wasn't spouting any of the wilder sovereign citizen theories,” Pitcavage said, adding that Dowdell is identified with the Greater Orlando Tea Party and other groups.

“Maybe he was able to reach out and get a sympathetic ear.”

Other counties

Dowdell claims that there is an active people's common law grand jury operating in Manatee County, but he offered no proof.

“I can't talk about it,” he said. “Everything is secret. In order to keep innocents who may be investigated from being damaged, whatever a grand jury does is secret.”

“Only he would know,” said Angelina Colonnesso, Manatee County's Ad-Interim Clerk of Court. “They're not affiliated with the court system at all.”

Colonnesso has seen sovereign citizens attempt to file multimillion-dollar fraudulent liens against judges and other officials.

“We forward them to the Sheriff's Office because they're a criminal act,” she said. “As clerk, we process paperwork from the court system. If it's not affiliated with a real case, there's no mechanism set up to recognize that. Things have quieted down here lately. The real problem is in Dixie County.”

Dana Johnson, Dixie County's clerk of the court, says she receives correspondence from sovereign citizens every day.

“I'm getting harassing emails and threatening faxes saying they're going to arrest me,” Johnson said. “This one says they want info on bonds and oaths. There are further demands. I'm concerned about my safety. The local sheriff has alerted (the Florida Department of Law Enforcement) and the FBI. Anytime they come up on our public agenda we have security with us at all times.”

One Dixie County resident, Terry Trussell, has been charged with 14 counts of impersonating court officials, Johnson said. The criminal case is pending.

“Once Trussell got selected to serve on a legitimate grand jury, it became the perfect storm,” she said. “From that point, he's taken it on his own authority to create a sovereign citizen board of common law grand jurors. I am constantly scared.”

Dixie County Sheriff Dewey Hatcher, who has just 15 deputies to patrol 700 square miles, says he has known Trussell all his life, but only recently met Dowdell.

“He's one of their 'administrative investigators' for their people's grand jury,” Hatcher said. “He came into it when Trussell had 'indictments.'”

The sheriff has not arrested anyone.

“They asked if I would help with their indictments. I said any order has to be signed by a judge — whether it's a warrant or whatever — it's got to be a legal court document,” Hatcher said. “They 'indicted' everyone from the governor and (Attorney General) Pam Bondi on down to the president of our school board, and they said the school board attorney should be fired.”

Unknown connections

Barcomb, the Sarasota County Charter Review Board chairwoman, said she had no knowledge of the link between common law grand juries and the sovereign citizen movement, or that the FBI considers some of their extremist members to be domestic terrorists.

“That's the antithesis of what I'm all about,” Barcomb said. “I don't think board knew anything about that concept. It was a group of individuals who presented a concept to the board. That's what the Charter Review Board does — not leaning one way or another. Frequently, the board will look at something and determine if it's appropriate or in the best interests of the county. For the most part, and I include myself in this, we're completely ignorant about the concepts.”

Board member Anthony Sawyer, a former legal aid attorney and a retired prosecutor from Ohio, voted against further study of the people's common law grand jury proposal.

“They may mean well, but I don't agree with them,” he said. “Charitably, it made no sense. The Charter Review Board cannot do anything in conflict with state law, and state law creates the grand juries in Florida. We couldn't pass it if we wanted to. They say the purpose of a people's common law grand jury is to indict public officials, but we already have a system for that. Go to the authorities, or ask FDLE to investigate, and people get indicted. I don't understand where they're coming from.

“The bottom line: I didn't think much of it, and I voted against it because it didn't make sense and we don't have the authority to do it.”