Bob McDonnell might do some time -- good thing he has that fancy watch. Scott Brown thinks lawmakers need to know how to plan battles, which makes sense considering his hero is President Thomas Whitmore from "Independence Day.” And Rep. Steve Southerland is hosting a men-only fundraiser, saying that such events go back to the 12th Century.You know what else goes back to the 12th Century? Not including women in things. This is HUFFPOST HILL for Thursday, September 3rd, 2014:

MCDONNELL AND WIFE FOUND GUILTY OF CORRUPTION - At least they can stop pretending that they hate each other and get back to the politically proper thing of ignoring each other...just this time it'll be in jail. "Former Gov. Bob McDonnell of Virginia and his wife, Maureen, were convicted of corruption in federal court Thursday, following a trial that halted the political ascent of the one-time Republican star and peeled back the couple’s private life to the bone. As 11 counts of 'guilty' were pronounced on counts of conspiracy, bribery and extortion for Mr. McDonnell, he covered his face with his hands and his head fell nearly to the defense table. His wife, convicted on nine counts, looked straight ahead. There were sobs from the seats behind the couple that included their five adult children...Asked whether Mr. McDonnell will appeal, his lawyer, Henry W. Asbill, said 'Of course.' He said he was 'shocked' by the verdict." [NYT]

The Former Abramoff Lobbyist Pissed At Things, famous for having Equinox delivered to his jail cell, has some words of wisdom for McDonnell: "FALPAT is with you on being sad because it sucks going from being the guy everyone wants to be around to the guy who doesn't get a phone call except from his overpriced lawyers. Speaking of your lawyers, get new ones, and the fact you threw your wife under the bus makes you the biggest John Edwards in American politics." Thanks, FALPAT!

FLASHBACK: "McDonnell rejected plea offer to face one felony, spare wife any charges, avoid trial" [WashPost headline in January]

HELP HUFFPOST'S FERGUSON FELLOWSHIP - We're seeking reader support for a year's worth of journalism in Ferguson, Mo. Our Ferguson Fellow is named Mariah Stewart and you can read more about Mariah and our fellowship HERE.

D.C. CIRCUIT TO RE-HEAR CRUCIAL OBAMACARE CASE - AP/HuffPost: "The full D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals has agreed to re-hear the case of Halbig v. Burwell. In July, a three-judge panel from the D.C. Circuit Court ruled that people in the 36 states that use the federal health insurance exchange as part of the Affordable Care Act are ineligible for subsidized insurance...The same July day the D.C. Circuit Court panel ruled on Halbig, a Virginia federal appeals panel ruled the opposite way on an identical case. The plaintiffs in the D.C. case requested the Supreme Court to take on the case in August. According to the Wall Street Journal's Brent Kendall, oral arguments will be heard in December." [AP/HuffPost]

DAILY DELANEY DOWNER - The new unemployment rate comes out tomorrow. It will probably be part of a positive jobs report. There will only be millions of unemployed people, maybe a few million long-term. I had lunch with a lady today who is selling all her stuff to make rent. [Hang in there!]

Does somebody keep forwarding you this newsletter? Get your own copy. It's free! Sign up here. Send tips/stories/photos/events/fundraisers/job movement/juicy miscellanea to huffposthill@huffingtonpost.com. Follow us on Twitter - @HuffPostHill

GAY MARRIAGE BANS STRUCK DOWN IN INDIANA AND WISCONSIN - Rudy (and Jeff)! Rudy (and Jeff)! Rudy (and Jeff)! AP: "A U.S. appeals court in Chicago has ruled that gay marriage bans in Wisconsin and Indiana are unconstitutional. Thursday's decision by a three-judge panel at the U.S. 7th Circuit Court of Appeals bumps number of states where gay marriage will be legal from 19 to 21. The decision was unanimous. The Wisconsin and Indiana cases shifted to Chicago after their attorneys general appealed separate lower court rulings in June tossing the bans. The 7th Circuit stayed those rulings pending its own decision." [AP]

HEALTHCARE.GOV HACKED IN JULY - "A hacker broke into part of the HealthCare.gov insurance enrollment website in July and uploaded malicious software, according to federal officials. Investigators found no evidence that consumers' personal data was taken in the breach, federal officials said. The hacker appears only to have accessed a server used to test code for HealthCare.gov. The Department of Health and Human Services discovered the attack last week. An HHS official said the attack appears to mark the first successful intrusion into the website, where millions of Americans bought insurance starting last year under the Affordable Care Act. It raised concerns among federal officials because of how easily the intruder gained access and how much damage could have occurred." [WSJ]

AMERICA MIGHT HAVE (ANOTHER) GENOCIDAL FRENEMY - Sabrina Siddiqui: "The Obama administration has flatly ruled out working alongside the same regime that has committed large-scale atrocities during the Syrian civil war. But several military and counterterrorism analysts believe the U.S. may be left with limited options should it go after ISIS in the region absent a tacit agreement, at the very least, with [Syrian President Bashar] Assad. Unilateral action, some argue, would expose the U.S. to a number of risks -- be it the downing of one of its military aircraft or gaps in intelligence that would make a successful bombing campaign against ISIS difficult to execute...Seizing on an opportunity to legitimize his government, Assad has said he is open to partnering with the U.S. against ISIS and warned the Obama administration against acting unilaterally." [HuffPost]



The Free Beacon has a supercut of Luke Russert's bro-iest moments.

DARK MONEY: CAN'T STOP, WON'T STOP - Paul Blumenthal: "Dark money groups have spent at least $142 million on advertising campaigns naming specific senators, representatives and congressional candidates over the past 20 months, according to a Huffington Post analysis of news reports, press releases and political advertising reports collected by the Sunlight Foundation. This total now surpasses the $122 million spent by independent groups that do disclose their donors and only stands to grow...network raised and distributed $400 million in the 2012 elections. This time around, the six groups at the center of the Koch operation have already combined to spend at least $53.5 million just on candidate-specific ads." [HuffPost]

Rand Paul refuses to shrug the atlas: "Paul defended himself against critics of this apparently new position in a Time op-ed on Thursday, pushing back against pundits who 'are surprised that I support destroying the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) militarily.' Paul claimed that he is neither an isolationist nor an interventionist and that he sees 'war as the last resort.' But he ultimately supports military action against extremists threatening the Middle East because ''Peace through Strength' only works if you have and show strength.'" [HuffPost]

ONCE MORE INTO THE UNTO THE BREACH, BROHEEMS - Plus he probably discussed pikeman formation and castle siege tactics with all those kings and queens. Mike McAuliff: "Scott Brown... is again talking up his long service in the National Guard, suggesting it taught him how to run a 'frontal attack.' ...Still, he gave the impression Wednesday in a campaign question-and-answer session in Hudson, New Hampshire, that he was a bit more combat-seasoned than that. Criticizing President Barack Obama's efforts cutting costs and reshaping the military as 'incoherent,' Brown suggested he would do better because of his experience. 'That's why we need someone in there with military experience to do that, who understands what an 11 Bravo [infantryman] is, and what's the composition of a rifle company, and how do you lead a frontal attack. Those are the things that we need to be aware of,' Brown said." [HuffPost]

CONGRESSMAN HOLDS STAG NIGHT - Suddenly Steve Southerland's women's outreach initiative, "Broads for Steve," starts to make a lot more sense. Kate Nocera: "Back in March, organizers held a fundraiser for Republican Congressman Steve Southerland described as a meeting with Southerland and a 'small group of concerned men,' according to an invite obtained by BuzzFeed. The invite goes on to say that attendees should 'tell the misses not to wait up' because 'the after dinner whiskey and cigars will be smooth & the issues to discuss are many.'...Good men sitting around discussing & solving political & social problems over fine food & drink date back to the 12th Century with King Arthur’s Round Table,' the invitation said." [BuzzFeed]

Next time she should just accuse Scott Walker of causing Ebola: "Democratic National Committee Chair Debbie Wasserman Schultz (D-Fla.) said Thursday that she 'shouldn't have used' charged language to describe Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker's (R) record on women's issues. The congresswoman ripped Walker at a Wednesday roundtable in Milwaukee for giving 'women the back of his hand' by signing a bill that prevents victims of employment discrimination from seeking punitive and compensatory damages in state courts." [HuffPost's Igor Bobic]

BECAUSE YOU'VE READ THIS FAR - Here's a dog excited about the water.

COMFORT FOOD

- A treatise on PG-13 movies.

- The Times has details on Apple's next big product announces.

- Don't dress your dog up like a gigantic spider. It's terrifying.

- A roundup of some of Joan Rivers' best moments.

- Bulldog teamwork.

TWITTERAMA

@indecision: Glenn Beck says Hillary Clinton will win in 2016. Sounds like somebody's angling for a VP nod!

@jesseberney:

BOTH SIDES

E L

N A

G V

H E

A R

Z Y

I

@dceiver: I dunno why Biden wants to chase Isis to Hell, Michigan but it sure looks like it's gonna be tricky you guys

Got something to add? Send tips/quotes/stories/photos/events/fundraisers/job movement/juicy miscellanea to Eliot Nelson (eliot@huffingtonpost.com) or Arthur Delaney (arthur@huffingtonpost.com). Follow us on Twitter @HuffPostHill (twitter.com/HuffPostHill). Sign up here: http://huff.to/an2k2e

More: Huffpost Hill