WASHINGTON -- President Obama continues to lean on Congress to invest in the battle against opioid overdoses and now he's built a team to make certain insurers are doing their part.

Obama Sets Task Force to Ensure Access to Addiction Tx

Noting that the opioid abuse and heroin epidemic "is affecting everybody -- young, old, men, women, [and] children," President Obama launched a federal task force Tuesday to address the issue.

The Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Parity Task Force will work to ensure access to coverage for behavioral health issues, Obama said here at the National Rx Drug Abuse and Heroin Summit.

The task force builds on the approach of the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 in requiring that health insurance policies cover mental health and substance abuse treatment on par with treatment for physical illness; the group also will help enforce parity provisions included in the Affordable Care Act. The task force will identify best practices for compliance with parity laws and problem areas, in particular challenges accessing substance use disorder treatment.

Medicare Competitive Bidding Program Under Fire

A new Medicare competitive bidding program for durable medical equipment has made it more difficult for diabetic beneficiaries to get the supplies they need, according to endocrinologists and diabetes advocates.

"As implemented, Medicare has used the Competitive Bidding Program to significantly reduce the cost of diabetes testing supplies by restricting access to improved technology devices and limiting choice for patients and healthcare professionals based primarily on cost," George Grunberger, MD, president of the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, wrote in a letter to senators Orrin Hatch (R-Utah) and Ron Wyden (D-Ore.) leaders of the Senate Finance Committee.

"The result has been an increase in patient adverse events, including higher mortality rates and hospitalizations, which ironically have led to overall higher Medicare costs."

FDA OKs Use of Mifepristone Later in Pregnancy

The FDA has approved new labeling for mifepristone (Mifeprex), also known as RU-486, the drug that is used for ending early pregnancies.

"The labeling changes include revisions to the Prescribing Information, Patient Medication Guide, Patient Agreement Form and Prescriber Agreement Form to reflect the most current clinical practices and safety and efficacy data for Mifeprex," Danco Laboratories, the drug's maker, said in a press release Wednesday.

This labeling change "is another affirmation from the FDA that medication abortion is a safe and effective option to end an early pregnancy," said Raegan McDonald-Mosley, MD, chief medical officer of Planned Parenthood Federation of America, in a statement.

P-TAC: Ready, Willing, Able to Tackle Payment Reform

A new panel of physicians and health policy experts established by Congress aims to ensure that physicians' voices are heard on the issue of payment reform, and it's already facing a couple of problems.

First, word hasn't gotten out yet to the medical community about the Physician-Focused Payment Model Technical Advisory Committee (P-TAC), according to Harold Miller, P-TAC member and president and CEO of the Center for Healthcare Quality and Payment Reform (CHQPR) in Pittsburgh.

That's because doctors know the Sustainable Growth Rate (SGR) formula was repealed, but few understand its replacement, the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act (MACRA) of 2015, Miller said.

FDA Advisors Lukewarm on PD Psychosis Drug

An FDA advisory committee voted 12-to-2 that the benefits of treatment with pimavanserin (Nuplazid) outweigh the risks in Parkinson's disease psychosis, although members still expressed reservations.

The Psychopharmacologic Drugs Advisory Committee (PDAC) did not make a direct vote on whether or not to recommend approval. However, it did decide that the drug appeared to be efficacious (12-to-2) and that the safety profile was adequately characterized (11-to-3).

Chairperson David Brent, MD, of the University of Pittsburgh, noted that panelists said that while the pros of the agent outweigh the cons, there are some caveats. "There were concerns about safety, and an emphasis that the FDA should be as specific as possible in labeling the drug to restrict off-label use," Brent said. "But given the lack of alternatives and the poor quality of life in this condition, I think that explained the majority of endorsements for the favorable risk-benefit ratio."

FDA: Implanted Devices Don't Preclude CT

The FDA offered some reassurance Friday about the safety of CT scans in patients with implanted devices such as insulin pumps, neurostimulators, and cardiac implants such as pacemakers.

The agency has received reports of interference with the operations of such devices in patients undergoing CT imaging. Nevertheless, it said, the risks still appear "extremely low" and outweighed in most cases by the medical necessity of such scans.

"The presence of [such devices] should NOT preclude the performance of an appropriate, medically indicated CT scan," the FDA said.

Next Week

The Senate returns Tuesday. The House continues a district work period.

On Thursday, the FDA Gastrointestinal Drugs Advisory Committee Meeting will discuss obeticholic acid oral tablets, proposed for the treatment of primary biliary cirrhosis in combination with ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA).

On Thursday and Friday, the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission will discuss payment and policy issues.