If Hillary Clinton is right that Obamacare is 'working,' Americans should be terrified..

Protesters in front of the Supreme Court in Washington, D.C., in March 2015. (Photo: Jack Gruber, USA TODAY)

“It’s working.”

That’s how Hillary Clinton described the Affordable Care Act on Dec. 1. Yet her bold statement seems out of touch considering the growing list of issues plaguing President Obama’s signature law. Median premium increases are about 12%, according to consulting firm McKinsey & Co. Health and Human Services forecasts that between 9.4 million and 11.4 million Americans will enroll in the online exchanges — half as many as previously thought. And health-insurance networks continue to get narrower, as insurers try to keep costs from rising even faster than they already are.

These developments are concerning enough. But they pale in comparison to what lies ahead. Using the latest health-insurance-exchange enrollment data and a model funded in part by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, I recently estimated how the Affordable Care Act will affect the health insurance market over the next decade.

In brief: Costs will continue to rise and coverage will continue to underwhelm. In fact, it will likely go into reverse, leaving millions more Americans uninsured than today.

Start with the premiums, which are rising by an average of 12% from this year to next. This trend shows no signs of stopping. Across all individual plans, premiums will likely rise a further 7.4% between 2016 and 2017. Family plans will be slightly lower, increasing by roughly 6.2%. Similar increases will continue over the next decade.

By 2025, I estimate that premiums for individual plans will be about 61% more expensive than they will be in 2016. Family plans, meanwhile, will see premium hikes of roughly 61.5%. Silver plans — the most popular plans by far — will have annual premiums of nearly $5,500 for individuals and $23,500 for families. By comparison, those same plans will cost an average of $3,200 and $13,600, respectively, in 2016.

The Affordable Care Act’s supporters typically respond that Americans will be fine because any premium hikes will be covered by taxpayer subsidies. Yet my analysis finds this is woefully misguided.

For most plans, I estimate that 50% or more of annual premium growth will come out of consumers’ pockets. Between 2016 and 2017, families will pay an average $600 more a year for the most popular silver plans. This number will steadily grow in the coming years, until the annual new costs total more than $1,000. Cumulatively, I estimate silver family plan holders will be paying almost $8,000 more out of pocket within 10 years. Individuals with comparable plans are looking at $2,000.

Remember: That is on top of existing premiums, deductibles and out-of-pocket maximums, all of which have also risen under the Affordable Care Act.

These premium increases will be driven by two factors. The expiration of the Affordable Care Act’s insurer assistance programs — so-called “risk corridors” and “re-insurance” — in 2017 are already forcing insurers to price their plans higher. But this creates a chain reaction where customers — especially the healthy young adults who are crucial to the law’s success — start leaving the insurance market in droves.

This chain reaction is already in its early stages. Millions of Americans are already struggling to pay for the Affordable Care Act’s insurance. For millions of others, it’s not just a struggle — it is impossible.

POLICING THE USA: A look at race, justice, media

For a growing number of Americans, the Affordable Care Act’s penalty for not purchasing insurance will be the most affordable choice. Millions of people are already taking this path. The Obama administration initially predicted between 2.7 million and 5.4 million people would pay the Affordable Care Act’s penalty for not purchasing insurance. Yet last year, roughly 7.5 million Americans already took that path.

This trend will only accelerate. I estimate that Affordable Care Act exchange enrollment will peak in 2016 and 2017, then start declining thereafter. By 2025, six million Americans will have left the market entirely. Millions more will join the pool of eligible workers, largely due to population growth, yet many of them will refuse to sign up for the Affordable Care Act in the first place.

Overall, the number of uninsured Americans will rise from 29 million in 2015 to a staggering 40 million in 2025 — a nearly 40% increase. Perhaps most concerning is that this will leave nearly as many Americans uninsured as there were before the Affordable Care Act was passed.

Hillary Clinton could indeed be right. The Affordable Care Act could be working as intended. If that’s true, it should be absolutely terrifying for the millions of Americans who are suffering — or will soon suffer — under it.

Stephen T. Parente, a professor of health finance, is an associate dean at the Carlson School of Management at the University of Minnesota.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the Opinion front page.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1QXZz5A