Some church leaders around the state were sent scrambling to rework their services this weekend after a state Supreme Court decision affirmed that gay couples in New Jersey can begin getting married on Monday.

The Rev. Cynthia Black, lead pastor at the Church of the Redeemer in Morristown, said she had to quickly rewrite her sermon after the court ruled Friday not to overturn a Mercer County judge’s declaration that same-sex couples in the state could be legally married.

“My sermon was pre-planned, all about the earth, then along comes this ruling. As a lesbian I’m not going to ignore it,” Black said this morning. “So trying to transform a sermon about the earth to a sermon about the Supreme Court was a little bit of a challenge.”

The Episcopal Morristown church is in their “creation season,” Black said, in which they focus on a different element of creation each week. During today’s service, a bowl of dirt was brought forward during the offertory, a symbol that Black equates to moral justice.

“In gardeners terms it gets under our fingernails, and this is really the justice that needs to get under our fingernails, and get so far under our fingernails that we can’t scrub it out. And I think that’s happening,” she said.

At least half the congregation at Redeemer in Morristown is LGBT, according to Black.

“It’s obviously a wonderful thing that has happened, it’s a sign that the moral arc of the universe is long, and it really does bend toward justice,” Black said. “It’s a sign of bigger things, not only justice for LGBT people, but justice for any person who is different, justice for any person trampled on for being ‘less than.’ “

Black understands the distinction between civil unions and marriages — though “married” to her partner in 1988 in a commitment ceremony, a boating accident in 2010 left her with a broken back and a newfound understanding of the challenges that come with the limited legal rights offered to couples who don’t possess a marriage license.

One year later, the church pension fund changed its rules, requiring a couple to be legally married to receive benefits.

“If I had died in that boating accident, (my wife) Becky would not have received spouse benefits. So we went off to Massachusetts,” Black said. “We would have much rather done it here, but we couldn’t wait. We needed the protection for her.”

Church of the Redeemer in Morristown was planning to perform a marriage at 12:01 a.m. Monday, Black said, but the town in which the couple lives was slow to get the paperwork done, so the ceremony will be held later this week.

In Montclair, the Rev. Ann Ralosky of First Congregational Church in Montclair said she didn’t feel it necessary to re-work today’s sermon, she talked about the court's ruling during today's services.

“This has been an integral part of our community,” Ralosky said. “I’m literally preaching to the choir.”

Ralosky will open today’s service with a celebratory prayer, and she said the mood around the church, which is about one-third LGBT, is very joyous today.

She said Friday’s ruling was crucial because it added legal security to relationships that had been strong for years already.

“The love was there, the commitment was there, but the protection wasn’t there,” Ralosky said. “Really what this means is that the state has caught up with what we’ve known all along — that marriage strengthens communities.”

In her Morristown church this morning, Black touched on the universal justice she had spoken about earlier, and she pushed congregants to keep fighting until every underrepresented person was treated as an equal.

“Stand with me and promise to share the earth of justice, rising and unscrubbable,” Black said at the end the sermon. “The earth and all that is in it is not ours to exploit. We and every living thing are precious and holy, lovable and loving.

“Be a gardener,” said said. “Dig a ditch, toil and sweat. And turn the earth upside down.”