EAST PEORIA — There is not one definition for paramedicine. It means different things in different parts of the country.

For the East Peoria Fire Department, it will mean an added service for a particular set of residents.

“Ten years ago, when I first started hearing about it, it was primarily billed as a service that would be used for places like Wyoming, places that would have a long distance between where someone lived and the closest hospital,” said Ryan Beck, assistant chief and EMS coordinator. “Paramedics would be able to perform a wider scope closer to procedures and things that a doctor would do, such as putting in sutures, removing sutures.”

The goal, Beck said, is to cut down on unnecessary transports to the emergency room.

“A lot of this is due to the Affordable Care Act. ... There is a health care reform component. ... Where paramedicine is at now — mobile integrated health care, or community paramedicine, community paramedics, are really all the same thing — the service now is an opportunity for us to further serve our residents,” Beck said.

“They’re our citizens. They’re our responsibility,” said Chief Al Servis.

Beck said the paramedicine program in East Peoria has been in the works for the past year and a half, and he is hoping to kick it off in May. The Department has been coordinating the program mainly with OSF Saint Francis Medical Center in Peoria, but Unity Point Health Methodist is on board as well, Beck said.

Case managers at OSF will use a risk scoring tool to select patients for the home visits in the 61611, 61603 and 61605 ZIP codes, said Debbie Trau, director of emergency services and patient experience at the hospital and Children’s Hospital of Illinois. East Peoria Fire Department will cover the 61611 area, and Advanced Medical Transport will cover the 61603 and 61605 areas in Peoria. There is no cost to the patient for these visits in East Peoria, Beck said.

Trau said the program will help decrease 30-day readmission rates, which Medicare and Medicaid have initiatives to reduce.

Beck said other fire departments are expressing interest in paramedicine, adding that it’s “the big thing that’s on everybody’s radar.”

Initially, two East Peoria paramedics will be sent to a patient’s home in the 61611 area after he or she is discharged from the hospital.

The program in East Peoria will consist of three components: the discharge follow-up visit, a focus on non-emergency calls and preventative visits.

Nationwide, over 20 percent of patients with certain diagnoses, like congestive heart failure and diabetes, are readmitted to the hospital within 30 days of their initial visit, Beck said. The main reason this is happening, he added, is a lack of access to follow-up care.

When EMS providers do patient assessments in the home, Trau said they will be able to pick up on subtle changes, such as weight gain or breathing patterns, which could be corrected with a visit to their doctor.

Hospitals will supply the EPFD with a list of patients’ names for scheduled house visits. Patients will be informed of this before they leave the hospital and can decline the service.

Those who take advantage of it will be visited up to five times a month.

“The hospital wants us to go in because we can be eyes and ears in a home setting that they can’t do,” Beck said.

After visits are completed, paramedics will report patients’ conditions back to the hospital.

Hospitals will pay $95 to the EPFD per visit. Beck estimates the fire department’s call volume to increase by 250 in the first year of the program.

One of the biggest challenges for the paramedics won’t be the increased call volume; Beck said it will be changing their mindset toward a non-emergency call.

“We’re used to something acute, emergent. We go and do things very quickly and get (patients) transported to the hospital if necessary, whereas this is a much more laid-back situation and we want our provider to take time with the patient,” Beck said.

The EPFD is not out to compete with other providers, such as home health care and nursing homes, Beck said.

“I know nationwide it’s a concern. No one wants anyone encroaching on their area of business,” he said. “Our focus is on those patients who are falling through the cracks.”

Beck said he sees paramedicine as a great service for hospitals.

“Hospitals obviously want the best for their patients. They’re overwhelmed. There’s doctor shortages. They’re swamped. ... They’re seeing all the patients they can see at this point. They’re looking at the best way they can serve these patients even if it’s outside of the hospital,” he said.

Trau echoed Beck’s comment: “This program will help the hospital. It’s really a program to help our patients, with the focus on the patient. We want to collaborate with our community partners to deliver care to where they are and help prevent a readmission to the hospital.”

In the future, Beck said the call volume may increase to the point that a paramedic would be dedicated to paramedicine full time and make house visits by a car rather than an ambulance or fire truck.

“As the program grows and is financially supported from the hospitals or other payer sources, then it may make sense to transition to a different model,” Beck said.

Trau envisions the program beginning in April.

“One of the other reasons that nationally this has been very successful, EMS providers know their communities. ... They are embedded in their community,” Trau said. “It’s really about reconnecting the community with a collaborative effort to improve our patients’ outcomes.”