<p>DAVID YAMAMOTO/SPECIAL TO THE STAR</p><p>Navy veteran Martin Falk (left) and Dr. Robert Shor, with the Jewish War Veterans, greet each other during Tuesday’s event in Agoura Hills to celebrate veterans. The event was at Meadowbrook Senior Living.</p>

SHARE DAVID YAMAMOTO/SPECIAL TO THE STAR During Tuesday’s event in Agoura Hills, Army veteran Al Negrin points to a picture of himself while recalling his memories of fighting on Okinawa during World War II. DAVID YAMAMOTO/SPECIAL TO THE STAR Navy Cmdr. Tom Long of Naval Base Ventura County talks with Meadowbrook Senior Living residents Harriet Licht (left) and Clara Mayman during Tuesday’s event to honor veterans. DAVID YAMAMOTO/SPECIAL TO THE STAR Swing Dames Gail Bianchi (left), Susan Huckle and Molly Cookson sing 1940s tunes during Tuesday’s event to honor veterans. DAVID YAMAMOTO/SPECIAL TO THE STAR Swing Dames singer Molly Cookson entertains the crowd during Tuesday’s event to honor veterans.

By Robyn Flans

"We must hear the World War II veterans' stories before we cannot," said Lyndsey Hale, lead representative for VITAS Hospice.

The organization partnered with Meadowbrook Senior Living in Agoura Hills for an event Tuesday to honor veterans and celebrate Spirit of '45 ? the nationally recognized day in August that celebrates the end of World War II.

David Swerdlow is one of about 25 veterans who live at Meadowbrook. As a Marine, he fought in four big battles in 13 months, including Iwo Jima.

"They wouldn't tell us where we were going because they didn't want anyone's nerves to get in a dither," Swerdlow said. "We landed on Iwo Jima not knowing what was going to happen, and it turned out to be one of the worst battles of WWII."

Swerdlow was a 21-year-old medic with nine other men. He was shot through the ankle bone, and the others saved his life.

"Dave is one of the last remaining Marines who landed on Iwo Jima," said Steve Senft, his son-in-law.

Veteran Arthur Fradkin, of Agoura Hills, was in his original uniform while visiting a friend who lives at Meadowbrook. He was stationed in the Aleutian Islands and the South Pacific.

"This is what I wore on the ship," he said.

Meadowbrook resident Paula Kaplan was wearing the Army shirt and hat that belonged to Julius, her husband who died about a year ago.

"His daughters preserved his uniform, and when they heard about today, they said, ?Mom, you have to wear part of it,' " Kaplan said. "He fought all over Europe ? Germany, England."

She said her husband didn't mind talking about the war.

"After the war, I was glad about four or five couples met once a month for many years at somebody's house and the boys would talk about their experiences, and I think it was very therapeutic for them," she said. "We laughed and we cried."

She clutched the shirt.

"It makes me feel close to him, wearing this," Kaplan said.

Bob Grorud, who lives at Meadowbrook, was a military meteorologist stationed in Canada.

"We determined the fuel consumption the planes would take when they would go on their runs," Grorud said. "It was an honor to serve."

Antonio Fucci brought his M-37 1951 Korean War military vehicle from his home in the Santa Rosa Valley.

"I have the vehicle to preserve history," Fucci said. "I came to give back."

Fucci got choked up as he spoke about his service in the Air Force during the Korean War.

"I'm glad I came home in one piece," Fucci said. "Every time you got in that aircraft to go up, it was always a close call. What's coming at you is not fireworks; it's the real thing."

Agoura Hills Mayor Bill Koehler said as the son of a World War II combat veteran, the event was near and dear to him.

"My father served more than five years in the South Pacific and saw a lot of action. With all the sacrifices all those gentlemen made," not only World War II, but also the Korean War and Vietnam, he said, "this is the least our community can do, and I'm tickled to be here."

Isaac Chernotsky, executive director at Meadowbrook, displayed a collage of his father, who was a veteran, as well as couple of his uniform jackets.

"We wanted to thank this greatest generation for the freedom we have," Chernotsky said.