Buy Photo Kentucky State Representative Darryl Owens blasted the rollout of the new Benefind state health care system, during a Seante Health and Welfare committe in Frankfort. April 11, 20\16. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh, The CJ)Buy Photo

FRANKFORT, Ky. - Two House bills meant to save kynect and the state's current Medicaid expansion died in a Senate committee Monday after an unusual move to pass the bills "with no expression" failed.

The vote prompted objections from Democrats on the Senate Health and Welfare Committee, who called the attempt to move the bills along without actually voting in favor of them a political stunt to spare Republicans from having to vote in support of "Obamacare."

"They just simply wanted to grandstand it," said Sen. Julian Carroll of Frankfort, one of three Democrats on the committee who didn't vote. The bill died for lack of enough votes, with only five Republicans voting in favor of moving the bill to the Senate for debate.

It needed at least one more vote for a majority of the 11-member committee.

Sen. Julie Raque Adams, R-Louisville and committee chairwoman, said there was no ulterior motive in calling for the bills to be passed with no expression, meaning committee members take no position for or against the measures. Members simply wanted more information on the measures.

"We had an open and inclusive hearing," she said afterward.

But it appears the two bills, which passed in the Democrat-controlled House, now will get no vote in the Senate, where many members of the Republican majority have been highly critical of kynect, the state health exchange, and the Medicaid expansion under the federal Affordable Care Act.

Vickie Yates Glisson, secretary of the Cabinet for Health and Family Services, in a comment echoed by several Republicans on the committee, noted that legislators had never voted to authorize kynect. Nor did they vote on whether to approve the federal Medicaid expansion, which extends health coverage to anyone below 138 percent of the federal poverty level.

"Kynect was created by executive order," she said. "Unfortunately, there was no legislative input."

The health programs were launched by former Gov. Steve Beshear, a Democrat.

But the programs have drawn fire from Gov. Matt Bevin, a Republican, as being too costly and unsustainable. He has said he plans to dismantle kynect and transition Kentuckians to the federal site, healthcare.gov. He also proposes scaling back the Medicaid expansion to add more costs for services that now are largely free.

About 85,000 people have purchased private health coverage through kynect and more than 400,000 low-income Kentuckians have enrolled in Medicaid under the federal health law.

Monday's votes on House Bills 5 and 6 followed testimony about both health programs - but much of the discussion focused on widespread problems with the state's new public benefit system, Benefind, that have disrupted services such as Medicaid health coverage and food stamps.

"Clearly the state is facing a crisis," said Rep. Darryl Owens, a Louisville Democrat and sponsor of the two bills. Owens called the Benefind system, launched Feb. 29, a "massive failure."

As for kynect and the Medicaid expansion, advocates testified the programs have been an enormous success for the health and well-being of Kentuckians, as well as the economy, with up to $3 billion in increased Medicaid spending over the past two years.

"In a nutshell, expanded coverage is without a doubt improving the health of Kentucky," said Emily Beauregard, executive director of Kentucky Voices for Health.

Preventative services such as cancer screenings have gone up and visits to emergency rooms have declined as people gain access to health coverage, she said.

Glisson, whose cabinet oversees the programs, came armed with a 33-page presentation she said shows the state cannot afford to maintain its own health exchange when it can easily transition Kentucky consumers to the federal exchange now used by 36 other states.

The transition from kynect to the federal site will save Kentucky about $15 million to $25 million a year in operating costs, Glisson said.

Stephen Miller, state Medicaid commissioner, said Medicaid costs for Kentucky will continue to grow and he did not recommend support for HB 6, which would have left the Medicaid expansion unchanged.

As for the problems with Benefind, Glisson said the state is working tirelessly with Deloitte Consulting, the contractor that designed the system, to eliminate problems.

Advocates and individuals have reported massive disruptions statewide that have resulted in thousands of people receiving notices, many erroneous, that benefits were being cut off. Calls to a state help hotline result in hours on hold for many callers or a recorded message advising people to call back. State benefit offices have been jammed with people waiting for help.

Glisson disputed a recent claim by an advocacy group, Keep Kentucky Covered, that as many as 50,000 people have lost benefits. While about 51,000 cases have been held up for "conversion," meaning they need a caseworker to reconcile contradictions or errors, that doesn't mean all 51,000 people lost benefits, she said.

However, Glisson was not able to say how many people have lost benefits under the new system.

And she rejected claims of advocates that the Benefind system was launched too soon, saying tests showed the system was ready to go Feb. 29 and the federal government, which paid 90 percent of the $101 million costs of Benefind, signed off on it.

Deloitte executive Deborah Sills, who also testified Monday, said her company is working to help resolve the problems.

"All large, complex systems like this have some problems in the early stages," Sills said.

Still, advocates said problems surrounding Benefind's launch don't bode well for nearly 100,000 Kentuckians who will move to the federal site to shop for health coverage by November if the Bevin administration dismantles kynect. People seeking to enroll in Medicaid will use Benefind.

"We've got a real live glimpse into what it will be like here in Kentucky," said Cara Stewart, a lawyer with the Kentucky Equal Justice Center.

Owens said he's disappointed with the apparent demise of his two health bills. But he said he doubts the Senate had any serious interest in approving them. Rather, he said the committee Republicans tried to get the bills to the Senate "so they could make a big show" of voting them down.

"It doesn't matter," he said. "The bottom line is they failed."

Reporter Deborah Yetter can be reached at (502) 582-4228 or dyetter@courier-journal.com.

Buy Photo Vickie Yates Brown Glisson, Secretary of Health and Family Services testified before the Senate Health and Welfare committee regrading the problems with the rollout of the Benefind health system. April 11, 2016. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh, The CJ)

Buy Photo Vickie Yates Brown Glisson, second from right, Secretary of Health and Family Services testified April 11 about problems the Benefind system. At left is Deloitte executive Deborah Sills. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh, The CJ)

Buy Photo Kentucky Senator Ralph Alvarado asked a question of those who testified regarding the problems with the rollout of the new Benefind health enrollment system. April 11, 2016. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh, The CJ)

Buy Photo Cara Stewart of the Kentucky Equal Justice Center makes a point while testifying before the Senate Health and Welfare committe in Frankfort. Stewart is a health caare enrollment connector and was explaining the many problems with the new Benefind system. On right is Representative Darryl Owens. April 11, 2016. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh, The CJ)

Buy Photo Kentucky Senator Reginald Thomas asked a question of Vickie Yates Brown Glisson, Secretary of the Health and Family Services for the state. Arpil 11, 2016. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh, The CJ)

Buy Photo Lissa Probus has a child with special needs who testified today about her problems with the rollout of Benefind. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh, The CJ)

Buy Photo Rep. Darryl Owens (Photo: Dylan Buell, Special to The CJ)

Contact reporter Deborah Yetter at (502)582-4228 or at dyetter@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1N4wS6f