After a relatively quiet primary season in Chester County, candidates seeking the open 6th Congressional District seat have begun to attract national attention as they head toward November’s general election.

Both Democratic candidate Manan Trivedi and Republican candidate Ryan Costello have been recognized by the national parties in their bid to earn the seat currently held by outgoing U.S. Rep. Jim Gerlach.

On Friday, Trivedi’s campaign announced that he had earned a spot in the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee’s (DCCC) Red-to-Blue program. The program highlights top Democratic campaigns across the country and brings with it the support and resources of the DCCC.

“Manan Trivedi has a proven record of serving his community and his country, both as a physician and Iraq War veteran, and he has shown he knows how to put together a strong and disciplined campaign,” said DCCC Chairman Steve Israel in a statement. “Voters in this district want to elect a moderate problem-solver like Manan Trivedi, and do not want a Tea Party Republican whose views are outside the mainstream and who will continue Washington Republicans’ obsession with boosting special interests and the ultra-wealthy at the expense of the middle class.”

Advertisement

Trivedi is a Berks County physician. This is Trivedi’s third shot at the 6th district seat, which has been looked at by Democrats as a possible win in November following Gerlach’s retirement announcement in January.

“It has been truly humbling to receive such overwhelming support from the voters of Pennsylvania’s 6th Congressional District,” Trivedi said. “Earning a spot in the Red-to-Blue program is a testament to the hard work of all the voters who have joined our grassroots campaign to stand up for middle class families and create good paying jobs in Pennsylvania. It is because of those shared values that not only will this campaign will continue to grow, but together we’ll be able to set the course for a better direction.”

Trivedi was also supported by the New Democrat Coalition, a national group of moderate Democrats at the end of May.

Costello, Chester County Commissioner, was also recognized by the national party, becoming a “Young Gun” in the National Republican Congressional Committee’s (NRCC) program in early May. The Young Guns program helps to provide candidates and their campaigns tools and resources.

Young Guns are considered the final level in the program and are established by showing a “clear path to victory through his ability to build a formidable campaign structure and achieve important goals and benchmarks,” according to the NRCC.

“Ryan has outlined conservative principles that will grow jobs, stop the harmful effects of ObamaCare, and get Washington’s spending under control,” said NRCC Chairman Greg Walden in a statement.

Earlier this week, Costello was visited by U.S. Rep. Paul Ryan at a NRCC fundraiser, according to his spokesperson Pete Peterson.

Peterson noted the fundraiser was a closed event at a private residence. PoliticsPA reported that the congressman and former vice-presidential nominee had made a surprise visit to the 6th district to talk about “the importance of electing Ryan Costello.”

“Congressman Paul Ryan came to the district to provide his support because he knows Ryan Costello will be a bipartisan leader who will work to protect taxpayers and help businesses create jobs,” said Peterson. “Congressman Ryan joins other Republican leaders who have already come to the district to support Costello, including Congresswoman Ann Wagner and Congressman Greg Walden. There is a lot of local excitement and national buzz about Costello based on the early strength of his campaign, which includes a recent survey showing Costello with a double digit lead in the race.”

Costello was also recognized by MSNBC host and NBC News Chief White House Correspondent Chuck Todd at the end of May, being named a Pennsylvania Rising Star.

The race has become closely watched throughout the country after Gerlach announced in January 2014 that he will not seek reelection.

The 6th District covers a large part of Chester County, and portions of Berks, Montgomery and Lebanon counties.

Follow Daily Local News staff writer Kendal Gapinski on Twitter at @KendalGapinski and on Facebook at www.facebook.com/KendalAGapinski.