The return of Bowe Bergdahl has prompted the latest round of criticism about Obama’s weakness in foreign policy. For Obama’s domestic opponents, calling him weak and ineffective on the world stage is nothing new – we’ve heard it repeated ad nauseam on events from Ukraine to Syria, Venezuela to the South China Sea. And he’s not the first chief executive to face this charge. Harry Truman’s critics complained that he had “ lost China.” Jimmy Carter was lambasted as weak due to his response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, his failure to recover American hostages in Iran and for “ giving away” the Panama Canal. What has been distinct about Obama’s situation is that his critics have simultaneously accused him of being both weak and excessively strong, with words like “tyrant” and “dictator” popping up regularly.

Does this make any sense? How can Obama be both a dictator and a weakling?

Story Continued Below

The Daily Show’s Jon Stewart picked up on the contradiction this spring, after a number of right-wing commentators compared Obama unfavorably with Russian President Vladimir Putin. But the two competing narratives go back further than that. In the spring of 2010, just weeks after Obama was accused of tyranny and “ shoving health-care reform down the American people’s throats,” his response to the Deepwater Horizon oil spill off the Gulf Coast invited criticism of weakness. It’s not just that both narratives exist as part of the discourse about the Obama presidency; sometimes both come from the same person.

Take Sean Hannity. In spring 2013, the Fox News host declared the president weak because of his response to the situation in Syria (Obama was “ sucking up” to Syrian dictator Bashar Assad, Hannity said). During Obama’s first year in office, Hannity criticized the president’s position on waterboarding, suggesting, “Now, this president is taking us back in time exposing us to the very same dangers that left us vulnerable before September 11,” and noting, “this president who bowed at the feet of the Saudi king.” Yet in 2012, Hannity registered his dissatisfaction with an executive order that he said would allow Obama to declare “ martial law” and with presidential actions that “ignore the basic principles of our Constitution.”

In March, Ted Cruz, the voluble Texas senator, announced at the Conservative Political Action Conference that we no longer have a president because Obama has declared himself our dictator. Two days later he was quoted in the Washington Examiner stating that “Obama’s weakness” was a factor determining Putin’s decision to act militarily in Ukraine. As Washington Post columnist Dana Milbank points out, former senator and Heritage Foundation president Jim DeMint also experienced made a quick shift from accusing the president of being a “playground bully” to pointing out his weakness in facing down the Kremlin.

What’s going on here? First, let’s look at the content of these critiques. Sometimes they have been aimed at the actual substance of policy: that the Affordable Care Act is too strong, the president’s policies toward Syria or on torture too weak. But the narratives about dictatorship sometimes focus on process rather than substance. These critiques suggest that the problem lies not with the policies themselves, but rather with Obama’s disregard for constitutional limits and for the separation of powers.

Being seen as simultaneously too strong and too weak is a structural condition for presidents. The framers of the Constitution debated about how to design an executive strong enough to protect the country, but still constrained by the rule of law. Writing from the vantage point of the mid-twentieth century, the political scientist Richard Neustadt argued that when presidents resort to unilateral “command,” it means their efforts to persuade others have failed. In this sense, it would certainly be possible for the president to both lack the necessary strength to govern and to have the capacity to use the powers of the office in excessive and even constitutionally questionable ways– in both foreign and domestic policy.

In recent decades, presidents have been even more vulnerable to this conundrum. Support for strong executive leadership declined after Vietnam and Watergate, as did trust in government across the board. Yet the need for “ energy in the executive,” as Alexander Hamilton described the original design of the office, never went away. Neither did our obsession with the man in the Oval Office; witness how George W. Bush was blamed for the decades-long failings of the Army Corps of Engineers in New Orleans, or how Obama has taken political hits for the actions of VA hospital officials in Phoenix. Two conflicting sets of expectations about presidential leadership have coexisted for about 40 years: Do we want our presidents to micromanage everything, or do we want them to share power—and with it, responsibility?