A misdemeanor charge is filed Friday against OU freshman running back Joe Mixon.

He's accused of assaulting a woman inside a cafe on Campus Corner.

It all started on the sidewalk outside Pickleman's and then ended up inside the business. It was an argument between Joe Mixon and Amelia Molitor, stemming from a homosexual slur that was made about Molitor's friend.

Court documents state it lead to Molitor pushing Mixon. He lunged at her. Then she slapped him, and that's when Mixon threw the now infamous punch that knocked Molitor to the ground and Mixon into a national spotlight.

Mixon is now charged not with assault and battery but with a misdemeanor.

"If you left it with the assault and battery, there would be too much of a way to wriggle out of it, but she assault and battered first, and it just kind of moves all of that argument out of it," Cleveland County District Attorney Greg Mashburn said.

Molitor underwent surgery and suffers from several broken bones in her face. Mashburn says Mixon's charge is more about morals, even though both Molitor and Mixon assaulted each other.

"If you're going to file on one then you're almost going to have to file on the other, and then you're acknowledging that it was mutual combat, and so it doesn't really fit necessarily," said Mashburn. "That's why I think this statute really fits what happened here. We have an act that caused gross injury to Miss Molitor, and that's injurious to public morals. You just don't hit a girl that hard in response to a push and a slap."

8/15/2014 Related Story: OU's Joe Mixon To Be Charged With Misdemeanor

No doubt speculation about Mixon being a football player played a role in his charge, but either way Mashburn says it made no difference in his decision.

"That's not something that's taken into consideration," said Mashburn. "My job is to file the right charge on the right person, and I believe I've done it in this case."

The University of Oklahoma released a statement saying, "The University must independently evaluate student conduct matters and will review the facts as part of its internal process. At an appropriate time, the University will determine Mixon's status."

Mixon will appear in court Monday. Molitor will not face any charges in this incident.