Oil tanks sit at the Esso oil refinery, operated by Exxon Mobil Corp., in Fawley, United Kingdom, on Friday. In 2014, Exxon Mobil’s business investment in the United States was $12.4 billion. (Simon Dawson/Bloomberg News)

In a fascinating talk recently, Jason Furman — the White House’s chief economist — took a crack at solving a great puzzle of the lackluster recovery: weak business investment. The explanation takes on added urgency after the latest disappointing jobs report. Although September’s unemployment rate remained at 5.1 percent, the number of new payroll jobs was only 142,000, much less than expected. Vigorous investment spending is the missing piece in a strong recovery.

Of course, businesses haven’t stopped investing entirely. In 2014, they spent $2.2 trillion on buildings, equipment (computers, machinery, trucks), software and research. For many large firms, the amounts are huge, estimates economist Michael Mandel of the Progressive Policy Institute, a left-leaning think tank. In 2014, AT&T led in business investment in the United States at $21.2 billion, followed by Verizon at $16 billion and Exxon Mobil at $12.4 billion.

Robert J. Samuelson writes a weekly column on economics. View Archive

But the spending represents a reduction from what — based on past trends — might have been expected. By Furman’s calculations, annual business investment is running roughly $400 billion short of where history suggests it should be. (Furman put the gap at 2.3 percentage points of gross domestic product, or GDP. With GDP — the economy — near $18 trillion, that’s about $400 billion.)

Stronger investment would almost certainly mean more jobs and, possibly, higher wages. Just as important, investment in new equipment and new technologies boosts productivity, which is essential for higher living standards. Weak investment implies weak gains in living standards. Consistent with this, annual labor productivity growth has averaged only 0.4 percent from 2011 to 2014. That’s way below the post-World War II average of about 2 percent.

So what’s hampering business investment?

One theory is that the Obama administration’s policies — say, the Affordable Care Act — have discouraged it by fanning uncertainty and fueling an anti-business climate. This seems questionable, because the investment shortfall afflicts most advanced economies. Compared with projections before the 2008-09 financial crisis, business investment is down 16 percent in the United States, 15 percent in the United Kingdom, 20 percent in Japan and 11 percent in wealthy euro-zone countries, Furman reported.

Whatever the defects of Obama’s policies, it’s hard to blame them for a global investment slump. Indeed, Furman noted, business profits have been strong in recent years. But rather than invest, companies have channeled much of the cash flow to shareholders through higher dividends and stock buybacks.

Another theory is that the economy has experienced a “structural” shift: Today’s tech companies (think Facebook) require less investment than their heavy-industry predecessors (U.S. Steel). Furman is skeptical. True, the investment needs of many tech firms — he cites Snapchat and WhatsApp — are modest. But consumers use these tech applications “through the often large investment in wired and wireless networks made by Internet service providers.” AT&T’s and Verizon’s massive capital spending attests to this.

What ultimately explains the investment slowdown, Furman contends, is the slow-growing economy. In many industries, capacity is ample to satisfy moderate demand. If the economy were growing faster, Furman says, companies would invest more. Not surprisingly, this explanation supports the White House’s proposal to increase the economy’s growth by lifting the existing caps on federal spending.

This may be true, but the argument is also circular: A stronger economy would boost investment; but one reason the economy is weak is that investment is weak. The crucial question is this: Why has investment deviated so markedly from its postwar trends, even in the face of impressive profits? The answer may be something that Furman barely considers: the legacy of the financial crisis and Great Recession.

Arguably, it changed business behavior, because companies — meaning the people who run them — were surprised by its occurrence and severity. Since then, they have become more cautious and risk-averse. They approve only projects that, compared with the pre-crisis years, have higher rates of return and less uncertainty.

That’s consistent with strong profits despite a weak recovery. It also helps explain why the investment slump is global — after all, the financial crisis and Great Recession were global. And it helps explain why the investment slump has been so hard to cure: Its origins lie in changed attitudes, which are hard to reverse.

Read more from Robert Samuelson’s archive.