On Sunday night, Miss Colorado Kelley Johnson, a registered nurse, performed an original monologue in the Miss America competition's talent segment. Her monologue provided a glimpse of a professional interaction she had as a nurse, caring for a patient with Alzheimer's.

The next day, co-hosts on the talk show, "The View," shared their impressions about the competition. Comments focused on the competition's talent portion and Johnson. Johnson's talent was summarily dismissed by Michelle Collins who stated, "She basically just read her emails out loud," and Joy Behar who asked, "Why is she wearing a doctor's stethoscope?"

Those opinions were reprehensible. Social media venues began to trend video replays of Johnson's monologue and the insulting commentary from "The View." Nurses began posting pictures of themselves with their uniform and stethoscope, describing how these items are essential to the nursing profession.

Health care team members — physicians in particular — responded by clarifying that a stethoscope is used by many health care professionals and are often first used on a patient by a nurse. I condemn "The View" comments and harness this as an opportunity to demystify misunderstandings of the nursing profession, as many of my colleagues have done through social media.

Today's nursing workforce comprises more than 3 million men and women. Registered nurses are educated to provide care to patients from a holistic perspective — a profession developed through mastery of specified skills rooted in liberal arts. They are required to pass a national licensure exam after graduating from an accredited nursing program.

Nursing positions are vast and diverse within our society — from bedside to community, with direct and indirect patient-care positions. The commonality of each RN position lies in the complex art of blending the many roles of nursing — caregiver, advocate, educator, counselor, leader and researcher — into his or her workday. Throughout a typical workday, the average nurse makes a decision once every 10 minutes or as often as every 30 seconds, depending on the job position.

In her monologue, Johnson acted out the role of a bedside nurse. Bedside nurses often wear a scrub-type uniform and have many props, such as a stethoscope, penlight or laptop computer. These props are tools of the health care trade and are used by all team members throughout the workday.

Nursing colleagues would certainly testify Johnson acted out the caregiver role of a nurse. Her script epitomized the delivery of personalized, compassionate care. Her script unveiled the unique exchange between a nurse and patient. It showed how an RN engages in therapeutic communication strategies by listening to a patient's feelings and concerns, conveying respect for the patient, providing empathy and acting within the scope of her responsibilities.

On, Wednesday, "The View" co-hosts accused the nursing community of overreacting to the sarcastic comments about Johnson's non-glamorous uniform, "a doctor's stethoscope," and non-talent. They said the comments were taken out of context.

Whoopi Goldberg scolded nurses for "not listening." Collins further insulted nurses by remarking nurses are hilarious and recommended that all bosses "give nurses a raise." The attempt to clear the air was more insulting than the initial Monday remarks. Do co-hosts of "The View" believe nurses are clowns who lack aptitude? It's interesting that nurses skilled in therapeutic communication did not have their "listening ears" on to hear Monday's comments correctly. Really? Johnson & Johnson showed its commitment to the professional nursing image when it announced it pulled advertisements from "The View."

The Affordable Care Act in 2010 sparked health care reform, and a landmark report in 2011 from the Institute of Medicine, "The Future of Nursing: Leading Change and Advancing Health," charged nursing to spearhead health care reform. Nursing education continues to prepare nurses to improve quality and safety for patients. Nurses provide holistic care to patients as independent practitioners or in collaboration with other health care professionals. Nurses are viewed to lead this charge, despite being called "untalented listeners" by "The View" co-hosts.

I hope "The View" cast extends a genuine, formal apology to all nurses. I encourage "The View" to assist nurses in future shows by debunking ill portrayals of our profession by educating its audience, as well as the co-hosts, about the importance of the nursing profession and impact on health care. This can be done through guest appearances of nurses from various roles and specialties. I am respectfully not just a nurse.

Karen Groller is an instructor of nursing at Moravian College, Bethlehem.