Democratic presidential candidate Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt. (Photo: AP File)

I hate Bernie Sanders. I hate his sanctimonious attitude. I hate his patently dangerous and cruel ideology. I hate the way he hunches over and raises his fists when he’s making a particularly idiotic point. I hate the fact that his presidential campaign and his politics are gaining traction with members of the American electorate. I hate that the media narrative surrounding Sanders is that he’s the most popular candidate with Millennials, and I hate the fact that they’re right – albeit partially.

Many people who I consider to be very intelligent are attracted to Sanders and his ideas because they are angry and bitter over the lies fed to them as they were growing up. They are drowning in student loan debt and their college degrees are nearly worthless in the over saturated and anemic job market. While my generation stares into the abyss that is this unfortunate truth, enter Bernie Sanders, with his “crazy uncle” demeanor (another Sanders trope I hate) and pie-in-the-sky promises of never-ending free lunches.

Sanders offers an escape to a fantasy world where the magic wand of government is the panacea for all social and economic problems and in times of economic distress, this message seems especially attractive to the frustrated and the beleaguered. One is reminded of the cursed children from A Christmas Carol. “The boy is Ignorance. The girl is Want,” explains the Ghost of Christmas Present, “Beware them both... but most of all beware the boy, for on his brow I see that written that is Doom, unless the writing be erased.”

Of course, the reality is that Sanders is nothing more than a cheap demagogue who has made his career preying off the ignorance of the desperate with reactionary sound bites while failing to live up to his rhetoric in any meaningful way. He voted for the Affordable Care Act, which is really just a subsidy to the large insurance providers. He was a co-sponsor of the Freedom Act, a bill drafted to fool the public into thinking the government is doing something about the constitutional abuses revealed by Edward Snowden. He voted against requiring senatorial confirmation of presidential “czars.” And while he voted against the creation of the Department of Homeland Security, he has subsequently voted to fund the agency. Not to mention his unyielding support of the F-35 fighter jet, a $1.3 trillion instrument of death. For a shining example of the destructive consequences of Sanders’ policies, look no further than Vermont. Before the debate, Sanders appeared on NBC’s Meet the Press and revealed definitively, for the few people who didn’t know, that he rejects the label “capitalist” in favor of “democratic socialist.” Like the brutal and authoritarian U.S. Handicapper General in Vonnegut’s dystopian vision of the future, Harrison Bergeron, he would rather doom the majority to poverty and mediocrity, rather than allow a few to excel. That is Bernie Sanders, that is democratic socialism, and that is why I hate him.

Michael B. Miley lives in West Burke.

Read or Share this story: http://bfpne.ws/1NWy0HC