The new healthcare options introduced this month can be complex—and confusing. To help you make sense of it all, Frank Lalli, former editor of Money magazine and author of an upcoming book on finding affordable healthcare, will answer questions through the month of October in his daily blog.

Q: Where can I check out Obamacare insurance, and how can I decide which plan might be right for me?

A: The government has set up new insurance marketplaces—called public exchanges—in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. And all of them are scheduled to begin enrolling people in Obamacare health insurance today for 2014.

These exchanges, staffed by counselors called Navigators, are making it easier than ever for uninsured people and those who buy health insurance on their own to shop for the right health plan.

The first thing to realize is that all the plans sold on the new exchanges offer the law’s full set of essential health benefits, from maternity to mental health counseling and more. So, with one exception I’ll explain later, whichever health plan you choose, you’ll be getting comprehensive insurance that includes a range of preventive care services at no extra cost.

Second, the plans are rated side-by-side for easy comparison on the online exchange according to what Consumer Union’s Lynn Quincy calls the plan’s “relative generosity.” That’s a fancy way of saying how much the plan figures to pay out to cover your actual medical costs, beyond what Lallyou shell out to cover your monthly premiums and annual deductible.

So it’s pretty simple to compare plans with the same “generosity” level, based on factors such as what you would pay in premiums, specific co-pays, and the plans’ different doctor networks.

Also called the metal ratings, these “generosity” levels range from platinum plans, which figure to pay for around 90 percent of your approved medical expenses, to gold at 80 percent, silver 70 and bronze 60. Those are all decent plans, in my opinion.

But the government also is allowing people under 30 to buy cheaper, bare-bones catastrophic plans that figure to payslightly less than 60 percent on average. Young people buying those catastrophic plans will essentially be betting they won’t get hurt or sick. That’s not real insurance to me. Plus those plans will only be a few bucks cheaper a month than bronze, and the buyser will not be eligible for government subsidies.

All in all, the government expects many middle-class people to settle on sensible silver plans, covering around 70 percent of out of pocket costs.

As you shop, focus on the metal ratings, rather than premiums alone. Since the metal names reflect how much the insurer will pay on average to help cover your medical bills. (The premium is the amount you pay each month for coverage. The deductible is what you must pay for medical services before the insurer begins paying.)

In general, the higher the metal value, the higher the monthly premium—but the less you are likely to have to pay out of your pocket if you need medical care, prescriptions or, worse, costly hospitalization.

The lower the metal value, the lower the premium—but the more you’ll have to pay to cover your health bills. A lower premium may seem attractive. But keep in mind that these days, if your health insurer doesn’t have your back, you can get hit with an emergency room bill topping $15,000 for a sprained ankle.

Health insurance is supposed to protect you from a catastrophic illness that could ruin your finances. Yet people often don’t protect themselves. Some 650,000 people will file for bankruptcy next year because of medicals bills. Don’t risk being one of them.

Ask your Navigator to walk you through some worse case scenarios, and then calculate your likely total health costs, including premiums, deductibles—and with some bad luck—your maximum out-of-pocket expenses.

Never pick a plan only because the premiums are low. Pick the plan you can afford that offers you and your loved ones the protection you need. Shop wisely.