Upset: As some of you know, this past Tuesday was Election Day. Only about 30 percent of us voted, so maybe not everyone knew. But Election Day it was, with a few key government jobs up for grabs.

Like, say, governor, for instance, with perennial Democratic nominee Jack Conway, Republican outsider Matt Bevin and Independent outsider Drew Curtis vying for the job.

The Atlantic listed it as the top race worth watching in 2015, as did The Washington Post, giving it the No. 1 spot in the “8 races worth watching.” From the Post:

One of the top issues: Obamacare. Popular outgoing Kentucky Gov. Steve Beshear (D) expanded Medicaid for more than half a million people in the state as part of President Obama’s 2010 health-care reform law, and the election is becoming a referendum on whether that was the right move.

The Kentucky race attracted the attention of John Oliver, who issued a scathing review of then-candidate Mr. Bevin on his show, “Last Week Tonight.” It’s an HBO show, so only click if you don’t mind a few expletives:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5d3nASKtGas

The day before the election, Wired ran an essay from Mr. Curtis, entitled “Someday, Tech Will End Our Dumb Two-Party System.”

He concludes:

“Can I Win? Do I have a chance to win the race tomorrow? To be honest, it’s probably slim. It’s kind of a tragedy because everyone says they want a candidate like me, who doesn’t bow to ideology, who looks out for society instead of selling government to the highest bidder, and most of all is smart enough to handle the unknown challenges ahead. But I ran into a strategic problem I couldn’t overcome. The other two candidates are barely average. Even their supporters don’t really like them. I can’t tell you the number of times people have told me they like me better than their own party’s candidate. But the problem is, the Democrats in particular really hate the other party’s candidate. Democrats may dislike their own candidate but they are downright terrified of the Republican. They are primarily voting to keep him out of office, and that makes them unlikely to take a flier on a third-party candidate; they’d rather pick the second-best candidate than vote for me. Meanwhile, I’ve been picking up GOP support no problem because they don’t seem as afraid. That tells me that if the GOP candidate had been more adequate, I’d have pulled this off.”

Said The New York Times of the race:

Analysts say much will depend on turnout. Registered Democrats outnumber registered Republicans in Kentucky, but if Mr. Bevin — a staunch opponent of same-sex marriage — can drive enough Christian conservatives to the polls, it could help him eke out a victory.

And then there was a low turnout and Mr. Bevin is now the governor-elect.

The Huffington Post suggests polls accurately captured support for Mr. Conway; the error was in underestimating the surge of support for Mr. Bevin. They echo the Times piece as well, citing low turnout as another benefit for the Republican candidate.

The Washington Post asks the question I heard many times over Wednesday morning: Matt Bevin is the new governor of Kentucky. Now what?” They talk to the Lexington Herald-Leader’s Sam Youngman:

“I think Bevin’s best asset — and this should be noted in the context of next year’s national races — was that he was not a politician. I know, I know. Yes, he ran for the Senate just last year, but he was viewed as an outsider and a businessman. And at least right now, that certainly seems to be a winning combination.”

The Nation makes a similar observation. They declare the race a “Warning From Kentucky: Managerial Democrats Can Lose to Extreme Republicans.” They suggest the Democrats put forth a serviceable, albeit safe candidate and that candidate lost to “Kentucky’s Trump.” So for all those not taking Trump’s Trump seriously, they’re going to want to take another look.

To The Washington Post once more — Max Ehrenfreund asserts Mr. Bevin’s win “could be the future of American politics.”

Many researchers now think that anger at and fear of the opposing party, rather than enthusiasm for one’s own party, are what motivates voters these days. As the chart below shows, while Democrats’ views of the Democratic Party haven’t changed, they see the Republican Party more negatively, and vice versa. And Abramowitz and Webster argue that those negative emotions come from how the major political parties and the national figures who represent them are portrayed in the media, rather than voters’ personal appraisals of particular politicians in their jurisdictions. In other words, loathing leads voters to paint candidates with a broader brush.

So we see the fruit of the political climate in which we’ve been living, in which candidates court our basest instincts to create an electorate both increasingly bombarded with information, yet simultaneously more reactionary and less sophisticated. That may be the most bipartisan platform we have.

So to Kynect, ACA, “Obamacare”:

Salon says Mr. Bevin’s win “undermines a major Democratic Party theory.”

By almost any metric, after all, Kynect — what they call the ACA in Kentucky — has been an inspirational success. Democrats hoped voters would reward the party for successfully implementing such a major policy. But from today’s vantage, it’s painfully obvious that they didn’t. And that’s not just a problem in the Bluegrass State — it’s a problem for all Democrats. Because one of the foundational assumptions behind Kynect, the ACA, and much of the entire Democratic Party agenda is that good policy makes for good politics. In Kentucky, at least, it didn’t.

In Bloomberg’s piece, “A Republican Can Kill Obamacare. Will He?” they suggest:

“Kentucky just volunteered to be a national political experiment, and it can’t help but be an edifying one for the whole country.” “In Kentucky, Democrats are out of power and Republicans are out of excuses. Health insurance for thousands of families is now in the hands of the Republican governor-elect. Either subsidized health insurance is here to stay, with or without the histrionics of Tea Party freedom fighters. Or the curb is about to get crowded.”

Talking Points Memo Says Mr. Bevin is unlikely to be able to deliver on that particular campaign promise. They speak with Caroline Pearson, VP of consulting firm Avalere Health. Says Ms. Pearson:

“It is nearly politically impossible to take benefits from people — even for Republicans. I think that’s not likely to happen, even though that might sell well on the campaign trail.” “Obamacare is here to stay. At this point it’s going to be about how you deliver that coverage more efficiently and sort of modifying the flavor a bit, but none of it’s going to disappear.”

Slate piggybacks off of Bloomberg, saying just about every Republican governor will be watching both what Governor Bevin does and how it’s received. The question according to Slate:

If he claws back insurance from people who vote Republican but also enjoy their health coverage, will he pay a significant political price?

So I guess we’ll all find out together.

Kentucky Staple: The day after your big Kentucky elections, you had the Country Music Awards in Nashville.

Kentucky’s own Chris Stapleton won the night, taking home new artist of the year, album of the year and male vocalist of the year for his debut album, Traveller, says The Guardian, ABC News, Fox News and The New York Times.

USA Today gives his moving acceptance speech from his third award of the night.

The question asked by many that night (and the days to follow): Who is Chris Stapleton?

Fox News would like to know; ditto USA Today; double ditto Here and Now (WBUR). Rolling Stone asks and answers: Who Is Chris Stapleton: 5 Things You Need to Know About the CMA King. The Tennessean has 5 more things for you.

Billboard offers some assistance with “10 Things to Know About CMA King Chris Stapleton” (first on the list: He’s from Kentucky).

Here’s your bullet list:

He’s 37.

Played with the band The SteelDrivers.

He’s written a truckload of songs, including some big time hits for some big players.

Traveller is his solo debut.

He’s from Kentucky.

The second most asked question is what does Stapleton’s win mean. The Washington Post calls it a move back to credibility and away from “bro-country.” The New Yorker suggests Stapleton has “cracked the country code — uniting roots authenticity with Nashville-radio success”

The Atlantic says he’s already conquering country music, though his debut has yet to yield a single radio hit and likely won’t.

Deadspin says he’s “your ‘real country music’ savior.”

Weighing down a relative unknown like Stapleton with Album of the Year, Best New Artist, and Male Vocalist of the Year trophies is the CMAs’ not terribly subtle way of hanging a PLEASE GOD LISTEN TO THIS GUY INSTEAD banner across the stage, and across the television screens of fans industry stalwarts wish had way better taste.

One other thing his victory likely means, according to Billboard, is that Traveller is heading to No. 1 on the charts when the next list comes out.

But it’s not just the awards making headlines this week; it’s his epic, show-stealing, duet with none other than a genre-hopping Justin Timberlake that has the internet’s attention, with raves from USA Today, The Los Angeles Times, TIME, The Huffington Post, Rolling Stone, and Country Rebel.

You can thank me later:

Please if there is a God let there be more music like this that people are craving! #ChrisStapleton #justintimberlake #CMAAwards2015 — Kelly Clarkson (@kelly_clarkson) November 5, 2015

@jtimberlake @ChrisStapleton I'll never get over that performance. #CMAs — Miranda Lambert (@mirandalambert) November 5, 2015

Justin was positively glowing after the performance, says Entertainment Weekly. Here’s what he had to say on Instagram:

About last night… I've been friends with @castapleton and his lovely wife Morgane for a couple of years now, but sometimes you meet people and feel like you've known them your whole life. He is one of THE MOST gifted musicians, songwriters, and vocalists I've ever met. So stoked to share this moment with him and watch him put the WHOLE WORLD on notice. So happy for you brother. Chalk one up for the good guys. A photo posted by Justin Timberlake (@justintimberlake) on Nov 5, 2015 at 2:07pm PST

As for Stapleton, he says, “It was crazy,” according to CMT. He said a bunch more, but that’s the headline.

Home Stretch: Your big finale to “The Hunger Games” series is just two weeks away, as “The Hunger Games: Mockingjay—Part 2” hits theaters Nov. 20. That means it’s premiere season and everyone’s talking about your girl, Jennifer Lawrence, on London’s red carpet. Or rather what she’s wearing. Or not wearing.

The Huffington Post, US Weekly, People, Popsugar and Scotland’s Daily Record say her stunning Dior Haute Couture allowed a lot of space to breathe, with a plunging neckline and open sides, giving a peek at what many quaintly refer to as sideboob.

Here you go:

Jennifer Lawrence at the #MockingjayPremiere in London today! pic.twitter.com/MSCZiP01lB — Jennifer Lawrence (@JLdaily) November 5, 2015

USA Today forgoes the conversation on the dress and moves the conversation to her “power pose.” They cite Shonda Rhimes’ new book, “Year of Yes,” in which the “Grey’s Anatomy” and “Scandal” creator recommends the Wonder Woman pose for success.

Listen, no matter your affiliations and allegiances, it’s been a stressful week, so I want to leave you with a batch of feelgood this weekend.

Here’s a video Megan gave me of people getting puppies as Christmas gifts and the ensuing joy only puppydom can provide:

The Verge and The Huffington Post say a terminally ill Star Wars fan saw the new movie, “The Force Awakens,” this week, a month before its official release. Daniel Fleetwood was diagnosed with a rare cancer and given just two months to live back in July. A twitter campaign, #ForceforDaniel, took off and caught the attention of some of the film’s stars before ultimately making its way to director J.J. Abrams and the folks at Disney. Fleetwood received a screening of the film in his home.

Speaking of, the Fencing Senior World Championships Moscow 2015 featured an epic lightsaber duel.

Sure, the remix of Maroon 5’s Sugar might belie the never-ending struggle of the battle between good and evil, but perhaps that’s what you want. Something to tip the favor for the light side of the Force over the dark side of the Force.

Is that right? You hear the dark side referred to constantly, but nary a mention of the terminology for its opposite. Maybe in the comic books or what have you. Light side sounds off to me.

Harry Potter fans, of which I know there are many, will rejoice at the first images of the spinoff, “Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them,” starring the incomparable Eddie Redmayne. He graces the cover of Entertainment weekly as his character, Newt Scamander, says ComingSoon.

So here’s that:

More information available from Jessica Chobot at Nerdist.

And then there’s this Good News Network story of Greta Hokanson, a leukemia survivor thanks to a bone marrow transplant. At her wedding, she danced with the donor who saved her life:

Be good to each other.

See you next week.