Upcoming Denver and Lakewood races offer consolation to displaced Boulder runners

Boulder Marathon director Jeff Mason failed to secure several key permits ahead of the Oct. 5 event, which he canceled Friday with about two weeks notice for the more than 1,000 people who'd paid to compete.

"They were required to get permits from the Colorado State Patrol, the Boulder Reservoir, Boulder County Transportation and the Boulder Police Department," Sheriff's Cmdr. Heidi Prentup said Saturday. "He did not meet the deadlines that are established to receive the permits, so he was not permitted."

Stacy Cole, manager of the Boulder Reservoir — where the race was supposed to start and end — said that by the time her office was contacted, the event was already dead.

"The State Patrol denied the permitting first, and because of that, there was no way that he could have the event," Cole said. "Subsequently, the county denied the permit and then we had no event to permit."

In a Friday afternoon email to runners announcing the cancellation, Mason made no mention of the permitting issue.

Instead, he said the decision was necessitated by lingering damage from the 2013 flood, which he wrote presented "hurdles and challenges" that "ultimately made it impossible to produce the Boulder Marathon event in 2014."

"Add to this the tragedy that occurred at the Boulder Spring Half Marathon," Mason added, referencing the death of runner Jessica Dillon, 20, "and the task of producing the... event just became impossible."

He also noted as a contributing factor the death of Lesley Kinder, the former race director of the Boulder Backroads Marathon who sold the race to Mason in 2007, and winded up suing him that same year for overdue payments related to the transaction.

Many of the runners, whose reactions to the email were generally characterized by some combination of perplexity, suspicion and outrage, were quick to point out Mason's failure to clarify why the flood and two deaths impacted his ability to put on the race.

Neither Mason nor his lawyer, Charles Martien, would comment for this story.

The consensus among the running community and several people involved in the production of this and other races in the area is that any lingering flood damage around the course — which was going to head north on 51st street before looping back south and ending at the dam area of the reservoir — is nominal at best.

"I ran most of the course last week and it's in perfect condition," runner Nick Williams wrote on the marathon's Facebook page. "I have no idea what the flood has to do with this."

"Everything we had as far as flood damage has been repaired," Cole said.

"As far as flooding goes," added Benji Durden, who used to map the race when it stilled belonged to Kinder, "that's just ludicrous. There are no roads closed out there. None.

"If there were, you make changes. Anybody with any kind of recovery skills can make changes and fix things."

'I am done with this circus'

It's not clear exactly how many runners had signed up for the race, but multiple sources have told the Camera the number is somewhere between 1,200 and 2,000.

Each of those people paid entry fees of just over $100. In fact, many of those payments were made in 2013, before the marathon was canceled for what Mason also said were flood-related reasons.

After the 2013 cancellation, Mason offered free entry into this year's run. In his Friday email, he offered the same consolation.

"All runners who are registered for the 2014 Boulder Marathon, Half Marathon & 5 Mile event on October 5th will be able to use their paid entry fee for either the 2015 Boulder Spring Half Marathon, or next fall's Boulder Marathon event," he wrote.

Registrants were understanding when the race was called off in 2013. This time around, many are clamoring for full refunds.

"I already lost over $200," Jacek Giecold wrote on the event page. "I want my money back and for sure I am done with this circus."

"Refund. End of story," added Andrea Russo. "Not being able to run a race that one has trained for goes with the territory. Happens all the time. But this is not normal.

"Two weeks out with no discernible unexpected event to make the run undoable and then to cancel is bad business and reeks of fraud."

Boulder District Attorney Stan Garnett said his office has not yet been contacted, but that this is "the type of thing that law enforcement would investigate, depending on the facts."

Cmdr. Tom Trujillo said Saturday night that Boulder police had also not received any complaints.

Denver, Lakewood events step up for Boulder runners

Runners who'd plan to compete on Oct. 5 in Boulder have two new options, as of Saturday evening.

The Rock 'n' Roll Denver Marathon, scheduled for Oct. 19, is offering free entry to displaced Boulder runners.

"The cancellation of the Boulder Marathon is obviously disappointing news for the local running community," said Casey Cortese, spokesman for Janus, the race's sponsor. "We understand the level of investment that runners make to prepare for a race — your dedication and perseverance are traits we highly admire."

Boulder runners can email proof of registration to rnrdenver@competitorgroup.com to receive complimentary entry.

Lakewood's Bear Chase Trail Race, scheduled for the weekend of Sept. 27 and 28, is also offering a 50 percent discounted entry to Boulder runners.

That event offers different races of 100 kilometers, 50 miles, 50 kilometers, 13.1 miles and a 10 kilometers.

More information can be found at bearchasetrailrace.com.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Alex Burness at 303-473-1389 or burnessa@dailycamera.com