Anti-Capitalism: You’d think that after ObamaCare’s chaotic launch, premium rate shocks, subsidy foul-ups and costly ad hoc changes, the insurance industry would attack the law. Instead, it’s slamming the drug industry.

“Drugmakers have no straight-face explanation to justify the increasingly astronomical prices they have been charging for their medications,” complains one of numerous public relations communications sent recently by the industry trade group America’s Health Insurance Plans.

The group has called drug prices “unsustainable” and accused the industry of “price gouging.” The focus of the industry’s fury at the moment is Sovaldi, a breakthrough treatment that can cure Hepatitis C, but which costs $84,000. These are the same complaints lodged for years by leftist groups that want price controls on prescription drugs — complaints that are at odds with the facts.

The truth is that spending on prescription drugs has been virtually flat for years, climbing just 3.5% between 2009 and 2012 at a time when the nation’s overall health care spending climbed 11.5%.

Amazingly, drug spending accounted for a smaller share of the total health tab in 2012 than it did in 1960, government data show.

Even if some drugs do cost a lot, it doesn’t make sense to look at just one side of the ledger. A cure for Hepatitis C could save billions in health costs elsewhere, to say nothing of the economic gains of having these people as productive citizens.

That broader perspective on drugs has been echoed in several studies. One of them, published in Health Affairs, found that each dollar spent treating congestive heart failure can save $9 in other health spending.

To the extent that drug prices are a problem, the cause is largely the massive regulatory hurdles imposed on the industry, not price-gouging schemes. Insurers say they’re raising a fuss in hopes that the drug industry will keep prices in check now, rather than suffer government price controls later. But it’s really just trying to deflect blame for ObamaCare-caused premium spikes.

By feeding the public’s impression that drug prices are wholly arbitrary, it’s providing fertile ground for those price controls. And not just for drugs. Soon, someone’s going to use the insurance industry’s same arguments to call for price controls on premiums, too.