Getty Images

Experts who want to fix the nation’s bankruptcy laws so that more struggling companies survive kept an important question in mind during their two-year project on reform: What’s the point of fixing bankruptcy law if companies can’t afford to use it?

Some of the country’s top restructuring lawyers, professors and advisers who released a nearly-400-page report earlier this month made it clear that, aside from strengthening tools for a bankrupt company, they want to make the process cheaper.

The last overhaul of the bankruptcy code in 1978 lifted restrictions on fees, enabling sophisticated lawyers, bankers and turnaround advisers to begin profiting within an industry for financially dying companies. The army of professionals winding down Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc., the most expensive Chapter 11 case in history, billed more than $2.2 billion since the investment bank collapse in 2008. The fees for defunct telecommunications company Nortel Networks are estimated at more than $1.3 billion, and even Detroit’s 17-month sprint through bankruptcy has cost more than $140 million.

But with corporate bankruptcy filings on the decline since 2009 despite a slow economic recovery, some professionals are questioning whether the industry’s greed has pushed the cost of restructuring using Chapter 11 protection so far that companies simply can’t afford it.

Chicago-based financial adviser William A. Brandt Jr. said he knew the industry had an affordability problem when he realized bankruptcy lawyers were charging higher rates than other colleagues in corporate law.

“I knew when that had happened that our business—to quote Fonzie—had jumped the shark,” said Mr. Brandt, who studied potential reform as one of 22 members of the American Bankruptcy Institute’s Commission to Study the Reform of Chapter 11.

To be sure, it’s not just cost that might turn off company executives. Owners who put a company in Chapter 11 protection could lose control, and managers could lose their jobs.

And with their backs to the wall, desperate managers may decide $1,000 an hour for top legal talent is a small price to pay.

“Bankruptcy has always been expensive, and there has always been an effort to rein in excessive costs,” said California bankruptcy lawyer Kenneth Klee, who helped engineer the 1978 overhaul.

Seton Hall law professor Stephen Lubben said it’s tough to tell whether Chapter 11 costs have gotten out of control since law firms don’t reveal what they charge for comparable corporate processes like a merger or bond deal. When he reviewed 1,026 bankruptcy cases filed in 2004, he found that professional fees cost 4% to 4.5% of the value of the bankrupt company’s combined assets and liabilities.

The recommendations propose to clarify rules on dozens of issues on which bankruptcy judges have disagreed, giving lawyers—in theory—less to fight about.

Two proposals address a big reason why costs can spiral upward: Bankrupt companies have to pay the legal bill for others.

Besides their own bankruptcy lawyers, investment bankers, financial advisers, accountants and public relations firms, bankrupt companies are legally obligated to pay the bills of the creditor committee that forms to advocate for vendors, employees and other unsecured creditors.

When someone else is paying the bill, the costs can escalate. Unsecured creditors of the Johnny Carino’s Italian restaurant chain, for example, proposed to hire a lead lawyer from Pachulski Stang Ziehl & Jones LLP law firm for $775 an hour, according to court papers filed earlier this year. The two Texas-based lawyers hired by the restaurant chain itself are charging an individual rate of $425 per hour. (In response, Pachulski Stang lawyer Bradford Sandler said his firm and colleagues successfully fought for more money for unsecured creditors in the case.)

The reforms recommend doing away with the automatic appointment of creditors committees in small-business bankruptcies.

Companies also often promise to foot the bill for legal costs for lenders and bondholder groups. Manhattan bankruptcy lawyer Rich Levin said those costs “are what we might call invisible costs, but they are very large.”

When bankrupt companies feel like outside professionals are charging too much, nasty courtroom battles can break out.

Once-bankrupt Momentive Performance Materials Inc., which makes silicone and quartz, recently fought a nearly $12 million legal bill from bondholders for an expensive courtroom battle over interest payments. Momentive Performance lawyers pointed out that they charged $9.4 million to handle the entire bankruptcy. The bondholders’ lawyers agreed to discount their fees, according to court papers.

Last year, a financial adviser who was paying the final bills for Colorado natural gas driller Delta Petroleum Corp. fought a $569,205.06 bill from DLA Piper law firm, which represented some bondholders and played “virtually no role” in the company’s bankruptcy restructuring, the adviser said in court papers. Delta Petroleum promised to pay the bondholders’ lawyer fees as part of its reorganization plan, which put new owners in charge. (A DLA Piper spokesman declined to comment for this article, but in a court-filed response, DLA Piper officials defended their fees as reasonable.)

DLA Piper was also at the center of a notorious billing dispute that broke out a few years ago after the bankruptcy of an upstate New York energy company. When the company’s owner sued the firm for overbilling, some alarming internal DLA Piper emails surfaced: “That bill shall know no limits,” one lawyer wrote. DLA Piper later settled the $22.5 million lawsuit.

To address this issue, the report recommends add new wording in the code that would give a bankruptcy judge the right to review any legal bill paid by a bankrupt company to make sure the hourly billing rate is reasonable.

The report also said that bankruptcy lawyers should be allowed to charge clients using methods like fixed fees, task-specific fees or contingent fees.

Lawyers and other professionals keep track of their time and bill a client at an hourly rate. A judge must approve their bills later; that visibility and the court’s role are supposed to serve as checks on excessive fees.

But experts say the hourly billing system has a problem: It incentivizes lawyers to do unnecessary work.

“Unless people exercise a boatload of control in terms of thinking about staffing and thinking about strategy, it’s easy to watch fees multiply,” said law professor Nancy Rapoport, who teaches at University of Nevada-Las Vegas’s law school.

Unsophisticated clients might not realize when their lawyers are pursuing unnecessary avenues.

“That person may not be getting sound advice on how to manage the legal process, and sometimes the legal process gets carried away,” said New York bankruptcy lawyer Jeffrey Wurst. “There is no one there to say, ‘Do we really need to take on that battle?’”

A Justice Department division that monitors fees in bankruptcy cases released guidelines last year that reminded professionals that it watches for charged fees “for services that are unnecessary, duplicative, or not beneficial to the estate.” Clifford J. White III, who heads that Justice Department program, noted that it can be hard to determine what a necessary fight is.

“Sometimes fighting may cost something upfront but save something longer term,” he said, adding that the reforms will only be able to reduce costs if people in the industry change their behavior in response to the new rules.

Write to Katy Stech at katy.stech@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @KatyStech