What a Brave New World we're living in. Health care premiums are more expensive than ever. Health care costs are way up. But your doctor and your hospital will spy on you to avoid getting fined.

Time to learn to love Big Gov Health Care.

You may soon get a call from your doctor if you’ve let your gym membership lapse, made a habit of picking up candy bars at the check-out counter or begin shopping at plus-sized stores. That’s because some hospitals are starting to use detailed consumer data to create profiles on current and potential patients to identify those most likely to get sick, so the hospitals can intervene before they do. Information compiled by data brokers from public records and credit card transactions can reveal where a person shops, the food they buy, and whether they smoke. The largest hospital chain in the Carolinas is plugging data for 2 million people into algorithms designed to identify high-risk patients

...if you like your privacy, you can keep your privacy.

Carolinas HealthCare System operates the largest group of medical centers in North Carolina and South Carolina, with more than 900 care centers, including hospitals, nursing homes, doctors’ offices and surgical centers. The health system is placing its data, which include purchases a patient has made using a credit card or store loyalty card, into predictive models that give a risk score to patients. Within the next two years, Dulin plans for that score to be regularly passed to doctors and nurses who can reach out to high-risk patients to suggest interventions before patients fall ill.

The hospitals however are just acting in self-defense because everyone is being crammed into a single dysfunctional system and they have to find creative ways to avoid being fined under ObamaCare.

Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, hospital pay is becoming increasingly linked to quality metrics rather than the traditional fee-for-service model where hospitals were paid based on their numbers of tests or procedures.

"Quality" however means not readmitting patients. There are a number of ways to do it. Like admitting patients on an outpatient basis, which ends up hitting them hard in the pocket. Or trying to desperately control their lives.

The U.S. has begun levying fines against hospitals that have too many patients readmitted within a month...

These hospitals predictably serve the elderly and minorities, who are most likely to be readmitted with the same problems. So this policy neatly wipes out those hospitals and makes other hospitals go Full Orwell on their patients.

Being able to predict which patients are likely to get sick or end up at the emergency room has become particularly valuable for hospitals that also insure their patients, a new phenomenon that’s growing in popularity. UPMC, which offers this option, would be able to save money by keeping patients out of the emergency room. Obamacare prevents insurers from denying coverage because of pre-existing conditions or charging patients more based on their health status, meaning the data can’t be used to raise rates or drop policies.

But it can be used to keep patients out of the system or to decide which hospitals to close. And whose lives to try and take over.