Please enable Javascript to watch this video

During a recent conversation with good friend and former teammate Wesley Woodyard, the reality struck Von Miller. He’s one of the oldest linebackers on the Broncos.

“I am a veteran now,” Miller said following Thursday’s first training camp practice.

With age comes responsibility. Miller says he’s learned from last season’s mistakes — a six-game drug suspension, and added bulk following his return. His body provides proof before his words. Miller weighs in the mid 250-pound range, compared to 270 last December, the former a significant number for two reasons: it’s closer to where he played as a havoc-causing rookie, and it’s the same weight he carried when he left OTAs four weeks ago.

“I didn’t have a coach telling me. I just knew I had to keep grinding and doing what I have doing with my workouts and my diet,” Miller said.

Miller participated in one-one-one drills and 11-on-11 work. He will be closely monitored, but seven months after the ACL in his right knee was repaired he remains on track.

“It feels 100 percent. It’s great. I don’t think it could be in any better spot today,” Miller said. “I have been on a great game plan. I am just following the schedule. I am doing what they tell me to do.”

Miller said his preference is not to wear a brace but will if the protocol requires it. He remains anxious to team with rush end DeMarcus Ware, the player he idolized while growing up in Texas. Miller, like Ware, has ambitious goals this season.

“I want to be the best. That’s my mission. I am aiming for it,” Miller said. “I am working hard for it.”

HIGHLIGHT: Cody Latimer on the mark

Cody Latimer showed no issues with the broken left foot that limited him during OTAs. The rookie receiver caught a long touchdown pass from backup quarterback Brock Osweiler. The play-action pass fooled the safety and Latimer beat first-round pick Bradley Roby down the middle in the broken coverage. “The coaches called a great play,” said Latimer, who ran a 4.45 at the NFL combine with the foot injury and led all receivers with 23 reps on the 225-pound bench press. The Broncos considered him the best blocking receiver in the draft.

LOWLIGHT: Rough play on offense

If the Broncos were any more serious about ball security, the practice pigskins would be kept in an armored car. They repeated the message Thursday, but perfection remained elusive. Osweiler threw an interception to cornerback Louis Young, a deflected pass tight end Jacob Tamme couldn’t corral. And receiver Greg Wilson fumbled on an underneath route, which was recovered by defensive back Omar Bolden.

POSITION BATTLE: Right tackle

In an attempt to get their five best linemen on the field following Ryan Clady’s return from injury, the Broncos switched Orlando Franklin to left guard, creating competition at the right tackle spot. Chris Clark, who filled in for Clady last year, started Thursday and remained with the first-team during drill work. During OTAs, Winston Justice received starting reps, so his participation bears watching Friday in relation to the depth-chart discussion.

Harris could be cleared Monday

On Aug. 6, cornerback Chris Harris will be six months removed from surgery to repair the ACL in his left knee. “That’s the golden date,” he said. Harris has made encouraging progress and will visit Dr. James Andrews on Monday. “I am hopeful that Andrews will clear me. But I should be ready to go on the six-month mark and start doing what Von’s doing. I am pretty much doing the individuals they are already doing.”

Footnotes

The Broncos opened their team stretch to music Thursday, a nice touch since Dove Valley is eerily quiet with no fans permitted because of the $35-million renovation. The Rolling Stones’ “Start Me Up” was followed by U2’s “Where the Streets Have No Name.” … Cornerback Kayvon Webster, getting first team reps with Harris out, made multiple solid plays in coverage. … Bubba Caldwell started in place of Demaryius Thomas, who will miss the first four days of camp following the death of his grandmother in Georgia. “Demaryius let me know last night he wouldn’t be here. It’s just an opportunity for me to be out there with Peyton (Manning) and the first team and prove my worth.” … Defensive back Louis Young intercepted a high pass from Osweiler that Jacob Tamme couldn’t pull down. … Wes Welker was clinical in his efficiency during drill work, toasting young cornerbacks.