'We have years of work ahead of us'

Longmont residents recalled last September's St. Vrain River and Left Hand Creek floods, and the still-under-way community efforts to recover from that devastation, at a series of gatherings and projects on Saturday.

On Saturday morning, City Council members, city government officials and some of the community's flood-impacted business owners and residents held a formal one-year flood anniversary commemorative ceremony near a St. Vrain Greenway trailhead just east of the Harvest Junction North shopping plaza, northwest of Colo. 199 and Martin Street.

On Saturday afternoon, Gov. John Hickenlooper and U.S. Sen. Mark Udall toured a recently completed southside Longmont home and one that's still under construction — part of a Habitat for Humanity of the St. Vrain Valley project that's providing new residences for at least a few of the families displaced by last year's floods.

Mayor Dennis Coombs said the Saturday morning event provided an "opportunity to literally set in stone this day of remembrance," as he read the words that'll soon be displayed on a plaque to be installed on a boulder that has already been placed near the the St. Vrain Greenway trailhead where the morning event was held.

Coombs said the plaque-bearing boulder will tell passers-by that it's "a symbol of determination" that has been " dedicated to the people of Longmont for their courage in the face of danger, for pulling together to help one another" and for rebuilding a community that's "better than ever."

Coombs noted that the Harvest Junction area where Saturday's commemoration was held was under water during and after the flood, and that the St. Vrain River behind him had jumped its banks and rose to a level of 15 feet, 3 inches — a high-water mark noted in a recently installed city sign along a sidewalk path to the greenway.

"It was the Mighty St. Vrain River that day," Coombs said.

Petro Chan, left, and Ron Boog, employees of Walsh Construction, shovel concrete Friday to anchor a post for a gate across the St. Vrain Greenway path at Boston Avenue and the St. Vrain River. The gate will be used to close whenever that becomes necessary. It's one of several post-September 2013 flood-recovery projects that have been completed, are under way or planned for future years along the river corridor through Longmont. (David R. Jennings / Daily Camera)

Coombs reminded people attending the commemoration that those flood waters forced evacuations of an estimated 7,000 people from such flood-stricken Longmont areas as the Harvest Junction business park and the Southmoor Park, Creekside, Longmont Estates Greens, Champion Greens, Valley, Golden Ponds, Willow Creek, Schlagel and Grandview Meadows neighborhoods — as well as the St. Vrain and Royal mobile home parks.

The mayor said city officials have estimated the flood damages totaled about $31.9 million to 2,319 Longmont homes and about $28.2 million to 327 Longmont businesses.

"There were hundreds of tons of stuff that came out of people's basements" during the post-flood cleanups, Coombs said.

'We can't forget what happened'

City public works director Dale Rademacher said the floods streaming through the St. Vrain and spreading across Longmont would have filled all of the National Football League's more than 30 stadiums, "with water to spare."

Rademacher, Coombs and city manager Harold Dominguez applauded what they said had been the heroic efforts of first-responders, city staffers, and Longmont residents as they came together during and after the floods.

"We have years of work ahead of us," Dominguez said. "We will continue to rise from the ashes, and like the phoenix, our plumage will shine."

Rademacher predicted that as the St. Vrain's path through Longmont is repaired, and the city's bridges and greenway paths restored, replaced or upgraded, the river corridor stands to become "our front porch, rather than our outhouse or our back porch."

Rademacher added, however, that "even though we're optimistic looking forward, we can't forget what happened" during the floods — "the damage and pain and suffering that people have gone through."

One those flood-impacted families — Crystal Cordova and her two children, Jonah, now 2, and Angelina, now 10 — were living in the basement of her parents' Southmoor Park home when it flooded last year, forcing her into temporary housing options until she was able to move into the her new Habitat for Humanity-enabled home in Longmont's Poplar Grove neighborhood last month.

"We felt completely blessed to have a place to go," Cordova said.

Moreover, "there's nothing like having your own home," said Cordova, a nurse at Avista Adventist Hospital in Louisville.

Cordova said that when Habitat for Humanity asked if Hickenlooper and Udall could tour her new home on one of the flood-recovery -themed visits politicians have been making this weekend, she said she'd told Habitat she'd be happy to do "anything I can, to help you guys."

Shelters, then a rental, finally a home

Udall and Hickenlooper also got a look at a still-unfinished home that Habitat volunteers are helping build for Jose and Florina Soto and their four children, a family who lost their Longmont mobile home in last September's flood.

The Sotos, who were working alongside homebuilding volunteers on Saturday afternoon, said they've since lived in shelters and are now in a rented apartment, and hope to be able to move into their new Poplar Grove house in October or November.

John Lovell, director of development for Habitat's St. Vrain chapter, said the organization has built or is building seven homes in the neighborhood that lies between the 800 blocks of South Terry and South Coffman streets, including three for families displaced by the floods: Crystal Cordova and her children; the Sotos, and Emiliano and Liberia Cavo.

Lovell said Habitat recently bought an adjacent property in the Poplar Grove neighborhood that will provide sites for 14 more homes.

Also on Saturday afternoon, U.S. Sen. Michael Bennet dropped by a gathering on the 1100 block of Twin Peaks Circle, one of the parts of The Greens neighborhood hit by last year's flooding.

U.S. Rep. Cory Gardner, whose 4th Congressional District includes Longmont, was in attendance at the city's Saturday morning flood commemoration, as were Boulder County Commissioner Deb Gardner, state Sen. Matt Jones and state Rep. Jonathan Singer.

Contact Times-Call staff writer John Fryar at 303-684-5211 or jfryar@times-call.com