COMMERCE CITY — More than 50 games into his tenure as Rapids coach, Pablo Mastroeni is searching for that first signature victory. He needs one. Soon. In a sport that can be as frustrating as it is beautiful, even the strongest of wills can survive only so long without tangible reasons to smile.

“The most fundamental aspect of team is winning. And winning is the one thing you can’t control,” Mastroeni told me Thursday. “You can control the preparation, the planning, the player selection and the tactics. You can control all those things. What you hope as coach, in order to validate you as a coach, is you do all those things and in doing those things, you get results. That makes you a good manager or a bad manager.”

No matter how you cut it for any coach, and particularly for an unproven coach, it all comes down to scoreboard, baby.

“It’s the scoreboard. And that’s what defines you,” said Mastroeni, nodding in agreement. “But knowing that, you can’t say: ‘Guys! I need you to win this game for me.’ “

One signature victory could shake the Rapids from the most unproductive stretch of soccer in franchise history. One signature victory could provide a strong signal that Mastroeni, the most decorated player to wear a Colorado uniform, can transfer his unquestioned brilliance on the pitch to consistent success on the sideline.

The Rapids have won two consecutive games for the first time in more than a calendar year, after a recent switch to a more aggressive 4-3-3 formation awakened a moribund offense. About time, don’t you think? During what has been a red-hot summer for soccer in America, with record-breaking television ratings for the women’s national team during the World Cup, the Rapids have largely been a dud, outside of their usual Fourth of July fireworks.

“The mentality has to be: ‘We have to win every game.’ And the preparation has to be as such,” Mastroeni said. “It’s not going in (a game) and playing reserved; it’s not going and waiting for our moments. It’s going in with no doubt that we’re going to do it.”

Since being named coach prior to the opening of the 2014 season, Mastroeni has built the foundation of a strong defense but has little to show for his efforts, winning only a dozen times in 53 games. That’s as inept a stretch as any in franchise history; even during a bad run of 54 games from 2001-02, the Rapids won 18 times.

With a roster in transition, too often it has appeared as if Mastroeni tries to win every game 1-nil. The Rapids of Mastroeni have seldom been out of any game, but have more rarely put the fear of defeat in foes. The young coach’s team knows how to tie. All those old ties, however, eventually get thrown in a dusty corner of the closet, while you sit at home and watch other teams in the playoffs.

There is nothing but the utmost respect here for the passion and skill Mastroeni exhibited as a holding midfielder, whether as an MLS all-star with the Rapids or as a member of the USMNT. But I had to ask: Has Mastroeni been too conservative, too reserved and not creative enough as a coach?

“From my experience as a player, I understood that a great defensive foundation provides the attacking players with enough confidence and enough structure to allow them to express themselves,” Mastroeni said. “The toughest thing in soccer is to strike that balance. And what allows you to strike that balance is results.”

The long slog of the MLS regular season means the playoff hunt is never over until math pushes a team off the end of the table, even if you’re in last place, where the Rapids sit now.

So here’s the chance for a signature win. This weekend, the Rapids travel to play the first-place Sounders in Seattle, a place where Colorado has never won.

Is this mission impossible?

“Listen, we’ve played Seattle two times this year and both games I felt like in good portions of those games we were the better side and just didn’t capitalize on some opportunities,” Mastroeni said. “Going into Seattle on the heels of two good performances and two good results is the best time we’ve had this year to capitalize on momentum against a top team at the top of the table and start to turn things around.”

Big opportunity doesn’t knock. It must be seized. Therein lays the beauty of a signature win. It can make a struggling team believe in itself, and a city believe in an un- proven coach.

Mark Kiszla: mkiszla@denverpost.com or twitter.com/markkiszla