A Nepalese boy runs past houses destroyed by the earthquake that devastated the region last month. Credit: Associated Press

By

Nepal is victim to a natural disaster, and, thankfully, the world is responding generously. While the Nepalese set their tents up on streets, reminiscent of Haiti in 2010, the international community already has pledged support. Charities have their websites updated and their donate buttons highlighted ready to divert resources to the immediate need.

Hundreds of thousands were killed during the 7.0 magnitude quake in Haiti five years ago. The world pledged $9 billion to "build back better." However, only 6% of the money reached the intended victims. "We found that about 94% of humanitarian funding went to donors' own civilian and military entities, U.N. agencies, international NGOs (nongovernmental organizations) and private contractors. In addition, 36% of recovery grants went to international NGOs and private contractors, " according to The Guardian's Jan. 14, 2013, story.

Jonathan Katz, a former AP correspondent in Haiti, and author or "The Big Truck That Went By: How the World Came to Save Haiti and Left Behind a Disaster," said, "Aid goes to priorities that the donors think are important, but are not necessarily the ones that truly are most important on the ground or is wanted by the local people."

Are there lessons to be learned by Nepal or the next recipient for international relief? Fearfully so — since Haiti's earthquake, there is no real change in the way that relief agencies treat sufferers of natural disasters. That lack of action puts the burden on well-meaning donors to make sure their dollars are used effectively.

In Nepal, that's not easy. There were only a handful of local organizations that were active in Nepal and none did emergency relief with the exception of one — the Nepal Red Cross Society. They've now mobilized their local volunteers and have a presence on Facebook.

Organizations respond to a disaster in two ways — immediate disaster relief and rebuilding. In both cases, they are more effective if they have firsthand experience in the country of concern.

In the case of immediate relief, too much time and effort can be spent trying to find translators, equipment and space, let alone trying to work effectively with the local culture. That lets out a number of the seven organizations vetted in a post from Charity Navigator that awards each with a 75% to 100% rating (Note: Charity Navigator monitors nonprofits according to a rating system as well as filling out paperwork properly and filing it on time. It does not vet organizations based on a criterion of effectiveness, but it does have a good Tips for Giving in Times of Crisis).

Some organizations such as CARE and Save the Children mount immediate responses as well as gather money for later projects, some of which are appropriate to the specific country, some of which are based on standardized programs. Without more research on the individualized projects slated for Nepal, it's difficult to make an educated decision on whether their future programs will be effective.

Bottom line: Those charities doing immediate emergency relief with on-the-ground Nepalese experience appear to be Nepal Red Cross Society, Catholic Relief Services, Handicap International, Operation USA, Save the Children and UNICEF.

Learn from Haiti: Give generously; give often; give effectively.

Judy O. Haselhoef is author of "Give & Take: Doing Our Damnedest NOT to be Another Charity in Haiti." She lives in Pewaukee.