“Switched at Birth," the ABC Family drama about two teenage girls who were, as the title tells, switched at birth and then grew up in radically different ways, comes back from its mid-season hiatus in two weeks.

The official description of Episode 11 of Season 4, “To Repel Ghosts,” informs that Bay (Vanessa Marano) will be haunted by her recent breakup with Emmett (Sean Berdy) and will have a hard time trying to figure out what to do next, now that her relationship has come apart. Meanwhile, Daphne's (Katie Leclerc) enthusiasm about her new relationship with Mingo (Adam Hagenbuch) is strained by what her friends think about the fellow.

So there is plenty of new romantic drama about to unfold for everyone. But, according to Lea Thompson, who portrays Kathryn Kennish on the series, the trouble will be coming in all forms.

In an interview in the Nerd Report, the 54-year-old actress brought up a slew of impending problems for the characters. Season 4 will be busy with marital stress and a pregnancy, as well as unwelcome specters from the past returning to stir up the scene and just plain old money concerns.

"There's a lot of characters from past seasons that come to visit and cause trouble," she said, adding, "I'm really proud because I don't feel like the show's tired at all. We're conquering new elements. We're going different places with stories. It's not just rehashing the same old stuff over and over."

Thompson, who mentioned how she loves the cast and the fact that the show is still on the air after four years, feels that working on the series is "just such a beautiful experience.”

In a recently released promo for the upcoming premiere we get to see how raw Bay is feeling after her split with Emmett. As she walks into a bar she spots Travis (Ryan Lane), an older friend who is pals with both Bay and Emmett. Seeking his council about heartbreak she asks him “Does it get any easier?”

Ryan signs back to her that people keep telling him that he needs make himself do things he doesn't want to do.

“And here I am,” she counters back, addressing her own attempts at post-break up socialization.

“Feeling better?” Travis asks.

“Not one bit,” says Bay.

"Switched at Birth" returns to ABC Family on Monday, Aug. 24 at 8 p.m.

Watch the sneak peek: