Pink Floyd’s classic album Dark Side of The Moon will be recreated in Montgomery, Alabama, on February 20 by The Black Jacket Symphony, AL.com reported today. The Black Jacket Symphony will perform the classic Pink Floyd album at the Performing Arts Centre in Montgomery. The Birmingham-based musical group has also scheduled performances of Pink Floyd’s Dark Side in other cities, including Memphis, Tennessee, and Tuscaloosa, Alabama.

The group will be brought the Pink Floyd album to the stage in Tuscaloosa on September 12, reports the Tuscaloosa News. The show included two parts, with the first being the full performance of the classic Pink Floyd album while the second part of the show included performance of other selected songs by Pink Floyd.

“We treat rock albums with the same respect as a symphony would treat a classical piece,” said Jason Rogoff, manager of the BJS Pink Floyd show. “But it’s still a rock show.”

Pink Floyd’s Dark Side of the Moon is one of several albums the group has performed live on stage. BJS has also performed music by other artists including Prince, Michael Jackson, The Eagles, Led Zeppelin, The Beatles, The Doors and Fleetwood Mac.

Pink Floyd’s Dark Side of The Moon, one of the most popular albums by the English progressive rock band, was released in March of 1973. The album is the most successful Pink Floyd album, selling more than 50 million copies. Many fans rank it as the greatest of all the Pink Floyd albums.

“It built on ideas explored in the band’s earlier recordings and live shows, but lacks the extended instrumental excursions that characterized their work following the departure in 1968 of founder member, principal composer, and lyricist, Syd Barrett. The Dark Side of the Moon’s themes include conflict, greed, the passage of time, and mental illness, the latter partly inspired by Barrett’s deteriorating mental state,” as described of the Pink Floyd album by Wikipedia.

Pink Floyd has recently announced an album of previously unreleased music titled The Endless River. Wikipedia reports David Gilmour saying the new Pink Floyd album will be the band’s last album. The songs on The Endless River reportedly come from the same recording sessions that lead to the Pink Floyd’s 1993 ablum, Division Bell. Inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1996, Pink Floyd has recorded 15 studio album and has sold more than 250 million records internationally.

While they may not record another studio album, the performance of their music by bands like Black Jacket Symphony shows the popularity of Pink Floyd remains strong.