Editor’s note; This is the second installment on the results of the Southwest Riverside County Regional Healthcare Economic Development Summit held May 5 in Murrieta. The first installment last week in the Valley News highlighted speaker Mary Walshok who suggested regional cities work together using innovation and global outreach to bring more medical interests into the area and improve the economy. This installment will explore how providing more medical local technical education for students will keep them in the region where more medical facilities are planned.

Members of Reach Out, the Inland Health Professionals Coalition, and Convergence, urged southwest Riverside city representatives at the May 5 Southwest Riverside County Regional Healthcare Economic Development Summit in Murrieta to work together to expand their existing healthcare facilities to meet the southwest county’s rapidly growing population.

Statistics were given at the summit showing the southwest county has the fewest number of beds and skilled physician pool than any other county area and far lower than the national and state patient to bed and patient to physician ratios. This brought Reach Out to seek out Healthy Communities Initiatives and bring together the Coalitions and Convergence to find ways to meet the regions healthcare needs.

City managers from Murrieta, Temecula, Wildomar, Menifee and Lake Elsinore recently met to discuss the healthcare needs of their communities and continue to grow the hospitals and clinics needed in the region. The managers, seeing the need for better healthcare and the opportunity for more economic growth, met with the Reach Out group. From there, the May 5 summit was called.

One of the keys to reaching the goal better healthier communities according to Carol Allbaugh, M.A., director of the Inland Health Professionals Coalition, is for the communities to provide more medical teaching institutions for local students. While speaking at the Summit she said the IHPC is dedicated to advancing education and diversity in health professions. The IHPC serves more than 3,500 students and teachers and delivers more than 650 more resources, programs and student learning opportunities in health professions in the Inland region.

Allbaugh in addressing the participants, said they needed to come up with some action items in the healthcare area that the region will benefit from in economic development. She said the Coalition is there to help.

“The coalition is all about the shortage of health care professionals, the fact that the population is increasing and we’re all getting a little older and the Affordable Care Act and the changes that have happened because of it.” She said “we have to get our heads together for something we don’t even know exists yet and that is what the challenge is here today.”

In her presentation she listed what things the summit might look to accomplish in bringing specialty healthcare services to the region. They include, bringing the first open heart surgery to the region, the first STEMI Center, expansion of pediatric services, development of comprehensive cancer services, expansion of the Loma Linda University emergency room and opening a new Prenatal Intensive Care Unit at LLUMC Murrieta to keep area patients close to home.

Earlier in the summit Dr. Donald B. Kearns, president and CEO of Rady Children’s Hospital and Health Center, outlined some of the breakthrough services the Murrieta hospital has made in helping children of the community and the hospital groups plans for the future, some of which addressed Allbaugh’s suggested area healthcare needs.

Rady, the fifth largest children’s hospital group in the nation, recently announced plans to build a 66,000-square-foot Rady Children’s Health Services complex on Hancock Avenue in Murrieta. It will serve as a children’s outpatient clinic and include pediatric, adolescent and prenatal specialty care.

He said Rady has been a leader in the field of Proton Therapy that helps children with brain tumors. He cited a successful case of a local patient named Emily who received the Proton Therapy. The hospitals treatment has helped the little girl who is now being cared for in her Murrieta home.

“We are excited about growing healthcare in this community,” Kearns said. “You are a large part of where Rady is going to grow… I want to predict the future here. This community is going 120 miles per hour and I am excited to be a part of that!”

Following Dr. Kearns presentation, the participants were called on the break into groups at each table and discussed ideas about out to help grow the healthcare industry in the region and improve the economy. They were asked to share their ideas on “Health Professions Pipeline Development, Economic Development for Health and Health Cities and Communities.”

Before the group ideas were reviewed, Kerry Heindrch, CEO of Loma Linda University Medical Center made a presentation about what Loma Linda University Medical Center is looking ahead to in Murrieta and the region to better provide its services to residents in the area. Loma Linda University Medical Center is the largest healthcare provider for residents of Murrieta.

Heindrich said LLUMC has made a very significant commitment to the community and to the region. He noted that

the medical group has invested almost half billion dollars into the region to date. He pointed to the changes that the Affordable Health Care plan that Congress approved is creating a major change in the healthcare delivery systems that exist today. LLUMC is a significant provider of the healthcare in the region both in outpatient care and extended delivery services.

The Affordable Health Care Act has pushed 1.5 million residents of Riverside and San Bernardino counties to be enrolled.

“Nearly one-third of those are enrolled in this region,” Heindrich said. “This has caused a severe impact because of the lack of acute care beds, outpatient facilities and primary care physicians and specialty services. That creates a real challenge.

“People now have insurance coverage but they have no access to medical care. They can’t get primary care appointments and that is why they come to the emergency system,” he explained. He said the result has virtually “overwhelmed” the emergency system.

He said Loma Linda and the other hospitals in the area did not expect the demand to be so extreme. The result of changing the medical healthcare system (Affordable Health Care Act) from a “fee for service to at risk,” has been a tremendous challenge for the healthcare service community. He said Loma Linda and other hospitals in the region are working to create networks with a much broader reach to those patients in need. “We need to consolidate, coalesce and redefine the healthcare delivery system,” Heindrich said.

He exclaimed Loma Linda University Medical Center to do this is “committed to this community. We believe to be right, healthcare needs to be done in the community with qualified professionals!”

Following the discussions Diana Fox, executive director of Reach Out, that presented the event, reviewed the results of the round table discussions made by those attending. The ideas were presented in a slideshow to the participants.