Whether you fell asleep early, stayed out too late, or simply want to watch it again, we realize it's not always possible to get your entire "Piers Morgan Live" fix from television. As an answer to this, we offer the below labor of love – "Piers Morgan Live, Rewind" – dedicated and designed to getting you caught up and connected to the conversation.



The Single Life: Why has Jacqueline Bisset never married?

On the heels of her jovial yet incoherent acceptance speech for Best Supporting Actress in a Series, Miniseries, or Television Film for “Dancing on the Edge,” prolific actress Jacqueline Bisset caused quite a social media stir at Sunday's Golden Globes, amusing viewers and tweeters alike.

Three days since her memorable moment, Wednesday evening saw the 69-year-old beauty join Piers Morgan for a live, face to face interview from the host's Los Angeles studio.

More lucid, but no less candid, the award winning actress relived her evening of triumph, even recounting playful shenanigans that took place with fellow Best Supporting Actress nominee Sofia Vergara after the red carpet cameras had stopped rolling:

“Later on we were dancing with different people at the party, and she said, ‘Let's pretend we're fighting’ ... I listened to her and then she grabs the globe – the orb, whatever – and we have a scuffle. It was adorable.”

Equally adorable, and with no less charm, Bisset herself has spent decades stealing the heart of male suitors worldwide. Why then, has she never married? Seated across from Morgan, Bisset revealed that while she has had several long-term relationships, early observations hadn't exactly left her with the best impressions of married life:

“It's probably because my parents were not happy," she told Morgan. "They were both intelligent and fascinating in many ways and they didn't get on together. It was a dead feeling.”

But despite never tying the knot, the Hollywood beauty insisted she's experienced many deep emotional connections:

“I’ve been in love every time in my major relationships," she responded, when asked the hosts signature "proper love" question. "I've been in love absolutely.”

Robert Gates: No "high-fiving" for death of bin Laden

Serving as Secretary of Defense under both President George W. Bush and President Barack Obama, Robert Gates has certainly navigated an impressive, multi-decade political career. His new autobiography “Duty: Memoirs of a Secretary at War” has sparked both praise and criticism for its straightforward critique of the Obama administration, and on Wednesday night Gates joined Piers Morgan to discuss several of his books key topics.

The May 2011 killing of Osama bin Laden was a night to remember for the American public. And with a front row seat alongside President Obama during the raid that killed the infamous terrorist, Gates was among those to experience an unforgettable evening of suspense.

Joining "Piers Morgan Live" for a primetime interview, the former Secretary of Defense reflected on anxiously watching the events from the White House situation room as SEAL Team Six raided bin Laden’s compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan:

“Once they entered the house, we really didn't know what was going on for perhaps 15 minutes, which was probably the longest 15 minutes in any of our lives.”

Many Americans erupted in applause following the public announcement of bin Laden’s death. But for Gates, when the “enemy killed in action” alert was received, the response in Washington was merely a silent acceptance that justice had been fulfilled:

“There was no high-fiving. There were no cheers or anything like that," he noted Wednesday. "I think there was just a quiet sense that those Americans who had been killed on September 11 had been avenged."

For the next edition of "Piers Morgan Live," watch CNN every night at 9.

-

» Follow "Piers Morgan Live" on Twitter

» Follow "Piers Morgan Live" on Instagram