Out of the thousands of snowbirds that flock to Bay County each winter, many of them come from our neighboring country to the north.

They celebrated their country and culture at the area's annual Canada Day Sunday afternoon, and the group honored a special guest during the country's 50th anniversary of its Maple Leaf flag.

You might not expect to find a blend of cultures at Panama City Beach's Canada Day.

But snowbirds from all of Canada's and several different countries who vacation here every year say they wouldn't miss the celebration.

"We're proud of our heritage," Canada Day's Chairman Dan Bazinet said. "And especially this year being the 50th year, we really wanted to do something special, bring the Canada event really to a peak."

They didn't just honor the Canadian flag, but the woman who sewed the very first one. Joan O'Malley's been visiting our beaches for a decade.

"When we get here it's, okay, we're home now. It's three months here, we just love it," O'Malley said.

She says it was a natural choice to celebrate at her home away from home.

"I knew there was going to be a big party here and I thought, 'This is the place for me,'" she said. "And I think everybody down here really enjoys this party, and I wanted to be in on it down here."

On February 15, 1964, O'Malley worked late into the into the night sewing that first set of flags. She says at the time she had no idea of the historical significance of what she was doing."

"My dad, he realized it, and he was all excited," she said. "And I was saying, you know, why is he all excited about this? I'm just going to sew these flags and that's it."

The committee says it's last year they'll honor Canada Day in Bay County, after 12 years of celebrations.

But committee members and snowbirds alike say they hope another group will continue the celebration.

O'Malley says someone actually stole the first flag she sewed only a few days after it was first put on display.

And Canadians have no idea where it is to this day!