Rockies trainer Keith Dugger offers an optimistic prognosis on Troy Tulowitzki. He’s in wait-and-see mode regarding outfielder Carlos Gonzalez and left-hander starter Brett Anderson.

Tulo underwent surgery Friday to repair a torn labrum in his left hip and faces a recovery period of about five months. It’s the same surgery former first baseman Todd Helton underwent in the summer of 2012.

According to Dugger, Tulowitzki emerged from the operation in good shape.

“It was actually pretty cut and dry as far has hip surgeries go,” he said Saturday. “Hopefully it provides some stability that allows us to continue to do some of the same strengthening exercises that he’s been doing.”

Even since Tulowitzki tore a left quadriceps tendon in 2008, he’s had issues with muscle strength and stability. Dugger is hopeful the operation will help change some of that.

“You always have a little bit of instability, but there are plenty of professional athletes who take care of the tear and have very successful careers and have no issues,” Dugger said.

Helton’s surgery helped the first baseman increase his mobility and lessened some of the first basemen’s chronic back pain, Dugger said.

Gonzalez will undergo surgery on his left patella tendon Monday in Frisco. Dugger said the full extent of the damage to CarGo’s knee won’t be know until the operation.

“You have some diseased tissue in the middle third of the patella,” Dugger said. “You don’t know if you are going to go in there and find debris and clean it up, or if you are going to have to split (the tendon) and suture it back together.”

By “diseased,” Dugger said he was referring to “tissue that has either been torn or split and it’s just kind of chewed up and mangled.”

Anderson underwent surgery Thursday to repair a ruptured disc in his lower back. He’s limited to light walking for the next two weeks before he can begin light exercise.

“It was a very, very large size disc, so we are going to be a little more conservative,” Dugger said “He blew out his back. It was an acute rupture that just happened. This was not something that was there before.”

Footnotes. The Rockies made a number of roster moves Saturday. Outfielder Michael Cuddyer (shoulder) was recalled from the 60-day disabled list, and right-handed reliever Brooks Brown was recalled from Triple-A. Brooks filled the roster spot for right-hander Tommy Kahnle, who was placed on the 15-day DL because of lingering right shoulder inflammation. To make room for Cuddyer, first baseman Ben Paulsen was optioned to Triple-A and Anderson was moved from the 15-day to the 60-day DL. … First baseman Justin Morneau was a late scratch Saturday night because of a stiff neck. … Second baseman DJ LeMahieu (sore ankle) did not start Saturday’s game.

Looking ahead

Game 1: Reds’ Mat Latos (4-3, 2.95 ERA) at Rockies’ Jordan Lyles (6-1, 3.70), 2:10 p.m. Sunday, ROOT; 630 AM

For the Reds to have any chance to remain in the postseason hunt, they are going to need quality starts from Latos, a 6-foot-6, 245-pound right-hander. Though he began the season on the disabled list, he brings a 0.94 WHIP into Coors Field. Over his last three starts, he’s 2-0 with a 2.08 ERA. In eight games against the Rockies, Latos is 5-2 with a 3.63 ERA. In five career starts at Coors, he’s 3-1 with a 3.21 ERA. The only two Colorado players with much experience against Latos are Carlos Gonzalez and Troy Tulowitzki, and both of them are out for the rest of the season because of injuries.

Game 2: Reds’ Dylan Axelrod (season debut) at Rockies’ Yohan Flande (0-5, 5.36), 7:10 p.m. Sunday, ROOT; 630 AM

Flande, the emergency lefty called up from Triple-A Colorado Springs for his June 25 debut, is still waiting for his first big-league win. Despite his 5.36 ERA — only slightly higher than the starters’ cumulative 5.03 ERA — he has pitched well enough on several occasions to earn a victory. Trouble is, in seven starts, the Rockies have provided him with just 14 total runs of support. Flande generally handles hitters well in the first three innings, but he tends to get hit hard the second or third time through the order.

Monday: Off

Tuesday: Royals’ James Shields (11-6, 3.29 ERA) at Rockies’ Tyler Matzek (2-8, 5.50), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Wednesday: Royals’ Danny Duffy (8-10, 2.60) at Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (12-8, 4.32), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Thursday: Off

Patrick Saunders, The Denver Post