A s consolidation fever grips the managed care industry,Molina Healthcare ( MOH ) prefers to "stick to our knitting," as chief financial officer John Molina likes to say.

Its knitting since its founding in 1980 by Molina's father, David Molina, has revolved around the health care needs of low-income people who face barriers to care.

Based in Long Beach, Calif., not far from where it was founded, Molina operates health plans in 11 states and Puerto Rico, most of them managed-care Medicaid programs for low-income and needy populations.

If the pending merger ofCentene ( CNC ) andHealth Net ( HNT ) goes through, Molina would be "the purest of the pure plays" in Medicaid managed care and, more broadly, government-aided programs for low-income populations, Molina said in an interview with IBD.

"We don't want to get into the broad commercial business. We don't want to take care of Medicare retirees who play golf three times a week," he said.

Managed-Care Medicaid

As it happens, the managed-care Medicaid market is the fastest growing segment of the managed care industry, says Brian Wright, an analyst with Sterne Agee CRT.

"About 28% of all Medicaid expenditures are in managed-care Medicaid," he said. "Our view is that this is a market that can triple from where it is (today)."

Molina is benefiting from that growth as states shift Medicaid patients to managed care programs. It also has gained business from state exchanges under ObamaCare, covering the "lowest income levels," says Wright.

Molina's largest number of members are in California, Washington, Florida, Ohio and Texas.

In April, Molina added Puerto Rico to its roster, covering around 350,000 members for more than 3.3 million in total. It's currently bidding for new business in Iowa and Georgia. But the company is also looking to grow in existing markets such as Florida and Texas.

"We're hiring folks. We're expanding. At the same time, we're sticking to the core business dad put us into 35 years ago," Molina said.

The company is still a family business of sorts. Molina's older brother, Mario Molina, is the CEO; his sister, Martha Molina Bernadett, is an executive vice president. Both are physicians. "I went to law school and became the numbers guy," Molina said.

Through various trusts, the Molina family owns a 25%-30% stake in the company, Molina says. The company went public in 2003.

New contract wins and privatization of Medicaid programs will continue to drive Molina's top-line growth, says Ana Gupte, an analyst with Leerink Partners.

Revenue has grown around 26% on a compounded annual rate over the last two years. But growth has picked up sharply this year. In the first quarter, revenue jumped 53% over the earlier year to $3.2 billion. Enrollment grew 38% across all its health plans.

Its Florida health plan alone added 185,000 federally subsidized exchange members in the quarter, resulting in a tripling of premium revenue over the prior year.

Earnings per share in the quarter soared to 56 cents a share from 10 cents. Second-quarter results will be released on July 30.

Economies Of Scale

Analysts polled by Thomson Reuters estimate that Molina's revenue for all of 2015 will jump 49% over last year to $14.4 billion, slightly above Molina's forecast for $14.3 billion. They see earnings rising 99% to $2.59 per share.

"We have the lowest (general and) administrative costs in the managed care industry," said Molina, noting that it's around 8% of revenue compared to the average 12% to 15%. The company forecasts a 7.6% ratio for the full year.

Even though it's a relatively small managed-care player compared withUnitedHealth Group ( UNH ),Anthem ( ANTM ) andAetna (AET), which plans to acquireHumana (HUM), "scale and critical mass give it leverage to improve fixed costs," Gupte said.

Rather than drive costs down through a merger, Molina seems more intent on improving net profit margin to 2% from less than 1% by increasing revenue on its own. It raised around $400 million in a secondary equity offering in June and has since announced three small acquisitions for putting that capital to work.

The three are in Florida, Michigan and Illinois, states where it already has business.

Molina's scale in local markets is viewed as more crucial by some than scale across state borders. "The benefits of scale (through mergers) have been greatly exaggerated in this industry," Wright said. "You have to have local market share. There are plenty of quite successful (companies) of smaller scale such as Molina. It's growing nicely organically. I think it has enough scale in the Medicaid business in its major markets to compete quite effectively."

Analysts have speculated that Molina might indeed get swept up in merger mania, though. Much of the speculation has centered on a combination withWellCare Health Plans (WCG) . Molina wouldn't comment as a matter of policy.

But Molina did offer an argument against a merger: "There is a notion people have that being larger is beneficial. Medicaid is in some respects unique because it is one state at a time. You don't do Medicaid across three states at once, so economies of scale are a little different."

Wright doesn't rule out a potential merger. But he doesn't think Molina "needs to be bought."

"I think there are plenty of people interested in buying it," he said. "The question is, at what price? The issue with price is that people don't want to pay what its value will be three years down the line. Potential acquirers have vastly underappreciated the growth of the company and the Medicaid business in general."