Before the federal consent decree in 1980, the reformatory dorms were overcrowded and unairconditoned. (Photo: Provided)

Opened in 1939, Kentucky State Reformatory has been an important part of the Oldham County community contributing jobs and economic benefits along with public service projects that are too numerous to list.

In more recent years the reformatory expanded facilities to better meet the needs of its ongoing prison population. The expansion includes the Roederer Correctional Complex, the Luther Luckett Correctional Complex and the Kentucky Correctional Psychiatric Center.

The expansion of facilities was due to the process of social prison reform that began when a federal court issued the 1980 Consent Decree to improve living conditions.

Up until that time the conditions at KSR were “dangerous," said retired KSR employee Shirley Sharp.

"We would have 240 inmates, if I remember correctly, on one of the dormitories. A dorm would have four sections, with 60 inmates or so in each of those sections, in bunk beds, and they were all crammed in there, without a whole lot of space. ...

"We would have no more than two and sometimes just one officer ... but if you didn’t have enough, one officer would be responsible in going back and forth. ... So the inmates were pretty much in control.”

There was no air conditioning and no protection from violent inmates, which resulted in a recipe for growing tensions and hostilities.

John Rees, who began working at KSR in 1969, became warden at the facility in 1980 to help implement the federal consent decree. He recently published a book, “My Life: John Dewitt Rees,” which provides a look inside prison reform during his career. He wrote the book because “people who are working in the field of corrections today have no conception of where we were in the late '60s. The amount of change is amazing.”

When Rees began his job at KSR, he was an assistant supervisor but his duties quickly expanded. Officially a caseworker for the inmates, Rees went on escape hunts, sat on the disciplinary committee, assisted the parole board and helped with medical issues. Mental health treatment was almost nonexistent, he said. The facility was totally run down.

Staff had not improved much and inmates performed functions in all areas of KSR including clerical work, personnel reports, keeping counts, and assistance with health and dental care.

In December 1970, one of the dormitories, Dormitory 4, was integrated, which was followed by several disturbances that had to be quelled by tear gas. After that, nothing else happened toward integration until 1972 when a group of black inmates entered an all white dormitory and attacked inmates, some of whom were asleep.

With only one security guard in the dorm, the event quickly escalated and the institution went on lockdown.

In Rees’ book he described the next scene: “By the time I got there, they had the inmates separated dormitory by dormitory and were preparing to open up the yard. This was a major technical error. Immediately all the white offenders were out on the baseball field, obviously armed with anything they could get their hands on. The black inmates were in another area of the institution and equally armed. If the two groups of offenders got together a lot of people were going to be seriously hurt. ... I was at the railroad gate with the Reformatory Riot Squad fully armed and fully suited up. Everyone had been ordered not to fire a shot ... when the white inmates got up and started to charge the black inmates. ... I ordered the officer at the railroad gate to fire his weapon.”

Fortunately the officer listened to Rees, against the Warden’s orders, firing three or four into the air, which immediately settled the groups down.

By 1980, inmates at the Kentucky State Penitentiary and the Kentucky State Reformatory brought a federal lawsuit against the two prisons over living conditions. They alleged that the living conditions at both institutions violated their civil rights. Judging that it would not be prudent to litigate, the Department of Corrections entered into a consent decree.

Rees was brought in as warden at KSR to oversee the compliance issues. According to Rees, the decree "established a ‘new’ normal. It brought medical and security staffing up to minimal standards. It gave raises to the correctional officers and staff who worked issues, security issues, etc. It fixed the crumbling dormitories, It improved the physical plant.

"What was happening in Kentucky was simultaneously happening across the nation. The Federal Courts were requiring accreditation. That established a management structure that was going to be fluid. It is continuing to evolve today. By requiring accreditation it mandated into the future. They're not perfect but it was going to maintain minimum standards regarding safety and security and the quality of life that goes on within the facility.”

You can contact Nancy at: nancystheiss@gmail.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1R23Hl4