Nine years and 3-billion miles in the making, NASA spacecraft New Horizons returned a beautiful photo of Pluto today—by far the most detailed one ever taken. This morning at 7:49 AM ET, New Horizons sped past Pluto at 30,800 miles per hour, while its suite of instruments gathered data about the planet. Pluto’s strange heart-shaped region is featured prominently:

SNEAK PEEK of gorgeous Pluto! The dwarf planet has sent a love note back to Earth via our New Horizons spacecraft, which has traveled more than 9 years and 3+ billion miles. This is the last and most detailed image of Pluto sent to Earth before the moment of closest approach - 7:49 a.m. EDT today. This same image will be released and discussed at 8 a.m. EDT today. Watch our briefing live on NASA Television at: http://www.nasa.gov/nasatv The high res pic will be posted on the web at: http://www.nasa.gov. This stunning image of the dwarf planet was captured from New Horizons at about 4 p.m. EDT on July 13, about 16 hours before the moment of closest approach. The spacecraft was 476,000 miles (766,000 kilometers) from the surface. Image Credit: NASA #nasa #pluto #plutoflyby #newhorizons #solarsystem #nasabeyond #science A photo posted by NASA (@nasa) on Jul 14, 2015 at 4:00am PDT

A planetary astronomer for the New Horizons mission tweeted this,marking that humankind has completed phase one of its mandate of space exploration.

Pic we stayed up all night making is now part of the family portrait. There's something in my eye (h/t @zuluagajorge) pic.twitter.com/XrbrdLqeke — Alex Parker (@Alex_Parker) July 14, 2015

New Horizons, which can create images of Pluto with 1,000 times the resolution of the best earthbound telescopes, went dark in order to accumulate as much data as possible during the flyby. Around 9 PM ET Tuesday (July 14), the spacecraft will link back up with the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory and begin transmitting more data. (It will take 16 months to download all the data fully.)