Tea party activists scored a big win last week when House Speaker John Boehner announced his resignation.

Movement conservatives had been after Boehner for more than a year, frustrated that he wouldn’t embrace their no-compromise tactics for torpedoing the Affordable Care Act or defunding Planned Parenthood. For them, shutting down the government is an option. Boehner felt it would be a disaster.

“I hope all Republicans — including those in the Senate — are listening to what grassroots conservatives are saying: It is time for conservative leadership and conservative principles,” Rep. Roger Williams, R-Weatherford, said last week. Williams has some support from tea party voters.

In the coming months, the new House leadership will have to navigate stormy issues, including whether to raise the debt ceiling.

Tea party members don’t want the debt ceiling raised or budget caps busted, and they’re willing to do what it takes to prevent it.

But now House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy of California appears poised to pick up Boehner’s fallen standard. His selection would mean tea party conservatives won’t be getting one of their own, just the next leader up.

One aide to a prominent Texas Republican told me that McCarthy is Boehner with a different name.

Indeed, the hard-right revolution is far from complete.

So as the tea party prepares for another round of fights with the GOP leadership, activists are also looking for reinforcements.

“It’s unfortunate that it has to happen this way,” said Dallas tea party leader Ken Emanuelson. “Many of our representatives in Congress just go along to get along.”

Texas’ March 1 primary gives them a chance to knock off Republican incumbents and replace them with tea party loyalists and libertarians.

In 2014 they helped defeat former House Majority Leader Eric Cantor of Virginia, in a political shot heard around the country.

The upheaval was felt in North Texas, where former U.S. Attorney John Ratliffe, on the strength of tea party support, beat longtime incumbent Ralph Hall, R-Rockwall. State government saw even more carnage, with state Sens. John Carona and Bob Deuell losing to Don Huffines and Bob Hall, respectively, both backed by the tea party and libertarians.

Now hard-right conservatives have the taste of blood. And they promise to be more organized and better funded than the last election cycle.

Topping their hit list this time around is Rep. Pete Sessions, R-Dallas. Sessions chairs the House Rules Committee and is likely a candidate for majority whip.

In 2014, Sessions easily beat tea party leader Katrina Pierson for re-election, and he’s mobilizing for another tussle. Two weeks ago Huffines, the state senator, said he was not planning to run against Sessions, but his twin brother, businessman Phillip Huffines, is considering a challenge. Iraq war veteran Paul Brown has already announced his candidacy, and businessman Russell Ramsland has formed an exploratory committee. Both are tea party favorites.

Others in the Republican congressional delegation from North Texas could also get primary opponents.

As the last election cycle proved, grassroots activists are serious about reshaping government.

Boehner’s departure is another warning shot.

Follow Gromer Jeffers Jr. on Twitter at @gromerjeffers.