COZAD, Neb. – The first Eggs n’ Issues talk of 2016 was held Saturday morning at the Cozad Grand Generation Center.

The informal forum allows Dawson County’s State Senator in District 36, Matt Williams to meet with constituents to give them an update on pressing issues before the Legislature and hear local concerns about bills before the senate.

About 10 residents of the Dawson County area attended the event. Two more Eggs n’ Issues talks will be held, one in Lexington on Saturday, April 9 at the Opportunity Center at 8:30 a.m. and one in Gothenburg on Saturday, March 26 at 8:30 a.m. at the Gothenburg Community Development Office.

Williams spent most of his time discussing prison overcrowding, education funding, Medicaid expansion and what allocations may be used for if taken from the state’s reserve fund.

Provisions of legislative bill 605, which passed last year to address prison overcrowding were coming into fruition this year, Williams said

The implementation of more probation and special courts – such as mental health and drug courts – were being used to reduce prison overcrowding. Only non-violent low level felons would be eligible for these programs, Williams said.

Williams said the state’s prison system has a 170 percent capacity. An excessive inmate population has led to a lack of space in prisons for programs like education and career preparation because all room is used to house inmates, he said.

He said it costs about $37,000 to $38,000 per year to house one inmate in the state’s prison system. Currently there is also a 35 percent recidivism rate in Nebraska prisons, meaning 35 out of 100 inmates that are released will find themselves back in prison within a year.

“There are many in our prisons that have mental illness, addiction issues. LB 605 takes time, it will only happen as new people are sentenced,” he said.

The Legislature will begin discussion on the state budget and will focus on three key funding areas this week, Williams said.

Three major budget issues will be debated that would involve funding allocations from the state’s reserve fund, which currently has $725 million.

These three programs seeking funding are: a transportation bank to fund infrastructure across the state; funding to create 150 new corrections beds in Lincoln; and an allocation to help rebuild levies at Offutt Air Force Base in Bellevue.

A $50 million funding request will be made for the transportation bank with another $27 million allocation request being anticipated to pay for the creation of 150 new beds for the corrections department, Williams said.

“The Legislature will use the money and attract federal funds. The Legislature money (funds allocated from the state’s reserve fund) will get paid back with funds from the gas tax,” he said.

A $13 million allocation would be sought to pay for levies at Offutt Air Force Base, Williams said. He noted that the base is the largest employer in Nebraska. The refurbished levies could possibly help the base attract federal funding to its runway in the future, Williams said.

“The runway is in a horrible state of disrepair, there is talk of redoing the runway. It will cost close to 100 million,” he said.

On the hot button issue of school funding, Williams said it is no surprise to him that state aid funding to rural schools in his district, such as Cozad, Broken Bow and Gothenburg is decreasing at a time when agriculture land evaluations have gone up year after year.

Cozad Resident PJ Jacobson asked how Cozad Community School District could lose close to one million dollars in funding next year, Williams said it was tied to the state aid formula.

Williams said the equalization formula, the component of the state aid formula that decides school funding, shows that rural school districts such as Cozad and Broken Bow have a steady student population with increasing land valuations surrounding the school.

“The equalization formula is a needs-based formula,” Williams said.

The formula looks at resources in the school district compared with the real estate valuations and then factors in the funding needs of the schools. In the case of many rural schools in the area, even a slight budget increase means the needs are flat. Factor in sky high land valuations and the formula sees the rural districts as having less demand for school aide, Williams said.

Medicaid expansion efforts in the Legislature have moved past the committee level onto the floor of the Legislature, Williams said.

Currently, about 112,000 Nebraska residents fall into the donut hole, meaning they made too much money to quality for Medicaid and not enough money to quality for tax credits to receive health insurance from the Affordable Care Act Market Place. Medicaid expansion in the Legislature is aimed at providing coverage to these people, Williams said.

Williams said he knows rural hospitals in his district, such as Cozad Community Health System and Lexington Regional Health Center are supportive of Medicaid expansion efforts because the uninsured often seek non-emergency treatment in emergency rooms for issues – like a cold, flu – that drive up the cost of health care when these issues could be dealt with cheaper by primary care doctors.

The Medicaid expansion bill would seek to implement a pilot program to expansion coverage in the state and although the bill could trigger 90 percent in federal funding for Medicaid expansion efforts, Williams said he wasn’t sold on the bill.

Williams said research has estimated the cost of expanding Medicaid in Nebraska at $1 billion over the next 10 years. Although federal funding could offset the cost, if funding from Washington were ever cut the state would be left responsible for paying the costs, he said.

State senators are also looking at possibly raising stamp and visitor fees at Nebraska State Game and Parks locations to raise more funds for maintenance and costs. Williams said fee prices have not been raised in many years.