The Sculpture in the Park Show & Sale presents art from 160 local and national artists

Kendra Fleischman discusses her video sculptures Saturday with art patrons at the Sculpture in the Park Show & Sale in Benson Park Sculpture Garden. Fleischman works with a variety of media influenced by futurism, surrealism and other genres. ( Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

If you go Art in the Park: 10 a.m.-4 p.m. Sunday, North Lake Park, 2800 N. Taft Ave. Free to attend. The event offers art and food items for purchase. Call the Lincoln Gallery at 663-2407, or visit www.artintheparkloveland.com/ for details. Sculpture in the Park: 9:30 a.m.-4:30 p.m. Sunday, Benson Park Sculpture Garden, 2908 Aspen Drive. General admission is $7, and ages 14 and under are free. Call the Loveland High Plains Arts Council office at 663-2940 or visit http://www.sculptureinthepark.org/ for details. Loveland Fine Art and Wine Invitational: 10 a.m.-4 p.m. Sunday, Owens Field southwest of Loveland High School, on the south side of 29th Street. General admission is $7, and children 14 and under are free. The event will have ATMs on site, food, beverages and entertainment. Contact 623-734-6526, or visit http://vermillionpromotions.com for details. Reporter-Herald at Art in the Park: Children are invited to come hang out at Art in the Park with a couple of reporters from the Reporter-Herald to make origami flowers and hats out of newspaper or draw Weather Kids art. A booth will be set up near the food court noon-2 p.m. Sunday. Weather Kids drawings will be published in the Reporter-Herald in coming weeks, and photos of children making origami will be posted at facebook.com/reporterherald.

Turn an ice skate upside down, stick it on top of a mix of various objects, and the result is a giraffe.

The neck is formed out of the handle of a scooter, and the body and legs from items like a saw blade, parts of a bicycle and scooter, and a yellow wooden banana.

To top it off, the ears are made from the tongues from inside the skates because they are floppy and the perfect size.

"I call it mixed media assemblage because there's a variety of material," said Deborah Jang, a sculptor from Denver. "That's how it works. You keep doing design ideas and keep trying things out."

Jang assembled the objects into the shape of a giraffe but needed something for the head, and when she watched the Winter Olympics, she had a match and called her piece "Long Road to Sochi," for the giraffe's elongated body parts and the location of her inspiration.

The giraffe, along with a horse and a goose assemblage, are among the 2,000 pieces of art on display at the 32nd annual Sculpture in the Park Show & Sale Saturday and Sunday at the Benson Park Sculpture Garden, 2908 Aspen Drive.

The art for the country's largest outdoor juried show and sale was under four large tents, set against the backdrop of another 148 permanent pieces in the park paid for by previous shows.

160 Artists

The Loveland High Plains Arts Council, a nonprofit established in 1984 to promote sculptural arts and buy the art for the park, hosted the event. The show, one of three art shows near 29th Street and Taft Avenue during the weekend, will continue from 9:30 a.m.-4:30 p.m. Sunday.

This year, 160 local and national artists, including 29 first-timers to the show, presented samples of their work — each artist could bring up to nine pieces.

Mark Hopkins of Loveland was one of the first-timers, and he brought in an eclectic mix of bronze sculptures that included a mother and child giraffe touching heads, an elephant, an eagle, children at play and a branch with a bird and autumn leaves. Hopkins likes to work on four to five pieces at once, using the lost wax process, and calls what he does visual poetry and divine madness.

"I'm the director, the writer, and these are my actors," Hopkins said, pointing out his pieces on display in Tent A. "People pay for these mini scenes frozen in time. ... I love to share the joy of what I do with people."

Cyber Teller, one of Kendra Fleischman's video sculptures on display at the Sculpture in the Park Show & Sale at the Benson Park Sculpture Garden this weekend. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Hopkins gave as an example the mother and giraffe piece, which shows just the head and neck of the mother as she bends around to touch the calf for what looks like a kiss. He created a partial representation of the mother and let the viewer visualize the rest.

"The human ability to fill in the gaps is so powerful," Hopkins said.

Different Mediums

Al Glann of Tucson, Ariz., leaves gaps in what can be seen through the use of line and shape to represent the form and anatomy of horses and ravens, his current subject for his bronze and steel pieces.

"It's more of the gestural essence of the animal," Glann said. "There's enough information there, you know what it is. ... You become an active participant because you fill it in."

Robin Evans of Fort Collins works in fused glass and likes using nature for her subject matter.

"I like all natural inspired things, like trees, flowers, wind-blown branches and the movement of the ocean," Evans said.

In some of her pieces, Evans places images of nature on rectangles of colored glass she assembles together into larger rectangles.

"They're really long sculptures. They're modular," Evans said. "They're made to fit in spaces where you need a little pizzazz and there is none."

Kendra Fleischman works in bronze, creating abstract pieces demonstrating line and movement, and in mixed media that includes video components. She tends to work in futurism, surrealism and other genres.

One of her pieces is called the Cyber Teller, a digital storyteller made out of epoxy resin with an open mouth as she tells stories to baby aliens on her shoulders and arms. Her chest has buttons to push to change the digital feed of the different stories.

"Her job is to gather and tell stories," Fleischman said.

Fleischman likes working in multi-media to also tell stories.

"It allows me to tell the story deeper. The bronze doesn't let me do that as much," she said.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm