Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Judy Mitchell reads the names of women have served in the military during a Memorial Day ceremony to honor women veterans. Philip Scott Andrews, special to The Courier-Journal

The honor guard holds flags at a Memorial Day ceremony in Mount Washington. The event, organized by the Vietnam Veterans of America Chapter 454, honored Female veterans for their service and sacrifice. (Photo: Philip Scott Andrews Special to the Courier Journal)

When Mary Tindall and two other nurses were told that two of them had to go to Vietnam, she volunteered.

"I wanted it to be on my own time," Tindall said.

That was back in 1969. It was before she met her husband John while serving, before 40 percent of the patients at the hospital in Vietnam died and before her own son eventually entered the military.

Sunday, Tindall stood in front of a crowd of about 75 to share her experience for the 23rd Annual Memorial Day Service honoring "women veterans who gave their all" at the Highland Memory Gardens. The ceremony was held by the 454th chapter of the Vietnam Veterans of America.

RELATED: Waterfront flag planting honors fallen veterans



She told the story of Sharon Lane, the first woman to die of hostile fire in Vietnam, and she recognized many other women whose services went unrecognized for years. She also reminded the crowd that Gov. Steve Beshear proclaimed 2015 the year of the woman veteran in Kentucky.

The Rev. Tom Dillard sang the National Anthem and joined the group in prayer. There was a prayer of remembrance by Margaret Holmes and Wynella Berthards, and a reading of names by Judy Mitchell.

Another Vietnam veteran, James Angelini, read a poem he wrote dedicated to his friend who died next to him during their service.

Story continues after the gallery.

The service included a flag ceremony and a 21-gun salute. A scholarship was given to two JROTC members from the Vietnam Veterans Association. A wreath was also presented for each branch of the military, including a wreath for the South Vietnamese Army.

"We appreciate the U.S. Armed Forces for our freedom and our people's freedom," said Hung Lee, a Vietnam veteran who served for the South Vietnamese Army.

RELATED: Man making retreat a reality for troubled vets

The crowd consisted of attendees who had gone to the event for years, to those who just happened to be walking through the gardens that day.

Zelma Greegor has attended the service since her husband was buried in the Memory Gardens in 2008. Greegor sat on her walker with a large flag in hand next to her husband's grave before the ceremony started. She was waiting for her great grandson, Mason.

"He likes to put the flag in," Greegor said as she motioned to the vase atop her husband's grave.

Greegor said she also decorates and cleans the grave of the stone to the left of her husband's.

"We just noticed nobody ever came to decorate it, and it's a small thing to do compared to their big sacrifice," she said.

Speaking about the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C., Tindall said she wants people to know more about the veterans than simply seeing their names on the wall.

"They should also know something about the people because they were more than just names," she said.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1HDGWj4