Sam Elliott — he of the gravelly drawl and arched eyebrows — will be a special guest at the AARP Life@50+ Movies for Grownups Film Festival in Miami (May 14-16).

Elliott and director/cowriter Brett Haley will be on hand for a pre-release screening of I’ll See You in My Dreams, a romantic comedy starring Elliott, Blythe Danner, June Squibb (Nebraska), Rhea Perlman (Cheers) and Mary Kay Place (Mary Hartman, Mary Hartman). Elliott plays a wealthy retiree with whom Danner’s long-widowed character develops an unexpected late-life romance.

“I always enjoyed working with a good-looking girl, instead of with some sweaty cowboy,” laughs Elliott, who’s best known for his man’s-man roles in films and TV shows such as Tombstone and Justified.

I’ll See You in My Dreams opens the film festival at 6 p.m. on Thursday, May 14. The rest of the festival lineup includes:

Mr. Holmes

Friday, May 15, 12:30 p.m.

(In Theaters July 17)

Sir Ian McKellen stars as legendary detective Sherlock Holmes, now an old man living in a seaside farmhouse and tending his bees with his housekeeper (Laura Linney) and her young son (Milo Parker) for company. With the boy’s help, Holmes revisits the circumstances of his last, unsolved case.

Love & Mercy

Friday, May 15, 4 p.m.

(In Theaters June 5)

Paul Dano is breathtaking as troubled Beach Boy Brian Wilson, whose descent into mental illness was cruelly capitalized upon by his doctor (Paul Giamatti). John Cusack plays Wilson in his later years. Director Bill Pohlad ingeniously uses classic feel-good Beach Boys tunes to contrast with the unfolding tragedy of Wilson’s life.

Get discounts on airfare, hotels, car rentals and more — AARP Member Advantages. »

Caring for Mom & Dad

Saturday, May 16, 10 a.m.

(In Theaters May 7)

This hour-long film, produced by PBS and narrated by Meryl Streep, drops in on caregivers around the country as they make wrenching choices — and tradeoffs — about providing care for their parents. But there are hopeful looks, too, at innovative workplace and community-based programs that support working caregivers.

AARP senior vice-president and editorial director Myrna Blyth will moderate a post-screening discussion with director Larkin McPhee and Roslyn Schneider, director of global patient affairs for Pfizer Inc.

5 Flights Up

Saturday, May 16, 1 p.m.

(In Theaters May 8)

Earning four stars on the Movies for Grownups review site, this heartwarming romantic comedy stars two screen legends, Diane Keaton and Morgan Freeman, as a long-married couple who decide they can no longer stay in the fifth-floor Brooklyn walkup that’s been their home for 40 years. As they host open houses at their beloved apartment and search for new digs, they begin to wonder if life’s “what-ifs” are really worth obsessing over.

Novelist Jill Ciment will be on hand to answer questions from the audience after the screening.

Photo: Bleecker Street Media

Also of Interest

See the AARP home page for deals, savings tips, trivia and more.