Last year, Toronto’s left-wing establishment thought they knew what they were doing when they pushed potential mayoral candidates Shelley Carroll and Adam Vaughan aside.

Olivia Chow, the popular downtown NDP MP and former Toronto councillor would be their choice to beat Toronto Mayor Rob Ford.

The polls showed her as a serious contender, with plenty of political experience, and campaign ready.

What a difference a year makes.

With just three weeks to go in this ridiculously long mayoral campaign, the former frontrunner, Chow, is now third in every published poll. Her prospects are bleak.

Meanwhile, Carroll is likely to be re-elected as a councillor.

Vaughan seems pleased to have replaced Chow, winning the federal Trinity-Spadina seat she vacated and defeating Joe Cressy in the process, a long-time ally and friend of Chow and her late husband, Jack Layton.

Chow has tried to bill herself as fiscally responsible, to distance herself from the tax-and-spend reputation of her party.

It is a hard sell for a left-wing politician to make, and she did little to add to her credibility when she proposed scrapping the Scarborough subway expansion to save money, but keeping the revenue from the dedicated property tax for it to spend on other transit priorities.

The main reason Chow is no longer leading in the polls isn’t because she’s not likable (she is), nor is it related to any specific policy.

She has simply been unable to offer a compelling reason to vote for her.

Needing a mayor other than Rob Ford becomes an empty campaign battle cry, when the incumbent quits the mayoral race due to a diagnosis of cancer.

Torontonians are uninterested in squared curbs, and no one wants to see property taxes increase more than the rate of inflation, which fairly or not, many believe she will do. (She says she won’t.)

Perhaps most harmful to her campaign has been her transportation platform.

Chow argues hers makes more sense than John Tory’s or Doug Ford’s, but she’s been unable to explain it clearly.

Many people don’t want more buses or LRTs, which they see as a fancy name for streetcars.

They want subways – and Chow abandoned Scarborough subway expansion early on in her campaign.

It surprises many that Rob Ford is a highly effective political communicator when he’s on his game.

His message may not sound pretty, but people know what it is.

In the last election in 2010, there wasn’t a voter who didn’t know who Rob Ford was, why he was running for mayor and what he said he would do -- stop the gravy train at City Hall and show respect for taxpayers.

Chow has been unable to find that clarity.

Her message has been muddled and confusing.

Voters know she wants to be a “new mayor” but they aren’t really sure why.

This is hardly a unique problem for a would-be municipal politician.

Ontarians rejected former PC leader Tim Hudak and Canadians said no thank you to former Liberal leader Michael Ignatieff for very similar reasons.

Of the three major mayoral candidates now in the race, Chow is the first to release a full platform document.

Perhaps it was in an effort to regain momentum, more likely an effort to stay relevant.

It’s a 46-page, text-heavy document – that achieved its diversity quota so well, a keen observer could mistake it for a Ford Fest brochure.

But it will not help Chow regain the lead she allowed to slip away in this race.

It may be useful for journalists and policy wonks – but Chow needs to provoke interest from the voters who have left her since she launched her campaign.

Some of Chow’s criticisms of John Tory’s “SmartTrack” transit plan are valid but the overall idea of it is clear and it’s something voters hear and understand.

It’s simple, it’s visual -- using electric trains on existing GO lines to kickstart Toronto’s public transit system into the 21st century.

If all you’re doing is grasping at flaws in SmartTrack, as Chow is, you’re losing the debate.

Chow’s platform lacks that appeal.

It is so text heavy that Chow’s supporters won’t be inspired by it and her opponents won’t be worried about it.

With the sand draining out of the hour glass, Chow has little time left to reverse the trend of early Toronto megacity mayoral frontrunners (Barbara Hall, George Smitherman) fading in the stretch.

Indeed, at this point, it appears as if the more Chow campaigns, the more her numbers drop.