DALLAS, Jan. 29, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Star Wellness® is expanding into San Antonio and surrounding areas thanks to its newest franchise agreement with former Star Wellness client Chad Hierholzer. The Dallas/Fort Worth-based franchisor and provider of state-of-the-art healthcare screening services today announced that Hierholzer's franchise will serve San Antonio as well as Del Rio, San Marcos, New Braunfels, Kerrville and other cities in the region.

Hierholzer, who was a client of Star Wellness while working for the City of Richardson, has relocated to South Central Texas and said he is perfectly positioned to introduce Star Wellness' services to businesses and organizations in the San Antonio area. His wife Kelly, a certified registered nurse anesthetist, will serve as the company's president.

"I look forward to helping employers in San Antonio find solutions that will help them save premium dollars while helping their employees improve their health," said Hierholzer. "With the Affordable Care Act's new wellness incentives, employers are eager to be more involved with their employee's health, and demand is growing for the services provided by Star Wellness."

With more than 200 clients in over 20 states, Star Wellness is a pioneer and recognized leader in on-site medical screening and laboratory services that help corporations, local governments and school districts implement wellness programs to control or reduce healthcare-related expenses.

This is the third franchise agreement for Star Wellness, which also has franchises in Houston and Amarillo. The company has launched an aggressive expansion initiative and is actively seeking franchise prospects in major markets throughout Texas and the Southwest.

Star Wellness founder and CEO Johnette van Eeden said that Hierholzer represents the type of business professional needed to be successful.

"As an experienced businessman and former client of Star Wellness, Chad understands the important role that wellness screening plays in the rapidly-evolving healthcare marketplace," van Eeden said. "We expect him to quickly become a preferred resource for many leading employers throughout South Central Texas."

ABOUT STAR WELLNESS

Founded in 2003, Star Wellness is a pioneer and recognized leader in on-site medical screening and laboratory services that help corporations, local governments and school districts implement wellness programs to control or reduce healthcare-related expenses. By focusing on early detection and prevention through affordable on-site testing, Star Wellness clients are able to encourage and improve employee participation in personal health management programs that lead to lifestyle change, tangibly reduce costs, and help protect corporate health benefits. A proven business model that is built on reasonable profit objectives, low overhead, and rigorous operating cost controls allows Star Wellness to offer state-of-the-art screenings for a fraction of other providers' costs.

More information about Star Wellness and its franchise opportunities can be found at StarWellnessUSA.com or by calling 800-685-5572.

SOURCE Star Wellness