There are few, if any, medical diagnoses in life that are scarier than cancer.

Based on data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, cancer is now the second-leading cause of death in the United States. Furthermore, the World Health Organization is predicting that over two decades we'll see an additional 8 million cases of cancer diagnosed per year, bringing the total to 22 million new diagnoses per year.

Cancer is scary not only because its prevalence appears to be increasing, but because the mechanism by which it begins and spreads is still largely unknown. Don't get me wrong, researchers do have some general understanding of the genetic make-up of many of the various types of cancer cells, but there are still a lot of unknowns remaining.

This cancer is in focus

At or near the top of that list of worries is breast cancer, currently the second most commonly diagnosed type of cancer each year, and one which disproportionately affects women. Statistics from the American Cancer Society show that an estimated 235,030 cases of breast cancer are expected to be diagnosed in the U.S. in 2014. To add context to these figures, breast cancer represents 14% of all estimated cancer diagnoses in 2014.

Breast cancer is also the second-leading cause of cancer death in women, behind only lung and bronchus cancer, leading to an estimated 40,000 deaths in 2014. Put succinctly, it's a disease that commands the attention of pharmaceutical companies worldwide.

The medical community has apparently been listening.

A step in the right direction

A little more than a week ago a new study from BC Cancer Agency in Canada revealed a major step forward in reducing cancer recurrence risk in breast cancer sufferers over a two decade span. The study, which was published in the Journal of Clinical Oncology, examined 7,178 women treated for early to moderately advanced breast cancer over two periods, 1986-1992 and 2004-2008.

The findings of the new study demonstrated around a 50% risk reduction in recurrence compared to the earlier group. In cases where estrogen wasn't the primary cancer driver (also known as estrogen-negative cancers), the recurrence rate fell from 11% in the earlier group after the first year to just 6% in the 2004-2008 group. In the more aggressive HER2-positive cancers (HER2 is a protein associated with aggressive breast cancer) the difference was even more noticeable with the risk of recurrence falling from 23% in the 1986-1992 group to just 9% in the more recently studied group.

Although the findings of BC Cancer Agency's study didn't specifically look into the underlying causes of this recurrence risk reduction, the researchers postulate that it has to do with a combination of better education among women about breast cancer risks, regular breast cancer screening, and more efficient drugs.

These drugs are critical to beating this disease

While I would certainly concur that education surrounding breast cancer and its risk factors has helped, I can say with some degree of confidence that innovative drugs have played a key role in improving patients' quality of life and in many cases extending overall survival over the last two decades.

Leading the charge in the fight against breast cancer is drug behemoth Roche (NASDAQOTH:RHHBY) whose standard of care for HER2-positive cancers, Herceptin, and newer HER2-positive drug Perjeta, are making quite the difference. Both of Roche's breast cancer fighting drugs are predominantly used to combat later-stage breast cancer, but they also have been approved in adjuvant indications along with chemotherapy to help prevent recurrence of the disease.

Perjeta recently made headlines for the announced results in its CLEOPATRA trial that showed the combination of Perjeta, Herceptin, and docetaxel significantly extended median overall survival to 56.5 months in advanced cancer patients compared to 40.8 months for the control group which received only Herceptin and docetaxel. The 56.5 month median overall survival is the longest ever recorded in a clinical trial for an advanced stage cancer! That signals to me that we're witnessing progress unfold right before our eyes.

The future of preventative care

Roche may have quite the lineup designed to fight breast cancer now, but Galena Biopharma (NASDAQ:GALE) might have the next-generation vaccine meant to keep cancer from coming back.

Galena's pipeline is centered on its cancer immunotherapy known as NeuVax, which is currently in late-stage studies and expected to deliver results in late 2016 or early 2017. NeuVax is a vaccine designed to enhance a breast cancer patients' immune system to help recognize any remaining cancer cells that may otherwise go undetected. Best of all, NeuVax is patient-friendly in that a full course of treatment over three years involves just 11 injections.

In the midstage SN-33 (node-positive) study that examined breast cancer patients with low-to-moderate HER2 expression over the course of five years, NeuVax-treated patients had a recurrence rate of only 5.6% compared to the non-NeuVax group which had a 25.9% recurrence rate. This 78% recurrence reduction risk is huge, and if NeuVax proves its worth in phase 3 trials it could be a game-changer in certain types of cancer prevention moving forward.

I'd also suggest keeping an eye on the development of Pfizer's (NYSE:PFE) palbociclib which nearly doubled median progression-free survival in its latest study in combination with Novartis' Femara. Survival only increased by 4.2 months over the control group, but there's hope that palbociclib in an adjuvant setting could deliver impressive results.

One step at a time

If we've learned anything over the past few decades it's that cancer discoveries don't happen overnight. They take time. But, as time has passed we've seen a string of increasingly more effective and safer medications find their way onto pharmacy shelves. It's unlikely that breast cancer itself or a recurrence of breast cancer is going to be solved this year or the next, but it's an encouraging sign that we are continuing to head in the right direction. I, for one, look forward to the day that breast cancer becomes curable and remain hopeful that this day comes during my lifetime.