The Connecticut Insurance Department this week modified rates proposed by health insurers for coverage in 2015, including Aetna and UnitedHealthcare.

These are the latest of many rate filings that began as early as the summer. Each filing is for a distinct group of policyholders.

On Tuesday, the department rejected a proposed 9.4 percent increase on individual health insurance policies sold by Aetna Life Insurance Co. for coverage next year. The rate would affect about 3,700 individuals who buy health insurance somewhere other than the state's public exchange, Access Health CT. Instead, the department is allowing a 4.6 percent increase on the policies, citing the availability of a temporary federal reinsurance program that will help offset expenses for insurance companies.

On Monday, the department modified rates on a new health insurance plan that will be sold to individuals outside of the Connecticut public exchange. Because it's a new plan, there are no 2014 rates that are modified up or down. The brand new rates, however, were decreased 9.2 percent by the Insurance Department. The department cited the federal reinsurance program and it said UnitedHealthcare over estimated the impact of "trend," meaning the increasing cost of medical services and pharmaceuticals and the demand for both.

The department is currently reviewing 2015 rates proposed by ConnectiCare Insurance Co. for a 13.5 percent increase on individual HMO insurance policies, called "grandfathered policies" because they were sold before Congress passed the Affordable Care Act in 2010. The increase reflects both increasing costs in medical services and pharmaceuticals as well as federal fees, according to ConnectiCare's filing. The department did not have a tally of how many policyholders the rate change would affect.

Separately, the department is reviewing a ConnectiCare Insurance Co. request for a 13.5 percent increase on grandfathered individual Point of Service insurance polices. The change would affect 1,600 individuals covered by the plans. ConnectiCare cites the rising cost of medical services and pharmaceuticals as well as federal fees.

The department has an open public comment period through Oct. 27 for the ConnectiCare filings. For information, visit http://www.ct.gov/cid