WASHINGTON–An attack ad focusing on the Senate debate over NSA surveillance called Sen. Ted Cruz “the Capitulating Canadian,” for supporting a compromise bill.

America’s Liberty PAC, which supports Sen. Rand Paul’s presidential campaign, launched the ad on YouTube. The spot mimics a monster truck rally commercial and features “defender of freedom” Paul’s head on a hulking body, Cruz in front of Canadian flag and President Barack Obama behind a laptop with his campaign logo on it.

The debate is a major point of contention between the two 2016 hopefuls, who once filibustered together against the Affordable Care Act and the president’s use of drone strikes. Paul has made ending NSA surveillance pillar of his campaign, and filibustered PATRIOT Act authorization. Cruz co-sponsored the USA FREEDOM Act, a bill to balance privacy and security concerns that passed the House but is opposed by Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell.

Most legal scholars say Cruz, born in Calgary to an American-born mother, is still eligible to be president.

Cruz’s campaign declined to comment on the ad.

Jews swoon for Cruz

Cruz hammered home his staunchly pro-Israel platform in at New York gala for an organization funded by prominent Jewish Republican donor Sheldon Adelson, according to BuzzFeed.

The senator criticized the pending Iran nuclear weapons deal and Obama’s relationship with Israel at the dinner for The World Values Network–run by Rabbi Shumley Boteach and supported by Adelson.

Cruz also slammed the Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions (BDS) movement, meant to economically penalize Israel, calling it “antisemitism plain and simple.”

“We need a president of the United States who will stand up and say if a university in this country boycotts the nation of Israel than that university will forfeit federal taxpayer dollars,” said Cruz.

Gay hotelier who hosted Cruz donated to campaign

Ian Reisner and Mati Weiderpass hosted Cruz last month for a dinner at their New York apartment and insisted it wasn’t a fundraiser. But the New York Times reported that Reisner donated to Cruz’s presidential campaign, which drew harsh criticism from the LGBT community.

“In the interest of transparency, I gave Senator Cruz a $2,700 check to show my support for his work on behalf of Israel,” Reisner said in a statement to the Times “When I realized his donation could be misconstrued as supporting his anti-gay marriage agenda, I asked for the money back. Senator Cruz’s office gave the money back, and I have no intention of giving any money to any politicians who aren’t in support of L.G.B.T. issues.”

Weiderpass and Reisner were slammed for hosting Cruz, who’s actively opposed same-sex marriage. The April discussion reportedly focused on Israel and national security.