Name: Lt. Colonel André Dean (US Army, Retired)

Age: 54

Family: Happily married to Dianne for 31 years. The Lord has blessed our marriage with 10 beautiful angels ages 10-28, all biologically ours.

Occupation: Army Airborne-Ranger, 27-year Combat Veteran, Infantry Officer, private thru Lt. Colonel. Awarded the Combat Infantryman Badge, Bronze Star and Valorous Unit Award for my leadership under direct enemy fire.

Position Sought: U.S. House of Representatives (Congress), Washington D.C.

Reason for Running and what makes you the best choice: The 8th Congressional District needs new blood. Our 20-year congressman is now being rated by the venerated and most-trusted name in conservative thinking, the Heritage Foundation’s “Action,” with a terrible lifetime voting score of 55/“F”.

I am sick of being angry with “RINO” (Republican in Name Only) congressmen like Brady, Cantor and Speaker Boehner.

I am a proven, distinguished 27-year military leader.

I hold a bachelor’s degree from Texas A&M (with honors) and a Masters in Public Policy/Affairs from The University of Texas in Austin; none of my fellow challengers holds a college degree.

I am a Constitutional Conservative, and I am mad as Hell about our $19 trillion, irresponsible national debt. I demand a Balanced Budget Amendment and immediate fiscal restraint.

I will impose Term Limits so no congressman, senator, federal or Supreme Court judge will ever be allowed to serve a lifetime in office again.

I will make America safe again, by securing our Southern Border with Mexico and begin the 20-year deportation of all illegal aliens from America. I will freeze all Muslim immigration to the USA if our government cannot be 100% certain that the immigrant or refugee is not coming to America to kill us.

I will expunge Obamacare and all VA hospitals and clinics (which is government-run, apathetic, substandard, horrific “care” for our war heroes) and replace the VA with a Medical Card allowing Veterans to go to any doctor or hospital they choose for the best care to heal their war-wounds. I will do this at half the cost of the disgraceful, incompetent Veteran’s Administration. The VA is Obamacare for our Veterans. We must kill it now.

Experience & Community Service: I am profoundly Christian, a Husband, a Father, a Grandfather, a 27-year Army Combat Veteran/Infantry Officer-Leader, an Aggie, a Longhorn, a 5th generation Texan, a three-year public school teacher of student leadership and community service, and I am not a “Politician.”

Website: www.ColonelDeanToCongress.org