"Clearly some of those most likely to be affected by the ACA were ill-prepared to navigate the new health insurance environment," the researchers wrote.

The results mesh with earlier research showing that a third of Americans have only basic or below-basic health literacy.

The PNAS study was conducted over the summer, before the Obama administration's healthcare advertising blitz, but a more recent survey performed by the Kaiser Family Foundation wasn't very encouraging, either. Among uninsured people polled in February, half said they didn't have enough information to understand the law's impacts, two-thirds said they only knew a little about the law, and only a quarter knew that the deadline to sign up for coverage is March 31.

However, not knowing what the law is or does did not stop the uninsured from disliking it: 56 percent told Kaiser that they had an unfavorable view.

The PNAS researchers recommend taking a "nudgy" approach; for example, having Healthcare.gov automatically present the least-costly Bronze, Silver, and Gold plan to minimize the decision-making required.

Most of the buzz around the latest Obamacare ad push has centered on viral videos like the president's "Between Two Ferns" appearance. It could be that a more effective way to reach the uninsured is to knock on doors and make phone calls. However, just 15 percent of the uninsured told Kaiser that they had received a phone call, email, text message, or door-to-door visit about the law.

Mollyann Brodie, a pollster for the Kaiser Family Foundation, told me that it's partly the media's fault. Reporters, in her view, have been covering the controversy and political fallout of the law far more closely than its benefits and requirements.

"The contentious debate has seeped into the public's mind more than the details," Brodie said. "There's a massive public education challenge to help them understand what the law means and doesn't mean."

Pew

She points out that uninsured people are more likely to be poor, so they might be "working one or two jobs, trying to get their kids to school. They have complicated and stressful lives." That, combined with negative news coverage, might explain the don't-know-but-don't-like phenomenon.