Buy Photo Gov. Bill Haslam (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Pretty much everyone agrees that Gov. Bill Haslam’s plan to overhaul the Tennessee Board of Regents system is some of the biggest news in higher education this year. But a local expert has a different take.

Will Doyle, a Vanderbilt University professor who researches state and federal higher education policy, said the proposed changes might not be that big at all. Most of the time, he said, plans to split a system of colleges into separate entities "seem like they’re going to do a lot more than they actually do."

The plan would split off the six universities governed by the Board of Regents and create new local boards for each. If it is approved, schools such as Middle Tennessee State University and Austin Peay State University would have local governing boards that would be free to set tuition, hire or fire a president and approve a budget.

When it comes to student success, Doyle said, evidence doesn't show that there is much of a difference between a central college system and individual boards. Doyle said that in Florida, where public colleges have veered between a central system and independent boards, graduation rates and student retention have stayed about the same.

The changes “have impacts on campuses," he said. “But when you take a big picture and see how the state is doing, you don’t tend to see those big differences.”

Doyle said that the individual boards might affect the way administrators go about making policy changes, but they don't typically have an impact on the student experience on campus.

What can change when universities go from a large system to individual boards is tuition. Doyle said centralized systems, such as the Board of Regents in its current form, tend to have lower tuition rates.

Individual boards are more likely to hike tuition to bankroll projects that are important to university leadership

“If the state is interested in keeping tuition lower and keeping cost per student lower," he said, "there’s some evidence that a centralized board is going to be better able to do that."

Haslam has said his proposal would guard against higher tuition rates under the new boards. If his plan is approved, the higher education commission would be able to set binding limits to annual tuition increases.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1XUN5KY