Livable Boulder's "Development Shall Pay Its Own Way" ballot initiative represents the best solution yet for affordable housing: adequate funding.

The city of Boulder's newly-increased affordable housing fees on developers only assess $9.53 per square foot for a new office building. That inadequate sum doesn't come close to meeting the city's actual costs for affordable housing.

At that rate, the city collects only $9,530 from the developer of a 1,000-square-foot office building. That size office building accommodates about five workers, according to industry average standards. At least one of those workers won't be able to afford to live in Boulder without help. But the city's fees fall far short, because it costs the city an average of $69,500 in subsidies to make a dwelling affordable for that worker.

Do the math: The city pays $69,500 to house that worker, but collects $9,530 — that's an "unfunded gap" of nearly $60,000 per affordable unit!

Who makes up that difference? You. Not the developer who profits from the development and brings the worker to Boulder, or the company that profits from that worker. Unless you and other Boulder citizens pay the $60,000 per new worker affordable housing shortfall, the actual costs of affordable housing aren't met.

Advertisement

Livable Boulder's new citizen initiative solves this problem. Our ballot initiative has a mechanism for fully funding affordable housing. It simply requires new development to fully fund its impact costs, including affordable housing. This approach ensures adequate funding for the affordable housing needs of new workers, and avoids transferring these costs to existing residents and businesses. We ask all Boulderites and civic organizations to support our initiative because it — alone — fully funds affordable housing. We particularly seek endorsement from the Boulder City Council and the Boulder Chamber of Commerce, both of whom publicly claim to support affordable housing.

This initiative directly relates to Livable Boulder's other initiative, Neighborhoods' Right to Vote:

With the costs of growth so disproportionately borne by existing residents through general taxes, many Boulder middle-income and lower-middle-income homeowners struggle. Many individuals and families live in Boulder's most affordable neighborhoods and represent the least resilient of our home-owning populations. Many just received 20 percent to 30 percent property tax increases.

Unfortunately, Boulder's current housing debate demonizes homeowners, wrongly assuming they're all "safe," wealthy, old, and uncaring — an ill-informed type of modern day prejudice. Thousands of residents who own small homes in Boulder's most modest neighborhoods don't earn 80 percent of area median income and thus would actually qualify for the city's affordable housing program. Many work two jobs to cover their mortgage and ever-increasing property taxes, or are fixed-income seniors. Many are young families who sought a house with a yard for their kids. City re-zoning plans may render this lifestyle obsolete for them and future families seeking the same. What of their options, and rights? Have they none, because a city planner decreed that towering, dense, urban design shall be that neighborhood's future?

The neighborhood initiative grew out of concern for all Boulder neighborhoods, including middle-income neighborhoods — the least resilient of our home-owning population. The city planning department is unfortunately designing one-size-fits-all policies for all Boulder neighborhoods, rolling out the same set of aggressive re-zoning tools at all their "neighborhood workshops." This unprecedented re-zoning campaign will impact neighborhood character and fundamentally disregards existing neighborhood residents and localized impacts. The neighborhood vote initiative recognizes that what might work in one part of Boulder might have unintended consequences in Boulder's least expensive, least resilient neighborhoods.

The main targets of the city's re-zoning plans are likely to be the already diverse, highly pressured modest neighborhoods least able to absorb additional impacts and least able to attend planning meetings due to working multiple jobs, raising families, etc. They deserve a voice.

The people who best understand likely impacts in their neighborhood are its residents. Our initiative gives them a vote. It's simple: All voters within a neighborhood would have the right to vote on a re-zoning decision, only insofar as their neighborhood. Their vote would only affect their neighborhood — not any others.

Let's develop compassionate policies for all Boulderites: persons needing affordable housing and struggling middle income homeowners. Boulderites are compassionate people, sensitive to community-wide concerns. Together, neighborhoods can figure it out. They do this best when they have a real voice. The neighborhood initiative's real goal is planning that seriously takes into account neighborhood concerns. Please join us in signing these initiative petitions. Visit www.livableboulder.org.

Ken Beitel lives in Boulder.