Despite compulsory voting, nearly 6 million Australians still did not cast a vote. Photo: Karleen Minney

Canberra - we have a problem!

One of the many messages from the recent election is that our citizens are now so disengaged that there are millions of Australian citizens who have now opted out of our democratic system.

The cynics will be saying, so what? It can't be that bad and even if it is; if people don't want to vote, why should they be forced to?

There is some sort of twisted logic to that; but whatever the merits or otherwise of compulsory voting, we have it and despite the compulsion, there were still nearly 6 million Australians who did not cast a vote.

Advertisement

Naturally, not all people are eligible to vote; but the vast majority will be, and only 11.7 million people turned out on Election Day instead of the 17.6 million Australians aged over 18.

When the informal vote of 694,376 is added to this figure it brings the total non-performing vote up to 6.6 million.

To provide some context for this figure; the combined conservative vote was 4.9 million and Labor's share was 3.7 million; both of these are significantly lower than the non voting share.

All of this begs the question – How can any party claim it has a mandate when 37.5% of the eligible voters did not express a view on their policies?

Or did they? There are so many possible reasons for people not voting; it may be that they do not agree with the views and policies of any of the parties or maybe they only wanted to vote for one candidate and not pass on preferences? In any event we will never know.

While it is so easy to write this non vote off as public apathy; I suggest that it has a lot to do with public anger and frustration.

The latter part of my public life and my time in the media tell me that people are better educated and informed than ever, but the petty, partisan politics of our current system drive them away from politics.

Voter drift away from the Major parties; the rise of Clive Palmer's mob may well reflect that public anger, as did the rise and fall of the Democrats and Greens.

Political parties are indifferent to the niceties of democracy. They have no other imperative other than to win elections and to do this they only have to beat their opposition.

Neither side cares whether there are two or twenty million votes cast; as long as they get enough of the available votes to win power, it is OK by them.

It is too much to ask that the party system reform itself, to expect politicians to act with complete honesty and integrity or ask that every member of the public stay abreast with the endless political machinations.

However what these figures show is that something needs to happen before the majority of Australians drop out of the system – either we deal with this issue or our democracy will drown in a sea of indifference.

So why are the electoral rolls so far out of whack? We have independent taxpayer-funded bodies with the job of getting people onto the electoral rolls. They also seem indifferent to the size of this issue.

The Australian public is entitled to expect those who are paid to deal with these issues do so. It is entirely reasonable to ask of the various Electoral Commissions why this growing voter deficit has been allowed to happen.

I am old enough to remember when there were teams of people out door knocking to ensure the enrolments were as accurate as they could be.

Somehow it all stopped happening.

We need a serious enquiry into why so many Australians feel the need not to vote and what we can do to restore our democracy.

Follow WAtoday on Twitter @WAtoday