Stephanie Downs performs her contemporary-style dance “Human” to the song by the same title by Christina Perri.

Achievement: Stephanie Downs won an award of excellence in the PTA Reflections state contest for dance choreography and advanced to the national level.

Other local state-level winners whose work advanced to national competition in dance choreography are:

•Morgan Ray, Lincoln Performing Arts, intermediate division, award of excellence at state, award of excellence at national competition.

•Savannah Townsley, Jeffersontown Elementary, primary division, award of excellence, state creative interpretation award, advanced to national competition.

Local winners at the state level:

•Veeksha Katta, Goshen Elementary, primary division, award of excellence.

•Ellie Avery, Greathouse-Shryock Elementary, intermediate division, award of merit.

•Carly Elizabeth deDoming, Noe Middle School, middle school division, award of merit.

•Aristan Marie Hazlett, East Oldham Middle School, middle school division, award of merit.

•Grace McWilliams, DuPont Manual High School, high school division, award of excellence.

•Al’Nesha Elaine Adkins, Pleasure Ridge Park High School, special artist division, award of excellence.

Background: The National PTA Reflections Program recognizes student achievement in the arts. In this year’s contest, 122 Kentucky students won either an award of excellence or an award of merit at the state level. Of those, 24 entries went to the national competition, including nine from the Louisville area. Students may enter in literature, musical composition, photography, visual arts, dance choreography, and film (video) production. Entries are judged first at the local level, where selected works are chosen to advance to the district, state and national levels.

About her dance: Stephanie performs her contemporary-style dance “Human” to the song by the same title by Christina Perri. “I wanted to make it seem like I was having a conversation based on the lyrics. When the song talks about falling down, I’m on the floor. When it talks about uplifting stuff, I’m up, and my moves are graceful.”

Her background in dance: Stephanie has been dancing for 13 years. This is her first time creating the choreography for a dance, and she said she hopes to do more of it. “I liked the way I could express myself, tell my story rather than someone else’s.”

Her process: Stephanie wanted to create an entry to which everyone could relate. “Everyone is so hard on each other and so hard on themselves,” she said. “We’re only human. When we fall down; we get up. Sometimes we cry; sometimes we’re happy. My dance tells that story.”

Why she likes dancing: “I like the way it makes me feel. I can express myself. I like competition. I like being on stage, with the lights on me. I like being with my team and the social interactions,” she said, adding that she like to learn new dances, finds dancing to be a stress reliever, and thinks dancing is very fun. “For me, dancing is like breathing.”

Stephanie’s home life: Stephanie lives in Glen Oaks in Prospect with her parents Jennifer and Brian Downs. Her older brother Edward is a student at the University of Louisville.

Future plans: Stephanie intends to attend U of L and study to become a nurse practitioner. She hopes to open her own dance studio so she can help younger kids.

She enjoys: dancing, competing in competitions with her dance team, hanging out with friends, watching TV.

2015-2016 PTA Reflections Contest: The theme will be “Let your imagination fly.” To enter, contact your school’s PTA or PTSA for entry forms, rules, and deadlines.

meet the achiever

Achiever: Stephanie Downs

Age: 16 in June

Grade, school last year: 10th grade at South Oldham High School

To view her dance: Go to https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=191YM2l0EX8&feature=em-share_video_user

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1M4l8vu