iStock

Would patients think twice about participating in a clinical trial if they knew the physician running the study receives some form of compensation from a drug maker? Some might. A new study finds that multiple sclerosis patients who have not participated in a clinical trial say disclosure is important enough to influence their participation in industry-sponsored clinical trials.

For instance, 79% of multiple sclerosis patients surveyed said it was important to know that a drug maker sponsoring a study would pay a portion of a physician’s salary before deciding whether they would participate. Nearly as many responded the same way when asked whether payments for speaking or consulting work was also important enough to influence their participation.

Among those who have never participated in a trial, 87% believe that a doctor involved in a study should disclose they or their office is paid for a patient to participate. Similarly, 75% of those who have participated in a trial hold the same view. And two-thirds of both groups says a doctor involved in a study should disclose how they or their office use money paid for patients to participate in a study.

“Potential physician conflicts can be an important piece of information for patients as they weigh the pros and cons of volunteering for a research study and can enhance or preserve trust between a subject and investigators and ensure that patients make well-informed decisions that preserve their autonomy,” the authors write in Multiple Sclerosis Journal. The study canvassed 597 people who suffer from the illness.

In academic medical centers, payments may subsidize research infrastructure. But the study authors also note some benefits “may rebound to individual researchers,” either directly or indirectly, and may support a salary or substitute for providing clinical care that generates revenue. The connection between payments and physicians who are in private practice may be more direct, they point out.

In any event, the study authors write that the extent to which revenue from industry-sponsored trials may compromise ethical standards, particularly for physicians in private practice, remains a “pressing, but open question.” They also maintain that industry-sponsored trials, in general, are infrequently acknowledged as a potential source of a conflict of interest.

Consequently, they suggest that uniform disclosure guidelines should be adopted and financial connections shown to prospective trial participants. The goal is to improve the informed consent process and shed greater light on financial ties in order to enhance patient trust, says Andrew Solomon, one of the study authors and an assistant professor of neurology at the University of Vermont.

“It’s clear that patients care about granular details. They want to know where the money is going,” he tells us. “If we improve our informed consent process, maybe we can improve relationships patients have with physicians, so they can make informed decisions.” However, he notes there needs to be more study on what patients want to know, why, and how to ensure they are able to make well- informed decisions.

The study is not the first to examine whether clinical trial participants would prefer that physicians disclose any potential conflict of interest. But the study authors note that data on the disclosure of financial relationships that are tied to people who participate in clinical trials sponsored by the pharmaceutical industry is limited.

The study emerges just a few months after the federal government launched its Open Payments database, which displays how much money doctors receive from drug and device makers. The database was created under the Sunshine Act provision of the Affordable Care Act and aims to mitigate concerns that industry payments to doctors may unduly influence medical practice and research.

Speaking of disclosure, Solomon has received a research grant from the National Multiple Sclerosis Society and was a primary investigator for a trial for a Biogen Idec drug. Another study author has received payments for speaking at academic conferences. And a third author has received research grants and payments for speaking and consulting from various drug makers.