President Barack Obama at the White House in July. Associated Press

President Barack Obama’s speech on the Iran nuclear deal at American University helps set the stage for congressional debate on the agreement. Whatever the outcome in Congress—right now it looks like Republicans won’t have enough votes to override Mr. Obama’s promised veto—aspects of Mr. Obama’s foreign policy are likely to endure regardless of who succeeds him in 2017.

A maxim of U.S. foreign policy is that it changes incrementally from one president to the next, even if the presidency changes party. There are two straightforward reasons: The executive branch holds much more sway over foreign policy than Congress and sets the agenda. And an administration’s commitments to other countries in its final years create a certain path dependency that is difficult for a new president to override quickly.

Look at the shift from President George W. Bush to Mr. Obama. For all of his campaign’s talk of change, President Obama inherited and then implemented a series of policies from his predecessor: President Bush signed the deal that led to the pullout of troops from Iraq and made decisions to increase troop levels in Afghanistan; he established the framework for international diplomacy and sanctions on Iran. President Obama may have ended use of the term “global war on terror,” but many of the tools and tactics he used were set into motion under Mr. Bush. Even the killing of Osama Bin Laden was a counterterrorism success that took years–a steady accumulation of intelligence and operations that began long before Mr. Obama was elected.

Flash-forward to 2015: Historians may one day view this as a time when President Obama fulfilled his 2008 promise of “changing the mind-set” in U.S. foreign policy and moving beyond the U.S. national security strategy of the decade that followed 9/11.

Mr. Obama ran on two main foreign policy platforms in 2008: Avoid getting the U.S. involved in unnecessary wars, and engage adversaries. These were wrapped in a strategy of rebalancing our national security focus beyond the trenches of Iraq and the broader Middle East to a reinvigorated global engagement in other regions and a stronger focus on transnational issues such as climate change.

Since the 2014 midterms, the Obama administration has moved on multiple fronts to deliver on his initial vision and break the mold in U.S. foreign policy. Beyond the Iran nuclear deal, the Obama team has restored diplomatic relations with Cuba and signed a climate agreement with China last fall. All could have long-standing consequences.

What Mr. Obama does in his final year could further reinforce his legacy and create realities that his successor, whether Republican or Democrat, might be reluctant to override. His current goals include a trade deal with Asia, additional progress toward addressing global climate change, boosting and broadening U.S. engagement in Africa and Asia, and continuing strategic dialogues with rising powers such as India and China. Taken together, these steps could put the U.S. on its strongest international footing since the end of the Cold War.

To be sure, many issues will remain when Mr. Obama leaves office; among them, the fight against Islamic State and mutating threats from other Islamist extremist groups in Egypt and elsewhere; Syria’s civil war; continued challenges from Russia in Ukraine and China in the South China Sea. Emerging threats in the cyber realm will continue to pose major challenges. And for all of its achievements, the Obama administration has not articulated a clear argument for U.S. global engagement that inspires and unifies the country (an admittedly tough task in today’s divisive political environment).

But no matter what is said about the Iran deal in the wake of Mr. Obama’s AU speech and in the 2016 election cycle –and some Republican candidates have already promised to scrap the agreement if elected–there is a lot of time until 2017. Presuming it is implemented, the Iran agreement will be tested. If it succeeds on nuclear program monitoring and verification, and Iran abides by its commitments, a deal that sounds controversial in the summer of 2015 may later draw broader support. Despite the overheated rhetoric and partisan rancor that now come with our politics, Mr. Obama’s actions have set a course on foreign policy that any successor would find difficult to alter.

Brian Katulis is a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress. He is on Twitter: @katulis.

RELATED IN THINK TANK:

A Suggestion for Obama’s American University Speech on Iran Deal

Countering the Islamist Violence Rising in Egypt

After Mullah Omar’s Death, the Taliban Could Fracture Further

How India Could Benefit From the Iran Nuclear Deal

Why War Isn’t Inevitable If Congress Rejects the Iran Nuclear Deal

The Risks in Lifting Sanctions, and Pressure, on Iran’s Weapons Activities

How the Iran Nuclear Deal Stands to Inflame U.S.-Saudi Tensions

Reagan, Nixon and Lessons for Obama’s Iran Deal