After civil war, areas that did best were made up mostly of one 'tribe'.

Refugees at a temporary camp outside Irbil, in northern Iraq. (Photo: AP)

It felt like déjà vu. I spent time with Iraqi journalists and intellectuals recently. They talked, anguished about the disintegration of their country. One female journalist lamented that she no longer dares go out on the streets. Her husband was killed for belonging to the wrong sect. Another desperately wanted Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki to understand that if he isn't more inclusive, Iraq is doomed to civil war.

Two decades ago, I heard identical anguish as Yugoslavia fell apart. A Serb friend didn't want to fight for the Serb cause. He wanted to identify himself, as he always had, as a Yugoslav. A Croat cab driver had had two wives, one Serb, one Muslim. His kids were a mixture. How to take sides? Impossible, he said.

This is increasingly a 21st century story: old borders and identities challenged, seized, changed. With a force Americans sometimes find hard to grasp, history, and historical grievances, are alive in many parts of the world.

New borders in Ukraine and Sudan are just two of the latest. The Kurdish part of Iraq is making secession noises, including a referendum on independence, echoing the move of Slovenia that launched the Yugoslav wars.

Tribal trouble is erupting in once-stable countries such as Kenya. Even Scotland is holding an independence referendum.

'Isms' disappear

One reason is clear. The Cold War choice of "isms" that held tribalism in check — communism or capitalism, America or the Soviet Union — is gone. Borders drawn by the Great Powers are no longer inviolate.

Since the Cold War, 34 countries have been created: The Soviet Union divided into 15; Czechoslovakia became the Czech Republic and Slovakia; Yugoslavia has spun off into seven countries. Russian President Vladimir Putin earlier this year simply seized Crimea from Ukraine.

The Sunni Islamic group that has declared an Islamic state in Iraq has also understood that borders are again up for grabs. Its sophisticated PR has honed in on the British-French Sykes-Picot agreement that drew Iraq's borders almost a century ago. It has declared it dead.

What is the U.S. to do? Keeping countries together is almost always best. But this is the age of split-ups. Next up, almost certainly: Kurds, Sunnis and Shiites in Iraq. Secretary of State John Kerry recently traveled to Kurdish Iraq to stop a Kurdish secession — as U.S. officials once did in Yugoslavia.

But the Kurdish leaders aren't listening. The failed Texas court order this week to seize a Kurdish oil tanker off the U.S. coast — Iraqi leaders claim it — is one more sign.

It may be time to pragmatically consider what forces can keep stability if Iraq splits up.

Yugoslavia, two decades on, offers some lessons for Iraq, and hope. The parts of Yugoslavia that have best moved forward are the parts that are predominantly of one "tribe." Most have already got, or are working for, European Union membership. The EU imposes standards that curb corruption, discrimination and lack of democracy.

Divisions on identity

In the unhappiest part, three groups in Bosnia — Serbs, Croats and Muslims — have been forced into a new country. Not only did they lose their Yugoslav identity, they also gained a Bosnian one with the people they bitterly fought in the 1990s. The Bosnian parliament barely functions. Unemployment is high. EU membership is stalled.

The winds of sectarian war in Iraq uncannily echo Yugoslavia's. Not only is Kurdish Iraq pushing a referendum on independence, as Slovenia did. Sunni fundamentalists have seized swaths of northern Iraq and are massacring Shiites — as Serb militants once swept into towns and villages to "ethnically cleanse" non-Serbs.

The U.S. helped end Yugoslavia's wars with airstrikes, peacekeepers and peace accords. Though the U.S. has military advisers in Iraq and might help with airstrikes, Iraq is in a more volatile neighborhood. It could go down differently. Even so, Iraq can still follow the path of Yugoslavia's best parts. That would require a continued insistence on inclusive leadership. Plus the accountability the U.S. could not impose after U.S. forces left. That's hard, but not impossible. There is no Middle Eastern EU. But a sensible Iraqi constitution and many laws the U.S. helped craft are still in place.

Much of Yugoslavia got the 21st century new-old tribalism genie back in the bottle. Time to think about post-breakup ways to a better Iraq-Yugoslavia déjà vu.

Author and journalist Louise Branson is a member of USA TODAY's Board of Contributors. She was a foreign correspondent for the London Sunday Times in the former Soviet Union and the former Yugoslavia.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter @USATopinion or Facebook.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1s2AdXR