The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act was on the ropes -- yet again.

Since it was signed into law by President Barack Obama in March of 2010, the landmark health-care legislation has been battered, bruised, bloodied, left for dead. At least if one has listened to the critics.

Consider just the even-numbered years.

Throughout the summer and fall of 2010, Republicans running for Congress didn't so much campaign for a particular office as run against the health care law. Their success in retaking control of the House of Representatives managed to convince many on the right that Obamacare, as they loved to call the law they so hated, was doomed to fail.

But with Democrats still running the Senate, the GOP could do nothing.

Opponents therefore turned their gaze to the Supreme Court and the White House. If Congress couldn't act, perhaps the justices could ride to the rescue. Failing that, they hoped to get one of their own elected in place of Obama.

But the summer of 2012 found the high court upholding a key provision of Obamacare, and the fall saw the president handily re-elected to a second term.

Fast forward to Tuesday. A federal appeals court panel ruled against subsidies for millions, invalidating financial aid for those who signed up for coverage in states that hadn't set up their own exchanges. Opponents were gleeful. For about two hours, anyway.

Soon after the first ruling, another panel in a separate case found the subsidies perfectly kosher.

The cases focused on the health-care exchange set up by the federal government as opposed to those established by the states. Since the law refers specifically to subsidies for state-run exchanges but not to a federally operated market, opponents contended, financial aid for millions was based on nothing at all.

One of Tuesday's rulings agreed, and the other was exactly opposite.

Will the Supreme Court again make the ultimate call? Probably. And how that might go simply cannot be predicted.

Just as many had been incorrectly counting Obamacare out in 2010 and again in 2012, forecasts of its imminent demise might well again be far off the mark.