Now that the wedding is over and done with it was only a matter of time before rumors started circulating about what Kanye West will be up to next. Besides his shoe line at Adidas, and proclaiming how awesome he is, there’s been news about a new follow up album to the widely acclaimed album Yeezy.

Word on the street is that West was making an album called New Testament with art work of an alleged album cover even floating on the web. The artwork for Kanye’s supposed album features Michaelangelo’s David in all of his glory.The fact that this album is named The New Testament wouldn’t be that far fetched.

West has many biblical themes throughout his work, and one of those works includes boldly proclaiming that he’s a God. However, this New Testament is nothing but talk and wishful thinking by West fans. Someone from West’s camp told Gawker that the news of an album is completely fabricated.

According to a source close to West, “We have no idea what this is. It’s not coming from us.”

In addition to the art work that touts the album’s release date as June 10, 2014, a Twitter handle was created in honor of the fake Kanye West album. The Twitter handle KWsNewTestament currently follows 878 people, which include news sites, and other various celebrities. As it is Kanye is only following one person on Twitter.

Another example that points to this being a ruse is that during the blackout promotion of his album Yeezus Kanye’s team didn’t set up a separate Twitter handle for the album. In fact, it wasn’t even promoted until weeks after the album came out.

As far as social media goes, it seems like West is starting to show the world that he has a sense of humor. Earlier West embraced a meme that someone made of him. The graphic shows the rapper superimposed in the infamous Kim Kardashian bikini photo. His image is photoshopped to look like he’s running into her behind.

The 36-year-old wrote “Haha” right above the image of Kardashian in the swimsuit. As for Twitter, West has been frequently posting photos of himself with his new bride as well as baby Nori “North” West, who he has shielded from the private eye for some time.

Dreams come true http://t.co/JlNzCKwZ0h pic.twitter.com/sC3KNTl7fH — KANYE WEST (@kanyewest) March 24, 2014

I love my family pic.twitter.com/SDZohbsoaA — KANYE WEST (@kanyewest) March 26, 2014

pic.twitter.com/4fUQMtMhe9 — KANYE WEST (@kanyewest) May 27, 2014

[Image via Bing]