A federal audit of the Maryland health exchange indicates the state owes the federal government tens of millions of dollars.

Mobile users tap here to watch video

The audit, which was requested last year by U.S. Rep. Andy Harris, R-District 1, shows the Office of the Inspector General determined the state misallocated $28.4 million and should pay the money back. Federal auditors uncovered accounting errors and determined the state agency not only got money from the wrong account, but got too much of it.

"There are only two explanations: Either incompetence or they were intentionally deceiving the government. Neither one of them are good explanations," Harris said.

Auditors determined Maryland improperly billed the federal government based on projections of how many people bought private insurance and how many qualified for Medicaid.

The number of people expected to buy private plans, which came from the Hilltop Institute at the University of Maryland-Baltimore County, was way off. The number was downsized from 147,000 to 70,000. The new figures were disclosed at one of the legislative oversight committee meetings held last year on the flawed exchange.

The auditors noted the state lacked oversight and internal controls, which led to the accounting errors.

Auditors recommended Maryland pay back the $15.9 million it received because it used outdated enrollment data and the $12.5 million it got for using a methodology for 21 months that included a material defect. Auditors note the state didn't amend its application even after discovering the defect.

Auditors suggest, after paying the money back, the state should apply for what it's actually entitled to. The findings also recommend the state come up with a written policy on how to calculate costs and emphasized using updated enrollment data.

Exchange officials agree with the written policy recommendations, but do not concur with the other findings.

"I think the current administration still has to continue to find out what went so wrong with the last exchange," Harris said. "I think there are still other issues about what contracts were paid, about contractors paid appropriately. I don't think those issues have been resolved."

According to his press office, Gov. Larry Hogan is reviewing the audit. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services are also reviewing the findings to determine whether the state has to pay the money back.