Ben Carson's health care charity fail

With help from Paul Demko

BEN CARSON’S HEALTH CARE CHARITY FAIL — Long before he considered a bid for the White House, Ben Carson helped set up a charity that he envisioned would someday provide health coverage to millions of uninsured Americans. "Angels of the OR" was supposed to grow into a massive endowment that would generate enough interest income to cover uninsured patients’ expenses for neurological surgeries and other medical costs. But that didn't exactly pan out.. POLITICO’s Kyle Cheney and Isaac Arnsdorf report, “Over nine years of operation, Angels of the OR generated less than $150,000 for patient care and helped 34 patients cover portions of their medical bills, according to its tax forms. Carson had said he wanted to raise as much as $20 million in seed money, but the charity collected less than $1 million from donations and celebrity-studded events — like a private benefit headlined by Kenny Rogers and the 2003 film premiere of 'Stuck on You,' in which Carson made a cameo appearance … Angels of the OR spent $1.03 million during its life span, and at least 53 percent of its funds went to salaries and fund-raising costs, according to POLITICO’s review of its records. The charity shut down in 2013 when Carson stepped down as director of pediatric neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins Hospital.” Their story: http://politico.pro/1NOGdcB

Story Continued Below

TURING CUTS DRUG PRICE … TO A POINT — Amid fierce criticism for jacking up the price of an old AIDS medication, CEO Martin Shkreli saidhe would lower the price of the drug, daraprim. Now, Turing Pharmaceuticals appears to be doing that — to an extent. The company said it would cut the price by up to 50 percent for hospitals — bringing the price to as low as $375 per pill. But as Pro’s Sarah Karlin points out,that still represents a 2,500 percent hike over the original $13.50 price. Also, the company wouldn’t specify how many hospitals will get that full 50 percent discount, saying pricing will be based on the volume of drugs used. Sarah has more: http://politico.pro/1QGQVb8

DALEIDEN TESTING FEDERAL JUDGE’S PATIENCE IN PP CASE — The National Abortion Federation’s lawsuit against the Center for Medical Progress isn’t going smoothly as David Daleiden, the 26-year-old behind the Planned Parenthood sting videos, is not cooperating with the court’s requests, a federal judge said. Judge William Orrick said Daleiden is trying to “hide the ball" instead of complying with his orders to hand over information. He’s told Daleiden to release the names of people from the fake tissue company portrayed in the videos who had attended the abortion federation's meeting. But Daleiden's lawyers say that disclosing names would violate the Center for Medical Progress's First Amendment right to freedom of association. Pro’s Jen Haberkorn has the story: http://politico.pro/1jiy1Ja

GOOD WEDNESDAY MORNING and welcome to PULSE where we're thankful for a functioning HealthCare.gov, a government that isn’t shutting down (at least not this weekend) and our lovely and loyal readers. Happy Thanksgiving! Send tips, scoops and leftover pumpkin pie tobehley@politico.com and emershon@politico.com and we'll see you all back here bright and early on Monday!

"It's been a long day without you, my friend

And PULSE will tell you all about it when I see you again … "

BLUE SHIELD RESPONDS TO RISK CORRIDORS CRITICISM — Blue Shield of California took issue with yesterday’s PULSE item about its $107 million risk corridors payment. The nonprofit plan’s former public policy director, Michael Johnson, argued in a blog post that the insurer should refund that money to its customers because they were charged too much. Stephen Shivinsky, Blue Shield’s VP for corporate communications, argues that the system worked exactly as intended, noting that they were essentially pricing in the dark during the first year of exchange operations. “We set competitive rates and returned the $107 million so that it would support those plans with sicker enrollees,” Shivinsky wrote in an email. “Claims to the contrary are spurious.” Johnson has been waging a public campaign against Blue Shield since March, questioning whether it deserves tax-exempt status. Earlier this month, the insurer sued Johnson and accused him of disclosing confidential company information.

COMING NEXT WEEK: SENATE GOP HUDDLES ON OBAMACARE REPEAL — Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell wants to talk Obamacare repeal with his GOP Senate colleagues when lawmakers return from Thanksgiving break. McConnell scheduled a 6 p.m. Republicans-only meeting Monday night when members are expected to discuss how to proceed with an Obamacare repeal vote using budget reconciliation. Pro’s Jen Haberkorn has the details: http://politico.pro/1PMooB5

** Presented by the Annie E. Casey Foundation: A healthy start lays the foundation for a child’s positive development and lifelong success. The Casey Foundation's KIDS COUNT Data Center provides policymakers and advocates with the latest children's health data at the national and state level. Find out how kids fare in your area: http://bit.ly/kidhealthdata. **

WERE PREMIUM PROJECTIONS OVERBLOWN? This new Urban Institute study says yes - though the analysis did not look at all 50 states. Researchers analyzed final approved rates for 2016 and found a 4.3 percent increase in the average premium of the lowest-cost silver plan across 20 states and the District of Columbia from last year. According to the study, the average premium of the lowest-cost silver plan increased by less than 5 percent in five states. It increased between 5 and 10 percent in five states and increased by more than 10 percent in four states. The study:http://rwjf.ws/1OeEkuv

ICYMI -WILL MENTAL HEALTH FALL VICTIM TO GUNS? Stop me if you think you’ve heard this one before. An attempt at reforming the mental health system in response to a spate of gun violence and mass shootings may once again get injected into a poisonous political fight over guns. A bipartisan bill is gaining momentum in the Senate, with the HELP committee likely to take it up early next year. But the Senate’s No. 2 Republican, John Cornyn of Texas, has been working behind the scenes to drum up support for his own mental health legislation — apart from the bipartisan initiative sponsored by Sens. Chris Murphy (D-Ct) and Bill Cassidy (R- La.) Cornyn’s bill is blessed by the National Rifle Association — and Cornyn told POLITICO he believes his bill will become the "engine that pulls the train.” He expects a Judiciary Committee hearing in January. Cornyn’s push is creating a wedge in the bipartisan coalition that had been pushing to keep mental health clearly separate from any legislation touching on the politically volatile issue of guns. My story: http://politico.pro/1MADqWD

CDC RECOMMENDS PrEP FOR HIV PREVENTION — The CDC recommended on Tuesday that people at high risk for HIV should take a daily pill called Truvada. The agency said the therapy — PrEP or pre-exposure prophylaxis involves taking Truvada daily and makes it more difficult for a virus to lead to a permanent infection.Details: http://1.usa.gov/1NXoK68

SHOUT OUTS: FAH’s president and CEO Chip Kahn was appointed to the International Advisory Committee of the Israel National Institute for Health Policy Research.

WHAT WE'RE READING by Brett Norman

The number of women under 26 who have been diagnosed with early stage cervical cancer has jumped in recent years, thanks to Obamacare, according to cancer researchers, Sabrina Tavernise reports in the the New York Times. http://nyti.ms/1T2cCjL

The tax-driven Pfizer-Allergan merger is “nothing short of a disgrace,” John Cassidy writes at the New Yorker. http://bit.ly/1I9Bvtx

The NFL tried to silence a neuropathologist who was researching chronic traumatic encephalopathy more than a decade ago, according to an excerpt of Jeanne Marie Laskas’ Concussion published in the Wall Street Journal. http://on.wsj.com/1lIdyPW

Retired lawyer Philip Dorsey lays out Obamacare’s successive impact on his employer plan, his group insurance plan and his individual market policy, none to his liking. http://onforb.es/1MAbXV1

An FDA advisory committee concluded yesterday that BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc.’s new drug to treat Duchenne muscular dystrophy hasn’t been proven to be effective, the Wall Street Journal’s Thomas Burton reports. http://on.wsj.com/1kSBEXW

** Presented by the Annie E. Casey Foundation: A healthy start lays the foundation for a child’s positive development and lifelong success. To help kids succeed in school and connect to opportunities, we must solve poverty, poor nutrition, lack of preventive health care, substance abuse, maternal depression and family violence — all of which can thwart children’s health and their ability to thrive.

The Casey Foundation's KIDS COUNT Data Center provides policymakers and advocates with the latest children's health data at the national and state level — and by race and ethnicity. Find out how kids fare in your area: http://bit.ly/kidhealthdata.

In addition to national data, the KIDS COUNT Data Center tracks child and family well-being in 50 states, the District of Columbia and two territories. Users can explore data on economic well-being, education, family structure, safety and more by state, county, congressional district and city. **

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **