RFDS dental trip

A REMOTE pocket of Outback South Australia, where The Ghan meets the Indian Pacific and there are more emus than people, is no place for a toothache.

Kingoonya, population 15, has a great pub, a few sheds and stunning sunsets but no dentist.

Draw a line from the four furthest corners of SA’s borders and Kingoonya is roughly where they intersect.

It’s about 700km to Adelaide, or a nine hour drive.

It’s reputed to have Australia’s widest main street, and cricket games have been held on it when the beating sun gives a break, but that is no help when your child has a toothache.

The nearest dentists are at Port Augusta one way, Coober Pedy the other. And first you have to drive 43km just to get on the Stuart Highway.

Enter the Royal Flying Doctor Service.

For for people looking up to enormous empty blue skies, the plane carrying dental care is a godsend.

The Royal Flying Doctor Service Central Operations Remote Oral Health Care Program are the bush equivalent of tooth fairies.

Adelaide Airport has partnered with the RFDS to deliver the program for the next three years.

Twice yearly fly-in clinics will go to remote communities — in 2013/14, 96 patients including 38 children attended the clinics.

The extension of the program comes after a successful two-year pilot and ensures more adults and children living in remote SA communities will get regular visits from senior dental students as well as access to preventive treatments and oral health education.

The RFDS will deliver the program in collaboration with the University of Adelaide’s School of Dentistry to communities including Marla/Mintabie, the Gawler Ranges and the Birdsville Track — places where access to a dentist can be up to a day’s drive away.

The service includes cleaning, fillings and extractions.

Landing on the red dirt airstrip at Kingoonya as kangaroos scramble out of the way gives a hint of the vastness and sparseness of the region.

On this day five final year dental students supervised by Dr Dick Milner are in the small RFDS clinic with a steady stream of patients. It is the second time the clinic has been held in the tiny town.

For Lynly Kerin of North Well Station the fly in dental care is gold.

Daughter Elke, 5, in Reception in the School of the Air, has had a check up and no problems found.

“People get very busy and when we go to town dental care is usually at the bottom of the list,” Mrs Kerin said.

“People usually leave it until they are in terrible pain. Having this as a preventive care service is just wonderful.

“It gives peace of mind that Elke can be checked so easily.”

Mrs Kerin well knows the peril of putting off dental checks.

Her husband Mat put off having check after chipping a tooth. It eroded to a point he had to be rushed to Adelaide for surgery which cost $4500.

“He was on morphine and I have never seen him in such pain,” Mrs Kerin said. “But that is too often the case here — it is a long way to travel to see a dentist and it can be hard to get in to see one.

Peter Beaton, 48, is typical of many people in the small waiting room.

He has driven four hours from Mobella Station to be told he needs four fillings and a wisdom tooth extracted.

“My tooth had been giving me curry so when the station manager said the dentist was coming to town I put my hand up,” he said.

“If it wasn’t for this I probably would have waited until I was in agony and may have had to be flown out.”

The five dental students also are enjoying the day.

It is the first time student Katherine Rao, 26, has been to this part of SA.

“This is a wonderful opportunity for us — and a real eye opener,” she said.

“We are seeing a really diverse group of people and it is great to be involved in preventive care.

“It is also great to see this part of the world.”

RFDS Central Operations General Manager of Health Services, Dr John Setchell, said

the continuation of the RFDS Remote Oral Health Care Program means RFDS will be

able to address serious shortcomings in more communities.

“The pilot program uncovered serious problems and even worse potential health issues

created by a lack of regular oral care services, with as many as two-in-three school-age

children and three quarters of adults having at least one cavity,” Dr Setchell said.

“Pleasingly, a significant proportion of those who received a dental examination and

treatment during their first visit showed significant improvements in oral health at

subsequent visits.”

The dental students also conduct community oral health sessions to increase awareness

of the link between poor oral health and chronic disease; these take place one-on-one

with patients or in formal group sessions.

Adelaide Airport managing director, Mark Young, said the association with RFDS was highly valued.

“Our position as the major gateway to South Australia provides us with an opportunity to

partner with local community initiatives and worthwhile causes as part of our Community

Investment Program. We consider our partnership with the RFDS a significant investment.

“We have an excellent longstanding relationship with RFDS — they are a vital part of the fabric of Adelaide Airport and make an incredible contribution to the State.”