× Republican presidential candidate John Kasich: You Decide 2016

Campaign ended: May 4, 2016

Current position: Governor of Ohio

Career: Ohio Governor 2011 to present, U.S. House of Representatives 1983 to 2001, Ohio Senate 1979 to 1983

Hometown: McKees Rocks, Pennsylvania

Family: Married to Karen Waldbillig with two daughters

Religion: Anglican

On the issues:

Economy: Boasting his stats in Ohio, Kasich says no other candidate in the race has been as successful as he has in putting conservative budget policies to work. He has enacted $5 billion in tax cuts, eliminated income taxes for small businesses and grew the state’s rainy day fund to $2 billion. He says the tax code should be simpler.

Education: Kasich is against federal education standards and believes parents should have more say in their children’s learning. As Ohio governor, he increased the number of vouchers available for students and helped freeze college tuition.

Environment: Kasich says he believes climate change is a real issue, but does not feel the EPA should regulate emissions.

Gun control/rights: The Ohio Governor has been endorsed by the National Rifle Association, advocating to protect gun rights and gun owners’ privacy.

Health care: Like many other Republican presidential candidates, Kasich says he would repeal and replace Obamacare. He says greater emphasis should be placed on keeping Americans healthy. Kasich is against abortions and pushed for funding of rape crisis centers.

Immigration: Kasich says undocumented immigrants should be able to stay in the country legally, but he does not support a guaranteed path to citizenship.

National security: “Wiping ISIS off the map requires a complex, collaborative strategy involving mutual defense action by NATO- as well as regional allies- in the wake of the attack on France, intensifying international intelligence cooperation, increasing support to the highly-effective Kurdish military, creating safe havens and no-fly zones,” Kasich says on his website. He says we need to strengthen our cyber defenses, stand up to Russia and counter China.

Social issues: Kasich opposes gay marriage, but says we should embrace the court’s decision. He’s said if one of his daughters was gay, he would accept them.

Social:

Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/JohnKasich

Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/JohnKasich/

Twitter: https://twitter.com/JohnKasich

Website: https://johnkasich.com/