Fields are barely dry from ice and snow, but high school baseball is just around the corner. Games will fire up the first week in March and teams will try and overcome those early frigid temperatures with hopes that warmer weather is just around the corner.

Last season, some made their own heat, while others struggled. The slate is clean this season though and two teams — East Henderson and Brevard — have new coaches.

Here's a look at what to expect from area baseball teams this season:

EAST HENDERSON

Last season: The Eagles finished 7-15 and didn't make the playoffs.

Key returning players: This year's team returns a strong core with pitcher and shortstop Austin Fisher, shortstop and catcher Patrick Jackson, pitcher and third baseman Cameron Oberlies, first baseman Cole Revis, pitcher and utility player Jonathan Buckner and catcher and second baseman Austin Pritchard.

New addition: East will add a transfer from Phoenix, Ariz. Chris Jackson is a junior left-handed pitcher and will join the Eagles this spring.

Outlook: Last season was a tough one for the Eagles. East won some close games but lost some as well. Sam Perry is taking over the program after the departure of coach Josh Miller. Perry was an assistant coach for East last season.

This season, East returns a strong pitching tandem in Fisher and Buckner. Both logged plenty of good innings last season.

"These two guys are great competitors and want the ball in their hands when the game is on the line," Perry said.

The Eagles also return Patrick Jackson. The infielder recently committed to play Division I baseball at Gardner-Webb and is the top returning hitter for the Eagles.

This season is about a higher calling for the Eagles, Perry said. It starts in the details and expands to the product on the field.

"I want our guys to be the toughest on the field —every pitch, every throw and every swing," Perry said. "I also want to bring a new level of focus to our program and players. Our preparation this year will translate to wins on the field."

u u u

HENDERSONVILLE

Last season: The Bearcats finished 20-1 and were upset in the first round of the state playoffs.

Key returning players: The Bearcats lost a big component in last year's dominance with Sam Linn, but have a lot of returning players. Hendersonville returns Justin Sparks, Bradley Schmidt, Michael Schmidt, Noah Linhart, Austin Redden, Cole Cleary, Blake Lyda and Carson Chet.

New addition: Jordan Strickland and Sawyer Hunt are moving up from the junior varsity program.

Outlook: The last moment of last season is one most Hendersonville fans will want to forget. Hendersonville coach Mark Cook has enough talent returning to possibly make that happen.

Justin Sparks, Noah Linhart, Michael Schmidt, and Bradley Schmidt were all statistical important components to the Bearcats' undefeated regular season run last year.

Austin Redden served as closer and Cole Cleary has the wheels to get to first base safely on a regular basis.

"(This goal this year is) to have a winning, successful season and to make a good run in the playoffs," Cook said.

To do that, Linhart, Carson Chet and Austin Redden will have to shine on the mound.

Sparks and the Schmidt Brothers could be a scary trio in the heart of that lineup.

The key to success, Cook said, will be for his players to "show up every day, be ready to work, have a positive attitude and work as a team."

u u u

NORTH HENDERSON

Last season: The Knights struggled last season with a 6-19 record but found their stride late in the season and lost 19-11 to Crest in the first round of the state playoffs.

Key returning players: North returns Dalton McKee, Dalton Whitaker and Ryan Decker. The trio will lead the way for North as they continue the momentum found at the end of last season.

Outlook: Last season was one with many growing pains for North. Injuries to key players, like current North Carolina Tar Heel Zack Gahagan, threw the season into a flux before it even began.

Early on, the Knights were just trying to find a rhthym. As the season progressed, the team gelled and gained experience and by the end of the season, the Knights were in the playoffs.

North coach Justin King hopes that momentum carries over.

"I hope we compete in every game and play with an aggressive swagger that will lead to a winning season and who knows after that," King said.

The two key components heading into the season, King said, will be a solid defense and more knowledge top-to-bottom in the program.

On top of those components, the Knights will be pushed this season.

"We are going to practice with more intensity and channel as much game situation into practice as possible," King said. "Our kids are going to feel stress at practice so that games will hopefully be easier."

u u u

WEST HENDERSON

Last season: The Falcons had a strong season last year. West finished 16-8-1 and advanced to the third round of the state playoffs — farther than any other team in the area.

Key returning players: West returns Dustie Fender, Grant Anderson, Dillon Curtis, Hunter Hall, Jake Ryan and Devon Spake this season.

Outlook: West may have lost more than any other area team. Storm Edwards and Mitchell McCrary are both playing Division I baseball. Brandon Bloomfield was a fixture in the offensive scheme of things.

With that said, the Falcons still return plenty of talent and West coach Brandon Ball feels like his team can contend.

"Our goal each year is to be competitive in the WNCAC and compete for a conference championship, as well as make the playoffs," Ball said. "We are going to have to play as one unit. We will need to maintain a team atmosphere and share responsibilities."

The Falcons have two things working for them. They have a deep pitching rotation led by Dustie Fender, Grant Anderson and Dillon Curtis. "We are returning three guys that threw a substantial amount of innings last year," he said.

And then there's the versatility factor.

"Our strength should be our defense," Ball said. "We are fortunate to have multiple players being able to play multiple positions at a high level.

u u u

POLK COUNTY

Last season: The Wolverines finished 7-16 last season and missed the playoffs for the first time since 2005.

Key returning players: The Wolverines will have seven returning to starters to build on. Bryce Martin, Mark Mazilli, Daniel Painter, Morgan Groves, JD Edwards, Konner Scruggs, Dequan Gary and Justin Jones will be the foundation this season.

Key additions: Noah Howell and Corey Skipper will get looks in the lineup this season.

Outlook: It's been a long time since the Wolverines missed the playoffs. It's been since 2005 since they didn't. Last season was the first time since 2006 that Polk County didn't finish No. 1 or No. 3 in the Western Highlands Conference race.

All-conference players Bryce Martin and Mark Mazzilli will lead the way to turning all that around.

The key for Polk, however, will be health. Last season, injuries plagued the pitching staff and that will have to change this year, coach Ty Stott said.

"We have everything we need," he said. "If we stay healthy, we will be back to beating teams. We had seven good years and then one bad season, but we are working hard and having our own Junior Legion is really going to start paying off soon."

u u u

BREVARD

Last season: Brevard finished 8-14 last season and lost to Owen in the first round of the state playoffs.

Key returning players: The core of Alec Dubreuil, Austin Adams and Nick Mehalic will lead the way for the Blue Devils.

Outlook: Brevard will have a new coach in Chris Lambert, who has been the junior varsity coach for the last two seasons. He'd been a varsity assistant at Brevard since 2007.

The former Mars Hill player takes over a program that was close at times last season and Lambert is confident in the product that will be on the field this season.

"I do feel we can compete in all aspects of the game with any other team we step on the field with," he said.

The goal is simple, he said. Lambert wants his team to be playing for a WNC Athletic Conference championship in the last week of the season and he wants his team to make a deep run in playoffs.

Those goals can be met if the Blue Devils pay attention to the little things.

"Each day we need to get better than the day before," Lambert said. "Do the small things. Small things produce big-time outcomes."

u u u

ROSMAN

Last season: Last season the Tigers finished 18-3 and advanced to the second round of the 1-A state playoffs.

Key returning players: Rosman returns seven starters from last year's team, but the trio of Dillon Zachary, Aaron Newman and Tanner Galloway will be vital to repeating success.

Key additions: Sophomores Harper Reese and Colton Holbrook are both versatile and could provide meaningful innings for the Tigers.

Outlook: Rosman returns a lot. The Tigers came up just short in its hunt for a Smoky Mountain Conference championship last season, and coach Derrick Huggins hopes that they can get over that hump this season.

To do that, the Tigers will have to overcome the loss of Brevard College's Noah Poteat. Poteat hit seven homers last season and was the conference Player of the Year.

The difference this season, however, will be the makeup of the team. Poteat took some of last year's power with him. This team will be speedy and will rely on some small ball, Huggins said.

The biggest strength this season though, may be what the Tigers return on the mound. Rosman will return six of its seven pitchers. The top duo will be Zachary and Galloway.

"I believe we will get quality innings out of all our guys this year on the mound," Huggins said. "I am very optimistic about that."