The Cañon Literacy Center, Inc., has completed its fifth year of serving Fremont County. In order to sustain continued operations, we need to receive ongoing donations. Interested donors may send their tax deductible contributions to Cañon Literacy Center, Inc., P.O. Box 1793, Canon City, CO 81215. ( Courtesy Photo )

The Cañon Literacy Center, Inc., has completed its fifth year of serving Fremont County.

During 2013, we provided more than 3,000 hours of free one-on-one reading instruction to children reading below grade level. The center wishes to express its heart-felt appreciation to the following individuals and businesses for their monetary and in-kind giving that has made 2013 such a success.

Tutors and volunteers: Lois Olson, Katherine Cook, Janelle Bergant, Eileen Cain, Hollie Ciresi, Audrey Daniel, Dave and Dee Wall, Mary Richardson, Charolette Nelson, Beth Newey, Nan Davenport, Kaycee Young, Patty Schlesinger, Taylor Ford, Edith Masar, Sue Farringer, Gayle Hirt, Jodie Sedillo, Conner White, Ted Huskey, Patty Willyard, Judy Gillette, Anne Courter, Kathy Wyatt, Helen Haddow, Lana Davis, Peggy Dunn, Lynette Anderson, Jeff Williams, Betty Dilley, Mary Hewlett, Stacey Cline, Susan Sandoval, Debbie Smith, Rene Buchholz, Johannah Maybach, Donna Borgush, Wally Firkins, Lorraine Veltri, Richard Davis, Melody Lamborn, Veronica Topash, Riley Harwood, Roxanna Chalmers, Katie Vestering, Bonnie Boardman, Nicole Davis, Barney Yetter, Bill Freda, Lauren Newey, Kristine Vuolo, Beverlee Solano, Shelly Harwood, Nicole Dille, Paul Short, Patricia Vandenbusche, Maryann Kingree, Autumn Meagher, Jeannie Pinkerton, Diane DeLaurentis, Baylee Marchiani, Anna Goodin, Pat Goodin, Theresa Raiford, Lea Darnell, Jacquie Mitchell, Mark Mitchell, Barney Demicel, Eileen Lakey, Jo Beth Palmer, Brenda Cochran, Darcey Crites and Sarah Kwitek.

Advertisement

Donors: Village Inn, Pizza Hut, Sonny's Ace Home Center, Dairy Queen, Brady's Garden Center, City of Cañon City, David and DeeDee Wall, Donna and John McDermott, Bernard and Sharon Yetter, Shawna and Kerry Appleman, Rex and Sandy Brady, Katherine Cook, Eileen Lakey, Ann Kilpatrick, Hugh and Roxana Chalmers, Douglas, Carolyn and Erin Kerrigan, Joshua Newberry, Melanie McCain, the many who donated to our Potato Bar at the Ride The Rockies Event, Lorraine Donohue, Donna Curtis, Greg and Lisa Glab, Sunflower Bank Employees - Dress Down Days, West Central Mental Health, Walmart VAP Program, Phillip and Catherine Ott, Tina and Thomas Dewar, Alpha Delta Kappa Sorority, Florence Parnegg, P.E.O. Chapter DK, Frank and Janelle Bergant, Rockvale Community Club, Charles and Linda McIntyre, Beth Nadine Bohl, Douglas and Bonnie White, Daniel and Joyce Bauer, John and Jowanda Villyard, Anne and Wally Firkins, Terry Speaks, Daniel and Patty Schlesinger, Marlene and Robert Highberger, Gary Speaks, Thomas and Judith Gillette, Lola Humphreys, Walter and Juanita Conover, Jerry and Anna Paulino, Norma Moore, Davisons of Colorado, Michael and Connie Kendall, Kristin Jones, Steve and Carol Blackburn, Malene and Randy Stillwell, Charles and Nancy Pearce, Audrey Sandefur, Eldon and Elaine Leff, Patricia O'Grady Vanwey, Adam and Rebekah Combs, Thomas Stevens, Hawkeye Tax and Accounting Inc., Debra Blackwell, Marsha and Gramstorff, Chris Harrington, Colene Schmoyer, Jan Sershen and Stacy Bishop, Lois Olson, David Jeffery, Eileen and James Cain, Jeffrey and Jennifer Schmidt, Lena Dice, Stephani Lopez, Holly Coleman, Jennifer Malespini, Deedee Larson, Darlene Meier, Thomas and Patricia Grette, James and Kathleen Blair, Peace in Motion Exercise Club, Vickie Miller, Bank of America, Glenda Adamic, Joan Geiger, P.E.O. Chapter FC, Linda Innes, Doris Gonzales, El Pomar Foundation, Fremont Community Foundation, Anschutz Family Foundation, The Denver Post Community Foundation-Ride The Rockies, A.V. Hunter Trust, Inc., Holcim, Inc., Cañon Supply, City Market, Cañon Rental, Pawn Dough, Pappa Murphy's, Domino's, Laurie Miller, Sue Farringer, Dianne DeLaurentis, Abbey Event Complex-Ride the Rockies Event, Stan Miller, Kenneth Fox, Lenny S., Aaron Albertson, Shantell Barker, Jenett Conklin, Gabe Miller, Cold Stone Creamery, Mission Deli and many anonymous donors.

The Cañon Literacy Center receives nearly all of its financial support from local donors. In order to sustain our continued operations, we need to receive ongoing donations. Interested donors may send their tax deductible contributions to Cañon Literacy Center, Inc., P.O. Box 1793, Canon City, CO 81215. Your support is most sincerely appreciated by our students, parents and volunteers.