Apparently, "I will think before I tweet" should be on Irin Carmon's New Year's resolution list. Her failure to do so shortly before the ball dropped in Times Square signaling the beginning of 2014 has caused her considerable embarrassment.

On Tuesday, Supreme Court Justice Sonia Sotomayor issued an injunction which "temporarily prevented(the government) from enforcing contraceptive coverage requirements (in Obamacare) against the Denver-based Little Sisters of the Poor Home for the Aged." MSNBC Digital National Reporter Carmon then proceeded to compare the "wise Latina" to the man who betrayed Julius Caesar (HT Twitchy):

Abortion rights absolutist Carmon quickly deleted her tweet, but Twitchy's Twitter curators captured it for posterity.

Sotomayor's injunction is a routine one-page, eight-line document which in no way indicates the Barack Obama-nominated justice's disposition towards the case.

Ms. Carmon, who, as noted, claims to be a "reporter," is — I'm not kidding — a visiting fellow at the Yale Program for the Study of Reproductive Justice, whose mission is:

... to promote justice with respect to reproductive health issues, provide a supportive environment for young scholars interested in academic or advocacy careers focusing on reproductive rights and justice issues; and provide opportunities for communication between the academic and advocacy communities.

The Program assumes that Roe v. Wade should be treated as unassailable settled law, and seeks:

to encourage the academic community to broaden the narrow focus of scholarship in reproductive rights and justice from the questions of whether Roe was correctly decided, to an examination of different factors that are necessary for justice in area of reproductive health policies.

Not that I expected it anyway, but I don't think we'll be getting much objective reporting on court proceedings relating to the HHS contraception mandate from Ms. Carmon this year. So I resolve this year not to believe a word she writes on those matters.

Cross-posted at BizzyBlog.com.