COLUMBIA - South Carolina, along with most states, received a failing grade from a national parenting organization for laws that discourage shared custody of children and, instead, promote single-parent families.

The National Parents Organization gave South Carolina and 22 other states a grade of "D" for its laws in its 2014 Shared Parenting Report Card. Most states got a "C" or below, with only eight states receiving a "B." None got an "A."

According to its mission, the organization's goal is to promote shared parenting after separation or divorce. It seeks to reform the nation's family courts with laws that establish equal rights and responsibilities for both fathers and mothers.

The organization said the inaugural report card is the nation's first comprehensive analysis of custody laws across the nation. The Palmetto State shared its failing ranking with neighboring North Carolina and Tennessee. Georgia received a "C."

A higher number of children are being raised in single-parent households, and the organization argues those children account for high numbers of teen suicides, high school dropouts, juveniles in prison, and homeless and runway children, among other issues.

"Conversely, children on average do much better on all these measures if they have shared parenting," the report said. "Children ardently desire shared parenting in most cases, and are happier with it."

The organization encourages states to enact laws that encourage both parents to play equal roles, regardless of whether they live in the same home. The group calls for neither parent to have a child for less than one-third of the time.

Sen. Katrina Shealy, R-Lexington, was a primary sponsor of a bill introduced during the 2014 legislative session that called for parents to share almost equal amounts of time with a child, unless there was proof of abuse or neglect on behalf of either parent. The bill failed to gain traction in the Senate, when no subcommittee picked it up for discussion, Shealy said.

"I think there's a lot of opposition against it, but I don't know why," Shealy said. "All kids need both parents."

Shealy said fathers who wanted to take an active role in their children's lives approached her about the measure, because the state still tends to favor the mother as the preferred parent in divorces. Courts, she said, don't look at both parents like they should. Shealy said she plans to revisit the bill during the upcoming legislative session.

Reach Cynthia Roldan at 708-5891.