Topics: aol_on, Movies, Nix Nought Nothing, The Cold Lands, Tom Gilroy, Video, Entertainment News

Nix Nought Nothing is the “songwriting adventure” of Bart Warshaw, and this new music sets his composition to bonus footage from “The Cold Lands.”

The Tom Gilroy film, starring Lili Taylor, is available now on video on demand, and we have been premiering exclusive music for the last week or so, including new material from Mark Mulcahy, Michael Stipe and Azure Ray.

We talked to Warshaw about the new music, and the entire collaborative process, below.

How did you get involved with the project? What is your connection to Tom Gilroy and the film?

Tom got his hands on an advanced copy of my album “The Storm” and approached me very early on in the evolution of these projects. He sent me a copy of “The Cold Lands” and to me it was noticeable that the film had a similar tone to where my songs were. We had a few email exchanges and eventually met up and started throwing out some ideas and ended up choosing two songs from the album that I rerecorded and combined into one.



Did you know what you wanted included in the footage or make any requests? Or did Tom simply set you up with the clip he wanted you to have?

A starting point for me was that I didn’t want there to be any references to civilization. The subjects of the songs, and even the way they were written, have an intrinsic isolation. I wanted this to be reflected somehow in the story we were going to tell, so anything that involved things like cars or houses we just ignored. “The Cold Lands” has a lot of scenes that take place in the forest, so there was no lack of amazing shots and material to draw from.

What was your process like from there? How much time did you spend with the footage trying to match your music with the film? Or did you simply understand the emotional feel of what you wanted to do, and go from there?

Our way of thinking about it is that we were narrating the music with film, in the same way we would reverse-score a film, using the footage to rise and fall as if it was instruments and textures. We knew we wanted to evoke a sense of mystery and longing that developed into a section that could be seen as a calming lullaby after a bad dream.