What’s the biggest lie we tell ourselves about retirement?

MARC AGRONIN: Many people fear retirement because they imagine it to be the beginning of old age. If a few wrinkles and gray hairs didn’t already herald this concern, retirement rings it in with all of its glory. Too often the “old age” they envision is a downward slide into a void that they will struggle to fill. True – we must acknowledge that medical issues and memory changes do become more commonplace in the postretirement years. But if we define late life simply on that narrow basis, we miss the reality of aging that most people find surprisingly full of life.

Consider the possibilities: At the same time that individuals are transitioning from previous careers and jobs into retirement, the brain is actually making some astonishing gains. We are still accumulating knowledge because our brain cells can always sprout new connections. No letter ever arrives in the mail along with our AARP membership telling us that learning and development suddenly stop at a specific age. If anything, we have more time to develop our brains by delving into subjects and hobbies that always intrigued us. In addition, our emotions are becoming more stable and our cognitive styles are becoming broader and less ideologic. These trends underlie what we commonly refer to as wisdom. Relationships have the potential to become deeper as our passions become more focused and balanced by our maturity and the self-evident benefits of partnerships. Our expectations are more measured by the closer horizon of the life span, but for most people this is viewed as more of an opportunity than a void. In fact, most studies indicate that we experience higher levels of well-being and lower levels of stress as we age–contrary to what we imagine when young. Thus, the most honest and accurate vision of retirement is actually quite optimistic.

Marc Agronin (@MarcAgronin), is a geriatric psychiatrist and the author of “How We Age: A Doctor’s Journey into the Heart of Growing Old.” He is the medical director for mental health and clinical research at Miami Jewish Health Systems and an affiliate associate professor of psychiatry and neurology at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine.

Read the latest Encore Report.