BRONX, N.Y., Nov. 13, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Affinity Health Plan announced today that it will offer an enhanced version of its AffinityAccess Plan on the New York State of Health Marketplace, which will be even more affordable than Affinity's 2014 rates, while maintaining the same extensive provider network. As a state-approved Qualified Health Plan, Affinity has a vast network of nearly 26,000 healthcare providers and more than 85 of the leading hospitals in the New York metropolitan area – one of the largest provider networks on the Marketplace. Open enrollment begins November 15, 2014.

"As an independent, not-for-profit health plan with deep roots in the community, we see ourselves as champions of rich and rewarding lives – and access to high-quality healthcare coverage for every New Yorker is essential to that vision," said Glenn MacFarlane, Affinity Senior Vice President, Chief Financial Officer. "In the past year, more than 265,000 New Yorkers in our coverage area enrolled in a health insurance plan under the Affordable Care Act – many for the first time in their lives – representing a tremendous leap forward in reducing barriers to critical health and medical care. Affinity is proud to offer, for the second year in a row, high-quality coverage options on the New York State of Health Marketplace – so that our families and communities can access the quality healthcare they need, when and how they need it, regardless of circumstance."

Open enrollment for health plan options on the New York State of Health Marketplace runs from November 15, 2014 to February 15, 2015 for coverage that starts as early as January 1, 2015. During this time, people who have not yet signed up for health insurance can enroll in an AffinityAccess Plan, and people who are not satisfied with their current plan now have the opportunity to change plans.

"While the majority of health insurance plans are raising premiums, Affinity is actually reducing rates for our offerings on the Health Plan Marketplace – without changing the largest network of healthcare providers and top hospitals in the Greater New York City area," added MacFarlane. "We are a not-for-profit company, so our focus is on customers in our communities, and our measure of success will be in the number of lives impacted positively with access to care."

Affinity will commemorate the first day of open enrollment on November 15 with a flagship celebration at 305 E. Fordham Road in the Bronx, as well as smaller celebrations at four other Affinity retail store locations in Brooklyn, Queens, Suffolk, and Westchester. All are welcome to join community leaders, New York residents and Affinity employees to enjoy music, food and entertainment, and benefit from free multilingual health insurance resources and counseling to better understand healthcare options in the Marketplace.

Locations of Smaller Celebrations

Brooklyn

2228D Church Avenue

Brooklyn, NY 11226

Queens

168-22 Jamaica Avenue

Jamaica, NY 11432

Suffolk

757B Suffolk Avenue

Brentwood, NY 11717

Westchester

10 Palisades Avenue

Yonkers, NY 10701

For more information about the AffinityAccess plans, visit www.affinityplan.org/health_benefit_exchange/.

For information on New York State of Health: The Official Health Plan Marketplace, visit www.nystateofhealth.ny.gov.

About Affinity Health Plan

Founded in 1986, Affinity is an independent, not-for-profit organization driven by the mission to help its members, their families and their communities lead rich and rewarding lives. For nearly 30 years, Affinity has built one of the area's largest physician networks, which includes nearly 26,000 providers and more than 85 of the top hospitals in the Greater New York region. Affinity offers a variety of programs under Medicare, Medicaid, Child Health Plus and Qualified Health Plans on the New York State of Health Marketplace for members in the five boroughs of New York City, Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Rockland and Orange counties. For more information, visit AffinityPlan.org or follow Affinity on Twitter and Facebook.

MEDIA CONTACT

Ulysee Huling

Marketing Communications Manager, Affinity

(718) 794-5794

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130910/NY76541LOGO-a

SOURCE Affinity Health Plan