Scroll down to see how to look up your property and see if it's within the new Coastal A zone.

Buy Photo Homes in Ortley Beach, destroyed by superstorm Sandy, as seen in November 2012. (Photo: File Photo)Buy Photo

TOMS RIVER Concerned that new state regulations could make it cost prohibitive for some waterfront residents to rebuild, Toms River Council members have asked New Jersey to discard its plan to designate some properties near the waterfront in a new Coastal A zone.

"I think it's really unfair," said Councilman George E. Wittmann Jr., who offered the resolution asking the state Department of Community Affairs to rescind the Coastal A zone designation. "You will have some homes built to one standard, and now, new homes will have to be built to V zone standards. It will also lead to disparate insurance rates."

Late last month, the state informed municipalities that New Jersey had adopted more stringent construction standards for homes located near the ocean and Barnegat Bay. Wittmann said Toms River officials believe the new Coastal A zone includes 500 to 1,000 properties in the township.

Statewide, the number of affected properties probably numbers in the thousands, although DCA spokeswoman Lisa Ryan has said the state does not know the number of homes included in the new zone.

Before the Township Council voted, 7 to 0, to approve the resolution, Wittmann said Toms River officials plan to reach out to those in neighboring towns to see if other municipalities will also ask the state to rescind the Coastal A designation.

Under the state's newly adopted Uniform Construction Code, homes in the new Coastal A zone — located seaward of the so-called "LiMWA line" — will likely be required to build using the same pilings, helical piles and breakaway walls required of homes located in the V, or velocity, zone on FEMA's flood maps.

LiMWA stands for "limit of moderate wave action," and structures within the line's boundaries must be built to withstand the impact of breaking waves of between 1½ and 3 feet. In the velocity zone, houses must be built to withstand damage from waves of 3 feet or more.

Elevating homes in the V zone and the new Coastal A zone with pilings or helical piles is generally more expensive than lifting a house where a closed foundation can be used, according to many builders. Homes that are being elevated with pilings or helical piles must be moved out of the way so that the support structures can be placed in the ground.

You can look up your property and see where it is located in relation to the LiMWA line by using FEMA's "What is my BFE?" look-up tool.

But DCA's Ryan said the experience of experts within her agency indicates pilings can actually be cheaper than closed foundation construction in many cases.

There is a six-month grace period -- until March 21, 2016 -- before the new rules are phased in.

"This means that homes in the permit pipeline need not be redesigned as a result of the amended code," Ryan has said. Homeowners who apply for a building or elevation permit after March 21, 2016, will need to comply with the new regulations, Ryan said.

Homes that do not comply with the more stringent building code may face higher flood insurance premiums, FEMA has said.

FEMA has sent out an advisory detailing key requirements for buildings in the Coastal A zone.

Jean Mikle: (732) 643-4050, jmikle@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1RIB9u3