Since the end of the recession in June 2009, the number of job openings in the private sector has steadily climbed — just as one would expect to happen as the economy recovered.

But over those same years, the share of 25- to 54-year-olds who are active in the labor market has steadily fallen, to the point where just over 80% of this age group is either working or looking for work. (It was more than 84% in 2000.)

“How can job openings stand at 14-year highs, but the labor force participation rate for prime age people hover around levels not seen since 1984?” asks Patrick Tyrrell of the Heritage Foundation’s Daily Signal.

How indeed. And what’s keeping able bodied people out of the labor force when so many jobs are going begging?

Tyrrell turns to University of Chicago economics professor Casey Mulligan for answers. Mulligan posits that the root cause was an attempt by Congress to help people displaced by the recession. Democrats who controlled Congress at the time made several changes to anti-poverty subsidies, adding things like mortgage assistance programs, the benefits of which are phased out as income rises. ObamaCare provides still another one, by offering insurance subsidies that also phase out.

While these programs might help those in need over the short term, they add to what is already a steep effective marginal tax rate for those in the phase-out range.

Mulligan figures the top rate for these families eligible for various federal aid programs went from 40% to 48% in the immediate aftermath of the recession. In other words, for every extra dollar someone eligible for various aid programs makes, they lose 48% from taxes and benefit reductions.

“Helping people is valuable but not free,” Mulligan says. “The more you help low-income people, the more low-income people you’ll have. The more you help unemployed people, the more unemployed people you’ll have.”

Unfortunately, politicians always seem to ignore such adverse secondary effects in their zeal to “do something.”

Follow John Merline on Twitter: @IBD_JMerline.