In the nascent days of the 2016 presidential campaign trail—when Jeb (!) and Hillary were pundits’ fast favorites for the nomination—we expected somewhat of a showdown between two of America’s most deeply established political dynasties. Now that the race is closer to fruition, this is obviously not the case. Popular favorites have emerged, political outsiders like Bernie and Trump, whose exciting rallies and revolutionary agendas are attracting hordes of previously apathetic voters. The Bush family has sheepishly retreated from the political scene. Hillary’s campaign scrambles to tap into why The Bern has impassioned so many faithful Democrats. This election—vocal, angry, and splintered—is unlike any election in recent memory. Or, for that matter, it’s unlike anything in distant memory. Both parties are wildly fractured. And, of course, the host of The Celebrity Apprentice is leading in Republican delegates.

Summed up, this presidential campaign is full of idols and villains. If ___ wins, I’m moving to Canada. Bernie or Bust. Hillary or Bust. Cruz or Bust. (I’ve never heard that last one, but who’s to say it’s impossible?) One voter’s idol is another’s Hitler. With such extreme positions—Cruz is widely viewed as the most Conservative member of the Senate, and Sanders is perhaps the most liberal—there probably is no American right now who isn’t terrified that their personal villain, whichever candidate that may be, could someday have the nuclear launch codes. Of course, anger will flare during any election year, when sensitive issues that inflame passions seem to hang in the balance. No doubt: advocates of universal healthcare were very angry in 2012, when Mitt Romney proposed to eliminate Obamacare. Conservatives, on the other hand, firmly believed that Obamacare was a useless financial blunder. But Mitt Romney was never anyone’s villain, nor was Obama. No one was going to Canada (except Ted Cruz, probably, to visit his hometown). So why 2016? I think the internet is largely to blame.

I’ve recently wondered why this particular election has generated such a culture of extremes—extreme stances, and extreme personalities. Certainly, America’s current sociocultural climate is a contributing factor. When a national security threat like ISIS instills fear into the population, strong reactions and staunch populism will emerge. But, in the grand scheme of things, 2016 is an odd year for such a People’s Choice Election. If war is the impetus for political fracture, why didn’t Americans choose divisive hardliners in 2004, when many of us were thoroughly dissatisfied with the Iraq War? Instead of choosing the Anti-Bush, Democrats ultimately stood behind an establishment centrist. If economic strife is the impetus for an election of extremes, why didn’t this happen in 2008, at the height of the Great Recession? Barack Obama was a radical change from Bush, of course, but he was a classic moderate compared to some of today’s candidates. Today’s extreme candidates are not solely the products of extreme sociocultural conditions, then, but rather the byproduct of a larger, internet-driven phenomenon.

Social media was prominent in the 2012 and 2008 elections, so I do not suppose that our use of social media is a major factor in making 2016 the year of heroes vs. villains. However, the way we use social media has undergone a major evolution: journalism is condensed into action-packed microsummaries, clickbait, that appear enticingly on our Facebook or Twitter feeds. Sites like The Daily Beast provide news articles that are userfriendly, exciting, and very quick reads. Most significantly, much of today’s popular internet news caters to a particular political orientation. The goal is to generate the largest number of readers, so articles’ titles compete to be the most attractive.

I view this clickbait phenomenon, perhaps somewhat cynically, as a natural progression of journalism’s becoming a capitalistic industry. Before the advent of the TV, when there was one (at most two or three) different newspapers distributed in a given city, the news had to uphold a certain standard of objectivity in its coverage. Once the news no longer held a monopoly over local markets—that is, when TV news emerged—there was more room for options. With several TV news channels from which to choose, news sources now had to distinguish themselves so that the public would prefer their product above others. The News had entered a free market. As a result, America witnessed the emergence of politically-motivated news channels. Fox News is often seen as unfairly conservative, and many consider MSNBC unabashedly liberal. By pandering to viewers’ biases, these channels can successfully attract consumers. We’re all more comfortable listening to someone who shares our opinions. When news entered the internet age, there is no reason to think the phenomenon wouldn’t continue.

Now there are hundreds of homegrown news sites, which compete for the most shares, for the most likes. To achieve this goal, they must say something that you really agree with, or really disagree with, to coax you into clicking the bait. While Fox News has often been discounted by liberals as unfairly biased, even Fox News has now been accused of being a phony mouthpiece for the political establishment by Donald Trump supporters. The sheer number of internet news sites allows them to be highly diverse. Some are very liberal, some are very conservative, and most are just trying to find a faithful audience. Scrolling down my Facebook feed just now, I immediately glimpse an article from a far-left site called RAWSTORY.com (which I imagine to be headquartered in a dimly lit SoCal basement). Rawstory.com’s current homepage uses inflammatory vocabulary like “ludicrous” to describe Sarah Palin. A go-to conservative equivalent, thenewrevere.com (which I imagine to have been created in a dimly lit Iowa doomsday bunker), is displaying an article about the “Global Warming Hoax”. Using words like “ludicrous” and “hoax” in reference to today’s current events is not productive; it is pandering.

The political climate is, of course, sharply divisive, regardless of whether we choose inflammatory news sources. But we need to collectively be a bit more responsible in the links we share, in the journalism we read. Let’s take some time to consider whether RAWSTORY.com is fairly contributing to the political discussion, if it is an example of balanced critique and thorough factual investigation. If we all were a bit less self-serving in what we choose to read, America might still find itself with the fractured same set of presidential candidates. But I’m certain that, if we limit our intake to balanced and credible reporting in spite of the exciting amount of pandering available online, we will be better off. The candidates may remain the same, but they will have to moderate their views to suit a better informed public. If everyone agreed to read a column written by someone with whom we disagree, instead of clicking on a stimulating title that satisfies our preexisting views, the inflammatory slogans of 2016’s candidates could fade away. No more villains.