Sound Off! (Photo: serazetdinov, Getty Images/iStockphoto)

BATHROOM LAWS: The president has another legacy item; something a Third World country leader has never accomplished ... rules for going potty.

POLICE MEMORIAL: Actually, it seemed more like about only 20 civilians (not 40) were at last Monday evening’s police memorial event at the sheriff’s office. And most of the 20 knew someone in a department. It’s a disgrace, especially now with our law-enforcement being targets more than ever.

CYFD: What is wrong with the Children, Youth and Families Department administration? It is spending $2.7 million for a glossy "PullTogether" PR campaign. The embarrassing videos for "PullTogether" are pretty bad, having no substance, and the website design is terrible.

GOVERNOR: Our governor has never been of the opinion that anyone was innocent until proven guilty, but her assertion that our mental health providers are guilty even after being proven innocent is a good example of just how unfit she is for office.

NMSU: The Sun-News would do a service if they would investigate the percentage of the NMSU budget that is actually spent on salaries and benefits of people who teach classes. Many classes at NMSU are taught by people earning about $4,000 for a one-semester course, and these often have 40 students.

ELECTION: I will defend Trump because Hillary is 10 times the liar he is, and Hillary did nothing good for our country while being secretary of state.

BATHROOM LAWS: Dictator Obama forces public school to allow boys and girls to use the same bathrooms or locker rooms. Trump supports transgender bathrooms. He should not have the GOP nomination. We still have a primary! We still have a convention!

BATHROOM LAWS: You may not have realized it yet, but the Obama administration just destroyed the traditional American public school. Kid should not be sharing a unisex locker room.

IRAQ WAR: Obama has now presided over a war longer than any president in U.S. history. We should have been out of Iraq the first month of his presidency. It’s Bush’s lousy, phony war, but it’s Obama’s and Clinton’s fault they prolonged it.

BUS SERVICE: In Sunday’s Sound Off, someone suggested a $5 to $7 fare for a one-way rural bus ride. If you take into account the cost of a car payment, insurance, maintenance and gas, that fare is looking mighty good for people who chose to live outside of town and away from basic services.

GRADUATIONS: Wouldn't the LCPS school district save money by having high school graduations either at the individual school or the Field of Dreams white elephant? And limit by ticket those who can attend the graduation. Having aunts, uncles, second, third cousins and who knows who attend is ridiculous.

OBAMACARE: Obamacare does not control what private companies charge for their premiums or co-pays if they are not part of the federal or state exchanges. That is why Blue Cross/Blue Shield left the state exchange because they wanted to increase their premiums more than 10 percent

ELECTION: I am a registered voter and will exercise this privilege in November. If I have to choose between Clinton and Trump, I intend for the first time in 60 years, to vote a write-in ballot for Howdy Doody.

ELECTION: Of course Paul Ryan will make nice with Trump. He has his eye out for the main chance like all the rest of them. Just one big hypocrite after another.

Be heard: Call 575-541-5466 or email soundoff@lcsun-news.com to submit an item.

Read or Share this story: http://lcsun.co/27slEQe