The Affordable Care Act recently passed its sixth birthday, and while voting for it contributed to my 2010 loss, I could not be prouder to see it increase access to care and patient choice while lowering overall costs.

Before the health care law, insurance company bureaucrats, rather than doctors and patients, made too many health care decisions. Thanks to the law, insurance coverage restrictions based on preexisting conditions have gone the way of the dodo bird. Yet, when it comes to prescription drugs, the health insurance industry has evolved a new way of rationing health care.

Advancements in specialty drugs have the potential to significantly improve the lives of patients suffering from serious, chronic and life-threatening conditions – from cancer to heart disease to rheumatoid arthritis. But, because these new pharmaceuticals often come from the latest breakthroughs in biotechnology, utilizing complex formulas made from living organisms, they are bound to be more expensive. So, many insurance companies and pharmacy benefit managers, protective of their bottom line, are finding ways to restrict coverage despite the drugs' effectiveness.

RELATED CONTENT RELATED CONTENT Obamacare's Rocky Future If Colorado adopts Coloradocare it would be a blow to Obamacare – from the left.

One tactic is to require that an existing cheaper drug be prescribed rather than the new, potentially more effective drug. This process, called step therapy, has been widely criticized by patient groups and physicians alike. Or, instead of excluding the drug outright, payers often pile on onerous, bureaucratic red tape such as so-called prior authorization requirements, which make it much harder for patients to access new drugs.

How do payers justify these hurdles? One way is to strategically deploy allies in the health care nonprofit world to camouflage their decisions under the cloak of economic analysis. A key example is the Institute for Clinical and Economic Review, which recently began conducting analyses to determine whether a new drug's benefit is worth its cost. It has found most of the drugs it has reviewed to be too expensive, giving insurance companies and pharmacy benefit managers an excuse to restrict them. Ed Silverman, who writes "The Pharmalot View" column for STAT said, the institute "is becoming a de facto arbiter for the nation's medicine chest."

Given that vital role, one would think the institute was an official government agency, like the National Institutes of Health or the Office of the Surgeon General, charged with doing what's best for patients and answering to Congress and the American public. Or at least that the institute is expert, totally independent of special interests, its decisions made objectively.

RELATED CONTENT RELATED CONTENT Combat Drug Demand Instead of Supply Early intervention and treatment are more effective at combating addiction than any war on drugs.

While the institute claims independence, its funding tells a different story. The lion's share comes from health insurance companies and their trade associations, pharmacy benefit managers and their associated foundations. Foundations run by current and former insurance company executives are still vehicles for industry money. In 2013, the Blue Shield Foundation of California accounted for about two-thirds of the institute's total funding.

The institute's ties to the insurance industry go deeper. Its president worked for the industry's Washington lobbying group, and its board is mainly current and former insurance company executives with a few advocacy groups represented. Board representation is guaranteed for the Blue Shield of California Foundation.

The institute is clearly not independent or objective and yet the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services released a proposed rule last month that says it's considering, among other things, adopting the institute's methods. That further confuses the public as to what The Institute for Clinical and Economic Review is and, unless the proposed rule can be stopped (public comments are due May 9), would truly be flying in the face of the Affordable Care Act's patient protections.

RELATED CONTENT RELATED CONTENT Hepatitis C Now Leading Infectious Disease Killer in U.S. Insurance companies are finding new ways to restrict drug access after the Affordable Care Act.

That's because of the way in which the institute's so-called value assessments establish a price threshold for new drugs, and after surpassing that threshold, it deems a drug too expensive to be covered. These assessments use a metric that the Affordable Care Act expressly prohibited for Medicare – quality-adjusted life year – which measure both the quantity and quality of life. One cancer survivor and patient advocate described quality-adjusted life year as "an invented metric that values a healthy year at '1.0' and then devalues a person's year to a fraction if they are diagnosed with a disease."

The Affordable Care Act banned Medicare's use of this metric because it would otherwise be deciding that one life is more important than another. Through the institute's use of quality-adjusted life years as a metric, the insurance industry is already violating the spirit, if not the letter, of the provisions of the health care law, written to ensure there would be nothing like so-called death panels condoned by the law.

Ironically, by skimping on short-term expenditures for innovative medicines, the payers are actually driving up costs – for consumers, health providers and society. A Stanford University study published in October 2014 found that if new hepatitis C-curing drugs were used to heal all 500,000 prisoners nationwide with the disease, taxpayers would later save somewhere between $2 and $5 billion, as the prisoners, once freed, would be less likely to have complications or to pass treatment costs onto government programs

RELATED CONTENT RELATED CONTENT Your Health Depends On Your Race We must acknowledge the link between race and poor health before we can meet our nation's daunting health equity challenge.

It's no surprise that the institute's analyses ignore such longer-term benefits since they go beyond the horizon of insurance company bureaucrats who are focused on quarterly profits.