A deal announced on July 24, marked success in Anthem Inc.’s (NYSE:ANTM), 12-month pursuit of the smaller Cigna Corporation (NYSE:CI), part of its attempt to become the country’s largest health beneficiary company.

The $48.40 billion acquisition involves Anthem paying $188 for each Cigna share, 38% higher than Cigna’s closing price on May 28, the last trading day before merger talks between the companies began.

Anthem believes the combined entity will cater to 53.20 million consumers, and generate almost $155 billion in pro-forma revenues. Its ambitions of operating within a large-scale market stem from the company’s expansion into commercial managed-care membership in states including California, Georgia, and Missouri. The consolidation is now expected to add new members in Arizona and Tennessee.

In areas where Anthem is already present, it is forecast this merger will raise its profile. Already, 54% of Cigna’s enrollees are in states where it is a dominant player. The take-over will expand the business’ footprint by adding new dental enrollees in Texas and Florida, where the corporation has no exposure.

The combined company will have 81% of its insurance plans within the commercial managed-care sector. If we look at the data collected by Bloomberg Terminal, we can see the total membership of each company in every market segment. In the local group-employer market, Anthem’s competitive advantage becomes obvious.

Within this, Anthem has 15,219 members. Cigna’s roll totals 8,828. Put another way, the new company will have 45% of the total available membership in this market sector. In the national accounts-employer market, the newly combined corporation will control 31% of total memberships. The difference for Anthem’s position will come Cigna’s presence in both the local group and national accounts-employer markets.



Anthem’s decision to buy out Cigna will allow it to expand its reach into the commercial managed-care business. This segment is not expected to register exceptional growth. That reduces its significance to the company.

In fact, it is the government-sponsored health plan market that is expected to show high growth in the future. Bloomberg’s data for 2014 shows Anthem’s share of the Medicare Advantage enrollment market amounted to 8.40%. Cigna counted on 2.70% of the total. The bigger company will only pick up an extra 3% of market share by purchasing Cigna, giving Anthem 11.10% of the Medicare enrollment market, below United Health Group Inc.’s (NYSE:UNH) 17.90% share.



Within the Medicaid enrollment market, the merger appears encouraging. With Cigna’s low profile within the sector, Anthem will only acquire under 1% of additional market share. That raises the merged firm’s total to 7.80%. In contrast, United Health holds 7.50% of the market, shows data compiled by Bloomberg.



Health insurance companies are eager to take advantage of the growing opportunities arising from the Affordable Care Act (AKA Obamacare), where the government is accelerating efforts to offer health insurance to previously uninsured people. Consequently, enrollment in both Medicaid and Medicare is expected to increase.

Data from the Henry Kaiser Family Foundation underlines increases of 13.20% in enrollment and 14.30% in spending within Medicaid by 2015. In buying Cigna, Anthem will not enjoy any significant improvements in the sector.



The Anthem-Cigna merger will not produce future high growth for the new entity. Anthem paid an almost 40% premium and did so with a large degree of debt. It will issue $22 billion in debt and $21 billion in stock for the purchase. That puts the business’ debt-to-capital ratio at 49%, perhaps the highest when compared to the debt-to-capital ratios of other diversified health insurance firms.

Anthem is planning to reduce its debt-to-capital ratio to 40% in two years, after closing the buyout. The company’s target could result in the suspension of share repurchase programs.



Anthem has payable debt worth $625 million in FY15, $947 million in FY17, $1.28 billion for FY18. Its projected free cash flows are $2.82 billion for FY15, $3.37 billion in FY16, $6.55 billion during FY17, and $7.55 billion in FY18.