Buy Photo Gov. Steve Beshear spoke the Kentucky Association of Counties on Wednesday in Lexington. To his right: Lexington Mayor Jim Gray. (Photo: Joe Gerth/The CJ)Buy Photo

LEXINGTON, Ky. – Gov. Steve Beshear said Wednesday that Kentuckians have nothing to fear from Syrian refugees being resettled in Kentucky by the federal government and that to stop offering asylum to those in need would be giving in to terrorists.

“The very thing that these terrorists want is for us to abandon the values that make us the greatest democracy in the world. And if we do so, they win,” Beshear said in an interview following a speech to the Kentucky Association of Counties. “I, for one, am not going to let them win.”

More than half of U.S. Governors - almost all of them Republicans - have said they oppose the resettlement of Syrian refugees following last Friday’s terrorist attacks in Paris. The Islamic State, which operates in Iraq and Syria, has claimed responsibility.

Gov.-elect Matt Bevin issued a statement on Monday saying that he opposes resettlement of Syrian refugees.

“My primary responsibility as Governor of Kentucky will be to protect the citizens of the Commonwealth,” Bevin said in a statement. “This is why I am joining with other governors across the country in opposing the resettlement of Syrian nationals until we can better determine the full extent of any risks to our citizens."

Some in Congress, including some powerful Democrats, have called for a suspension of the refugee program, a move that President Barack Obama opposes.

Beshear said the refugee program offers plenty of checks and balances to ensure that terrorists aren’t slipping into the United States.

“This program was in place during the 9/11 tragedy and was used to bring many Iraqis and Afghans who were victims of persecution into our country,” he said. “It’s been used in peacetime, and in war time it has gotten even more restrictive in terms of security checks in recent years.”

He noted that the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Department of Homeland Security, State Department and Defense Department all must vet refugees before they are allowed into the country, a process that generally takes between one year and two years.

During a Senate Homeland Security meeting last week, FBI Director James Comey acknowledged that there are still gaps in the vetting process in part because of limits to U.S. intelligence in Syria.

“There is risk associated of bringing anybody in from the outside, but specifically from a conflict zone like that,” he said.

Since 2011, when the problems in Syria arose, Beshear said that 21,000 Syrians requested asylum in the United States and only 2,500 have been resettled here. He noted that the federal resettlement program has been in place since 1980 and has been supported by Republican and Democratic presidents.

“I’ve got full confidence that this is the best system around, that that it does what it should do, and that our public safety is going to be upheld and at the same time, we’re going to continue to show the values that makes America great,” Beshear said.

His comments came following a 21-minute speech to county officials at the Lexington Convention Center, which he used almost as a valedictory address as he prepares to leave office in less than three weeks.

He touted his administration’s work in emerging from the recession that gripped the nation about the time he took office and noted that the state’s unemployment rate has dropped from nearly 11 percent to 4.9 percent.

“Where we are today is because of our partnership,” he said.

One issue that Beshear didn’t bring up is health care. Bevin has promised to do away with the kynect health insurance exchange and to scale back Kentucky’s Medicaid expansion, seen by many as Beshear’s most important accomplishments.

In September, a report by the U.S. Census Bureau found that Kentucky had seen its percentage of uninsured residents drop from 14.3 to 8.5 percent, the largest drop in the United States.

Beshear said afterward that he didn’t see a need to rehash the issue and tell them what they already know.

“I think that virtually every one of these people know how important that is to their people. Every one of these counties have thousands of people who are getting affordable health care, many for the first time in their lives as a result of the Affordable Care Act, and expanded Medicaid and the health benefits exchange,” Beshear said.

“They know how important that is and I think you’ll find they’ll be among a very large group of folks that are going to be advocating for those programs to stay in place,” he said.

Joseph Gerth can be reached at 502-582-4702 or jgerth@courier-journal.com. Follow him on Twitter at @Joe_Gerth.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1j8jm38