When the left attacks a working economy, it can succeed in destroying prosperity and human freedom. This destruction is a goal. But its policies fail to produce the expected results. The left can exploit the failure to push even more radical programs, the way that Bernie Sanders has succeeded Obama. If ObamaCare doesn't work, push Single Payer. If that doesn't work, just go to the death panels.

As I wrote earlier this month,

Each of the left’s solutions creates the problems that the left then proposes to fix. The New Deal created the mess for the New Frontier and the Great Society to fix. The Great Society’s mess had to be tackled with Bill Clinton’s Bridge to the 21st Century. Then Obama’s Hope and Change came over that bridge. Bernie Sanders, whose gargantuan government ideology encompasses everything from New Dealism to the decrepit days of Obama, is the perfect follow-up act. If government control didn’t work before, it’s only because the government didn’t have enough control. Only by sweeping away the free market will the failed Socialist policies of a hundred years be made to work. And if they still don’t work, then it’ll be time for even more consolidation, centralization regulation and eventually total government control. Leftists keep promising to fix the problems they made.

For the most part though lefties do believe their latest program will work. There are those smart enough to know it won't, but for the most part they do believe that government control works. If they believed it didn't, their entire program would cease making sense except as a Stalinist exercise in sadism. And while that breed of leftist exists, he isn't in the majority.

So

1. The left succeeds at destruction

2. It fails to achieve its policy goals

It can get some things done by sheer brute force the way that Stalin and Mao did, but it's wildly destructive and inefficient. The core systems never work.

Obama has succeeded in wrecking all sorts of things and in building up the left's power. But beyond power, the actual programs don't work. And while the left builds on failure, eventually the failure gets too big so that the whole thing implodes. We're seeing that now in Venezuela. Not to mention Cuba, North Korea and even China.

The left wants to win. But it believes that it can prove that its way works best. It doesn't. Obama was supposed to demonstrate that, he failed. If Bernie Sanders wins, he'll inflict a great deal of damage and perhaps strengthen the left, but the core program of proving that the left's way works best will fail. And after enough failures, the left loses in a big way and gets overthrown.