Buy Photo Republican gubernatorial candidate, Matt Bevin, speaks at a Religious Freedom Rally in Frankfort, Ky., on Saturday, August 22, 2015. Photo by Mike Weaver (Photo: Mike Weaver, Mike Weaver/Special to The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

Matt Bevin debuted his first ad of the general election on Friday, with a 30-second attack ad that likens Jack Conway's agenda to that of President Barack Obama.

Appearing as if it's a NFL game promo, an announcer voices the entire commercial and claims Conway "supports Obama's liberal agenda – that means he supports Obamacare and Obama's job-killing Cap and Trade Plan."

In 2009, while running for the Democratic nomination to the U.S. Senate, Conway said he supported cap and trade but only with a number of caveats – some of them unlikely.

The legislation would have capped the amount of pollutants businesses could release and allowed those that reduced emissions to sell their emission credits on the open market.

Conway said at the time that he opposed cap and time as it was originally filed, he said he liked some of the changes made by the U.S. House of Representatives.

Those changes included giving utilities additional credits and more time to meet goals, and spending $60 billion in federal money to fund research into technology that would capture carbon before it is released into the atmosphere – something that would have helped the coal industry – and another $20 billion to fund battery research.

But he said the bill needs to go further in providing tax credits to offset any increase in energy costs, providing strict government oversight of the trading of emissions credits. Additionally he said he would oppose it unless China, India and other countries to abide by the same provisions – an idea that China and India had rejected a week before.

Conway did say he would have voted "proudly" for the health care plan but said he would have preferred that the legislation allow Medicare to buy prescription drugs in bulk, which he says would save the country $200 billion.

Here's the full script:

"Two teams taking the field. Leading Obama's team, political insider Jack Conway. Conway's playbook supports Obama's liberal agenda – that means Obamacare and Obama's job-killing Cap and Trade Plan. Conway will take us the wrong way.

"Leading Kentucky's team of greater prosperity is outsider businessman Matt Bevin. Bevin has a conservative game plan to cut taxes, create jobs and fight Obama's job-killing regulations.

"Vote the Kentucky Team. Matt Bevin for Governor."

The campaign said the ad is running in the Louisville, Lexington, Paducah, Evansville, Hazard and Charleston markets. The campaign didn't say how big the buy was but one document filed with the Federal Communication Commission estimates the total spent in Louisville to be about $70,000, which would signify a significant ad buy.

Bevin hasn't been raising much money and going up now suggests he has contributed or loaned a significant amount of his own money to his campaign.

Reporter Joseph Gerth can be reached at (502) 582-4702 or jgerth@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1KkXBXp