Dear Scott, I only managed to get through half the gibberish you spewed in today's column. Ed

That's a solid start, Ed. Today, it's half my gibberish. Tomorrow, maybe two-thirds. Before you know it, you'll be able to stomach all of my gibberish in a single sitting!

Scott, I read your column every time. I almost always agree, but this one ["School tests 91 of 180 days? Seminole proposes simpler plan"] is really spot on. The incessant testing in our schools is a bad joke. Wayne

Wayne, parents agree. So do teachers, principals, superintendents and virtually anyone else on the front lines of education. The only ones who don't are the people you elect to serve in Tallahassee ... and the testing companies and private schools who benefit from this costly, inefficient mess.

Maybe to get Tallahassee's attention, we should create a word like they did with "Obamacare" … something like "Scott-Testing" to make the governor's skin crawl. Jim

Well, catchphrases do seem more effective than policy arguments these days.

One sure-fire way to resolve the testing craziness is to require that ALL schools that receive public funding (private, charter, religious, etc.) be subject to the same accountability testing and standards.Bud

Bingo, Bud. This is what proves the battle cries of "accountability" are a farce. If they really wanted accountability for all public money spent on schools, they would demand the same thing from all schools that take the public money. But they don't — because the real desire is to drive folks away from traditional public schools.

Hey Scott. My wife and I left Orange County schools a couple of years ago. Testing demands, data managers and all the associated problems just demoralized us and we were just lucky enough to be in a position to leave after good careers. John

See?

My husband and I enjoyed your recent article on the number of tests and prep days our students face each school year. I "escaped" from the public system to the private-school sector so that I could really teach my fourth-grade students. We went on field trips, did science experiments, wrote plays, enjoyed recess and did so many other things that make learning a joy instead of a drudgery. They took one national standardized test toward the last half of the second semester and did fine. Sandy

See, again?

Scott Maxwell – such a hack ... still trying to pretend you are relevant. #fake #desperate #impostor. BigDaddyWolf

#Thanksforreading.

Did you really start your column today with, "Most everyone . . ." I have always admired your use of the English language. Now I see you are just as proficient in Bad English. I suggest that you contact your third-grade teacher so she can remind you of the correct use of "almost everyone" vs. the incorrect "most everyone." David.

David, most everyone makes mistakes. Heck, I once knew a guy who sent me a note correcting my grammar that started with a question — and yet didn't include a question mark. Can you imagine.

Scott, I look forward to your column each time it is in the paper. Sometimes I agree...sometimes I don't...sometimes I laugh....but this one ["The U.S.S. Indianapolis 70 years later — a survivor finally falls"] is the first time I have cried. So sad that this great guy was forgotten by so many.Patricia

Well, his life has been celebrated now, Patricia — by you and many others.

Your proposal to lower tolls is common sense. Therefore our policy-makers won't do it. Mr. Jones

Someone's gotta keep the bond-brokers happy.

Be careful. Suggesting that a government agency actually reduce fees will get your "liberal mainstream media" card revoked. Robert

Not among people who actually use that phrase.

I'm at a meeting right now where John Mica is picking on you. Anonymous

Oh, John and I like to kid each other. He thinks I'm a small thinker. I think he's a big spender. One of us has $4 billion worth of highway, airport, rail and toll-lane construction to back up our position.

Your column is not worth replying to. Donald

I'd be more prone to believe you, Donald, if you hadn't replied.

Always love yourcolumn, Sam! Sharon

Thanks, Shontell!

smaxwell@orlandosentinel.com