House Republicans have unveiled a package of bills aimed at bringing the country’s energy infrastructure, reliability and other energy matters into the modern era.

The measure, from the House Energy and Commerce Committee, avoids some hot-button issues on Capitol Hill, such as repealing the ban on exporting crude oil, in an attempt to construct a package that could attract broad support.

ADVERTISEMENT

After unveiling the package Monday night, the committee announced that its subcommittee on energy and power will start to consider and vote on four sections of the bill Wednesday.

“Wednesday’s markup is the next step in ensuring we not only get this legislation done but get it done right,” Rep. Fred Upton (R-Mich.), the committee’s chairman, said in a statement. “The sooner we say yes to energy, the sooner we can take full advantage of America’s energy abundance and bring our policies into the 21st century to create jobs and keep energy affordable.”

If lawmakers are successful, they could pass the first major energy legislation since 2007.

The 95-page package includes a number of provisions that Republicans and Democrats alike have supported at some point. The Obama administration has also expressed a desire for legislation to address some of the issues in the bill, especially in its major energy infrastructure report from May.

It would streamline the permitting process for natural gas pipelines in an attempt to better transport the historically large volume of gas being produced domestically.

Power utilities would be freer to violate environmental laws if necessary to maintain electric reliability.

The bill includes various proposals to modernize the electric grid, such as pushing utilities to better prepare for power disruptions and giving the secretary of Energy emergency power to respond to threats to the grid.

The package is the first result of months of hearings lawmakers have held this year.

The Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee is working toward its own energy policy reform package that is likely to be unveiled before lawmakers leave for their August recess.