The U.S. Capitol building is seen through a snow covered trellis at the start of the 114th Congress on the Capitol grounds in Washington January 6, 2015. REUTERS/Jim Bourg

4439368

In 1995, Pope St. John Paul II correctly said that abortion and contraception are part of a “culture of death” that was overtaking America. Despite the efforts of millions of Americans, the problem has gotten worse since then, and has culminated in the Obama administration’s unconstitutional requirement that Catholic nuns must provide abortifacient, sterilization, and contraceptive coverage in their health plans.

In 2015, however, that can change. Thanks to the efforts of countless pro-life, pro-family, and pro-liberty activists, Republicans took Congress for the first time since 2006, and now have the opportunity to roll back at least some of President Obama’s radical pro-abortion agenda.

This week, Republicans have announced they will vote on a bill to protect as many as 18,000 babies from death in the womb, and their mothers and fathers, their siblings and grandparents, and even the abortionists themselves from the grisly horror of abortion.

But that’s not enough. Right now, U.S. taxpayers send hundreds of millions of dollars to Planned Parenthood, often against their will. This funding should end, unless President Obama wants to defend an organization that that covers up sex abuse of minors and illegal abortions, and has encouraged BDSM and other dangerous sexual practices among children.

Likewise, conscience rights must be restored by making the Weldon Amendment permanent law. Last year, Republicans and Democrats denied medical professionals and insurers in Washington, D.C., and California the ability to uphold pro-life beliefs by not enacting this critical rider.

Funding for the enforcement of the HHS Mandate should also be on the chopping block. This unconstitutional provision failed in the Supreme Court last year, and has been knocked down in dozens of federal courts across the country. Congress must demand the Obama administration protect life by respecting religious liberty.

Eliminating this violation of religious liberty would also help rein in abortion funding under the Affordable Care Act (ACA), much of which is in violation of the Executive Order signed by the president in 2010.

Finally, the American people deserve transparency in their insurance. Last year, the Government Accountability Office found that the ACA was illegally funding abortions in more than 1,000 health insurance plans across the country. Americans should never have to fund abortion if they don’t want to.

Forty-two years ago, the U.S. Supreme Court opened the floodgates to the culture of death. The 114th Congress has the chance to protect life and liberty, and give the next generation of Americans a greater ability to pursue happiness.

John-Henry Westen is a co-founder of Voice of the Family, an influential worldwide coalition of pro-life and pro-family groups, which defends life and family in the media. He is also a co-founder of LifeSiteNews.com, a leading daily news website on life and family issues.