Several nonprofits distribute gifts, food baskets to low-income families in Larimer County

Sherry Hess, left, Vicki Grassman, Kenzi Murphy, 17, and Tori Hess, 17, wrap presents while volunteering together Thursday, Dec. 12, at the Boys & Girls Club in Fort Collins. ( Steve Stoner )

Every member of the Boys & Girls Clubs will get a gift next week, and it will be something they want.

"It's just a little fun for the holidays," said Tammy Chandler, finance director of the Boys & Girls Clubs of Larimer County, adding that the staff knows the kids and figures out what they desire for the holidays. "They love it, of course."

Thirty volunteers wrapped more than 300 gifts last week to distribute to the Loveland, Fort Collins and Wellington clubs, representing a small aspect of the gifts and food baskets that area nonprofits will hand out to low-income families this month.

"We give out a present to all of our kids who come on a regular basis," Chandler said, explaining that many of the presents come from the Salvation Army in Fort Collins and from business donors.

Additional presents will be distributed through the Boys & Girls Clubs' Holiday Angels adopt-a-family program, where donors will give money or purchase gifts for the 18 families identified by the clubs as needing holiday assistance. Each of the families also will receive a turkey and the fixings from the Food Bank for Larimer County.

"It's not open to the public. We only do this for members and their families," Chandler said. "It's hidden from the kids. They don't know it's from us."

Toys for Tots

Toys for Tots of Larimer County and Santa Cops of Larimer County both collect and distribute gifts for low-income families living in the county.

Advertisement

Toys for Tots has more than 30 drop-off sites in Loveland and Fort Collins to collect toys for children, plus a few sites in Berthoud, Wellington and Estes Park.

Last year, the nonprofit distributed toys to 7,400 children and is expecting to deliver toys to 8,000 children this year, said Shawna Stacy, coordinator of Toys for Tots of Larimer County, a part of the Marine Toys for Tots Foundation.

Stacy is hoping to bring in enough donations by the end of the collection season on Sunday, Dec. 22.

"Donations are down, partly, I think, because Thanksgiving is a week later. It took longer for people to start thinking about Christmas," Stacy said.

Stacy logs in every toy, book and stocking stuffer that is collected to divvy them up to six local charities, which then distribute the gifts to their registered families. The charities include the Salvation Army of Fort Collins, Catholic Charities Northern in Fort Collins, Timberline Church, Touchstone Health Partners, the House of Neighborly Service and the Pacto de Amor of Crossroads Church in Loveland.

"Our mission basically is that every child has a gift on Christmas," Stacy said. "I would hate to see a family not have any gifts for a child to open."

For a list of the drop-off sites, go to toysfortots.org.

Other Sources of Gifts

Santa Cops, a nonprofit consisting of local law enforcement, businesses and individuals, provides underprivileged children living in Larimer County with toys and other presents. The officers deliver three presents to each child of the families that apply for the program to an average of 4,000 children.

The toys are collected at the Larimer County Sheriff's Office, the Loveland and Fort Collins police departments, the Colorado State University Police and the Colorado State Patrol and at toy drives. The last toy drive will be Sunday, Dec. 21, at the Loveland Walmart at 1325 Denver Ave.

Project Self-Sufficiency hosts a holiday party every year for its clients with an average of 75 to 90 people attending. The party features a shopping area for children to select a gift for their mother or father and games and books from Santa Claus.

Through the nonprofit's under-the-tree program, donors can shop for the client families using a wish list or giving them gift cards to do their own shopping.

Alternatives to Violence connects donors with families to give them gifts, but does not give out any names.

"If anybody wants to help a family with gifts, we can't give details about the family make up," said Glenda Shayne, executive director of Alternatives to Violence.

So far, the nonprofit has distributed $1,500 worth of toys, Shayne said.

Meals on Wheels of Loveland and Berthoud is working with area agencies to provide winter necessities, such as blankets and outerwear, to the clients most in need.

Holiday Food Baskets

The House of Neighborly Service distributes food baskets to low-income families in two ways, through an adopt-a-family program and at the facility, 565 N. Cleveland Ave.

Families signed up for the adopt-a-family program through Friday, Dec. 6, to be matched with donors who will put together holiday food baskets and, as an additional option, provide gifts and needed items. The donors, including individuals, businesses, churches and other families, will purchase the items and deliver the baskets and gifts directly to the recipients.

"This is a great opportunity for them to make connections with the families, to see the reactions on children's faces," said Glorie Magrum, executive director of House of Neighborly Service.

Any individual or family wanting a food basket who did not sign up by Dec. 6 can apply for a holiday food basket of donated items, including a turkey, ham or chicken and all of the fixings, Magrum said.

Some of the food for the baskets comes from the Food Bank, which also provides food for the Salvation Army, the Loveland Housing Authority and local churches and businesses wanting to give out the baskets.

"We actually work through our agency partners. They request turkeys and other side items from us," said Lauren Mingus, communications manager for the Food Bank.

Don't Forget the Animals

The Larimer Humane Society hosted an adoption event, Whisker Wonderland, on Saturday with discounts on adoptions, determined by a spinning wheel game. Anyone who adopted an animal received a goody bag for dogs or cats with items for their new pets.

"This is a great way to promote adoption through the holidays," said Stephanie Ashley, marketing and community outreach program manager for the Larimer Humane Society.

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.