In their campaigns, many Republicans often rail against big government and tout the virtues of local government because it's closer to the people. But when it comes to actual governing, it can be a different story — especially with the current crop of Republicans in the state Legislature.

From residency rules to transportation to voting, these Republicans are eager to impose their will and vision on local governments across the state, regardless of how local representatives and citizens feel. One more example comes in the form of a bill introduced by Rep. Chris Kapenga (R-Delafield) to prohibit local municipalities from enforcing local minimum wage laws when any state money is used to pay the workers.

Philosophically, we agree that such local laws are a bad idea, as we think residency rules are generally a bad idea. And the current version of this bill is better than the original, which would have been more blatant about shutting down local control by simply banning local minimum wage laws. But we also think local governments with the support of their citizens should be the ones making these decisions in most cases even when aid is involved.

Workers would be hurt by the legislation, according to officials in Madison and Dane County: The bill would mean $3-an-hour pay cuts for some employees. Dane County's minimum wage is $11.33 an hour. A Milwaukee County ordinance approved last week by the County Board sets the minimum wage at $11.32 for county workers and contractors.

Yes, when local governments fail to provide adequate services such as mental health care in Milwaukee County, the state needs to step in. But living wage laws and residency rules aren't services; they're choices that local communities should be allowed to make on their own.

And fought out on their own: Milwaukee County Executive Chris Abele — who has lobbied the Legislature for a higher state minimum wage — has said he will veto the ordinance (and for good reason, we think), and the board will have a chance to override that veto.

That's the way the process should work. It shouldn't be imposed by state legislators intent on bending local government to their will.

In this case, at least one Republican does get it. Assembly Speaker Robin Vos asked Kapenga to scale back his bill. "Look, I disagree with what the Milwaukee County Board did," Vos said. But "they get to make some decisions."

Yes, they do. And Mr. Speaker, shouldn't the same apply to issues such as regional transit authorities and residency?

•••

One of the first acts by the Milwaukee Common Council under the leadership of its new president, Michael Murphy was to call last week for a regional summit to address the growing plague of heroin addiction in the region. It's a good first act.

Heroin use and fatal overdoses have been spreading throughout the state, including the Milwaukee area. There have been local summit meetings to talk about it; a regional summit should be the next key step.

In a letter to top law enforcement, health and human services officials, as well as Attorney General J.B. Van Hollen, Murphy said the heroin trade did not recognize municipal boundaries: "Because of the seriousness of the heroin epidemic, and the fact that its harmful effects are now experienced throughout the Milwaukee area, we believe that all communities in the region need to unite to tackle the problem together."

The state Department of Justice says heroin use is the top concern for local law enforcement, and the issue has resulted in new state legislation.

Murphy and his fellow aldermen are right. A regional summit that would help law enforcement agencies, courts and lawmakers to better coordinate their efforts could go a long way toward helping curb this menace before it gets worse. We hope that summit is held soon.

•••

And a belated congratulations to Murphy on his election to council president. He follows a class act in Willie Hines, who left to take a job with the housing authority. Murphy has proven himself an intelligent, talented and energetic alderman. The city will benefit from his leadership and his experience. We wish him all the best.

•••

Kudos to Rep. Joel Kleefisch (R-Oconomowoc) for being the lead sponsor on a bill that would make bar people from transferring custody of children to nonrelatives without going through government agencies.

The bill was approved 97-0 by the Assembly Thursday, and deserves the same kind of support in the Senate, where it goes next. The bill also would bar people from advertising online the availability of children for informal adoptions — updating an existing prohibition on such advertisements in newspapers and on television.

Kleefisch said the proposal would ensure the needs of children are taken into account any time custody is transferred. Wisconsin is leading the charge on cracking down on re-homing, he said.

"It was shocking to know individuals could sign a notary and readopt their kids...to complete and total strangers without any kind of background checks," said Rep. La Tonya Johnson (D-Milwaukee).

Here's hoping other states follow Wisconsin's lead on this.