Dr. Ben Carson had a choice response Saturday to President Obama’s incredible statements at last week’s National Prayer Breakfast comparing current Islamist atrocities to wars fought in centuries past in the name of Christianity.

“It makes me feel that perhaps we’re being betrayed,” Carson said on “Fox & Friends.” “Perhaps we don’t have a leader who feels the same about things as most of us do.”

Carson knows knows better than most how important the National Prayer Breakfast can be. His recent political fame stems largely from a speech he gave at the 2013 National Prayer Breakfast, when he stood only a few feet from President Obama and castigated the president’s progressive policies — including Obamacare.

It was a performance that endeared Carson to conservatives everywhere – and made the retired neurosurgeon a possible contender for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination.

That kind of prominence made Obama speech at this year’s prayer breakfast particularly alarming. His dredging up of dustry history — the Spanish Inquisition and the Crusades — as some sort of justification for the savagery being committed worldwide by Islamist terrorists in the contemporary world, showed a mindset alien to most Americans, Carson said.

“Well, certainly his words give us some insight into his thinking and his actions or lack thereof, and, you know, there have been atrocities committed throughout human history in the name of religion, and they’re all horrible, and to sit down and try to decide which one is worse than the other, doesn’t make any sense,” Carson said.

“We should condemn them all, give no quarter to anyone who is involved in such activities, and to try to divert the attention away from the outrage that has been focused on the radical Islamic terrorists, in this manner is rather disingenuous, I’m sure, to say the least.”

But thanks to the Founders, he said, the United States has a response to “disingenuous” politicians — and their followers.

“The good thing is, we have a system in place that has allowed us to take control. We need to observe carefully what our leaders do and what the people who support them do,” he said. ”We can’t forget who those people are, and we will have another opportunity, coming up in 2016, looking at all the senators and the congressman who rabidly support this man. Let’s make sure that they get the message.”