Topics: Editor's Picks, George Lakoff, George W. Bush, Politics, Politics News

When George W. Bush became president in 2001, it marked the first time in 70 years that conservative Republicans controlled all three branches of government. By the time Bush left office, we were all reminded why. The financial crisis and resulting global economic meltdown Bush left us with were eerily reminiscent of the Great Depression, but there was also 9/11, the Iraq War and Katrina—a multifaceted record of spectacular failure so stunning that it should have disqualified conservative Republicans from holding power for at least another seven decades. Yet, the Democrats’ political response to the many messes Bush left behind has been so spectacularly inept that they’ve not only lost both houses of Congress, they’ve also lost more state legislative seats than any time since before the Great Recession.

There are many ways one might explain this state of affairs—and certainly the rise of Wall Street Democrats and the decline of labor played crucial roles. But beyond any particular issue area, there’s also the matter of differences in how liberals and conservatives think—and how they act and organize as a result.

As I’ve written before, a growing body of literature reveals that liberals and conservatives think differently from one another in ways that can even be traced back, in part, to the level of instinctual response, reflecting conservatives’ heightened sensitivity to threat bias. This work is congruent with an integrated multi-factor account offered by John Jost and three co-authors in the 2003 meta-analysis “Political Conservatism as Motivated Social Cognition.” In their abstract, they explained, “Analyzing political conservatism as motivated social cognition integrates theories of personality (authoritarianism, dogmatism–intolerance of ambiguity), epistemic and existential needs (for closure, regulatory focus, terror management), and ideological rationalization (social dominance, system justification).” Their meta-analysis integrated findings from 88 sample studies in 12 countries, with 22,818 individual subjects—meaning it drew on a substantial body of work by others.

Yet, once publicized, it drew such a hostile response there was even talk of Congress defunding the entire field of research into political attitudes. In response, Jost and one co-author wrote a Washington Post Op-Ed, which defused the crisis. In it, they wrote:

True, we find some support for the traditional “rigidity-of-the-right” hypothesis, but it is also true that liberals could be characterized on the basis of our overall profile as relatively disorganized, indecisive and perhaps overly drawn to ambiguity — all of which may be liabilities in mass politics and other public and professional domains.

This statement underscores the point that liberal cognitive tendencies can be as problematic in their way as conservative ones are.

The multi-factor distinction Jost and his colleagues analyzed is roughly congruent with a broader distinction, discussed by Chris Mooney in”The Republican Brain” (which I wrote about here), related to two of the “Big Five” personality traits—conservatives score higher on conscientiousness, while liberals score higher on openness to new experience.

As these few examples suggest, there are multiple ways to characterize the differences in how liberals and conservatives think. For instance, Mooney argued that liberals, still fundamentally inspired by the Enlightenment promise of ever-growing knowledge about the world, are fundamentally mistaken about the nature of human reason, which they see as knowledge- and truth-seeking. But modern cognitive science teaches us that our brains are much more fundamentally shaped by the need to make persuasive arguments, which only require the appearance of rational argument.

In “The Battle for God,” Karen Armstrong illuminates a slightly different, though related, difference, contrasting the modalities of mythos and logos. As Armstrong explains, logos is concerned with the practical understanding of how things work in the world, while mythos is concerned with ultimate meaning. Either modality can be used by liberals and conservatives alike in their everyday lives. But macro-historically, there’s been a distinct bias—and weird twist on top of it—at least since the dawn of the modern era. That’s when logos began becoming so all-pervasive that it seemed destined to dislodge mythos, and some defenders of mythos (now commonly known as fundamentalists) fought back paradoxically by assuming the framework of logos, and arguing that their mythos was literally true—a move that true traditionalists would have found to be deeply in error, because it devalued the essential purpose of mythos.

The congruence with Mooney’s argument is obvious: There’s a clear kinship between logos and the Enlightenment model of reason on the one hand, and mythos and persuasion on the other. If conservatives under George W. Bush once again proved themselves incompetent in the logos of governing, liberals under Obama proved themselves incompetent in its mythos.

Or so I hypothesized. But I wanted to check things out with perhaps the world’s leading expert on incompetence, psychologist David Dunning, the senior researcher in the team that discovered the Dunning-Kruger effect, which Wikpedepia defines as “a cognitive bias whereby unskilled individuals suffer from illusory superiority, mistakenly rating their ability much higher than is accurate.” Wikipedia added that “This bias is attributed to a metacognitive inability of the unskilled to recognize their ineptitude.” Or, as Dunning explained to Errol Morris, writing an essay series, “The Anosognosic’s Dilemma: Something’s Wrong but You’ll Never Know What It Is,” for the New York Times, “If you’re incompetent, you can’t know you’re incompetent … [T]he skills you need to produce a right answer are exactly the skills you need to recognize what a right answer is.” A recent article by Dunning, “We Are All Confident Idiots,” provides both humorous and serious examples showing just how pervasive the problem is.

Like many, I first learned of the Dunning-Kruger effect from that NYT series—and made some observations based on it at the time. There are obvious conclusions one can draw from the Dunning-Kruger effect: perhaps most important, that none of those obvious conclusions will apply to your own shortcomings, even though those are the ones that ought to concern you most. But this is specifically an individual effect, and my observation was about groups—and rather large ones, at that. So in reaching out to talk with Dunning, behind any specifics, I had two questions in mind: Could it apply to groups as well as individuals? And was it possible to do something about it?

In both cases, he answered yes, but some of the specifics surprised me. Which is just what I should have expected—to discover some limits of my own understanding. (Dunning himself has referenced Donald Rumsfeld’s phrase “unknown unknowns” to describe what we’re up against, just by the very nature of being human. But don’t have a cow, man. He’s also referenced Socrates, as well.)

To begin with, I wanted to make sure we were on the same page. An example that came readily to mind was the GOP’s claims to have 46 jobs bills that had passed the House, and were languishing in the Senate. If only Obama and Harry Reid would act on them! The reality, of course, is that these bills would not actually do very much in the way of job creation, as critics have pointed out repeatedly over the past several years. In late October, the New York Times even interviewed some top GOP economists who admitted as much, along with independent analysts who said it would be hard to measure much impact.

In short, the GOP “jobs bills” aren’t seriously intended to create jobs. They’re intended to create talking points about creating jobs — and to counter Democratic talking points (while also doing favors for GOP donors, of course). They reflect both the persuasive nature of human cognition highlighted by Chris Mooney, and the meaning-making function of mythos described by Karen Armstrong. They might not create many jobs, I noted early in my conversation with Dunning—it’s aggregate demand that’s the primary driver in doing that—but they do resonate with the “job creator” mythos, which has been so prominent in conservative circles these past several years, and which makes perfect sense in the world of small businessmen I’ve known.

Dunning thought it was an apt example. He noted that people are often perplexed over where a never-ending, chicken-and-egg cycle begins. “You have business people, they don’t just decide there is going to be a market, they respond to the market, they respond to a demand,” Dunning said. “But they start the process where they enter the picture … People tend to think of themselves sort of as creators who come in and are imposing their will and their desires on the environment, and sort of filter out the conditions that they are really reacting to. They can recognize it pretty accurately for everybody else, they just miss that for themselves. Which I think is interesting.”

Understanding an example of how conservatives’ thinking leads them astray is the easy part, however. It helped to get our thinking in sync. But the real challenge would be making sense of how liberals and Democrats make comparable kinds of errors—errors they cannot see. And here is where things had to get a bit tricky, since I had some ideas of what the errors might be, but given the Dunning-Kruger effect, I had to expect some ideas I’d never thought of, too.

The next thing out of Dunning’s mouth wasn’t quite that—but it did have some of that flavor. Above I mentioned a paper by John Jost that represents the integration of work done by hundreds, if not thousands of researchers over a period of several decades. That integration very much represents the broad consensus view of how liberal and conservative thought relate to one another—a consensus that has since been significantly strengthened with the addition of a related finding in the physiological dimension. But there are at least two notable voices who stand out with somewhat contrasting views—Jonathan Haidt and Dan Kahan—and Dunning quickly mentioned both of their work as being harmonious with what I was saying.

I could have gotten down into the details of their theories, but in a big picture sense, Dunning was perfectly right: They’re all saying something similar—that liberals and conservatives do think differently from one another, which means that they can both fall prey to the Dunning-Kruger effect in ways that may be different—in terms of cognitive processes—as well as similar—produced by similar sorts of situations, for example. What’s more, if one is concerned with trying to identify ways in which people are blind to their own shortcomings, then it’s helpful to have as many different accounts as possible.

Kahan’s work is particularly challenging, because he prefers to use a two-factor model of orientation—hierarchical/egalitarian and individualist/communitarian—rather than the single-factor measures used by most investigators, which can then be correlated with liberalism/conservatism. But he still does encounter and deal with real-world political questions where things tend to divide into two. One striking example is the “white male effect,” so-called because white males have been observed to be significantly less fearful about certain sorts of risks—most notably ones associated with guns and the environment. In a 2007 paper, for example, Kahan and his colleagues wrote, “The insensitivity to risk reflected in the white male effect can thus be seen as a defensive response to a form of cultural identity threat that afflicts hierarchical and individualistic white males.” Even though two factors were involved, the result was an effect most notable for setting one sub-population apart from the rest of the public—a cognitive bifurcation of sorts.

“Essentially you have each side interpreting what’s going on through different lenses,” Dunning said of Kahan’s work, and what connects this to his work is “the idea that people either have no idea that the other side has a different lens—they literally don’t know it, so that if you are looking at things the logos way, you really don’t know that there’s an alternative way of viewing the world is the mythos way. Or, if you are exposed to it, you think it’s not real.” Expanding on the later alternative, Dunning said, “I can guess if you described the logos world to a person who was into mythos, and vice a versa, their response would be, well, that’s a very interesting way of viewing the world, I wonder what took them off the right track.”

Although this made sense, my working thesis was not that most people don’t have both mythos and logos in their experience—that may or may not be true—but that the political worlds of liberalism and conservatism are organized differently, so that only certain aspects of the personal resonate strongly with the political.

“Well, that makes sense,” Dunning told me, then quickly added, “I’m from the other world, though, where I find it very easy to focus on the individual level.” Which led directly to the next question on my mind: Is there specific evidence for the Dunning-Kruger effect overlapping from the individual level to larger social groups?

“The answer is, yes it can,” Dunning told me. He’s still working on writing up experimental results, but he was happy to share some broader observations. “It’s likely to happen in two different ways,” he said. “The first is often you have organizations that are well set–you can say they’re very competent–in their ways. They can have a problem when conditions on the ground shift, and you could say that in the last 10 or 20 years, the conditions on the grounds shifted demographically, in terms of the people, for example who vote in the midterm.” Twenty years ago, these older voters had come of age during the Great Depression, and leaned Democratic as a result. But older voters now are much more Republican, which tends to skew the midterms in the opposite direction from the past. (The age-based difference in participation rates has also grown over time, as well.) As a result, Dunning said, “You have Republicans in midterms, and the occasional voters now are the young, and they’re rather Democratic so there is oscillation between elections and that’s a changed situation,” which is precisely the first sort of thing that tends to trip up organizations.

“The other thing is that the most recent work we’ve done suggests that the real cost of the Dunning-Kruger framework at the organizational level is that when a very smart idea or very smart person comes along, the organizations are not necessarily very skilled at recognizing that person’s genius,” Dunning said. “We have lots of data showing that very top performers, their top performances are very much missed. The genius of their ideas are just missed by the group.”

Three examples on the Democratic side came readily to mind when Dunning said this. First was civil rights lawyer and Harvard law professor Lani Guinier, whose work on voting rights and representational fairness was easily demonized by the right when she was nominated to head the DOJ’s Civil Rights Division, in part because Joe Biden (then chair of the Senate Judiciary Committee) couldn’t understand it, and Bill Clinton didn’t even take the time to try. Yet, in retrospect, if they had stood behind her, most of the GOP’s voting rights mischief in the past 20 years—including the theft of the 2000 election—could have been avoided, or defeated, and there would be a much stronger foundation for multi-racial coalition politics at all levels of government.