The Cleveland Indians’ Chief Wahoo logo on the left sleeve of Lonnie Chisenhall’s uniform, as seen on May 20. The Wall Street Journal

Democratic senators find the Washington Redskins team name offensive enough to ask the National Football League to order a change. But how do they feel about the other Indian-themed teams back in their home states?

Sen. Sherrod Brown (D., Ohio) was among the 50 senators who signed a letter to the NFL calling for the end of the Redskins name. In the Buckeye State, Mr. Brown doesn’t object to the Cleveland Indians‘ name — but he does want the baseball team’s controversial logo, Chief Wahoo, to go, spokeswoman Megan Dubyak said Thursday.

Sign up for the Capital Journal Daybreak newsletter, straight to your inbox: http://on.wsj.com/CapitalJournalSignup

Mr. Brown has been opposed to the Chief Wahoo logo since the 1990s, Ms. Dubyak said. He’s hardly the only Ohioan calling for it to go: In February the Cleveland Plain Dealer editorial page said the team should retire the logo.

Chief Wahoo, a toothy Native American caricature, has been the subject of scorn in recent years. The team has de-emphasized its use, changing its primary logo to a block C this season but retaining the symbol on jersey sleeves and on hats worn for home games.

Indians spokesman Curtis Danberg said the team has no plans to eliminate Chief Wahoo from its uniforms and hats.

“We are very cognizant and sensitive to both sides of the conversation – our fans deep, long lasting attachment to the memories associated with Chief Wahoo and those who are opposed to its use,” he said. “We continue to research our fan base to better understand their perception and stance on the logo, but at present time have no plans of making a change.”

Meanwhile, Sen. Claire McCaskill (D., Mo.), who signed the Redskins letter, doesn’t find the Kansas City Chiefs‘ name offensive, said spokesman John LaBombard. The NFL team plays at Arrowhead Stadium and has a horse named Warpaint at their games.

“In our view, the word Chiefs does not carry the same negative stigma as Redskins,” Mr. LaBombard said. “And we have not heard from tribes or other stakeholders offended by the Chiefs name. Redskins is a racial slur and simply should go.”

The other Major League Baseball team with an Indian theme is the Atlanta Braves. Georgia’s senators, Johnny Isakson and Saxby Chambliss, are both Republicans, so they didn’t have a chance to weigh in on the Redskins Thursday: Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.) only circulated the Redskins letter to the Democratic caucus.