How loyal are consumers to the hospitals in their provider network, and what implications does this loyalty have in terms of insurers including the more prestigious hospitals in the coverage they offer consumers?

The simple answer to both questions - plenty.

This is among the findings in a not-so-simple research study by Mark Shepard, a Harvard University educated post-doctoral fellow in aging and health care with the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Shepard, who next year will be an assistant professor of public policy at Harvard's John F. Kennedy School of Government, has written a paper on "Hospital Network Competition and Adverse Selection: Evidence from the Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange."

The title highlights Shepard's interest in what hospitals are within an insurance network, but the risk is not in reference to coverage for the sickest of consumers. It is about a less studied risk for cost that involves consumers with a loyalty to top rated hospitals for both specialty as well as routine care.

Shepard reviewed data from Commonwealth Care, then the state's subsidized marketplace insurance exchange, from 2010 to 2103, where, as he notes in his study, "Covered services and patient cost-sharing rules are fixed by regulation for all plans, so provider networks are the only significant benefit that differs across plans."

This means, Shepard said, that insurers can decide what hospitals are covered by a plan.

Shepard focused on Partners HealthCare, an integrated health system of medical providers founded by Brigham and Women's Hospital and Massachusetts General Hospital. These are both nationally ranked Boston hospitals, as well as ranked, by U.S. News & World Report, as the top two hospitals in the state.

He wanted to know why these hospitals have come to be covered only on the low-income exchange through an insurance plan that Partners owns.

"There used to be five plans in the health connector with Partners and today it is basically the Neighborhood Health Plan and no one else," Shepard said.

The insurance arm of Partners Healthcare is Neighborhood Health Plan, which last year lost $22 million. It is part of what is now called the Massachusetts Health Connector, and the majority of its 330,000 members are on Medicaid.

"What I discovered in looking at the data from Massachusetts was that sickness was not the only driver of costs. Another important factor was which doctors and hospitals a patient likes to use," Shepard said.

"We know there is tremendous variation in prices among providers for delivering similar services. A patient who tends to use a high-price hospital is going to have higher costs than an identically sick patient who uses cheaper providers."

This means, Shepard said, that consumer preference factors into cost, but is not something studied as a risk for insurers under current methodology. In business terms, Shepard said his research asked whether insurers are put at a financial disadvantage "based on the set of medical providers in their network."

"Economists think it is efficient to compensate insurers that attract sicker patients through a tool called risk adjustment. However, this tool in practice does not cover insurers for the higher costs involved with consumers who use expensive Partners facilities with their high prices," Shepard said.

"Covering these patients in the exchange ends up being a double whammy for insurers in the sense their plans attract patients who are sicker and need care from a star hospital, but the plans also attract patients who use these hospitals for primary care visits."

Shepard's research questions whether additional subsidies to plans that cover the top hospitals, known for their quality and research, would be justified or whether extra subsidies would encourage these hospitals to charge more for the care they provide.

"We are better with risk adjustment than without it," Shepard said.

"However, if with risk adjustment we are still having a problem, meaning fewer health insurance plans covering top hospitals, there are two possible solutions. Star hospitals have to find ways to cut costs, so there are lower prices for health insurance plans to keep them being covered in networks. If this is not possible, we have to look at other ways to subsidize the valuable research and teaching they are doing."

Cost disparities among hospitals is both a national and state concern, with at least one bill being filed in the commonwealth to address this issue.

Another question raised by the research is whether consumers, who opt to get routine care from a prestigious hospital, should be responsible for a greater cost of that care within their insurance plan.

Under law, public and private hospitals cannot deny emergency care to anyone. Under the Affordable Care Act, no one can be charged an insurance premium based on their health.

"When a patient can't get care anywhere else, there are regulations in the health exchange that require that hospital to provide that care at no extra cost to the patient when it is truly absolutely necessary," Shepard said.

"In terms of less extreme cases, the question is about allowing an insurer an extra level of flexibility before excluding a hospital from its network. This would be a higher cost-sharing tier so the insurer would not lose money on the population it attracts to its network."

Shepard added that this approach could "help address the problem of someone having to pay the full price of care when they go to see someone out of network. This is an enormous problem for both the individual, but also for medical providers unable to collect on this bill."

Charts included in Shepard's research list the most expensive, as well as the most used hospitals in the state on the exchange.

The most expensive listed is Brigham and Women's with an average insurance payment per in-network hospital admission of $23,278. Mass General was second at $21,428 and Baystate, whose severity index for patients was similar to Brigham's, was seventh at $13,715.

The most used hospitals listed are the seven within Partners Healthcare System, representing some 2,488 beds, at the time of Shepard's research, and with an average insurance payment per in-network hospital admission of $18,016.

Baystate, which had, at the time, three hospitals with a total of 774 beds, was seventh with 4.9 percent of admissions, with average insurance payment per in-network hospital admission of $12,361.

In his answers below, Shepard further discusses the issue of adjusting for financial disadvantages, or risk, for insurers of healthcare in terms of patient population and choice of hospital network.

What does the term "adverse selection mean" and what does it mean for plans "covering the most prestigious and expensive hospitals." Would you give an example?

Adverse selection is the idea that certain more generous insurance plans tend to attract the highest cost and sickest individuals. When this happens, those insurance plans are at a financial disadvantage. They may be forced to raise prices to cover their costs, which further discourages healthy individuals from signing up. In the extreme, the whole process can spiral out of control and make generous insurance financially nonviable.

The question my research asked was whether this adverse selection happens to insurers based on the set of medical providers in their network. In other words, do insurers face a disincentive to cover certain hospitals and doctors because doing so attracts high-cost customers to their plans?

The natural set of providers to start looking at were the prestigious academic medical centers -- places like Mass. General Hospital. Customers pay attention to whether these hospitals are covered. The question was whether the higher-cost, sicker individuals are particularly attracted to plans that cover them.

How did you get interested in this particular focus?

Adverse selection was widely documented in the 1990's when many employers were first introducing HMO's and other managed care plans. These plans tended to attract their lower-cost and healthier employees, leaving the traditional insurance plans with an adversely selected set of members. Employers were not doing much to offset this problem, and it may have accelerated the demise of traditional insurance plans.

Today the world looks different. Almost all insurance is managed care. And employers and health insurance exchanges are taking adverse selection quite seriously, often using policies like risk adjustment to try to address the issue. The question is whether the same problems would still emerge between today's generous and less generous plans. And an increasingly important factor in generosity today is whether the plan covers the best doctors and hospitals.

Massachusetts' pre-ACA health insurance exchange (Commonwealth Care) provided a nice place to study these issues. They standardized almost all insurance benefits other than provider networks. So you could compare plans that were almost identical except for the doctors and hospitals they covered. The first place I looked was at the providers who are the biggest and most prestigious -- Partners Healthcare, the parent company of MGH and Brigham & Women's Hospital.

You say that standard risk adjustment somewhat offsets the costs of insuring patients that are "sicker than average," but it does not help with those that select the more expensive providers of care. Why not?

The idea of risk adjustment is that a central authority like an insurance exchange uses data to measure how sick each individual is. It then transfers money from health plans that attract healthier populations to those that attract sicker populations. Clearly, this is going to help with the problem that certain plans tend to attract the sickest individuals -- though it of course may not work perfectly.

What I discovered in looking at the data from Massachusetts was that sickness was not the only driver of costs. Another important factor was which doctors and hospitals a patient likes to use. We know there is tremendous variation in prices among providers for delivering similar services. A patient who tends to use a high-price hospital is going to have higher costs than an identically sick patient who uses cheaper providers.

Risk adjustment was not designed to deal with this aspect of costs. So unsurprisingly, I find that it does not offset it very well.



What do you conclude in terms of what you learned? What might insurers learn from your research as well as policy makers and consumers?

The first big conclusion is that cost is not just about patient sickness. What hospitals and doctors do also matters. There is enormous price variation across different medical providers. This means that patient choice for an expense academic medical center is just as much of a cost factor. Providers and insurers should be aware of this.

Following this conclusion is that which hospitals are covered by insurers matters in terms of what type of insured are attracted to their health plan. Insurance plans with the most prestigious hospitals in Massachusetts tend to attract patients who are quite high cost and these insurers lose money more than expected from the ordinary set of patients. These patients are sicker than average and are the type who are very loyal in using these top academic centers, like those in Partners.

The real challenge for policy makers is whether encouraging insurers to cover star hospitals through special subsidies would allow prices to be kept higher than they would be otherwise and encourage more patients to use these expensive facilities. While subsidies are a normal solution for adverse selection, they might have this special disadvantage here.

It is a tough problem and not one with an obvious solution. One solution that might work better is to allow insurance the additional step of flexibility, so rather than drop a hospital, this would be putting expensive hospitals in a higher cost-sharing tier. This is a type of insurance plan that has grown in recent years. The logic is that there is a higher cost sharing to offset the high cost of individuals who use Partners a lot. This makes patients cost conscious when they use expensive academic hospitals for particular types of care that you could get in other settings.

This would mean, for example, a patient would get a higher co-pay if they went to Mass General for anything other than the most complicated treatment. The use of "tiered network" arrangements has grown in Massachusetts.

However, consumers need to note that the provider network is different from the medal level of plans like gold, silver and bronze on the Massachusetts Insurance Exchange. You cannot assume because you bought a gold plan it covers all of your preferred providers.