When I started working at the Chicago Tribune many years ago, I checked a box on some company form that allocated a percentage of each paycheck to a 401(k) retirement account. Pay period after pay period, year after year, the money has automatically been invested in various ways at my direction, and I've seldom given it much thought. A financial firm takes care of it, for a tiny fee.

The sum in my account is not as big as I would like, or, thanks to the decline in the stock market in recent weeks, as big as it was at one point. But my contributions and the return on investments will make my old age far more comfortable than it otherwise would be. And in all those years, to the best of my knowledge, I've never been defrauded.

That is noteworthy because Bernie Sanders has decided to assign all the ills of this world to the financial services sector. "The business model of Wall Street is fraud," he said in last week's debate with Hillary Clinton. "Greed, fraud, dishonesty and arrogance — these are the words that best describe the reality of Wall Street today," he asserted last month.

The same charges could be leveled against politicians, who often break their promises, knowingly deceive voters and become rich through "public service." But Sanders prefers to remove the mote from his brother's eye than cast out the beam from his own.

The resentment of large banks and other financial institutions isn't hard to understand or justify. Some of them played a major role in the financial collapse of 2008, and some required a government bailout. One reason they got help is that they have established friendships with politicians.

But Sanders is not heaping contempt on the auto industry because General Motors and Chrysler got federal aid to stay afloat. The panic may prove that people in the financial industry made grievous errors, but it doesn't prove they were dishonest.

As it happens, the crash stemmed more from human fallibility than human evil. A long stretch of economic growth and low interest rates fueled a housing boom that looked eternal.

Lenders got too generous in offering mortgages, assuming that rising property values would assure repayment. New securities "that were meant to spread risk turned out to concentrate it," noted The Economist magazine. No industry is immune to the old adage that stuff happens.

The financial sector is much larger today than in 1980 for a couple of obvious reasons. One is that the companies have found more and better ways to turn household savings into productive capital, facilitating economic growth and progress.

The money individuals put in retirement and other investment accounts goes into mutual funds, which buy stocks and bonds from private corporations, which build factories, purchase equipment and develop technology to better serve their customers — who happen to be ordinary people.

Another reason for the expansion is that the opportunities for investment have multiplied in recent decades. It's not only American corporations and startups that depend on "Wall Street" for capital but also businesses in Asia, Latin America and Africa.

None of this would have happened if the business were fundamentally dishonest. The wonder of modern capital markets is that millions of people hand over their hard-earned savings to strangers, who put that money into companies run by people they have never met. The basis of this phenomenally successful system is not fraud; it is trust.

Does greed drive the industry? No more than any other. But the financial sector, like other businesses, has to pursue profit by giving its customers something they want. If the hunger for money is a stimulus for companies to think up new products, cheaper goods or better service, what's so terrible about it?

No one buys from someone else unless the transaction makes each better off. I can't sell you something to advance my needs without also serving your needs.

Yes, there is such a thing as corruption on Wall Street. Yes, there is such a thing as cultivating politicians with campaign donations. Yes, there is costly stupidity. But the same phenomena exist in lots of sectors. Even nonprofit organizations like charities and universities have scandals.

To pretend the financial industry is worthless, harmful and rotten to the core is to grossly misrepresent economic reality. When Sanders' supporters cheer what he says, they're the victims of a fraud, but not by Wall Street.

Steve Chapman, a member of the Tribune Editorial Board, blogs at www.chicagotribune.com/chapman.

schapman@tribpub.com

Twitter @SteveChapman13

www.facebook.com/stevechapman13