Dave Stoecker with his daughters Sara Schell, left, and Casey McKim, right, Thursday at Rocky Mountain Christian Church in Firestone. Stoecker baptized both of his daughters at Rocky Mountain Christian Church. ( Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call )

Longmont resident Dave Stoecker was in his mid-20s when he started to wonder if being baptized as an infant was enough.

Stoecker had his head sprinkled with water as a baby, but he was helping to launch a new church, and it seemed necessary to make a conscious decision to dedicate his life to following Christ.

In April 1984, Stoecker was the first member of the new non-denominational Rocky Mountain Christian Church to be baptized.

Since then, 2,500 people have been baptized at Rocky Mountain Christian Church's Frederick and Niwot campuses.

The church, celebrating its 30th anniversary this year, was launched as a "daughter church" to Longmont's LifeBridge Christian Church, formerly First Christian Church, with 150 people meeting inside a high school. Now, more than 2,200 worshipers gather every week at the two campuses, said lead pastor Shan Moyers, who took over when longtime pastor Alan Ahlgrim retired in 2012.

Some of the 2,500 people baptized at the church have moved, changed churches or stopped going to church altogether, Moyers said. But dozens of members such as Stoecker, who is currently a church elder, have remained tied to the church and make up a group that has been key to the congregation's growth and success, he said.

Advertisement

"Baptisms aren't the important thing," Moyers said. "Transformation is."

Like most Christian churches nationally, the majority of members being baptized are teenagers, Moyers said. Youths are typically more open to understanding the lessons they hear on Sundays and are often "searching for more, for the meaning of life," he said.

In Stoecker's case, it was not a question of whether he wanted to be a follower of Christ, but if he needed to be baptized a second time, as an adult.

"Ultimately, I decided that the Bible was clear," Stoecker said. "It was something I should chose to do when I was able to chose that, as a way to be obedient."

While baptisms are one of the many factors that measure the impact a church has on its community, Moyers said, the latest milestone is not any more significant than Stoecker's baptism.

"Every baptism is a milestone for that person," Moyers said. "It's a personal commitment and it's true that the church plays a role in that, but we're the support system for the people who are making that change and transforming their lives."

Contact Times-Call community reporter Whitney Bryen at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com