There was nothing earth-shaking about drug distributor AmerisourceBergen's decision to change its business strategy a couple of years ago. It simply decided to go after a few big clients rather than pursue a bunch of smaller ones.

Today, because of that decision,AmerisourceBergen ( ABC ) is poised to post its best annual financial performance in years.

The company distributes branded and generic drugs, over-the-counter health care products, and home health care supplies and equipment to pharmacy chains and other customers, mainly in North America.

It is one of three players that dominate the U.S. drug-distribution market, ranking third in market cap behind No. 1McKesson ( MCK ) and No. 2Cardinal Health ( CAH ). Combined, those three control more than 90% of the market.

'Poised To Rebound'

All of these companies are benefiting from a favorable operating environment, analysts say.

"Utilization trends in the U.S. health care system are poised to rebound from a very soft five-year period as economic growth is finally gaining traction and the Affordable Care Act creates an environment in which a greater number of individuals are covered by insurance and seek treatment," RBC Capital Markets analysts noted in an Oct. 16 report initiating coverage on AmerisourceBergen at an "outperform" rating.

Meanwhile, AmerisourceBergen has gotten an additional boost from the change in strategy it implemented a couple of years ago.

"They made a shift in the type of customer they are going after by moving a lot of their business over to large clients," Morningstar analyst Vishnu Lekraj said.

The shift was made possible in part by Cardinal Health's decision to move "down the chain" by serving more smaller pharmacies, Lekraj told IBD. "That allowed AmerisourceBergen to aggressively move into a large client base."

The strategy took a big step forward last year, when AmerisourceBergen announced a 10-year distribution deal to supply branded, generic and specialty drugs to No. 1 U.S. pharmacy chainWalgreen ( WAG ) and its U.K. partner, Alliance Boots.

That deal not only gave AmerisourceBergen a major source of revenue -- it also came at the expense of Cardinal Health, which previously provided drugs to Walgreen.

The Walgreen deal came less than a year after AmerisourceBergen signed a three-year agreement to supply pharmaceutical products toExpress Scripts ( ESRX ), a provider of pharmacy benefit management services to managed care organizations and other clients. That deal was worth around $18.5 billion in annual revenue to Amerisource.

Those deals have "driven a lot of growth for AmerisourceBergen, especially on the top line, and profitability should continue to increase over the long term," Lekraj said.

Although Amerisource ranks third in market cap, it's the second-biggest drug distributor in annual revenue, behind McKesson and ahead of Cardinal.

AmerisourceBergen is expected to pad its lead on Cardinal on Oct. 30, when it reports fourth-quarter and full-year results for fiscal 2014, which ended in September.

Analysts polled by Thomson Reuters expect Amerisource to post fiscal Q4 earnings of $1.05 a share, up 33% from the prior year. Revenue should come in 26% higher, at $30.8 billion.

For the full year, the company is expected to grow EPS 25% to $3.91 and revenue 35% to $118.8 billion. The earnings gain would be its biggest since 2010. The revenue increase would be its biggest in at least a decade. In contrast, McKesson posted a 13% gain in fiscal '14 revenue to $137.6 billion, while Cardinal logged a 10% decline to $91.1 billion.

During fiscal Q3, Amerisource logged revenue of $30.3 billion, up 39% from the prior year and above consensus Wall Street estimates.

Company officials declined to comment for this story due to a quiet period ahead of its fiscal Q4 earnings release. In a press release following its Q3 results, the company said the top-line gain was driven by a 45% increase in its AmerisourceBergen Drug Corp. unit, "due primarily to the onboarding of all of the new Walgreen-branded pharmaceuticals business and a substantial portion of their generic pharmaceuticals business, and increased branded pharmaceutical sales to our other large customers."

Revenue for its AmerisourceBergen Specialty Group unit rose 13% year-over-year.

Amerisource's fiscal Q3 earnings per share came in at $1.01. That was up 29% from a year earlier and well above analyst views for 92 cents, driven in part by "earlier-than-expected benefits" from the Walgreen generics deal, Citigroup analyst Garen Sarafian noted in a report.

Sarafian has a "very positive" outlook on AmerisourceBergen, citing "strength in both operating segments" as well as "ramping synergies" with the Walgreen deal and improving macro trends.

ObamaCare Lift?

Those macro trends include a rise in prescription drug sales this year, helped in part by the Affordable Care Act, otherwise known as ObamaCare. In a recent report, JPMorgan analyst Lisa Gill said she "remains encouraged by the solid Rx trend, which we believe may be driven in part by incremental ACA-related volume."

Analysts surveyed by Thomson Reuters expect Amerisource to grow full-year earnings 12% in fiscal 2015 and 14% in fiscal '16.