Democratic congressional candidate Mike Dickinson, who recently claimed “Fox News does nothing but tell lies” and should be monitored by the FCC, was grilled by Sean Hannity Tuesday during an exchange the aspiring congressman may want to forget.

“You tell lies, you distort the truth, you promote hate,” Dickinson told Hannity when asked to defend his position.

However, he seemed unprepared to answer Hannity’s follow-up question.

“How do we promote hate?” the TV host asked.

In response, Dickinson said the network “distorts the news” by continuously referring to the Affordable Care Act as “Obamacare.” He never got around to actually answering how the network “promotes hate.”

“The Affordable Care Act is not socialism,” he added. “All you do on your show is call it Obamacare this, Obamacare that.”

Hannity proceeded to grill the Democratic congressional candidate, who is seeking to replace Republican Rep. Eric Cantor in Virginia, on President Barack Obama’s broken promises related his signature health care law. For the rest of the segment, Hannity controlled the direction of the debate.

“Did President Obama promise if you like your plan, you can keep your plan?” Hannity asked.

After a moment of silence, Dickinson conceded: “He did.”

“Have people gotten their plans cancelled?” Hannity pressed.

“They did, just like when George W. Bush stood on that aircraft carrier and said ‘mission accomplished,’” the Democrat said.

“Bush has been out of office for six years,” the host shot back. “Did he say if you like your doctor, you can keep your doctor?”

Again, Dickinson was forced to admit that the president “did say that.”

When Hannity then asked if Obama promised Obamacare would save the average family $2,500 a year on health care costs, he answered that he “may have.”

“No, he said it,” Hannity said. “So the bottom line is, he told lies and mistruths, the very criticism you have against us — and yet you support him. … You sound like a hypocrite.”

Changing the subject, Dickinson again said “all you do on your show is promote Obamacare and imply it is socialism.” He also claimed he has talked to a “ridiculous” amount of people who have this idea that Obamacare is socialism or “big government.”

“It is big government,” Hannity interrupted.

“It is not, you can choose your own plan,” he replied, adding that it was the insurance companies that kicked people off their plans because they are “greedy.”

Confronted again with Obama’s “lie of the year,” Dickinson admitted that “there’s going to be small errors” when dealing with legislative issues. Hannity pushed back, pointing out that seven million people have lost their plans so far.

Watch the rest of the tough segment here:





Watch the latest video at video.foxnews.com

(H/T: Mediaite)