Buy Photo Zander Morales of Des Moines holds pac-man icons while dancing in the crowds Saturday, July 11, 2015 at the 80/35 music festival in downtown Des Moines. (Photo: Rachel Mummey/The Register)Buy Photo

As the CFO of a military non-profit, I know some issues are truly non-partisan, that go above and beyond party politics just like our military. I’ve directed political campaigns and been a candidate myself, and I’ve seen just how ugly things can get playing political football, and how money influences the political discourse.

I was honored when a non-partisan organization like Iowa Pays The Price asked me to be one of its co-chairs. So far, one-third of all Super PAC money has been or will be spent here in Iowa leading up to the caucuses.I’ve come to the conclusion that we need more transparency and simplification in our campaign finance laws.

Allowing transparency is the best disinfectant for political partisan activity and would allow us to be better educated as voters. Current federal campaign finance laws impose a $2,700 contribution limit for individual contributions each in the primary and general elections. In Iowa, there aren’t any contributions limits for elections. I propose we do the same for federal races.

Reforming McCain-Feingold limits would place emphasis back on candidates and their campaigns. It’s up to us to hold our candidates and political parties accountable for the negativity by helping drive the process through the candidates and not the Super PACs. Special interest money doesn’t always serve the best interests of Iowans. The truth is we don’t know who’s funding our members of Congress. This must change. I believe in

transparency, disclosure and accountability through streamlining bureaucracy. After speaking with Democrats and Republicans, I believe these are issues we can fight together for and do what is best for everyday Iowans.

— David Niffenegger, Iowa Pays the Price co-chair, Des Moines

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1UvVG54