The gap is a consequence of the 2012 Supreme Court decision upholding major pieces of the Affordable Care Act. The law was written with the expectation that all states would expand Medicaid to cover nearly all low-income adults, so those who make less than the federal poverty level are not eligible for subsidies. But the court allowed states to opt out of expanding Medicaid, and 22 states, most of them Republican-controlled, have done so.

Photo

Without the expansion, Texas has some of the strictest Medicaid eligibility rules in the country, barring most adults from coverage unless their income is 19 percent of the poverty level or below — and, even then, only if they have dependent children. For a single parent with two children, for example, the number would be $3,760 a year.

But people like Laura Hillenbrand have managed to earn their way out of the coverage gap.

Ms. Hillenbrand, 28, earned $11,000 working part time at a wholesale bakery and a farmer’s market here in 2013. She listed that amount when she first applied for health insurance a year ago, and was deemed ineligible for subsidies because her income was under the federal poverty level of $11,670 for a single person.

But Ms. Hillenbrand wanted insurance so much — she rides her bicycle everywhere, she said, and worries about getting hurt — that she investigated further. After talking with a Foundation Communities counselor, she determined that she could add enough hours at the bakery to get above the threshold. Now she pays about $53 a month for her plan, with a subsidy of $141.

“I needed to earn more money in general, and I’m glad I could,” Ms. Hillenbrand said, adding that she had gone through a divorce and faced higher housing expenses. “But it’s pretty ridiculous that if you don’t make enough, you don’t get Obamacare.”

Some people are avoiding the gap through sheer luck. Deysi Torres, 20, a waitress who was recently reassigned to a busier shift, estimates that she will make $18,000 this year — about $2,300 above the subsidy threshold for her household of two. On her old shift, she said, she made $14,000 a year and would not have qualified. Ms. Torres smiled one recent afternoon as she enrolled in a Humana plan that will cost $28 a month, with a subsidy of $86.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Ms. Colvin said it was particularly hard for low-wage workers to bring their incomes above the threshold if they have several children, because the poverty level is higher for larger families. It is $27,910 for a family of five, for example.

“To get above 100 percent may be just way out of their reach,” Ms. Colvin said.

Children in low-income families, even in non-expansion states, are often eligible for Medicaid even when their parents are not. And even states with stringent Medicaid rules typically allow pregnant women and adults deemed severely disabled to receive Medicaid.

Fifty-four percent of people in the coverage gap already work full or part time, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation, often in low-wage retail or restaurant jobs. Half are Hispanic or black, and 86 percent live in the South.

In Austin, Nora Cadena, a Foundation Communities enrollment counselor, said she had met with a hairdresser who decided to start a dog-walking business to increase her income. Another counselor, Aubrey Stelly, said he had a client who took a weekend dishwashing job to escape the gap.

Photo

Elsewhere in the country, Amelia Goldsmith, an enrollment counselor with the Central Virginia Legal Aid Society, said one of her clients had picked up an additional day working at a day care, providing an extra $90 a month.

And Emily Brostek, who helps people sign up for coverage in Augusta, Me., said that while “it doesn’t happen a ton,” her group, Consumers for Affordable Health Care, had helped several people figure out how to increase their earnings just enough by picking up extra shifts.

Everyone applying for subsidies has to estimate his or her 2015 income, which can be tricky for people whose earnings fluctuate. If the estimate is more than 10 percent higher than the income listed on the applicant’s most recent tax return, the federal marketplace may ask for documentation.

“Some people might be nervous about putting on this application that they are going to make an income they’re not certain of,” Ms. Brostek said. “It’s up to them what they’re comfortable with.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But if someone who gets a subsidy ends up earning less than the poverty threshold, he or she will not have to pay back the subsidy under the current rules, said Cathy Kaufmann, enrollment program director at Families USA, an advocacy group.

Still, she said, “there needs to be some level of certainty in projecting their income as opposed to just wishful thinking, because in the end they are going to have to swear and attest that their application is true, and we see people take that very, very seriously.”

Although the law requires most people who remain uninsured to pay a penalty, those who earn less than the poverty level in states that have not expanded Medicaid are exempt. Instead, they fill out a form to get a so-called hardship exemption.

Ms. Ramos continues to struggle financially — she does not buy her three children Christmas gifts until she gets her tax refund — but believes she will be able to keep earning enough for subsidies. She has expanded the kinds of food she cooks and sells to include chicken mole and a special kind of tacos.

“The orders keep coming,” she said.