SOLON, Ohio – The city could face $200,000 in fines annually if changes are not made to the comprehensive healthcare plan it offers its employees. That means city workers will have to pay more.

The penalties are due to a regulation in the federal Affordable Care Act, referred to as the "Cadillac tax." But hefty fines can be avoided if changes are made to its healthcare plan before the tax is imposed in 2018.

Human Resources Director Nancy Stolarsky told the council's finance committee last week that the patient protection section of the law imposes a 40-percent penalty on any family plan valued at more than $27,500, or individual plans valued at $10,200.

"The fine is dependent on health care trends and where costs go with the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA)," she said. COBRA is the price workers, and their families, would pay for health insurance provided by the employer on the open market.

Based on that formula, Stolarsky said the city could be fined as much as $500,000.

To avoid the fine, Solarsky said the city will need to either raise the amount employees contribute to their healthcare, raise deductibles, or raise the amount of co-insurance.

Under federal law, workers who lose their benefits, due to a voluntary or involuntary job loss, have the right to continue with their employer's group plan for a limited time. With COBRA, the employee must pay the entire cost of the insurance with no subsidies from the employer.

Stolarsky said penalties are leveled if the employer's plan is "too rich."

Solon offers its employees one of the richest healthcare plans when compared to surrounding communities, according to the city. City employees contribute 7 percent toward their healthcare costs, while employees in most east-side suburbs pay 15 percent of their premium costs.

The city, which is self-insured, currently pays 100-percent coverage once an employee meets the $250 deductible for individuals or $500 deductible for families.

"In this day and age, 100-percent is considered rich. These kinds of plans are exceptionally rare in the marketplace," she said. "The richer the plan, the higher the penalties. And there isn't anyone who believes COBRA rates will go down, so there is no way around it."