Roughly 400 hearty souls enjoy a dip — and feel the love

Last February, with the Lyons branch of the St. Vrain River still trashed by historic flooding five months prior, the town's annual Polar Plunge took place in a portable swimming pool in the middle of a snow-covered park downtown.

"The fire department filled it with water from a hydrant," said John Daugherty, who helped start the event in 2010. "We plunged that, even though we couldn't plunge the river because it was too contaminated."

On Saturday, about 400 people, many decked out in Valentine's Day costumes heavy on the lingerie and red wigs, returned to the cleaned-up banks of the St. Vrain for a dip that, thanks to 65-degree warmth, was decidedly un-polar.

"I was actually hoping it'd be freezing outside," rookie plunger Ashley Touseull said. "That'd be more exciting."

"It makes it easier that it's not blowing sideways and cold, but I would've come anyway," said Tim Phelps, who lives outside of Lyons and donned a fuzzy, lime-green sombrero with a sheeny polyester button-down and tie-dyed pants.

Phelps was one of dozens of burly, bearded gentlemen — a demographic vastly overrepresented in Lyons — to take the plunge Saturday. For mountain folk like him, who've been through much gnarlier, the prospect of hopping into water in mid-February was never going to be daunting, regardless of the weather.

"I go to the hot springs and then I jump over the ice to get into the river," Phelps said. "I mean, I'm throwing chunks of ice around just to get in. I don't know if anyone here is more bad-ass than anyone else, though. It's just all fun."

Fun in the name of charity, that is: The organizers collected donations — as they have ahead of each Lyons Plunge — for the Golden Gang, a non-profit meal-providing and social programming service for the aging. They raised $7,395 this year, roughly double the event's previous record.

"We get to dip our giblets while helping show love to our elders," Daugherty, who also happens to be a rugged outdoorsman with unruly facial hair, told the crowd in a pre-plunge speech crammed with genital references.

"What the hell is Valentine's Day, anyway?" he continued. "Here in Lyons, we're trying to make it a celebration of the love that permeates this little town. We're trying to create an opportunity for us to dress up, paint hearts on ourselves, get crazy and have fun in the icy water of the mighty St. Vrain."

Molly Morton, a self-described "fair-weather plunger," felt the love.

"Love of community, love of the water," she said, before offering a more existential take. "This is what keeps us all alive — the water. It's great to be a part of this, even in winter. We're all 80 percent water, so why not get into it?"

Though Morton was one of many who admitted they might've abstained in nippier climes, purist veterans like Berthoud's John Way insisted a true plunger would never allow the temperature to dictate his or her approach.

"You get the initial shock over and then it's straight adrenaline," Way said. "Have fun, and get outta there as fast as possible."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness