Since the summer, there’s been an eye-catching reversal in relative U.S. and German bonds.

The differential between yields on 10-year U.S. Treasury bonds and equivalent German bonds, known as the spread, has reversed a broad trend that’s been in place over the past two years.

In late 2011, 10-year German bonds, called bunds, yielded 0.3 percentage points more than equivalent U.S. T-bonds. By this summer bunds were yielding a full percentage point less. But the trend has since turned around. Spreads have tightened a third of a percentage point and bunds now yield around 0.7 percentage points less than equivalent T-bonds.

So what’s going on?

While the U.S. market has been buffeted by concerns the Federal Reserve would start trimming back its bond purchases and, more recently, that the U.S. government would default on its obligations, Germany has been bathed in optimism.

German industrial surveys, business and consumer sentiment have all been encouraging to say the least–particularly expectations components. After a downtrend during much of 2011 and 2012, Germany is on an optimistic course again. Business surveys are broadly at pre-crisis levels.

Optimism has been reinforced by a sense that other euro zone economies are also starting to at least find a base. Improved domestic demand in these economies ought to boost demand for German goods. Meanwhile, Germany has been exporting more to the rest of the world.

Chancellor Angela Merkel‘s strong showing at the recent general election–even if negotiations over the governing coalition continue–makes it clear that Germans are broadly happy with how things are going.

At the same time, Americans are growing more worried. U.S. GDP forecasts have been pared back in the wake of the government shutdown. And there have been some recent misses on the data front, not least retail sales and consumer confidence numbers.

So perhaps it’s little wonder that the yield differential between German and U.S. debt should be shrinking. And that the euro should be appreciating against the dollar.

But some of this German optimism might be misplaced, warns Brendan Brown, head of economic research at Mitsubishi UFJ Securities in London.

First, German growth projections hinge heavily on expectations on strong domestic business investment. But German firms have been investing heavily abroad and there are few signs this is likely to change anytime soon.

Second, German consumption remains subdued. Although wages have picked up and are rising in real terms, government policy continues to favor output and exports over domestic demand.

And third, the global economy–on which German exporters depend–might not pan out so positively as investors seem to believe. There are worries about the U.S. China’s recent rebound might not have legs. And although the rest of the euro zone seems to have bottomed, solid growth remains a way off.

That’s not to mention tail risks like the possibility of renewed banking crises within the euro zone or political crisis in the region.

For now, the tightening of spreads between bunds and T-bonds is likely to continue. The momentum is certainly in that direction. But there are a few reasons to think it might not last either.