By Bre Payton | Watchdog.org Virginia Bureau

PURCELLVILLE — Two parks, one question: Should the federal government be maintaining Civil War sites?

The National Parks Service has closed all of the battlefields it maintains and have even tried to barricade a few more historic sites that they don’t run.

But two battlefields remain open, are well maintained and untouched by D.C. politics.

Last week, I took a detour from Route 7, and wound through a Leesburg neighborhood in a search for Ball’s Bluff Battlefield Regional Park.

My search stopped at a familiar cul-de-sac where the entrance of the battlefield starts.I was expecting to get stopped by barricades as I entered the park, but there was nothing put up to stop me.

Even the gated entrance to the small national cemetery swung open easily.

I confess, I was a bit disappointed that there were no goofy barricades for me to jump over. As a descendent of a Confederate army general, I figured my defiant intentions were enough to justify an ironic personal experience.

Why was my trip so effortless? Because the battlefield is a regional park owned and operated by the Northern Virginia Regional Park Authority, which has been completely ignored by the shutdown.

And the small national cemetery is surrounded by 215 acres of regional park. So even if the feds decides to barricade the entrance, visitors can walk up to the cemetery and peer over the roughly 3-foot tall brick wall.

In a spurt of curiosity, I searched for other battlefields that are still open.

I found Pamplin Historic Park and National Museum of the Civil War Soldier. A privately owned, 424-acre, historic site located in Petersburg, the site features a restored plantation, re-enactors, a Civil War museum and battlefield.

The battlefield is where the beginning of the end of the Civil War happened, said Brenna Ralston a marketing specialist for Pamplin Park said.

The federal government shutdown has been good for business though, because Civil War tour groups, which sometimes are booked months in advance, are left with fewer options.

The park has increased its hours of operation in order to keep up with the increased demand, Ralston said.

Contact Bre Payton at bpayton@watchdog.org or follow her on Twitter @Bre_payton.