NASHUA – Obamacare “navigators” from Planned Parenthood claimed success after helping roughly a dozen consumers as they signed up for health care at an Affordable Care Act Enrollment Fair at Nashua Community College on Saturday morning.

“It was a huge success,” said Jamie Chabot, 24, an Affordable Care Act navigator from Manchester. “We were busy the whole time.” ...

Please sign up for as low as 36 cents per day to continue viewing our website.

NASHUA – Obamacare “navigators” from Planned Parenthood claimed success after helping roughly a dozen consumers as they signed up for health care at an Affordable Care Act Enrollment Fair at Nashua Community College on Saturday morning.

“It was a huge success,” said Jamie Chabot, 24, an Affordable Care Act navigator from Manchester. “We were busy the whole time.”

Chabot said she “reached” nine consumers who were eligible for health insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act, which was signed into law in 2010. Chabot was joined by one other navigator at the fair, Eireann Aspell, 25, of Derry, who said she was also able to reach nine consumers.

Aspell and Chabot counted family members of those who enrolled, who may not have been at the fair but will still be covered under a relative’s plan, in the total number of consumers reached.

Chabot said she became a navigator because of her belief that “people should have access to health insurance regardless of income.”

“Preventative health care will bring down the cost of health care overall and help people catch things early,” Chabot said. “It improves the quality of people’s lives and it improves the health care system.”

Chabot also expressed her hope that New Hampshire’s legislative body will expand Medicaid protection. According to the State Employees’ Association of New Hampshire, expanded Medicaid would make an additional 58,000 consumers eligible for the lowest premiums under the Affordable Care Act.

“From the bottom of my heart, I hope it gets expanded,” Chabot said. “Everyone needs an option that works for them.”

Chabot’s sentiments were echoed by John Thyng, a member of the State Employees’ Association of New Hampshire, who worked the sign-in desk at the fair. Thyng said he has had to tell several people looking for coverage that they are “too poor” to be eligible for the Affordable Care Act’s lowest premiums because they also qualify for expanded Medicaid.

A Supreme Court decision that ruled Obamacare as constitutional also ruled states have the right to decide whether to participate in expanded Medicaid.

New Hampshire has yet to accept federal funds for expanded Medicaid.

Even so, Thyng said he was encouraged by Saturday’s turnout at the fair, and he said he believes better health insurance coverage will specifically benefit many of the state’s government employees.

“One of the reasons this is so important is there are thousands of part-time state employees without the ability to get employer coverage,” Thyng said, adding that part-time employees do not have access to the same level of health insurance coverage as full-timers.

Victoria Chesterley, an adjunct professor at Nashua Community College, was one of those part-time state employees. She chose to sign up for Obamacare with her husband, Mark Gaydos, at the fair.

“The navigators were very helpful,” Chesterley said. “My husband had trouble logging in (to healthcare.gov) earlier in the week, but today went very smoothly.”

Chesterley’s husband, Mark Gaydos, said he was excited to have access to cheaper health care, but said he questions why so many oppose Obamacare.

“I’ve done a lot of headscratching about that,” Gaydos said. “I struggle to see the downside of having people covered.”

Obamacare navigators at the fair said most enrollments take anywhere between 30 minutes and two hours, and pointed out that longer enrollment times are usually attributed to those signing up with larger families.

The enrollment period for Obamacare will last until March 31, and those wishing to have health care coverage under the Affordable Care Act by Jan. 1 have until Dec. 14 to enroll.

Bradford Randall can be reached at 594-6557 or bhrandall@nashua

telegraph.com. Also, follow Randall on Twitter (@Telegraph_BradR).