Rachelle Cicero, 38, has worked as a waitress most of her adult life. It’s hard work, she said, but she enjoys it, despite the fact that her feet often hurt after a long shift.

It’s something she’s willing to put up with, she said, but in September, she had just quit a job she had held for five years and was about to start a new one when she began having excruciating pain in her side.

“I didn’t even get to start the new job,” she said.

Cicero said her doctors couldn’t figure out the cause of her pain. They diagnosed her with shingles, even though she didn’t have the characteristic rash, and sent her home with pain and antiviral medications and told her she couldn’t work because her illness was contagious.

When the pain persisted, she went back, and a CT scan uncovered a cyst on the lining of her heart. These types of lesions are benign, and Cicero said her doctors didn’t seem overly concerned. They did, however, take her off of her pain meds.

“I don’t even know if it was ever shingles at all,” she said.

A few days later, the pain got worse, and Cicero went back to the ER and insisted on a chest X-ray.

“I knew something was really, really wrong,” she said. Her doctors then discovered two broken ribs on her left side.

“I have no idea how that happened,” she said. She can’t recall ever being injured there.

By October, Cicero was feeling the same pain on her right side, but didn’t have another appointment for a while and didn’t know if those ribs there were broken, too.

Cicero was frustrated by the slow pace of the process of diagnosing her pain, and was worried that it might be something serious.

“I don’t want to wake up one day and have my kids find me dead,” she said. In the meantime, she had no means of supporting herself and two of her children — a 19-year-old and a 9-year-old.

When the medical bills started coming in, she could barely look at them. One invoice alone was for $4,000. There’s no way she can pay them, she said. “My credit is shot.”

When she’s working, Cicero puts in 35 hours a week and brings home about $1,500 a month. After the Affordable Health Care Act was passed, she knew she needed to get coverage, so she tried applying for Medicaid, but was turned down because she earns too much. Cicero then tried to get a policy through a health exchange, but even the premiums for the cheapest one were more than she could afford.

Being uninsured, she has failed to comply with the law, so a penalty was assessed against her income tax return this year. That penalty was later withdrawn, she said, because her income was so low.

“How can I make too much money to get Medicaid, but not enough to pay the penalty?” she wondered.

Although Cicero has had no income since September, she is not eligible for any benefits, aside from a one-time emergency payment of $200 from her local social services department.

By the end of October, she was behind with her electric bill. The social services department referred her to Roanoke Area Ministries, where she received a grant through the Emergency Financial Assistance Program, which is supported by the Roanoke Times’ Good Neighbors Fund.

RAM could not cover the entire bill, so Cicero also got help from her mother and a friend, she said.

At the time she applied for the grant, Cicero was determined to go back to work, even though she is in too much pain to lift heavy trays.

“I’m going to go,” she said. “I have to. I hope I’ll be OK.”

She is grateful that her employer has left her job open, even though she had never actually worked for them.

“I’ve been really blessed that they’ve kept me,” she said.

Cicero has an older son who is out of the house and working on his own, but she won’t allow her 19-year-old daughter, a student at Virginia Western Community College, to earn any more than it takes to cover her part of the family’s phone bill.

“She’s extremely smart,” Cicero said, and is studying to become a nurse. Cicero herself had to start work at an early age. She doesn’t want balancing a job with going to school to affect what she hopes will be a brighter future for her daughter than the one she had.