Governor-elect Gina Raimondo on Sunday said she's nominating Elizabeth Roberts to lead the state Executive Office of Health and Human Services with the expectation that Roberts will make EOHHS a national leader in controlling growing Medicaid costs.

Leading Health and Human Services is "a tremendously important role in Rhode Island," Raimondo said during a news conference at her transition office. "As I said many times on the campaign, every Rhode Islander deserves access to high-quality affordable healthcare, and we are very fortunate in Rhode Island to have a national expert in Lieutenant Governor Roberts. She happens to be one of smartest people I know as it relates to healthcare, the delivery system, and she's shown time and time again a willingness and ability to be innovative."

Raimondo's intention to name Roberts as Health and Human Services secretary was first reported Friday (item #1) by Rhode Island Public Radio.

With ongoing questions about the state's ability to pay for its version of Obamacare, Raimondo signaled she's looking for Roberts to help impose budget discipline on healthcare costs, particularly Medicaid, the subsidized program for the poor. Rhode Island's current budget includes about $2 billion in Medicaid costs, although the federal government pays for a large part of that.

"A big part of the reason that I've decided to nominate Elizabeth," Raimondo said, "is because I think she's going to do a terrific job controlling costs, especially controlling Medicaid costs, but doing it in a way that is humane, in a way that doesn't hurt people. But the fiscal reality is that we have to get control over our Medicaid costs, and I believe she's going to lead Rhode Island to that place."

Roberts is wrapping up the second of two terms as lieutenant governor. She previously served as a state senator from Cranston and has long been interested in healthcare policy. Roberts, a Virginia native, came to Rhode Island to attend Brown University and later married into one of the state's political dynasties. Roberts was an active supporter of Raimondo's gubernatorial campaign.

Raimondo said she hasn't decided if outgoing HHS secretary Steven Costantino, a former House Finance chairman, will have a role in her administration.

Roberts said Costantino has started the effort to better control growing costs for Medicaid, the subsidized healthcare program for the poor, by "paying for care differently, delivering services differently. This is not a Rhode Island problem, this is a national problem, and the coverage expansion of Obamacare is going to help us."

Raimondo said controlling the cost of healthcare will be a key issue as she targets the elimination of the state's ominous long-term structural deficits. "We have to do it," she said. "We have to commit ourselves to being the national leader in controlling Medicaid costs, but do it in a way that's creative and innovative, so we don't hurt people in the process."

Roberts faces confirmation by the state Senate. The Executive Office of Health and Human Services is composed of four state departments: Health; Human Services; Children, Youth and Families; Behavioral Healthcare, Developmental Disabilities & Hospitals.

Roberts said she expects her first steps to include working with Raimondo to shape leadership for the departments that make up HHS, and setting healthcare priorities in the governor-elect's first budget, which expected to be presented in February.