Buy Photo Meridian Health, the owner of Neptune’s Jersey Shore University Medical Center and five other hospitals in Monmouth and Ocean counties, is in talks to merge with Raritan Bay Medical Center. (Photo: FILE PHOTO )Buy Photo



Meridian Health's proposed merger with Raritan Bay Medical Center would expand the hospital chain's reach into Middlesex County and provide a financial lifeline to Raritan, executives from the two companies said Wednesday.

It also would take another step in consolidating an industry that has been under increasing financial pressure since Obamacare went into effect four years ago.

"For us, it was a natural to begin to look beyond our borders," John K. Lloyd, Meridian's president, said in an interview. "As we think about population health in the future, we believe we need greater critical mass of populations we serve."

Wall-based Meridian owns six hospitals in Monmouth and Ocean counties, including Jersey Shore University Medical Center in Neptune and Ocean Medical Center in Brick, making it the Shore's biggest hospital chain – and biggest employer, with 12,000 workers.

Raritan Bay Medical Center has hospitals in Old Bridge and Perth Amboy. It has 2,000 full- and part-time workers.

Kimball lays off nurses, consolidates with Monmouth Medical

Four months

The two companies said Wednesday they would explore a merger over the next four months. A final deal would need to be approved by regulators.

The proposed merger comes as hospitals adapt to the Affordable Care Act, a law that is trying to slow the escalating cost of health care. In short, the law wants consumers to be treated outside of expensive hospital settings when they can. It has forced hospitals to cut expenses and look for other ways to generate revenue, such as expanding urgent care services.

Michael D'Agnes, Raritan Bay Medical Center's president and chief executive officer, said the hospital has been losing ground in recent years to other Middlesex County facilities such as Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital and Saint Peter's University Hospital, leaving it in tough financial straits. The company didn't have access to capital it needed to invest in its existing buildings or expand.

Meridian Fitness replaces former pool store in Brick

"From our standpoint, we've had a struggle financially the last few years," D'Agnes said. "Our access to capital is limited — if not (nonexistent). Any plans we have were stymied."

Hospitals have been consolidating in Central New Jersey. Meridian, for example, merged with Bayshore Community Hospital in Holmdel in 2009 and Southern Ocean Medical Center in Stafford in 2010. And they have come under more pressure since the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare as it is popularly known, has taken hold.

Buy Photo Meridian Health is in talks to merge with Raritan Bay Medical Center, whose Old Bridge hospital is seen in this file photo. (Photo: FILE PHOTO)

Medicare penalties

In a bid to tamp down on health care costs, Medicare now sharply penalizes hospitals if their patients are readmitted within a month of being discharged. And hospitals have scrambled to add clinics beyond their traditional campus to treat patients, ideally, less expensively and closer to home.

Still, the bigger hospitals get, the more negotiating power they have with insurance companies for higher reimbursement rates. A 2010 study of private insurance plans by the Massachusetts Attorney General's Office found health prices vary among hospitals and doctors, not based on the quality of care, but on how much leverage they had in negotiations.

Executives said it was too soon to know if there will be layoffs if the merger is finalized.

Meridian's Lloyd said the company likely would upgrade Raritan Medical Center's technology system and the Old Bridge hospital's emergency room. And Raritan Medical Center could follow the industry's lead by adding smaller health care facilities in neighboring towns.

"The opportunity is in Woodbridge, Edison, Sayerville," D'Agnes said. "The opportunity to grow services and attract more patients is there."

Michael L. Diamond: 732-643-4038; mdiamond@app.com

MERIDIAN HEALTH HOSPITALS

• Bayshore Community Hospital, Holmdel

• Jersey Shore University Medical Center, Neptune

• K. Hovnanian Children's Hospital, Neptune

• Ocean Medical Center, Brick

• Riverview Medical Center, Red Bank

• Southern Ocean Medical Center, Stafford

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1spFWIr