Tom Faudree, regional organizer for Southern Colorado for the ColoradoCare Yes campaign, speaks to a group of interested citizens Wednesday evening at Shepherd of the Hills Lutheran Church. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

What ColoradoCare would cover Comprehensive benefits must include primary and specialty care; hospitalization; prescription drugs and medical equipment; mental health and substance use services, including behavioral health treatment; emergency and urgent care; preventive and wellness services; chronic disease management; rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices; pediatric care including oral, vision and hearing services; laboratory services; maternity and newborn care; and palliative and end-of-life care. Additional benefits can be provided (http://coloradocareyes.co/initiative20) .

Proponents of the ColoradoCare initiative are working to bring universal health care to all Coloradans.

Entire families would be covered under the plan.

Sen. Irene Aguilar, M.D. is the force behind the creation of ColoradoCare, a Colorado based health-care system aimed to replace Obamacare that would cover all Coloradans. Tom Faudree, regional organizer for Southern Colorado for the ColoradoCare Yes campaign, spoke to a group of interested citizens Wednesday evening at Shepherd of the Hills Lutheran Church.

"If you want to know how this is funded, the short answer is we are cutting private insurance companies that are based outside of the state of Colorado," he said. "We are cutting them out of the equation. The United Health Care Corporation paid its CEO last year alone $66 million, and he's only one of several CEOs who make over $21 million per year."

Advertisement

He said even with the passage of Obamacare, in 2019 there will be 31 million people in the U.S. who still will be uninsured, and 400,000 of those will be in Colorado alone. He said 803,000 Coloradans, or 15.2 percent of the state's population, have trouble paying medical bills, and about 870,000 Coloradans this year are under-insured.

Under ColoradoCare, premiums would be collected from Coloradans based on income.

"The subsidies that have been coming into Colorado from the Affordable Care Act will continue, and that will then be administered by ColoradoCare," Faudree said.

Medicaid waivers and a Health Care Premium Tax on payroll and non-payroll income collected by the Department of Revenue also would help fund the program. Employers would pay 6.67 percent of payroll into the tax and the employee would pay 3.33 percent, or the employer could choose to pay the entire 10 percent for the employees. ColoradoCare replaces the medical portion of Workers' Compensation. Self-employed individuals would pay 10 percent of their income. Medicare beneficiaries would be able to enroll in a ColoradoCare Medicare Advantage Plan, or keep regular Medicare B and D coverage, and use ColoradoCare for supplemental coverage. ColoradoCare would be exempt from TABOR.

With ColoradoCare, there would be no deductibles, and no co-payments for designated primary care or preventative treatment services.

"ColoradoCare is going to enact efficiencies because of the economy of scale," Faudree said. "The whole state of Colorado is going to be covered — that gives us power to bargain, even on pharmaceutical purchases, drugs and medicines."

Residents Nancy Kovalcik, Roger Ratcliff and Donna Young are spearheading the effort to promote ColoradoCare locally and garner signatures for the petition that is due in October.

Ratcliff says it only makes sense to support the initiative because it saves Colorado more than $5 billion, and it covers everyone.

"In Colorado, we are lucky enough to have the citizens initiative, and we can go around the Legislature," he said. "This also replaces Obamacare, which is not as efficient as it could be — they may have made an improvement, but this is a bigger improvement."

Young said she strongly believes everybody should have access to health care and that it should be affordable.

"There are a lot of people who don't have health care, or there are many people who face medical bankruptcies," she said. "Other countries have much better systems — they cover everybody, it's less expensive, and it just seems like we should go there."

If voters approve ColoradoCare in 2016, it will go into effect in 2019.

For more information on ColoradoCare, visit http://coloradocareyes.co. The ColoradoCare Economic Analysis with 2016 and 2019 Projections may be found at www.couniversalhealth.org.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com