Edward Lazear, former chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors, has written an interesting op-ed at Politico Magazine on some of the healthcare reforms developed by President George W. Bush’s administration mid-way into his second term.

Lazear presents these reforms as an alternative to Obamacare, pointing to the recent findings in the Congressional Budget Office report showing that employment will drop by 2.5 million full-time workers because of the disincentives created by health insurance subsidies in the law. He explains that the 2007 reforms would have made healthcare more cost-effective and efficient. What’s more, it would have made health insurance more accessible to Americans who couldn’t afford coverage.

“The Bush 2007 plan achieves these goals,” Lazear wrote. “The basic structure is to offer all Americans a standard tax deduction, in 2007 set at $15,000 for families and $7,500 for individuals. The deduction would apply to payroll tax — both employee and employer contribution — as well as to income tax.”

“Importantly, the size of the deduction would be independent of the amount spent on the plan. Any taxpayer who has a plan that includes catastrophic coverage gets the full deduction, irrespective of the plan’s cost,” he continued. “That is important because it creates the incentives to choose efficiently.

Lazear explains that the problem with the current system is that it’s tied to employment. Instead, he argues, that offering tax credits to individuals would create “appropriate incentives to shop around.”

“Other features of the Bush proposal,” Lazear notes, “include allowing the purchase of plans across state lines to enhance competition and reform of medical liability to reduce the amount of defensive medicine.”

It’s not necessarily all that should be included in a healthcare reform proposal, but it’s a solid proposal and a helluva lot better than Obamacare. Similar policy ideas have been proposed by Rep. Tom Price (R-GA) and, separately, the Republican Study Committee Obamacare alternative.

But Lazear’s column begs this question: Why didn’t the Bush administration make healthcare reform a priority sooner than 2007?

Think about it, folks. Democrats had just routed Republicans and won control of both chambers of Congress and President Bush’s approval rating was stuck somewhere between 30% and 40%, both of which were largely because the United States was mired in an unpopular and unnecessary war in Iraq.

What’s more, President Bush had the opportunity to address healthcare reform in 2003, before his political capital had withered to the point at which it was virtually nonexistent.

Instead of pushing healthcare alternatives that would have expanded coverage and shifted coverage away from employment, the administration instead expanded Medicare, adding hundreds of billions to budget deficits over the next decade to an already broken entitlement program.

It’s true that the administration did win some noble healthcare reforms in otherwise fiscally irresponsible Medicare expansion bill, mostly related to expanded health savings accounts (HSA). But those reforms could have been passed on their own or as a part of a comprehensive healthcare reform bill that empowered Americans and delinked health insurance from employment.

Instead, President Bush expanded one broken entitlement while paving the path for another: Obamacare. By the time his healthcare reforms were presented to the public, he was too politically damaged to enact any significant domestic policy without congressional Democrats signing off on it.

None of this is to disparage the healthcare reforms offered by the Bush administration as described by Lazear, because they’re worthy of discussion. It’s just that this op-ed is a reminder, whether Bush-era Republicans realize it or not, of one of the biggest domestic policy failures of his presidency.