Photo by Rich Renomeron

Welcome back to Overheard in D.C., DCist's weekly column of funny, strange, and poignant things that our readers and staff overhear and send in. We've been doing it since 2006, and check out the archives here.

Young people these days, am I right?



Overheard of the Week

Wednesday morning at Filter coffeehouse:

A man in forties is talking to a young barista about a clothing store where nothing was neat or folded: "Millennials are the plague."



We can't have Overheard in D.C. without your submissions! Email your Overheards to overheard(at)dcist[dot]com and don't forget to include who was talking, to whom, and in what context.

After the jump, more youngsters, some oldsters, and maybe some mediumsters.

------



Trump fans in D.C.?



CVS on Bladensburg & Maryland Ave NE:

Older man on cell phone: "This is the worst CVS in DC, stuff everywhere, no one seems to be working"

Second older man: "Thanks Obamacare."

------

Hotttt

A small office in Dupont shortly before Valentine's Day:

A group of 20 and 30-something women are talking about their parents' romantic stories and anniversaries.

Woman: "I don't think my parents do anything romantic. The last romantic thing they did was... me."

------

Agreed

On the Orange line between L'Enfant and Smithsonian this morning:

Two late 20s guys are talking.

Guy 1: "On the Internet, A-N-A-L means 'am not a lawyer.' Ironic, right? Since lawyers are anal."

Guy 2: "Jesus, that's awful."

Guy 1: "It's awful awfulness."

------

You think?

At the Red Derby:

A couple walks in and looks confused, poking their heads around and walking to the back room, then back to the front.

Guy, opening the door that says "ROOF" on it in big letters: "I think this is the roof!!"

------

Well, then it's ok

Whole Foods parking lot, Silver Spring:



Apparently healthy woman, getting out of her just-parked car right in front of the entrance to an elderly woman driving with handicapped plates: "It's not a handicapped spot! Take a closer look!"

------

A B.A., you say?

On the bus in Alexandria on February 3:

A 20-something woman is using her outside voice to explain to her friend why Bernie Sanders is better than Hillary Clinton. She says Clinton's foreign policy experience is bad, and mentions the Iraq resolution at length.

Older woman sitting in front of her: "Excuse me, do you know what the Iraq resolution says?"

Younger woman: "It authorized military force in Iraq."

Older woman: "But have you read it? Do you know what it actually says? You should read it before you go telling stories."

Younger woman: "I haven't read it but I know what it does. I know what I'm talking about. I have a BA in foreign affairs!!"

Older woman: "I just want you to read it so you know what it says."

Younger woman: "THIS WASN'T A CONVERSATION INVOLVING YOU!" (She then gets off the bus in a huff.)

------

Or Valentine's Day training

Saturday evening two weeks ago at the Harris Teeter on Kalorama:

A well-dressed man runs down the stairs with an orchid in hand. A couple in their mid-twenties is walking down the stairs behind him.

Woman: "What do you think, make-up flowers or date?" (sees bottle of wine in his hand) "Oh, definitely date."

Man: "Yeah, that's some Netflix and chill right there."

Woman: "But the adult, I-have-a-job-and-a-decent-salary version."

------

Millennials are the plague



Outside Whole Foods on P Street:

A twenty-something guy to his friend: "Do you think we could convince someone to pay us a salary to go to college?"