Wilton's Verrilli in running for nation's top prosecutor

Wilton resident Donald Verrilli Jr. is seen as one of the top contenders to be the next attorney general following last week's announcement that Eric Holder would be stepping down after six years.

NPR named Verrilli as a frontrunner to replace Holder, who intends to stay on until his successor is confirmed.

Almost immediately after the announcement, news outlets across the country started listing potential replacements and Verrilli, the current solicitor general, was named by all major media sources as one of the leading contenders.

It doesn't surprise the people of Wilton that Verrilli is on that list, with several people in Town Hall expressing excitement, along with a former classmate.

"He was a great guy. A smart guy," said Wilton High Class of 1975 classmate Mark Ketley. "It's been great to watch him progress."

According to his Justice Department biography and his Senate confirmation hearing, Verrilli has led a distinguished career.

Since graduating from Wilton High in 1975, Verrilli went on to Yale, where he earned a degree in history before heading to Columbia Law School. He served as a law clerk to Judge J. Skelly Wright of the United States Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit and to the U.S. Supreme Court Justice William J. Brennan Jr.

Verrilli then joined the private sector and worked for Jenner & Block in Washington, becoming the co-chairman of the firm's Supreme Court practice. He argued at least a dozen cases before the Supreme Court, including MGM Studios Inc. vs. Grokster, which established legal precedent for the unauthorized distribution of copyrighted works.

During his time with Jenner & Block, he also took on several death row cases pro bono, including Wiggins vs. Smith, which established principles governing the right to effective counsel at capital sentencing.

Verrilli got married before accepting a position in the Justice Department in 2009 as an associate deputy attorney general. He later served as deputy counsel to the president before being confirmed in 2011 as solicitor general. In that role, Verrilli argued cases before the Supreme Court, including the defense of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, which the court affirmed.

During Verrilli's confirmation hearing in 2011, U.S. Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse, D-R.I., characterized him as one of the nation's most distinguished legal minds.

"A solicitor general must be a lawyer of the highest intellect and character. Mr. Verrilli clearly meets this bar. He is among our nation's most respected and experienced appellate advocates," Whitehouse said.

Whitehouse himself has been named as a potential replacement for Holder.

Verrilli is not the only one with Connecticut ties said to be in the running for the attorney general post. U.S. Sen. Richard Blumenthal, a former state attorney general, has also been mentioned, along with Massachusetts Gov. Deval Patrick and Preet Bharara, the U.S. attorney for New York's southern district.

Ketley, executive director of the Wilton Trackside Teen Center, said it would be a proud moment for the town to have Verrilli become the nation's top lawyer and lead the Justice Department.

It is somewhat amusing that Verrilli is working for the Obama Administration, since Verrilli's mother is a fixture in the town's Republican Party, he noted.

Rose Marie Verrilli was a three-term first selectman from 1975 to 1981 and is well respected in the community.

"She gave me my first job," Ketley said. "She's very smart. It's a good family."

Rose Marie Verrilli politely declined Friday to comment on speculation about her son's future role at the Justice Deparment, and Verrilli's brother could not be reached for comment.

While Donald Verrilli Jr. has not lived in Wilton since 1975, he does visit and most recently gave a speech at the Wilton Library in May.

Verrilli was confirmed by the Senate to his current post by a vote of 72 to 16. Former solicitors general of both parties wrote letters of recommendation for him and even U.S. Sen. Orin Hatch, R-Utah, admitted Verrilli was more than capable for that post.