The community of New Castle is hosting a big event for veterans next weekend.

On June 14 the town will host its second annual Patriotic Festival.

Mobile users: Tap here for video

"It doesn't seem like it's been that long. We don't know where the years have gone," said World War II veteran Herman Stanley.

Now, 70 years later, Stanley is looking back on his time serving in World War II. He's one of more than 15 veterans to be honored at the event.

"Mostly they want to know what went on in China, Burma and India because it wasn't publicized during the war. It was on the back burner, so to speak," said Stanley.

It will be the second time Stanley has attended the Patriotic Festival, which may be one of the largest gatherings of World War II veterans in the state in recent years. And it's happening a week after America celebrated the 70th anniversary of D-Day.

All of the veterans will share their stories. Col. Glenn Fisher has a favorite story of Stanley's time overseas.

"When he was shot down they were close to enemy territory for 27 or 30 something days. You know you get combat rations that you eat, but they don't last you that long, and I said, 'What did you eat?' He said, 'Well we'd watch the monkeys and whatever they'd eat, we would eat.' So it always fascinated me," said Fisher.

Fisher is one of the youngest World War II veterans at age 87. He enlisted at just 15 years old.

"When the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor on Sunday, December 7, 1941, it was a Sunday, and Monday I went down to the Army enlistment office and tried to enlist," said Fisher.

It took two months for Fisher to enter the Army, eventually battling across France into Germany.

He believes this festival is a great way to honor the greatest generation who are passing away at a rate of up to 1,000 per day.

"We're so thankful that we're alive. It's one of the first things I do every morning in my prayer, 'Thank you Lord for letting me live another day,'" said Fisher.

The New Castle Patriotic Festival kicks off at 11 a.m. Saturday.

It starts with a parade from Henry County High School with the World War II veterans serving as grand marshalls.

At 11:30 a.m. there will be presentations at the courthouse square. From noon to 2 p.m. the New Castle First Baptist Church will host a meet and greet with the vets.

Music and dancing will continue until 10 p.m.