Sioux Falls, SD

This summer has been unique for Lincoln High School U.S. History teacher Adam Morrison, who’s been spending most of his time with his young son, Jakob.

"He'll turn one on what would have been the first day of school," Morrison said.

After a public vote moved the Sioux Falls School District start date back after Labor Day. Because of the switch, teachers and students have an abnormally long summer break.

"It kind of feels like we have snow days coming up, like planned snow days, and we're certainly going to enjoy it while it lasts, but there is that feeling that, that we're going to pay for it at some point," Morrison said.

Morrison was against the change in the district's school schedule which pushes the start date to after Labor Day.

"There is a little bit of feeling of dread that our kids are falling behind," he said.

Nevertheless, he's enjoying his time off.

"We're with our son all day, and so we're playing all the time, we are playing between nap times, and everything, so that has been our entire summer, has been raising him," Morrison said.

Lincoln senior Alisha Auen says that the change gives her cheer team a boost.

"We don't have to worry about school and homework and stuff for the first few competitions, and we're not always missing school for the first two competitions instead, so we're actually like benefiting that way," Auen said.

Semester tests will now come after the Christmas break.

"I think a lot of the students academic-wise, don't really like it, just because of the testing," Auen said.

Lincoln senior Kade Walker is preparing for the football season. He concedes that some students like the change.

"But there's a lot of teachers who are, a lot of teachers and a lot of AP students are kind of mad, ‘cause the AP tests don't get moved back with the later start date," Walker said.

Andy Middlen teaches 8th grade math at Patrick Henry Middle School. He is spending time on his bike, and says the change in the schedule might not last.

"From talking to other teachers, too, I hear that, they'll probably go with it for a few years, and I can see it changing back to the way it was, based on high school students and the AP tests and semester tests," Middlen said.

"They're going to negotiate a change, I'm sure of it," Morrison said.

For now though, he has time with Jakob.

"We're seeing him grow every day, and we’re enjoying that," Morrison said.

The district’s calendar can be found here.