JERSEY CITY, N.J. — There are times during a game when Broncos receivers Demaryius Thomas and Wes Welker run a crisscross pass route so close together that their shoulder pads touch.

“We try to be precise,” Thomas said. “You are trying to make it hard so that the defender can’t get through, they can’t follow. They have to go underneath or go behind, and that gets our guys open.”

Call it a rub route, call it a rubout or call it a pick play, but call it highly effective. It’s a central component of Denver’s high-octane offense, something the Seattle Seahawks say they’ll be braced for Sunday.

“It’s something we are certainly aware of,” Seattle safety Kam Chancellor said. “You have to get around them, be athletic and get around.”

Rub routes have multiplied in recent years because of the incredible accuracy of quarterbacks such as the Broncos’ Peyton Manning, New England’s Tom Brady, New Orleans’ Drew Brees and Green Bay’s Aaron Rodgers. Because those type of quarterbacks are so accurate and can dissect a zone defense with ease, defenses were forced to go to tight, physical, man-to-man coverage at the line of scrimmage.

In the face of that pressure, offenses countered with a variety of pick plays and sophisticated routes. The Broncos, for instance, align receivers in “bunch” or “stack” formations in order to free up space for them to operate. In essence, the Broncos designate one receiver to come off the line and get tangled up with a defender, thus freeing up another receiver. The goal is keep the defense from getting its hands on all the receivers, which disrupts the timing of the routes. Picks and rubs are most often used in crucial situations — on third downs and often in the red zone, where space is squeezed — when teams look to beat tight coverage.

Critics call it cheating, claiming that receivers are essentially committing offensive pass interference. But Broncos offensive coordinator Adam Gase said rub routes are just one more tool for an offense to exploit.

“Everybody runs different forms of the play, not just the Broncos,” Gase said. “It’s about getting a (defender) to change directions.”

No team uses picks or rub routes more than the Broncos, except perhaps the Patriots. For example, in their Week 12 meeting, which New England won 34-31 at home in overtime, the teams combined to run 12 pick plays in the second quarter alone, six by each team.

That’s ironic, especially given that Patriots coach Bill Belichick unleashed a tirade the day after Denver beat New England in the AFC championship game. In that game, Broncos receiver Wes Welker collided with New England cornerback Aqib Talib, knocking Talib out of the game on a pass play to the Broncos’ Thomas, who was the “underneath” receiver on the rub route. Belichick called the incident “one of the worst plays I’ve seen.”

Dean Blandino, the NFL’s vice president of officiating, said “under current rules, this is a legal play.”

Mike Pereira, a former vice president of NFL officiating and now an analyst for Fox Sports, defended Denver’s use of pick plays.

“Everybody assumes that when they hear the word ‘pick,’ it’s illegal,” Pereira said. “But not all picks are illegal, and Denver has run them for years.”

Pereira pointed out that receivers are allowed to make contact with defenders within 1 yard of the line of scrimmage, which is why a lot of teams set up so-called bubble screens for their receivers. One of Manning’s favorite plays is throwing a bubble screen to wide receiver Demaryius Thomas, which allows him to use his strength and speed to break free as he cuts to an open gap.

Pereira also said it’s legal for a receiver to get in a defender’s way downfield, so long as the receiver doesn’t intentionally initiate contact while the ball is in the air. If he does, it should be called pass interference.

Pereira, however, also acknowledged that officials face tough judgment calls when it comes to pick plays.

“If you look at the Welker play, technically it was offensive pass interference because his pick occurred when the ball was inches away from Demaryius Thomas’ hands,” Pereira said. “It was one frame on the tape, so fast I can hardly stop it on the frame. It was like 1/26th of a second. So it was a bang-bang play, and it was impossible for the official to discern it.”

The Seahawks will try to combat pick plays by jamming Denver’s receivers at the line. Seahawks opponents often complain that Seattle’s defensive backs frequently get too physical with receivers without getting penalized. Expect plenty of hand-to-hand fighting at the line of scrimmage.

The Seahawks are confident they can disrupt the Broncos’ pick plays.

“You have to know when it’s coming,” safety Earl Thomas said. “They have little tells and keys. Everything is attack mode. When you know, you just go. You don’t second-guess yourself. Play with the absence of fear.”

While the Broncos will be looking to rub out defenders, the Seahawks vow to get physical.

“At the end of the day, watching film, I don’t think anyone ever hits them. They just take the pick play,” linebacker Bobby Wagner said. “We’re looking, we’re very aware of the pick plays and when they show up, we’re going to hit them.”

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp