GREENVILLE, N.C. - Five passing plays of 20 yards or more and four touchdowns headlined the offensive production, while two turnovers, backfield penetration and a consistent dose of third down stops highlighted the defensive effort during East Carolina's second intra-squad scrimmage of the spring Saturday morning at Dowdy-Ficklen Stadium.

The controlled contest, which was played under mostly cloudy skies and in seasonal temperatures, consisted of approximately 70 plays featuring all levels of the program's current depth chart.

The Pirate defense, although it surrendered completions of 54, 51, 29, 26 and 21 yards, limited the offense to just 2.4 yards a rush in 28 total carries.

"The competitive spirit from both sides was great," head coach Ruffin McNeill said. "One of the other things we talked about was being to play the next play. When the defense made a great play, the offense came back from it. If the offense made a play, the defense rebounded from it.”

A trio of quarterbacks combined to complete 53.5 percent of their passes as sophomore Kurt Benkert, junior Blake Kemp and redshirt freshman Ray Smith connected on 23-of-43 attempts for 285 yards and half of the contest's scores.

Benkert, who finished with an eight-of-17, 153-yard effort, accounted for three of the big plays after hitting senior tight end Bryce Williams (54 yards), junior Davon Grayson (51) and senior Chris Hairston (21) to go along with his 12-yard touchdown strike to sophomore Trevon Brown.

Kemp was 10-of-18 for 78 yards, 29 coming a throw to Grayson which marked his first completion of the morning, while Smith finished with a five-of-eight, 54-yard performance that included an eight-yarder to Jonathan Stanley for a score and the game's lone interception that was turned in by sophomore Trevian Hicks.

“The offense threw the long ball well today," McNeill explained. "I thought the quarterbacks operated the offense well. Kurt has been in the system a lot longer, but Blake and Ray did a good job today.”

Despite the big plays, ECU's offensive unit was again slowed by six penalties and a defense that racked up eight tackles for lost yardage. The Pirates were also stingy defensively on third down opportunities, making stops on 16 of 20 occasions.

Junior DaShawn Benton, sophomore Travon Simmons, junior Demetri McGill and senior Johnathon White contributed team-best four-tackle outings. Additionally, McGill and White were each credited with TFLs, while redshirt freshman Drew Turnage and junior Drayvon Fairley were responsible for the other turnover - stripping and recovering a fumble, respectively.

Sophomore Marquez Grayson led all ground gainers with 44 yards on six carries. Hairston, who also caught a pair of passes for 25 yards, scored from two yards out and Anthony Scott added a one-yard scoring plunge to account for the other pair of touchdowns. Sophomore Jacen Murphy (19 yards) and junior Isaiah Jones (16) topped receivers with three catches each.

“The execution was a lot better, handling ourselves in situations offensively and defensively with substitution patterns," McNeill added. "I liked the communication of our staff today.”

East Carolina will open its fourth and final full week of spring work Monday with a shells session beginning at 3:50 p.m. on Hight Field inside the Cliff Moore Practice Complex.