Advertisement - story continues below

For many months, Western Journalism has been telling you about the near-endless complaints from schools, students, and parents over efforts by Michelle Obama to push the unpopular food guidelines of her federally mandated nutrition program.

The first lady’s “healthy eating” pet project — criticized in school lunchrooms and cafeterias across the country for both compliance costs and unappealing menu items — is purportedly aimed at reducing childhood obesity.

Now comes another round in the government’s effort to tell people how and what to eat. In a massive, far-reaching 571-page report to the federal agency in charge of ObamaCare — the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) — the Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee (DGAC) details how it proposes to “transform” America’s food system.

Advertisement – story continues below

The expansive mission sounds as though it fits right in with Barack Obama’s early and prophetic promise to “fundamentally transform America.”

The Washington Free Beacon reports that among the many sweeping proposals to overhaul the country’s food production and consumption patterns and programs are calls for “the adoption of ‘plant-based’ diets, taxes on dessert, trained obesity ‘interventionists’ at worksites, and electronic monitoring of how long Americans sit in front of the television.”

In addition, the proposed guidelines — which are significant because they are used as the basis for government food assistance programs and nutrition education — call for people to radically change their eating habits to help combat global warming.

Advertisement – story continues below

Of course, many skeptics doubt that human activity has much, if any, real impact on the earth’s temperature patterns or long-term climate.

Still, this powerful federal committee responsible for nutrition guidelines and how they interact with government healthcare initiatives, tax policies, and behavioral preferences doesn’t take into consideration any doubts about the threat of global warming.

Consequently, the government committee is recommending that people eat less meat so that fewer cows, pigs, chickens, and turkeys are raised. The recommendations to cut back on meat consumption would, supposedly, serve the greater interest of maximizing “environmental sustainability” to reduce problems from climate change.

“The major findings regarding sustainable diets were that a diet higher in plant-based foods, such as vegetables, fruits, whole grains, legumes, nuts, and seeds, and lower in calories and animal-based foods is more health promoting and is associated with less environmental impact than is the current U.S. diet,” DGAC said. Advertisement – story continues below Trending Stories Glenn Beck Warns About What Comes Next on The Slippery Slope

Campaign Manager Makes Announcement About Donald Trump’s Running Mate

Justice Clarence Thomas Faces Internet Anger Over Dissenting Vote

In its initial reaction to the voluminous report that calls for cutting back especially on red meat in order to save the planet, the North American Meat Institute slammed the recommendations as “flawed” and “nonsensical.”