Fruitcakes are more of a cartoon character than an actual food. More often depicted as on the butt end of jokes than on tables around the holidays, fruitcake suffers from a few key flaws:

1. It's pointless.

2. It generally doesn't taste very good.

3. It's a bland dumpster fire of a dessert.

4. It's about as exciting as the prospect of getting trapped on a couch with your relatives, who just decided that now is a good time to discuss Obamacare and the fact that you're still single.

We have a dessert that incorporates fruit. It's called pie. It's awesome. Fruitcake, meanwhile, takes a few things that are great -- cake, fruit, maybe some nuts -- and adds them together to create something awful. It's like some sort of cursed baking calculator that keeps telling you 2 + 2 = -6. Fruitcake is anti-cake. It's a menace against Christmas and must be stopped.

Fruitcake

Fruitcake, it turns out, has a decent variation in quality, depending on where you buy it.

Thanks to the research efforts invested by MassLive (trying three fruitcakes), we can now determine that there are three types: kinda good, mediocre and abomination (AKA "Kill it with fire!").

The problem with fruitcake isn't that it tastes bad by design. One of these did taste "kinda good." It technically functions as a dessert that could please people who eat it, but really just seems like a waste.

Trying to sell someone on fruitcake is a lot like trying to sell them on a custom-made ride-on lawnmower that can do 35 MPH. Sure, it's technically legal for some reason, but that doesn't stop people from looking at you funny, worrying about your health and having serious concerns about what other dark secrets your hiding. In short, don't eat fruitcake.

So I ate fruitcake -- and tried three of them.

I should not have tried three of them. That was dumb. This is why we can't have nice things.

So what do they taste like

I ordered three fruitcakes for this experiment, going with a mail-order fruitcake from Harry & David as the "nice" one. I also grabbed a middle-of-the-line in-house fruitcake from Stop & Shop as the "OK" one. Then, I picked up a brick of Claxton's World Famous Fruitcake while I was at Big Y one day (the bad one).

The Harry & David one was actually pretty good. Of course, that's the fruitcake minority. The standard fruitcake fare?

Horror.

The kinda good one: Harry & David 80th Anniversary Fruitcake Confection

Well-balanced and crunchy, the Harry & David fruitcake hardly qualifies as a "cake." It's more like a caramelized fruit-nut cluster bound together at the bottom by a little bit of dough. This is a good thing.

Harry & David skirts around the fruit cake issue by going heavy into the nuts and fruit, which meld together nicely. The cherries have that real nice Maraschino sweetness and texture. I'm usually not big on pineapple, but they're simply sweet and not too pineapple-y here.

The nice level of nuttiness prevents the whole thing from simply becoming a giant glob of sugar, which is nice. Despite the haphazard nature of the whole thing, it sticks together pretty well in slices, even though it's barely a cake.

I'd gladly eat this again.

The mediocre one: Stop & Shop

This has a weird balance of cake and fruit. It tastes very much like a giant Fig Newton log, with a variety of fruits worked in to meld into strange flavor combinations. The fruit is a wild card and a little all over the place. The cake, though, tastes exactly like the outside of a Newton.

It's not bad, but not great either. The cake in general is light on the nuts, which is good since the nuts weren't great.

I'd be pretty neutral about eating this again.

The abomination: World Famous Claxton Fruitcake

It's chock full of nuts and fruit. It looks inviting. Don't fall for it's siren's song.

At first glance, it looks similar to the Shop & Stop one, only denser. But when you take a bite, there's no immediate flavor that comes out at it. For a moment, it doesn't taste like much. Then, it hits you with this haze of rancid funk, like someone shoved a handful of raisins and wonder bread in their pocket, sat on a flight to Fresno, stuff the fetid mess into a used mall Santa costume and threw it at you.

It tasted like a moist pineapple Dum Dum.

According to the packaging, this thing's been around since 1910. That's impressive. By my count, the only other thing in this country that sucks as hard as this fruitbrick and has stuck around for over a century is Congress.

I'm horrified at the prospect of eating this again.

The Final Word

This picture summed up things pretty well: