The employer mandate’s far-reaching regulations are likely to not only affect working adults, but also students employed by the very universities they attend.

Students at the University of Colorado at Colorado Springs and at schools across the University of Colorado system worry the Affordable Care Act’s employer mandate could have negative affects on how student employees are defined if they work more than 30 hours each week. According to The Scribe, the University of Colorado at Colorado Springs’ student newspaper, school officials there are receiving little guidance from the federal government regarding how to treat such workers, ones who under the law are classified as full-time.

“It will have a change definitely on how we calculate time worked,” Lisa Landis, assistant vice president for Employee Services for the University of Colorado system, told The Scribe. “We are getting very little guidance from federal regulations.”

According to the employer mandate, a company must define a full-time employee as anyone who works at least 30 hours per week. And many students working at the university fit the bill. The law requires businesses with more than 50 employees to provide such full-time workers health insurance.

“The limitation is very unfair, especially for students who are financially independent like myself,” Kristen Robards, a junior at UCCS who works at the Copy Center, told The Scribe. “For them to limit that I don’t think is morally right.”

University officials have been asking for clarification on how to treat student-employees for months, but much to no avail, Susan Szpyrka, vice chancellor of administration and finance for UCCS, told The Scribe.

“It isn’t saying that someone can’t work 35 hours in one week or 39 hours in one week,” she said. “It’s saying that we’re still trying to figure this out. I’ve been asking for advice on this now since probably July.”

Szpyrka noted that the university has not decided if they will limit students’ hours to less than 30 per week, as many businesses have done in preparation for the employer mandate. But such a decision hinges on if the 30-hour-per-week threshold will be enforced as a weekly limit or as a yearly cap of 1,560 hours.

The University of Colorado system conducted a review on how a 1,560-hour-per-year limit would affect student employees. When examining student employees who worked between Oct. 2012 and Sept. 2013, officials found that no students crossed such a threshold. However, between May 2012 and April 2013, 42 undergraduate students at UCCS worked more than 1,560 during that 12-month span.

Students working 40 hours a week — which would deem them a full-time employee under the employer mandate — may have to work both on-campus and in conjunction with employers off-campus, Szpyrka said.

Uncertainty surrounding the employer mandate and working young Americans has begun to arise despite the provision’s 2015 implementation. The Obama administration has yet to give guidance to employers on whether paid interns working more than 30 hours a week would be required to receive coverage, and many institutions, including universities, are lessening hours for adjunct professors as the mandate’s start date inches closer and closer.

h/t The Washington Examiner