If there is one word in real estate circles that conveys the new politics of commercial development in New York, it is Kingsbridge.



The name of a long-shuttered Bronx armory, it connotes a seminal moment in the annals of city projects. Just as the failed Westway highway proposal of the 1970s and '80s showed the power of environmentalism to kill a project, Kingsbridge did so for the cause of so-called living-wage jobs.



In two weeks, almost four years to the day after a mall planned for the cavernous armory was defeated by Bronx politicians, the final chapter in the Kingsbridge political saga is expected to be written. Having rejected the mall plan for its failure to guarantee compensation of $11.50 an hour to the 1,200 permanent workers it would employ, Bronx elected officials are poised to secure approval for its successor, a proposed indoor ice-rink complex that would be the world's biggest. Living-wage job count: 270.



Despite the lower number, City Council sign-off on Dec. 16 of the final major land-use application during the Bloomberg administration would send the mayor out on a high note. Although the ice-rink complex will require far fewer employees than the Related Cos.' mall plan, it will offer better wages—satisfying local politicians and activists—and promises to make the northwest Bronx a destination for a sizable unity of hockey players and figure skaters who otherwise would never visit.



"If this is the last one, it's a very worthy final approval for Mayor Bloomberg," said NHL Hall of Famer Mark Messier, the CEO of what would be the Kingsbridge National Ice Center. "This will be a big step in a borough that's been bypassed for a long time."



At the time of the mall proposal's demise, administration and industry insiders expressed befuddlement that a borough in economic straits would turn up its nose at $310 million in private investment. Today, the Bronx's 12.2% unemployment rate is the highest of any county in the state. (Brooklyn's 9.6% is second highest.) But in Bill de Blasio, the city is about to get a mayor who aims to require higher wages at any development benefiting from a city zoning change.



"This facility will really set forth an economic engine in the Bronx," said Mr. Messier, a former New York Rangers star. "It can be the first step in revitalizing a neighborhood that really needs it."

Neighborhood use

If the rink complex meets his predictions, it could be held up as justification for economic-development policy focused on the quality, not the quantity, of created jobs. "I suspect we might see more of this movement," said Bruce Berg, a political-science professor at Fordham University.



The $275 million Kingsbridge National Ice Center, or KNIC, would convert 750,000 square feet of abandoned space into a state-of-the-art complex featuring nine rinks. As part of a community-benefits agreement between local groups and developer KNIC Partners, 50,000 square feet will be devoted to neighborhood use.



"I know this is said all the time, but I truly believe that this is simply an unprecedented and historic agreement," said the Rev. Que English of Bronx Christian Fellowship, who played a key role in the community-benefit negotiations, which are now a standard element of any City Council-approved development. "It will bring unprecedented investment into the borough with the worst economic reputation, and pave the way for responsible development in the future."



The Rev. English gave KNIC particular credit for seeking out community input and approval before it began the formal review with assistance from the city's Economic Development Corp.—a decision that the developer asserts was just common sense.



"Unless the community really wanted us there, we weren't going to request help from EDC," said KNIC founder Kevin Parker, a former asset-management chief for Deutsche Bank AG. "As opposed to the normal process, we wanted to deal with the community beforehand and see if they really wanted what we were offering to build in their neighborhood, rather than go forward with the city, force the issue, and then ask the community what they wanted."

Councilman's machinations

Both the Rev. English and Mr. Parker believe the groundswell of local support for the rink complex should make council approval a formality. But some last-minute political machinations by Councilman Fernando Cabrera have brought a fitting uncertainty to the armory's long and twisting tale.



Mr. Cabrera, who as the local council member has tremendous sway over the ice complex's fate in the legislative body, has taken positions both for and against the project. He was widely thought to be a major backer of a competing plan by Youngwoo & Associates to bring a market, a fitness center and high-tech movie theaters to the armory.



According to numerous reports, Mr. Cabrera met with KNIC in March as it was finalizing the community-benefits agreement and requested that $100,000 a year be donated for the next 99 years to a group called Community Action Unlimited, a charity that he presided over before his election in 2009.



Mr. Cabrera's office denies such a request was made and says he is assessing the project on its merits. Local council members often use their home-ice advantage as leverage when major projects come knocking. Mr. Cabrera—his current stance inscrutable—has remained in negotiations with developers.



As a member of the Bronx Borough Board, Mr. Cabrera was part of a unanimous vote by that body on Nov. 20 to approve KNIC and send it to the council. But a spokeswoman from his office said the borough board vote did not signal his official approval of the ice center.



"He continues to evaluate the project," she said.



Mr. Cabrera's decision-making is coming under fire from community leaders and city officials.



"Anyone that would vote 'no' on this project is indicating that they don't care about this city," said the Rev. English. "I'm very confident that those we've elected will do right by the community they have the honor to represent."



Mr. Messier, himself no stranger to gamesmanship, is already looking to the future.



"We'll be there for 100 years dealing with kids, improving their lives," Mr. Messier said. "Kids, community and jobs for locals are what this project stands for."

Get Crain's Daily Alert Sign up for our FREE daily email newsletter. A summary of the day's top business and political headlines from the newsroom of Crain's New York Business. More Newsletters ›

Comments