MLK Day gives Glenda Robinson hope for the future

Related Longmont residents remember civil rights movement

A Q&A with Longmont civil rights activist Glenda Robinson

Martin Luther King Jr. Day brings up mixed emotions for Longmont resident Glenda Strong Robinson.

On one hand, Robinson is filled with pride at the progress she made with thousands of other men and women during the civil rights movement. On the other hand, she is rattled by recent setbacks, like Michael Brown's death in Ferguson, Mo., and their impact on race relations today.

Robinson, 66, grew up in the segregated South, during the Jim Crow era.

Glenda Strong Robinson, 19, a junior at Memphis State University, seen in the cropped photo bottom right, marches on Main Street in Memphis, Tenn., on April 8, 1968, during a Memorial March following the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. (Photo by Dr. Ernest Withers, Courtesy of Glenda Robinson)

"I couldn't go to any public place, the library, the parks, the pools, the zoo, restaurants," said Robinson, who grew up in Tennessee in the 1950s and 60s. "If you stopped at restaurant you had to go around to the back and they'd serve you from a window. You paid your money, but you couldn't come in and sit down."

In 1966, during her freshman year at Memphis State University Robinson joined the Black Student Association, which was formed on the predominantly white campus earlier that year.

She and other members of the group were trained in Martin Luther King's nonviolent approach.

"Cover your essential parts, your head if you can, your middle extremities, fold your knees, whatever you have to do," Robinson said. "But you don't fight back, and that was effective."

Advertisement

Robinson began participating in rallies, sit-ins and marches across the state and country.

On March 22, 1968, she marched with more than 10,000 activists behind King and other civil rights leaders during the March for Justice and Jobs following the death of two black sanitation workers.

The group marched down the streets of Memphis toward Clayborn Temple AME Church with firefighters, holding hoses ready to spray, lining one side of the streets and police with K-9s on the other. Marchers were struck by rocks being thrown at them by the opposition, but the activists stood their ground.

"I thought I could change the world," Robinson said.

It began as a peaceful march that erupted in a riot, Robinson said. Activist leaders such as King were whisked to safety while the rest of the marchers fled to Clayborn Temple for shelter. But the church provided no security from the opposition.

If you go What: Honoring Dr. King through Action community celebration When: 2 to 4 p.m. Monday Where: Silver Creek High School, 4901 Nelson Road, Longmont More info: Contact Carmen Ramirez at 303-651-8444 or email carmen.ramirez@ci.longmont.co.us

"Someone came in and dropped tear gas bombs, so I know what tear gas smells like, feels like, looks like. We were gagging," Robinson said. "That was significant. I just didn't understand. We're fighting for freedom."

All of the marches were significant, Robinson said. They were raising awareness about injustice and building up to what Robison describes as the climax of the movement, the Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial March.

Glenda Strong Robinson poses for a portrait Wednesday. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

The march was held April 8, 1968, four days after King's assassination, and became a defining moment for equality, Robinson said.

"Thousands of people came from everywhere, all races, creeds, colors because they believed in the basic rights of freedom," Robinson said. "I had a Jewish rabbi on my left side holding my hand and a Catholic priest on the right side as we sang 'We Shall Overcome' walking down Beale Street."

"It was so profound and meaningful because it says you thought you killed the dreamer but the dream just begins to become a reality," she said. "I knew our time, victory, had come in the civil rights movement."

Despite the progress since the memorial march, Robinson is feeling conflicted as MLK Day approaches.

The deaths of Michael Brown in August and Trayvon Martin in 2012 highlight the challenges that still exist in America's race relations, Robinson said.

The struggle has shifted from basic human rights, she said, to inequality among social classes.

Robinson tries to stay positive, and the national holiday honoring King gives her hope for the future.

"We're not there yet," Robinson said. "But thank God we're not where we used to be."

Whitney Bryen: 303-684-5274, wbryen@times-call.com or twitter.com/soonerreporter.