Get your nose in the know with the launch of the first ever Perfume Society



Calling all fragrance lovers: scent expert Josephine Fairley is about to send our pulse points racing with the launch of the very first Perfume Society

'This is the most exciting time in fragrance's history. There's a buzz about scent like never before'

Funny how a throwaway remark can change a life. The world has YOU to thank for The Perfume Society, which launches this very day, because it began as a Perfume Panel in the magazine for its readers: ten perfumistas, clustered around a table at B.Hive in Covent Garden, there to review ten of the new season’s scents. As I passed the fragrances and smelling strips around, along with Lorna McKay – the fragrance expert I’d enlisted to talk about the history of perfume and how best to explore the world of scent – I commented: ‘You know, it’s so weird that there’s no Perfume Society.’

Shivers went up my spine in a way they probably hadn’t since I discovered the two squares of 70 per cent dark chocolate on my husband Craig Sams’s desk, which led to the idea for Green & Black’s, the world’s first organic chocolate business that he and I started together in 1991 and ran for nine years. Then YOU’s editor Sue Peart, who had come along to the Perfume Panel to meet the readers, laughed and said: ‘Well, Jo, I think you should set one up!’

The Perfume Society's Lorna (left) and Josephine compare notes

I sat down at my iPad, Googled ‘perfume society’ and found nada. The fourth Google listing was Steak Appreciation Society. When I next logged on to my domain-name provider and found that scentsociety, perfumesociety and fragrancesociety were all sitting there waiting for me, I pounced, realising that a serious organisation for scent-lovers like me really didn’t exist, anywhere.

Two and a half years later, it does – with Lorna (former fragrance and beauty buyer at Harrods, visionary behind the Liberty Perfumery and the woman who brought countless brands, including Liz Earle, to QVC) as my partner in the venture.



Lorna is as nuts about fragrance as I have been since the days I used to spend my pocket money on Aqua Manda, which I’d proudly display on my dressing table, alongside bottles of Dior Eau Fraîche, Chanel Cristalle, YSL Rive Gauche and Hermès Calèche, which my father brought back from his business travels. Grown-up tastes for a teenage girl, perhaps, but the scent of any one of them has the power, even now, to Tardis me through time to that dormer-windowed bedroom, listening to Radio Caroline and drenching myself in (I liked to think) liquid sophistication when I should have been doing my homework.

Josephine in Grasse with rose petals destined for Chanel's iconic fragrance No5

I’ve always loved the description – by the remarkable Helen Keller, who was both blind and deaf – that ‘smell is a potent wizard that transports you across thousands of miles, and all the years you have lived’. No wonder so many of us are fascinated by scent and want to know more.

Now, for the past 23 years, since I won a Jasmine Award for writing about scent, I’ve had access to the most charismatic figures in the world of perfumery: the bottle designers, creative directors and evaluators (who nanny a fragrance from idea to launch, such as Estée Lauder’s Karyn Khoury), as well as the ‘noses’ themselves (from Chanel’s extraordinary Jacques Polge and Christopher Sheldrake to Guerlain’s genius Thierry Wasser), and dozens of other gifted craftspeople. I’ve also been lucky enough to see the roses and jasmine for Chanel’s iconic No5 being harvested and distilled in Grasse.

And right now, I believe, is the most exciting time in fragrance’s history. Lorna and I liken it to what happened 20 years ago in food, when the chefs came out of the kitchen, talking about ingredients and terroir, igniting us with their enthusiasm and turning us into foodies. That excitement is now being mirrored in fragrance: perfumers telling the stories behind their creations, artisan producers springing up. There’s a buzz about scent, from the high street to haute perfumery, as never before.

JOSEPHINE'S FRAGRANT FIVE

Since I’m lucky enough to smell every new perfume that spritzes its way on to the market, my dressing table boasts many, many scent ‘loves’; however, here are five that I always return to and what they mean to me. Frédéric Malle Lipstick Rose With its armfuls of roses and violets, it is exactly like the scent of the inside of my mother’s handbag – pure I-want-my-Mummy nostalgia. Chanel Les Exclusifs Sycomore I’m crazy for the scent of vetiver: smoky, earthy, deep. For me, this is a go-to scent when I need my feet planting firmly on the ground after living with my head in the clouds (or cyberspace). 4711 The bottle’s barely changed since it launched in 1792, and nor has the scent. An affordable cologne that I splash on liberally in summer – it’s as refreshing as a long lemonade with a sprig of mint tucked inside. Another teen favourite that takes me right back. Schiaparelli Shocking Bought for me by my husband Craig in 1991 on the trip to Paris that inspired our shocking-pink wedding. This vintage bottle sits at the back of my lingerie drawer, in the dark – but when I unstopper it I’m right there, in my bright-pink frock. (Rumour is Shocking might be coming back – hurrah!) Guerlain Mitsouko Less well-known than Guerlain’s Shalimar, Mitsouko is the favourite scent of Luca Turin and Tania Sanchez, authors of Perfumes: The A-Z Guide – and it’s my ‘desert island’ scent, the snugglesome, so-chic swirl of peach, rose, jasmine, patchouli, oakmoss and more, which I return to time and again.

It took a year of toing and froing for Lorna and me to even figure out what our Perfume Society should be. A massive, informational website, for a start: history, the stories behind the perfume houses, nose interviews, the latest scent news, ingredient explanations; 220,000 words and hundreds of ingredients later, perfume has now taken over from ‘The History of British Confectionery, 1956 to the present day’ as my possible Mastermind subject.



But, much more than that, The Perfume Society is an opportunity for fragrance-lovers to have exclusive VIP (Very Important Perfumista!) access to some of those incredible noses and creators at events, to learn how to put together perfumes themselves at workshops and to simply get together with friends to form a local Perfume Group (like a book club without the homework, we call it) via a monthly activity we’ll be sharing.



Above all, perfume lovers will get to smell things in a way that will turbocharge their enjoyment of fragrance, leading to a new appreciation of notes, harmonies and scents. Rather in the way that joining a wine society transforms your appreciation of wine.

Like most good ideas, it’s grown into something much bigger than our original notion, with Fragrance Education boxes available to subscribers (featuring smelling notes – again, like a wine society), and How to Improve Your Sense of Smell sessions around the country. (For which I’ll be sharing a workshop I gave for The School of Life based on wisdom taught to me by three of the world’s top noses. The session has the potential to transform anyone’s sense of smell from a six-stone weakling – ‘the fallen angel of our senses’, as Helen Keller put it – into a veritable Arnold Schwarzenegger, through a simple daily exercise.)



The little newsletter we told fragrance brands about – who, as excited as we are about The Perfume Society, are giving us access to their archives and creators – has morphed into a downloadable magazine, The Scented Letter. And we’ll soon be unveiling FR.eD: the virtual fragrance adviser Lorna came up with in the 1990s, which has had a 2014-style makeover for The Perfume Society website.

A team of two became a team of three, then four, and now five of us. Flat out. As my fourth start-up (I somehow opened an organic bakery and a health centre after selling Green & Black’s), there have been a gazillion things to do – though I quell any rising panic with the knowledge that most of them only ever need to be done once. But the truth is, it’s the most exciting thing I’ve ever done (Green & Black’s notwithstanding) and – so she tells me – that Lorna’s ever done, too.



I see women (and plenty of men) everywhere waking up to the realisation that fragrance is an art form – like music or painting. But the difference is we can wear it every day, triggering memories of people, places, experiences and creating memories of ourselves, too, for those around us. (And sometimes, just sometimes, making someone fall a little bit more in love with us…)

And it’s all happened because of one person’s throwaway remark. Thanks, YOU!







JOIN JOSEPHINE AT THE CHANEL PRIVATE SALON

To celebrate the launch of The Perfume Society, YOU has teamed up with Chanel for an intimate event on Monday 9 June at the Chanel flagship boutique on London’s New Bond Street

Set in the private Chanel Salon, which evokes the inherent elegance, audacity and refinement of the House and Mademoiselle Chanel’s famous apartment in Paris, The Perfume Society co-founder Josephine Fairley will be in conversation with renowned fragrance expert Joanna Norman.

Together they will explore the rich heritage of the perfume house, which, in 1921, changed the course of history with the launch of Chanel No5 – now the world’s most famous fragrance. Josephine and Joanna will also discuss the stories behind the House’s other fragrances and share how to discover your perfect signature scent.

This is a special opportunity to step into the world of Chanel fragrance in the most luxurious of settings. There will be two exclusive sessions at 3.30pm and 6pm and places are limited to just 15 attendees per session.

CHANEL, 158-159 New Bond Street, London W1





HOW TO BOOK



If you would like to attend one of these exclusive events call 020 7493 5040 between midday and 6pm today, or 10am to 7pm Monday to Saturday with your credit card to hand. Tickets cost £30 per person.



Terms and conditions

There are limited places. Tickets are sold on a first-come, first-served basis. Each reader may buy up to four. Tickets are non-refundable and cannot be exchanged. You reserves the right to change any element of an event due to circumstances beyond its reasonable control. By attending the event you agree to be photographed at the event and waive all rights, including moral rights, in any photography. *£30 redeemable against purchase.



HOW TO JOIN THE PERFUME SOCIETY For £25 a year, subscribers will receive a Fragrance Education box upon joining, including smelling strips and a Note Book; invitations to events, sampling sessions, workshops (including the free-to-subscribers How to Improve Your Sense of Smell sessions); eight downloadable issues a year of The Scented Letter and a subscriber card, among other benefits. To join, visit perfumesociety.org.