Feminist. Pro-choice. Pro-gay marriage. Catholic.

For this odd cocktail of beliefs, I’ve often called myself a “bad Catholic.” I’ve sat uncomfortably in a no man’s land between the sometimes discriminatory and tone-deaf doctrine of the church, and the faith that I cherish.

But the wonderfully bull-headed feminist activist American nuns and central characters of the new documentary Radical Grace have little time for shame. Their decades-long struggle to drag the Catholic Church into modernity is an act, in the words of Sister Christine Schenk, of “radical faithfulness.”

The documentary, which had its world premiere at Hot Docs in Toronto on Tuesday, is a funny, fast-paced window into the battle between U.S. nuns and conservative elements of the Catholic Church over the past four years.

The nuns’ aggressive politicking in support of President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act — which covered family planning — has drawn the ire of U.S. bishops. In 2012, the Vatican condemned the nuns for “radical feminist themes incompatible with the Catholic faith.” (If women’s equality is “radical,” Schenk quips in the film, “guilty as charged.”)

The film asks how these women can stay in a faith that demeans their work and questions their spirituality. For that matter, how can I?

But we are far from alone. In the U.S., 60 per cent of Catholics support gay marriage, according to Pew Research polling from 2014. A 2013 Ipsos Reid survey found three-quarters of Canadian Catholics agree women should be ordained as priests, and even more said priests should be able to marry.

The late Sister Jean Hughes, an affable woman who worked with ex-convicts, wonders in the film if she’s “propping up an organization that doesn’t believe that same things I do.”

Or maybe, as U.S. Bishop Thomas Paprocki, appointed by the Vatican to oversee the U.S. nuns, states in misogynistic arrogance, “The question is: Are you still religious? Are you still nuns?”

I put that question to Schenk, but she countered: “Who is drawing the lines?”

“Too many Catholics grew up handing over their own moral conscience decision-making to whatever the Father said,” she told me. “That kept them infantile in their faith.”

Even progressive Pope Francis — champion of the poor and a more open church — rejects women’s ordination.

“He doesn’t get it with women, still,” Shenk said.