Editor’s note: North Carolina chose not to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act. What does that mean for individuals, service agencies and hospitals? Today’s Focus piece answers those questions.

ASHEBORO — An estimated 9,000 people in Randolph County do not have health insurance today because North Carolina did not expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act (ACA).

Based on income levels reported in census data, that’s how many adults may have been eligible for the program, according to figures from the Randolph County Department of Social Services (DSS).

But not getting access to Medicaid is only part of their trouble.

Many of those Randolph residents find themselves in what is sometimes referred to as a “doughnut hole”: They do not qualify for Medicaid, but they also do not earn enough to qualify for subsidies and tax credits designed to make buying insurance affordable under the ACA, also known as Obamacare.

“They are truly caught in that gap — it’s really a gap,” said Devin Griffith, vice president of care continuum and support services at Randolph Hospital. “They simply are not going to be able to afford insurance on the marketplace.”

People who do not have health insurance typically ignore health concerns small and large, typically seeking treatment only when a sickness or ailment gets so bad it is impossible to ignore — and is usually more difficult and costly to treat.

Medicaid in North Carolina

Medicaid is a health insurance program funded with federal and state dollars. It varies from state to state, depending on how lawmakers decide to structure it.

Richard Park, business officer for the Randolph County DSS, characterizes North Carolina’s Medicaid program as “one of the most robust there is in existence.”

But the medical assistance portion of the program, for which eligibility is based on income and assets, covers only part of the population: Adults 65 and older or individuals who are blind or disabled; families with children under 18, individuals 19-21 and pregnant women.

“The expansion would have opened a new category,” said Sonja King, DSS income maintenance administrator.

That category would have been for adults ages 22-64.

The federal government pledged to subsidize 100 percent of Medicaid expansion (not including administrative costs) as part of the ACA for the first three years and 90 percent of the costs to the year 2020.

N.C. Gov. Pat McCrory and the GOP-led General Assembly declined to expand the program, pointing to existing cost overruns in the program and operational problems, saying that the state’s Medicaid program was “broken.”

McCrory signalled in July that he was open to revisiting expansion under certain conditions. On Wednesday, Dr. Aldona Vos, the state secretary of health and human services, told legislators that the state’s Medicaid finances are in much better shape now and that her staff is collecting information to offer McCrory possible ways to expand the program. Some state senators have discussed moving Medicaid from the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) control.

Medicaid in Randolph

Of the 163 employees in the Randolph County Department of Social Services, 41 work full time taking applications and determining Medicaid eligibility. Last year, they processed an average of 890 Medicaid applications every month.

As of June 30, this year, 26,378 Randolph County residents receive some type of Medicaid coverage.

According to Park, the average amount of Medicaid that flows into Randolph County monthly is $13 million, or about $150 million a year.

Payments go directly to health-care providers — hospitals, doctors, dentists and drug stores — not to Medicaid recipients.

The economic impact ripples through a local community.

Health-care providers say

Under the Affordable Care Act, Randolph Hospital President Steve Eblin explained, Medicare reimbursements to hospitals were cut — savings intended to help fund Medicaid expansion. In the 2013 fiscal year that meant a $3.7 million reduction in Medicare payments to Randolph Hospital.

“I’m not here to judge,” Eblin said, “but had North Carolina expanded Medicaid that $3.7 million would have been partially offset by $3.2 million.”

That’s how much Eblin said the hospital could have collected in Medicaid payments for treating patients whose income was at, or below, 138 percent of the poverty level — individuals who would have qualified for Medicaid under expansion.

As many as one-quarter to one-third of those who come to the hospital for health care are uninsured. Patients are treated, regardless of their ability to pay. “We’re not complaining about providing the care,” Eblin said. “We always have and always will provide the care.”

Still, Eblin calls the $3.2 million “loss” in Medicaid revenue coupled with the Medicare cuts “a huge blow.”

The hospital is the second-largest employer in the county with 1,200 full-time and part-time employees. When the hospital is in the black, profits are returned to operations, such as providing new services and hiring people for high-paying jobs to staff those new services. When it’s in the red, something has to be cut.

Last year, the hospital cut 81 positions.

“Two-thirds of the hospitals in the state lost money last year,” Eblin said. “We were one of them.”

The hospital will lose money for a third year in a row, he said, but “much less” than the previous two years.

Instead, physicians, employees and volunteers have been pro-active in quality enhancement and in changing the business model, with less emphasis on volume and more on outcomes — how well the hospital does in treating patients.

“Our medical staff and employees are doing a phenomenal job of making that shift,” Eblin said.

Randolph Family Health Care at MERCE is a private, nonprofit community health center in north Asheboro. It is also a federally qualified health center: 40 percent of the center’s budget comes from the federal government to cover care for uninsured patients.

But 55-60 percent of their patients are uninsured. And that percentage has gone up the last two years, due in part to job losses from plant closures.

Many adults who fall in the doughnut hole — those who did not qualify for insurance subsidies under the ACA but who would have been eligible if Medicaid had been expanded — are Randolph Family Health Care patients.

If those individuals did have Medicaid insurance, the clinic would receive $100 for each regular visit to see one of the three doctors or nurse practitioner on staff. That would be less than the average charge of $150-$160, but more than what uninsured patients are charged. The lowest copay is $20 per visit on a sliding scale based on ability to pay.

“It would make all the difference in the world to our bottom line and the amount of patients we can see,” said Teresa Shackleford, chief executive officer of Randolph Family Health Care. “We don’t really turn anybody away — it’s just kind of a juggling act.”

The future of reform?

“It’s important in Randolph County — to those 9,000 people and important to the physicians in this community and to the hospital — that reform get addressed quickly so expansion can be discussed,” Eblin said.

Randolph Hospital leaders favor provider-led Medicaid reform in North Carolina that focuses on changing the way healthcare is delivered, instead of turning the reins of the program over to a managed-care company.

Griffith noted that, on a small scale, StayWell Senior Care, which will open in the coming months at 809 Curry Drive in Asheboro, offers a glimpse into what provider-led healthcare reform can look like. Randolph Hospital, Cone Health and Hospice of Randolph County partnered to provide start-up funding.

The facility will be for individuals 55 or older who are eligible for skilled nursing care and will provide a range of services — from medical care, including physical, occupational and speech therapy, to exercise, activities and meals.

The idea is to improve participants’ health and quality of life and to allow them to continue living at home.

“If it’s provider-led and providers are at risk,” Eblin said, “there’s going to be a whole lot more collaboration.”