Topics: Books, Editor's Picks, Facebook, Privacy, Social Media, Technology News, Business News, Life News

Social media is a huge part of daily life for many people; some even ﬁnd it hard to imagine living without it. We use it to check in with friends, keep tabs on family members, shop for jobs and new purchases, and stay abreast of the latest breaking news. And let’s not forget the ﬂame wars in product reviews and comment sections. No matter your preferred means of self-expression, social media drastically expands your attackable surface for hackers.

If you want to minimize your exposure to the threat of identity theft, it is imperative that

you become master of your domain—at least as it exists on other domains like Facebook, Twitter, Tumblr, Pinterest, Instagram, and LinkedIn. And by “master” I mean that you need to learn how to use it in a way that minimizes your exposure to the threat of identity theft.

The Pew Research Center’s statistics for social media in 2014 showed that 74 percent of Americans used some form of social media, and more than 71 percent of these users have a presence on Facebook.

While I’m going to talk about Facebook here, feel free to pick your poison, because when it comes to social media, there isn’t a company out there that doesn’t make you an easier target for identity thieves. As far as the Three Ms go, the same thinking applies regardless of the venue. If you’re going to use social media, you must take steps to minimize your exposure.

Some people like the puppy pics and game app requests of Facebook, while others prefer the information river of Twitter or the career-focused content more native to LinkedIn. Some prefer to look at pictures and pithy memes on Instagram, while others just like liking things in the public way that Pinterest makes possible. Then of course there are all those gadgets and appliances—there are 2.8 billion currently installed in the United States—that fall under the category of the Internet of Things (e.g., Fitbit, Jawbone, or smart home devices like Nest; for more on this see Chapter 6), designed not only to make your life easier but also to feed your information to companies who use it for marketing, research, and product development. Virtually all of these devices invite you to share your personal information not just with their app but with the world as well, via social media. Often, the devices come preset to share everything with everyone, and you can only maintain your privacy if you change the right settings.

Every milestone achieved on your healthy lifestyle wearable, entered on a ﬁtness website, or logged on a phone-based app; every hour logged sleeping and talking and watching television; every time your smart appliance makes you coﬀee or turns on the morning news—all of that is tracked, and, depending on the company, either comes with a default setting to tell your friends and followers on social media your every move as related to that device, or includes an easy way to share those things.

#AlexFromTarget would have remained a humble checkout boy with a hip haircut had it not been for Twitter and Tumblr. He’s one of the few examples of someone who found an upside to social media—and troll me all you want, but I maintain that this upside does only apply to a few select users, even if we point to the growing army of microcelebrity, mega YouTubers or the assorted superaccounts on this or that platform. Even with all the stars launched on social media, including Justin Bieber, the odds that you’re beneﬁting from your proﬁle remain miniscule.

Like a Justin Bieber also-ran, Alex Lee’s odd luck put him within easy reach of fame and fortune. But that’s not how it usually works. Generally, social media serves only as a time-suck and an open door through which any bad player can glean what’s needed to steal your identity.

Social media makes you vulnerable to identity thieves in ways that most people aren’t thinking about. They all know that some of their “friends” may be weirdos, or possibly even criminals—but even so, they still put their personal information where it can be seen by those “friends.” It deﬁes logic.

In a SUNY–Buﬀalo study published in 2014, Facebook users were asked about a phenomenon called farcing—friending a target with a fake account that looks like it comes from someone they know. Most of the users they talked to were aware of the dangers— that among all those they counted as Facebook friends, there were possibly a few scammers—but that understanding didn’t have a big eﬀect on the ways they used the site. The underlying belief was that ﬁnancial harm (or worse) wouldn’t come about as a result of their information being on the site. (It’s important to bear in mind that while the focus in the above study was on Facebook, farcing happens on every social media platform.)

Unfortunately, we know this to be a false assumption. Identity thieves do not need much of your personal information to scam you, and what they need may be in the “about” silo of your timeline. It could be in a tagged photo, or, as we saw in the Science study on unicity and the reidentiﬁcation of anonymized data, it could be a picture of your lunch or cocktail on Instagram coupled with a tweet or Facebook status update that provides that last piece of the puzzle that a scammer needs to access your credit.

A few years ago I read a story about a newly instituted (and quickly suspended) employment screening policy of the Maryland Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services. There was the usual stuﬀ you might expect in the job seeking process—you had to complete an application that included a bunch of personally identiﬁable information—but there was an extra piece of information requested that gave one applicant pause: The Maryland Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services had requested his Facebook username and password.

Robert Collins had previously worked for the department. He took a leave of absence after his mother died, and when that came to an end he applied for a job at another facility under the

oversight of the corrections department. This process involved being recertiﬁed for employment in a job that involved regular contact with criminals. It was an admittedly sensitive hire, and the employer in this instance really did have to do a good job screening potential hires. The wrong person could cause serious problems, ranging from the proliferation of illegal substances within prison walls to smuggling prisoners weapons to aiding and abetting an escape.

The Internet ages very fast, and by any measure, 2011 was a very long time ago in the realm of things digital. But the behavior that Collins reported was inexcusable even at the time. According to Collins, his interviewer did not ask for, but rather demanded, his Facebook username and password.

Now, imagine you need a job. You know the process is winding down to a last sanity check—where the prospective employer calls a few people to make sure you’re not a loony—and then you’ll get an offer. You can tell. Now, imagine you’re sitting in an oﬃce waiting for them to make that next move, and instead you get this curveball: “Do you mind if we poke around your Facebook account?” What would you do? If you are like a lot of people, including Robert Collins, you’re going to hand over the keys to your Facebook account, or whatever other account the gatekeeper asks to see. The interview process is intense. You’ve gotten this far. It’s simply too hard to ﬁnd a job, and the stress is too great not to acquiesce to such a request— no matter how wrong it seems—when the alternative is not getting the job oﬀer. And you are pretty careful about what you post, right? There aren’t any embarrassing pictures of you. What about your private messages? Are you careful there, too?

So what happened at Mr. Collins’s interview?

“He logged into my account and went through my pages, my posts, my messages, all my pictures, things like that,” Collins told a reporter, not long after it happened. This private aﬀair had become a news story because, immediately following the interview, Collins contacted the American Civil Liberties Union. When the ACLU got in touch with the Department of Corrections about the incident, the explanation demonstrated two things: that no one there had thought much about the parameters native to privacy and social media—much less about best practices—and that they didn’t really understand why requesting login information might be a problem.

If I had to guess, I’d say there was a question on the application about social media (i.e., do you use it?), and if the answer was yes, the follow-up gave the option of providing an applicant’s login information “for screening purposes.” In other words, it was yet another one of those “voluntary” items that an employer can review—like your credit report or a drug test—to determine if they should hire you. And once asked for their information, who wouldn’t feel some pressure to say yes? Doubtless there would be plenty of applicants willing to hand over the keys to their likes, dislikes, and online behavior—including the way it chronicles their behavior in real life.