Rex Iverson owed a $2,400 ambulance bill. A Box Elder County sheriff’s deputy arrested him on a bench warrant Jan. 23.

Iverson, 45, died in a jail cell that afternoon. No foul play is suspected, but his death remains under investigation.

RELATED: “ Man who died in Box Elder jail was there for not paying a debt”

“We go to great lengths to never arrest anybody on these warrants,” Box Elder County Chief Deputy Sheriff Dale Ward told Mark Shenefelt, a reporter for the Standard-Examiner. “But we make every effort to resolve the issues without making an arrest on a civil bench warrant. The reason we do that is we don’t want to run a debtors’ prison. There is no reason for someone to be rotting in jail on a bad debt.”

Here’s how readers reacted to the story when we shared it on standard.net and the Standard-Examiner’s Facebook page. All quotes are verbatim:

Justin Crabb (FB): Tax money hard at work. Even though the majority of the "guilty parties" post bail, It's still more money people have to pay that they apparently don't have. The system is broken. Very broken.

Kristen Bell (FB): I think this is bull crap! Especially if it's medical! Thank you Obama care! I don't see them putting in the elderly because of this ! Completely outrageous!

Tammy Byrd (FB): this has been done way before Obama came into the picture! Geez!

Vg Chacon (FB): Also this had absolutely nothing to do with obamacare.

Ursula Martínez (FB): That is in violation of his 8th Amendment rights!

This is all the result of privatized healthcare. In smaller towns, ambulance service is often operated privately, but I don't know whether that is the case in Tremonton. It has nothing to do with "ObamaCare."

Brooke Hardman (FB): Well I absolutely agree he should not have been left to die in a jail cell over a medical bill. That's an absolute tragedy!

David Willis (FB): The civilized world did away with Debtors Prisons in the 1800's.The law needs to be changed...it is immoral beyond words to lock people up for unpaid bills, especially health care related ones. There are so many billing errors and disputes a lot of them could be wrong.

Danielle Rae (FB): I had a sheriff show up at my door for medical bills of my sons that his biological fathers insurance was responsible for paying but denied the claims and they went on my credit. If I didn't pay that sheriff right then he was taking me to jail. I gave him my entire paycheck. UTAH laws are something else. How awful is this.

Kathy Hougaard-Lively (FB): This is so wrong! You should never, ever end up in jail over medical bills! Utah's collection laws are horrible!

Mary Lou Bryant (FB): I've never used an ambulance but $2,400.00? How far did they transport him? That sounds excessive doesn't it?

Josh Rackham (FB): This is another reason many people don't trust the system and people don't like cops.

Frank Musil (FB): Oh, Tremonton.

Paula Jaramillo Stewart (FB): For a debt? This is ridiculous! Shame!

Kathy Hougaard-Lively (FB): If you don't have money, you don't have money....I've been there and it's horrible!

SpaceBlue: Gee, and here I thought debtors prison was banned a long time ago. Maybe this case will lead someone to take a closer look at the law.

Doc: "ignores........subsequent court orders...." is called contempt of court and can involve incarceration. how is this a shock to anyone? you don't even have to pay your bills, but you do have to tell the judge why not.

Woz Neak: Guilty as charged, Poor and without income. Punishment incarceration and then Death by neglect.

Disman: justice system is big biz.

Chrissy Sabala (FB): THIS IS ANOTHER PERFECT EXAMPLE, OF THE SYSTEM GOING WRONG. HE WAS IN JAIL FOR NOT PAYING A BILL...WHAT A JOKE,, HE PROBABLY DIDNT HAVE A RIDE TO GET TO COURT..

AND THE JAIL,, REALLY THE SET UP IN THE JAIL,, HELLO MY MOM WORKED AT THE JAIL FOR 15 YEARS, THEY ARE LOOKING RIGHT AT ALL THE HOLDING CELLS..SO WHY DIDNT THEY SEE SOMETHING WAS WRONG?? THATS MY QUESTION?