Cunningham Group, the nation’s largest independent agency representing medical malpractice insurance products, announced today the launch of Healthcare Matters, a new internet television program that explores the intersection of healthcare practice, the business of medicine and the law. Healthcare Matters can be located at http://www.cunninghamgroupins.com/all-md/healthcare-matters.

Hosted by Michael Matray—editor of Medical Liability Monitor, the medical professional liability industry’s publication of record—Healthcare Matters investigates pertinent issues facing healthcare professionals such as succeeding in a post-Affordable Care Act healthcare delivery system, best practices for avoiding lawsuits, risk management, how to react when faced with a medical malpractice claim and new trends in medical liability litigation.

“We created Healthcare Matters as a service to our clients when we noticed many of our insureds shared similar concerns regarding healthcare reform and how it affects their medical malpractice risk,” said James Cunningham, Cunningham Group president and chief executive. “There’s a lot of moving parts right now in the healthcare arena, and this has understandably created some confusion. As an agency that has represented medical malpractice insurance for more than 60 years, we have relationships with many of the industry’s experts on a wide array of topics. With Healthcare Matters, we get to present expert opinions directly to physicians, office managers, hospital executives and physician extenders.”

Healthcare Matters launches today with a series of video interviews conducted with medical liability defense attorneys affiliated with the Association of Liability Lawyers in Medical Defense (ALL MD), the nationwide organization dedicated to connecting healthcare providers with the nation’s top medical defense attorneys, on a range of topics relevant to the modern practice of medicine. Future episodes will feature a roundtable discussion with medical liability defense attorneys and physician leaders, how to find the best price on medical malpractice insurance, billing and coding issues, medical technologies and how to prepare for a RAC audit.

Once its viewership is established, Healthcare Matters intends to offer healthcare professionals the opportunity to submit questions and topics for future episodes.