Chris Christie recommends starting war with Russia

The only thing worse than a liberal Republican is a liberal Republican who says dumb things to appear conservative and/or tough. Mitt Romney tried it when he awkwardly called himself "severely" conservative. Jeb Bush had one of his awkward moments when he used the term "anchor baby" – to many voters, he is an anchor baby. And now Chris Christie, thinking his tough guy image in the last debate helped him, has decided he wants to be tough, too, so he says America should shoot down Russian warplanes flying over Syria. This will of course start a war with Russia, but perhaps it will be worth it, to protect our vital allies...our vital allies...who are they again?

They are called the "Western-backed" rebels to set them apart from ISIS, but in reality they are a lot of small groups of rebels, with the largest force among them being Al Nusra, the local al-Qaeda affiliate. Every time we give weapons to the "moderates," they end up in the hands of al-Qaeda. That's right: Chris Christie wants us to go to war with Russia to protect al-Qaeda. Languishing at the bottom in polls of the Republican presidential field, Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey ramped up his tough talk on foreign policy on Monday, calling President Obama a “weakling” and saying that the United States should threaten to shoot down Russian planes conducting airstrikes in Syria. Mr. Christie went on to say that Mr. Putin was “punching above his weight” and called Mr. Obama “this weakling in the White House.” “You take him down,” Mr. Christie said, referring to Russian warplanes. Oh, he's a real tough guy, that Christie. But why doesn't he ever talk tough about securing the border or deporting illegals? Or fighting Obamacare? Or Obama's illegal amnesty? Or defunding the abortion mills? Somehow, he's never tough on these topics. In this one statement, Christie has in my mind disqualified himself from being president. He's a dangerous warmonger. There are times to go to war – to protect our national security or that of our close allies. Protecting radical Islamic rebels in Syria doesn't even come close. But it's comical that Christie thinks this will help him in the polls. All around, he has bad judgment. This article was written by Ed Straker, senior writer of NewsMachete.com , the conservative news site.