Glenn Beck lost it on his radio program Thursday after his co-host Stu Burguiere read him a Politico report saying FCC Chairman Tom Wheeler “made some last-minute revisions to his net neutrality plan” after Google, Free Press and New America’s Open Technology Institute “asked the commission to revise language they said could unintentionally allow Internet service providers to charge websites for sending content to consumers.”

“So they know the specific language of the bill,” Beck said. “And as American citizens, the ones who will be affected by this, we don’t know that language. We’re not allowed to see it! We can’t get the commissioner that we pay to go and testify on the contents of what’s in that proposal.”

“Sound like the way the government is supposed to run?” Beck demanded. “Does that sound like net neutrality? Does that sound like these big, evil corporations don’t have anything to do with anything? I mean, it’s being written by the big evil corporations and special interest groups! Your whole point is, we don’t want special interest groups and we don’t want big, evil corporations to have special access! They just wrote it, you nincompoop!”

“You morons! You useful idiots!” Beck added heatedly, addressing supporters of net neutrality. “That’s all you are. You’re a useful idiot. Read Joe Stalin you moron.”

Beck said America’s “entire educational system” has failed and is “churning out morons.”

“It’s just like Obamacare — you won’t root it out now,” Beck said of the proposal, which passed in a straight party-line vote after Beck’s radio program ended. “It started the ball rolling. So they’ll say, ‘Well, we need something. We need some sort of regulation.’ And you morons, you morons on the left, do you realize what you’ve just done? The next president that gets in — you put me into the Oval Office, you want me running your Internet?”

“The truthful answer to that is yes, because I’ll disband all the regulation on it,” Beck continued. “But the monster that you think I am, you want me running it? … I’ll make your life a living, stinking hell. That’s the monster you think I am. And I have news for you, that monster is out there on the right. And there’s a monster out there right now on the left that will do the same damn thing.”

“That’s why you don’t let unelected officials control things,” Beck concluded. “You don’t let a bureaucracy do this.”

Your browser does not support iframes.

The full episode of The Glenn Beck Program, along with many other live-streaming shows and thousands of hours of on-demand content, is available on just about any digital device. Click here to watch every Glenn Beck episode from the past 30 days for just $1!