With a drum roll and a countdown by board chairman Drayton McLane, a blue cloth fell Tuesday afternoon to expose a sign proclaiming the hospital at Interstate 35 and West Loop 340 as Baylor Scott & White Medical Center-Hillcrest, part of the largest nonprofit health system in Texas.

About 200 dignitaries, business leaders and hospital executives attended the ceremony that celebrated Waco becoming home to the first hospital in the state to wear the brand name of the $8.6 billion Baylor Scott & White Health, which has 500 patient care sites, more than 6,000 physicians and 36,000 employees.

The entity reflects the merger of Baylor Health Care System and Scott & White Healthcare.

Glenn Robinson, president of Baylor Scott & White Hillcrest Medical Center, said the “size, scope and strength” of the new organization should well serve patients in North Texas, home of Dallas-based Baylor Health Care System, and those in Central Texas familiar with Temple-based Scott & White.

“We have had the opportunity to serve this community since 1920, and we can now draw on the expanded resources, advanced technologies and expertise of the Baylor Scott & White Health system, which is the result of the combination of two pre-eminent health organizations, both with outstanding reputations,” he said.

The nonprofit hospital will be steered by a 16-person board of trustees with equal representation from each system.

“These two entities had a common mission and common values, that being the Christian ministry of healing,” said Joel Allison, CEO of Baylor Scott & White Health. “Health care is changing, and 10 years from now, there will be far fewer large health systems, and Baylor Scott & White Health will be one of them.”

He added, “Every Baylor Scott & White sign that goes up, including this one today, takes us one step closer to our goal of creating a new, exemplary health system to serve as a model for others around the country to follow.”

The system’s 46 hospitals in Texas will receive new names as time and finances allow, officials said.

Baylor Scott & White has more than $8 billion in combined assets and about $6 billion in annual revenue.

The merging of Baylor and Scott & White reflects changes in the health care arena, officials said, noting that the Affordable Care Act means declining provider reimbursement and a renewed focus on wellness programs to keep patients out of hospitals and other health care facilities.

Dr. Robert Pryor, president and chief medical officer, expressed pride at taking part in celebrating the renaming of a 237-bed entity “with a heritage of taking care of McLennan County,” and applauded the vision and leadership that made it possible.

Pryor said the merger went smoothly and thinks it is because of the two organizations’ similar legacies of serving the people of Texas.

“There were no problems with this because of the cultures of our two organizations,” he said. “Both being strong in Texas for over a century really facilitated getting this done.”

This is the second merger involving Hillcrest, with Scott & White announcing in April 2009 it would take 50 percent control of Hillcrest Baptist Medical Center. Hillcrest formally opened on Herring Avenue in 1920, moving to State Highway 6 and Interstate 35 the same year Scott & White announced its plans to merge.