Rep. Adam Schiff Adam SchiffClinton’s email troubles deepen House passes policy bill for intelligence agencies Sunday shows preview: Sanders opens up about battle with Clinton MORE (D-Calif.) says the nation's airports remain vulnerable to terrorism after last week's attacks in Paris.

“If there was one vulnerability I would say we ought to focus on, it ought to be the airports,” the top Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee said on MSNBC’s “Andrea Mitchell Reports.”

ADVERTISEMENT

“I still believe that our airport defenses are inadequate,” Schiff continued. "It still distresses me greatly that when we test the TSA, they largely fail those tests."

Schiff also warned of the "risk of copycat attacks in the United States."

“Not likely of the scope in Paris, but nonetheless, people who have been homegrown radicalized here in the United States acting out, lashing out in the wake of these attacks,” he said of the threat.

About 130 people died during a series of coordinated bombings and shootings in Paris on Friday. Reports have since emerged that one of the attackers may have infiltrated Europe using a Syrian passport.

Schiff said the incident is no excuse for refusing to accept Syrian refugees in the U.S.

“The system does work,” he said. "It has protected us. But look, I understand the fear out there.

“What happened in Paris is terrifying,” Schiff continued. "Safety has to come first.

"While we want safety first and insist on safety first, we are also a very compassionate people,” he added. “We don’t turn our backs on mothers and children who are in need and the victims of persecution around the world. It’s part of the proudest tradition of this country.”

The House is likely voting on legislation later this week that would temporarily halt President Obama’s Syrian refugee resettlement plan.

Skeptics say that the vetting process for potential migrants is not thorough enough to prevent terrorism.

More than half of the nation’s governors also say they oppose resettling refugees in their states, according to a list compiled Tuesday by The Hill.

Obama pushed back against those who want to bar Syrian refugees.

“The people who are fleeing Syria are the most harmed by terrorism, they are the most vulnerable as a consequence of civil war and strife,” he said Monday during the G-20 Summit in Ankara, Turkey.