Local hospitals pair with docs, clinics for reliable revenue













Photo: Guiseppe Barranco, Photo Editor Image 1 of / 4 Caption Close Image 1 of 4 Dr. Kimberly Pitts talks with Garland Bryan during a check-up at her Port Neches family practice on Tuesday. Pitts, who plans to sign soon with Christus St. Elizabeth, is one of many area doctors partnering with hospitals as both parties seek to improve their financial prospects. Photo taken Tuesday, February 10, 2015 Guiseppe Barranco/The Enterprise less Dr. Kimberly Pitts talks with Garland Bryan during a check-up at her Port Neches family practice on Tuesday. Pitts, who plans to sign soon with Christus St. Elizabeth, is one of many area doctors partnering ... more Photo: Guiseppe Barranco, Photo Editor Image 2 of 4 Dr. Kimberly Pitts talks Tuesday about the benefits of signing on with Christus St. Elizabeth. Recent years have shown an increase in the number of private doctors signing on with hospitals. Photo taken Tuesday, February 10, 2015 Guiseppe Barranco/The Enterprise less Dr. Kimberly Pitts talks Tuesday about the benefits of signing on with Christus St. Elizabeth. Recent years have shown an increase in the number of private doctors signing on with hospitals. Photo taken ... more Photo: Guiseppe Barranco, Photo Editor Image 3 of 4 Dr. Kimberly Pitts talks with Garland Bryan during a check-up at her Port Neches family practice on Tuesday. Pitts, who plans to sign soon with Christus St. Elizabeth, is one of many area doctors partnering with hospitals as both parties seek to improve their financial prospects. Photo taken Tuesday, February 10, 2015 Guiseppe Barranco/The Enterprise less Dr. Kimberly Pitts talks with Garland Bryan during a check-up at her Port Neches family practice on Tuesday. Pitts, who plans to sign soon with Christus St. Elizabeth, is one of many area doctors partnering ... more Photo: Guiseppe Barranco, Photo Editor Image 4 of 4 Dr. Kimberly Pitts talks with Garland Bryan during a check-up at her Port Neches family practice on Tuesday. Pitts, who plans to sign soon with Christus St. Elizabeth, is one of many area doctors partnering with hospitals as both parties seek to improve their financial prospects. Photo taken Tuesday, February 10, 2015 Guiseppe Barranco/The Enterprise less Dr. Kimberly Pitts talks with Garland Bryan during a check-up at her Port Neches family practice on Tuesday. Pitts, who plans to sign soon with Christus St. Elizabeth, is one of many area doctors partnering ... more Photo: Guiseppe Barranco, Photo Editor Local hospitals pair with docs, clinics for reliable revenue 1 / 4 Back to Gallery

Kimberly Pitts will spend more time treating ailments and less time on nuisances in her office attic when she unites with a hospital that covets her patients.

The family doctor will turn over control of the solo practice she has run in Port Neches since 2003 to Christus St. Elizabeth, she said.

She will partner with a hospital that, like its national peers, has become a destination for refugee physicians fleeing the perils of navigating a shifting health-care landscape alone.

Without uprooting her practice or disturbing her clients' routines, Pitts will deliver thousands of well-insured, high-paying patients to a non-profit system that wants reliable revenue to counterbalance tens of millions of dollars in bad debt from uncompensated care.

Yet, while doctor-hospital partnerships solve each party's business needs, the consolidation trend that has made its way to Beaumont comes at a cost.

"The rates will be higher. Patients will pay more, and insurers will pay more," said Paul Ginsburg, a professor of health policy at the University of Southern California and researcher for USC's Schaeffer Center for Health Policy and Economics.

Newly released results of a Texas Medical Association survey show the share of Texas doctors who are employed by hospitals nearly doubled from 2012 to 2014, from 4 to 7 percent.

Over the past few years, Christus Health Southeast Texas has led the charge in this area, netting solo physicians, a neurosurgery clinic and an orthopedic clinic for its growing system even while it has come up short on at least one attempt to add a cardiology clinic.

Christus Southeast Texas CEO Paul Trevino said he could not confirm whether the hospital was in negotiations with Pitts. But the hospital system, he said, is actively looking to forge agreements with more doctors, a strategy it implemented about five years ago.

Hospitals seek more revenue

On the surface, hospital-doctor partnerships cut costs for both sides through economies of scale while helping hospitals achieve an "integrated" health-care delivery system, which the Affordable Care Act rewards and which Trevino said benefits patients.

"We believe that to remain viable and to meet our mission that we have to find ways to work with physicians to reduce costs, become more efficient, provide excellent outcomes and better service," Trevino said.

Beyond streamlining care, these deals also expand hospitals' access to people covered by commercial insurance by adding to the hospitals' outpatient facility footprint and delivering more patient referrals to the hospital, Ginsburg said.

Christus is targeting the primary-care clinics whose specialties represent the best profit opportunities, data show. A 2013 report by the physician search firm Merritt Hawkins lists orthopedic surgery, cardiology and family practice as the three most-reliable specialties for physician-driven hospital revenue. Neurosurgery ranked seventh.

On average, hospitals charge Medicare about 80 percent of what they can charge commercial insurers for the same services, according to a 2014 CNN Money report.

Medicaid reimbursement, meanwhile, averaged 65 cents to the Medicare dollar in 2012 in Texas, according to the nonprofit Kaiser Family Foundation.

Providers negotiate with private insurance carriers, while Medicare rates are set by the federal government and Medicaid by states. Having more doctors and patients on its rosters gives hospitals and clinics more power in those rate-setting talks.

In total, 125 area doctors are affiliated with Christus Southeast Texas, which includes the St. Elizabeth, St. Mary and Jasper facilities, according to the hospital's online database.

The Southeast Texas system has grossed on average $17.4 million over four years from 2009 to 2012, the latest available data, according to the nonprofit's tax filings.

At the end of 2012, the regional Christus system reported its assets totaled $429.8 million, up 14 percent from the end of 2009.

A request for an interview with Baptist Hospital administrators was turned down.

Doctors seek 'safe harbors'

Twelve years ago, when Pitts opened her practice, she spent her entire first week without a patient.

Now, her database includes about 4,000 active patients, with dozens coming through the door each day and most carrying commercial insurance, her office manager said.

Garland Bryan, a 63-year-old, longtime patient, said he keeps returning because the outgoing, affable doctor answers his medical questions honestly.

"She's not in and out with her patients," Bryant said. "She talks to you."

But time is finite, and Pitts, 44, said she's spending more of it doing the secondary work of maintaining a practice, like training on a new record-keeping system or solving IT problems.

"If anything breaks, we're in the attic, too," Pitts said.

By joining larger networks, doctors like Pitts save money by sharing costs with affiliates, said Donna Kinney, director of research and data analysis at TMA, which represents doctors and medical students.

Pitts will continue to operate out of her Nall Street office and plans to increase her office staff by two while also adding a nurse practitioner.

Caregiving shouldn't change, she said, except that she'll have more time to devote to it because Christus would handle administrative duties, maintenance and technology issues.

Pitts' perspective is not unique. Doctors increasingly view hospitals and larger physician groups as "safe harbors" to maintain an independence in medical judgment from regulatory uncertainty, cost pressures and other nagging responsibilities, Kinney said.

"Forces in the environment right now are encouraging physicians to get or stay employed," Kinney said.

The TMA survey shows that just 29 percent of respondents reported owning a solo practice, the lowest rate in the biannual survey since at least 2000 and well below the 50-percent high in 1990.

Growing group practices also sought

Another effect of the solo practice decline is the rise of group practices.

The TMA survey showed 22 percent of doctors identified as members of a group practice in 2014, up from 13 percent two years earlier.

Christus, like other hospitals nationally, desires these clinics.

Of group practice employees surveyed by TMA, nearly one in four reported working for a practice owned by a hospital. Texas law makes it difficult for hospitals to employ physicians, but they can - and do - employ hospital staff at partner group practices to perform medical services, like X-rays.

Nationally, 29 percent of physicians in 2012 reported working for a hospital, either directly or for a practice at least partially owned by a hospital, according to the American Medical Association. That share jumped from 16 percent in 2008.

In January, Christus celebrated the one-year anniversary of its partnership with the 13-doctor Beaumont Bone and Joint Institute, which had been co-owned by orthopedic surgeon Dan Thompson.

Through the agreement, which has a sunset date and options to extend, Christus purchased the clinic and equipment and employs staff like X-ray technicians at the site, Thompson said.

The hospital does not employ the doctors, who in turn maintain their independence to make treatment-related decisions without input or employment-related incentive from the hospital.

"That's sort of the key feature of the arrangement," Thompson said. "We're not employees of the hospital, and the hospital doesn't direct clinical decision-making at all. They provide a clinic space for patients to be seen."

Like Pitts, Thompson said the arrangement frees doctors to focus on treatment rather than shifting regulatory burdens.

It has brought at least minor changes to the clinic visited last year by more than 50,000 patients, who needed more than 3,100 procedures last year.

Before the acquisition, patients at Beaumont Bone and Joint paid doctors for their time and operations and paid the clinic for services like X-rays.

They received one bill, with the itemized charges, from the clinic. Now, for example, patients who need an X-ray administered by hospital staff and hip replacement by an independent BB&J physician will be billed by Christus and the doctor separately.

Doctors' fees haven't changed since the contract was signed, Thompson said, but he's not sure what the hospital system charges for the services it provides on the same site.

That anniversary came one month after the hospital announced the creation of its neurosurgery department through a partnership with Golden Triangle Neurocare. Like Beaumont Bone and Joint, the three-doctor clinic sees patients at its original facility as well as in the hospital.

Cardiologists spurn overture

Not all doctors want to join a hospital system.

Beaumont-based Advanced Cardiovascular Specialists, a group practice owned by physicians, declined a merger offer from Christus in 2013, said Angie Foster, ACS' administrator.

The rejection was at least in part because the partnership would have been too restricting on the practices' doctors, who are currently permitted to work out of Christus' facilities as well as Baptist Hospital of Southeast Texas and Tyler County Hospital.

"We've been able to sustain our practice," Foster said. "They just felt like giving up that control was not worth it to them. ... We didn't want to align ourselves with just one hospital."

Trevino said he could not comment on whether Christus previously sought to add ACS to its network.

How will the market adjust?

When a hospital acquires a private practice, its rate schedule often goes into effect. So prices may rise, even if the location, doctor and nature of the treatment do not change at all.

Medicare and insurance payouts are greater for hospital systems because the larger care providers have more negotiating power and stricter government mandates to meet.

Ginsburg, the USC professor, said rate hikes are sharper when hospitals acquire solo physicians because group practices start with more negotiating leverage.

"I think this is the biggest problem, the fact that it does lead (immediately) to substantially higher rates," Ginsburg said. "I don't think anyone denies it."

Rather than buying practices, hospitals could achieve "integration" and the cost savings it produces by developing "meaningful" relationships with primary care and specialty clinic physicians, Ginsburg said.

Government could slow the hikes by making Medicare reimbursement uniform across services rather than facility-based, he said.

Insurers could do more to mitigate the factors driving doctors to the so-called safe harbors, Ginsburg said. One example is helping the transition to a federally mandated electronic record-keeping system.

Consolidation, though, gradually reduces competition, which concerns health insurers, said Jamie Dudensing, CEO of the Texas Association of Health Plans.

"TAHP supports improving care through integrating services, but not if the result is merely higher prices for the same services," Dudensing said in an emailed statement. "Antitrust enforcement of anti-competitive mergers is vital to ensure that conceptive, high-quality health care markets are the standard across the country."

Observers continue to await a landmark anti-competition case that will lay out rules by which hospitals must abide when collecting physicians, Ginsburg said.

Trevino, meanwhile, said he does not expect care delivery costs to rise dramatically as an effect of hospitals partnering with doctors.

"If all it results in are greater costs, it will fail," Trevino said. "Payers also have a significant amount of market force and market leverage. Consequently they exert that in any negotiation. Then what settles out is a fair market value rate for both parties."

EBesson@BeaumontEnterprise.comTwitter.com/EricBesson_news