The most surprising thing about House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan’s budget plan – likely to pass the House this week – is how politically tone deaf it is. Until now, Ryan was the leading Republican voice pushing his party to care about poverty. His greatest frustration on the 2012 presidential campaign trail was reportedly his inability to convince running mate Mitt Romney to talk openly about ideas to help the 47 percent rather than mock them.

So along comes Ryan’s much-anticipated budget plan, following a listening tour last year on poverty in America. And guess what he delivers? A budget that snubs its nose at America, gutting the futures of middle- and lower-income Americans in order to pay for an enormous tax cut for the wealthiest.

Look at the specifics: Ryan would slash college aid by more than $100 billion; resurrect the draconian cuts to food stamps House Republicans proposed last fall, and cut an additional $125 billion from the program; privatize Medicare and gut the Medicare prescription drug benefit; eliminate both the insurance coverage and subsidies in the Affordable Care Act, with overall cuts to Medicaid of $1.5 trillion over 10 years; and issue entirely unspecified cuts to nondefense discretionary spending by nearly $800 billion below the sequestration level – shrinking nondefense discretionary spending to less than half its share of the economy under President Reagan.

[Read blogger Pat Garofalo on how the Ryan budget guts anti-global warming efforts.]

Notice Ryan’s plan is not like the sequester plan, where defense and non-defense spending took similar hits. Instead, Ryan would increase defense spending while gutting nondefense domestic spending. Nor is it a fiscally prudent attempt to get the financial house in order, not with the dramatic tax cut for the wealthy. Instead it is akin to Robin Hood in reverse – he takes from the poor and middle class in order to give to the wealthiest.

But this is precisely the wrong time for Robin Hood in reverse, as Ryan himself knows. America is undergoing dramatic change, and not for the better. There’s a reason major economists are ringing the alarm bells.

[See a collection of political cartoons on the economy.]

Evidence of inequality is all around us. Sales are up at both luxury goods and discount stores, but down at traditional middle-class stores. While many Americans still struggle to keep their homes, the “wealth effect” has driven sales of vacation homes up 30 percent over last year, the Wall Street Journal reported last week.

How does it feel to Americans? Exhausting and stressful. Facing stagnant wages and inflating costs, Americans now work more hours than ever recorded and more hours than any other industrialized nation. These hours take a huge toll, especially on working mothers of young children who discover every day that it is not a question of how hard we “lean in”; it’s the sheer exhaustion of the juggling act, as Brigid Schulte highlights in her new book, "Overwhelmed: Work, Love, and Play When No One Has the Time."

Politically speaking, his budget won’t go very far in the divided Congress; Senate Democrats have already announced they won’t act on it. So is Ryan’s purpose to lay out a grand vision for a future presidential run? If so, it’s surprisingly out of touch with the voters. It’s one thing to block grant domestic aid to give the states more control, as Ryan says he’s doing; it’s quite another to give a handout to the wealthiest by gutting domestic spending to its lowest level since modern government accounting, as he actually does.

[See a collection of political cartoons on the Republican Party.]

Or maybe he’s delivering red meat to impress House Republicans for a future run at Speaker?