Food worker washes feet in sink 0:31 An person was filmed at a takeaway chicken store washing his feet in a kitchen sink, maybe hygiene standards have changed these days.

COCKROACHES in the kitchen, rat droppings in the deep fryer and salmonella are just a few of the nasties that Brisbane’s food safety inspectors are finding on the menu at some of the city’s most popular restaurants.

Top franchises and well-known restaurants were among the eateries slapped with a whopping total of $600,000 in fines for dodgy hygiene and health practices during the 2013-14 financial year.

The revelations follow the DM jazz cafe being fined $25,000 in the Brisbane Magistrates Court this week after a customer found a live cockroach in the chicken and mushroom risotto.

Food safety inspectors slapped more than 30 restaurants and cafes with fines as part of the city council’s EatSafe program in a bid to clean up the industry.

Franchises including Sumo Salad and Shingle Inn, as well as popular restaurants such as the Landmark Restaurant at Sunnybank and Beach House Bar and Grill in the CBD were among those punished for breaches.

Landmark Restaurant manager Henry Leung said its $25,000 fine for uncovered and improperly stored food occurred two years ago on a busy Saturday night, but they since had cleaned up their act and passed three more inspections.

The Beach House was fined $30,000 in December after rat droppings were found in the deep fryer, as well as accumulated grease on the floor and wall surfaces in the kitchen.

But a spokeswoman for the restaurant said it had passed 10 inspections since then and now had a four-star rating. She said they had also applied for a HACCP Australia rating, which is the highest grade for food management and takes eight months to complete.

The Gap Tavern, owned by the ALH Group, was fined $28,000 for cleanliness issues including having live cockroaches in November 2013.

ALH Group spokesman said the organisation took food safety very seriously and had already taken steps to address the issues raised by the council.

“We have a robust ongoing audit process,” he said.

Shingle Inn director Andrew Bellchambers said its fine related back to 2012 when nearby construction work had disturbed the basement and created a pest problem.

He said attempts were made to keep it under control, but the council declared it unsatisfactory.

The firm had changed pest management suppliers, redesigned the kitchen and regained a four-star rating.

Brisbane Lifestyle Chairman Cr Krista Adams said the council made no apologies for carrying out rigorous inspections and they responded to every complaint.

“People can be more confident than ever with 91.5 per cent of Brisbane restaurants now ‘stepping up to the plate’ with a rating of three stars or above,” she said.

“This transparent approach to auditing along with the financial impost on businesses, act as an effective significant deterrent to reoffend, and so we see businesses really clean up their act.”

COUNCILS TURN BLIND EYE

MAJOR cities and tourist destinations throughout the state are hiding details about restaurants prosecuted for repeated dodgy hygiene practices, which could include insects crawling through the kitchen and food contamination.

There is now pressure on them to follow Brisbane City’s Council’s lead by naming and shaming eateries that flunk inspections and introducing a star rating system for food safety.

Diners on the Gold Coast and in Cairns could be eating at restaurants repeatedly fined for breaching health standards but wouldn’t know because their councils refuse to reveal who they are.

In Cairns, three restaurants have even been shut down temporarily by the courts to bring them back up to scratch.

Top restaurateurs and food safety advocates say consumers deserve to know which eateries have been caught out so they can make informed choices about where they eat. Gold Coast City Council confirmed it had prosecuted five eateries in 2013-14, with an average fine of $17,500, while another 98 were given a $550 on-the-spot fine.

While a council spokeswoman admitted there was a matter of public interest in naming restaurants that regularly breached health safety rules, the council still would not reveal any names.

“While it may be in the public interest for the media to report on noncompliant premises at the time of prosecution, City of Gold Coast does not wish to name and shame premises that have been prosecuted in the past and may be now fully compliant,” she said.

Despite this, she said those taken to court had usually displayed a pattern of not following the rules.

A Cairns Council spokeswoman said it was not the council’s policy to reveal the names of restaurants that had been prosecuted.

But she said three had been shut down temporarily because of poor hygiene, while another eight had been issued fines.

Other councils such as Townsville were willing to reveal eateries that violated health standards.

The Chilli Jam Noodle Bar in Townsville was fined $5000 on April 24 for handling food in a way that made it unsuitable for sale – the only prosecution in the 2013-14 financial year.

Since the successful EatSafe program was introduced by Brisbane City Council, it has spread to others including Logan and Bundaberg that have adopted similar programs.

Restaurant 2 owner David Pugh, who helped set up Brisbane’s EatSafe program, said it was important to name repeat offenders.

“It needs to be published,” he said. “If it’s good enough for Brisbane it’s good enough for cities and towns in the rest of Australia. People need to be informed about who is looking after the best interests of their clients.”

Mr Pugh said publishing breaches put pressure on eateries to maintain standards.

Food Safety Information Council boss Juliana Madden said there was no reason not to name restaurants that had been successfully prosecuted for breaches.

Queensland Health Health Protection Unit boss Sophie Dwyer said food safety rating schemes were a matter for local governments.