Ernest Hemingway said “wine is one of the most civilized things in the world,” and a Granite Bay couple is bringing that sentiment home. Having traveled the world, Sam and Lamya Malhorta are using their hard-won knowledge as vintners to offer locals a direct doorway into Napa County’s global fame.

The Malhortas have been part of the community’s life along the lake for 19 years now, but it’s their ownership of Work Vineyard in Calistoga that’s continuing to elevate them from veteran wine sellers to artisan wine makers, as well as giving them the ideal tools to help vino connoisseurs build nuanced, elegant bottle collections.

Throughout it all, the husband and wife duo say their experience with locals has helped them live the proverbial small business American dream.

In the introduction to his book “Wine and Dine Style,” Sam Malhorta recalls that his childhood in India taught him that “nothing comes in life by begging – everything comes through a ‘style.’” He also learned from his own family that meals could be, or should be, spiritual celebrations of bringing friends, families and strangers together. With those core values, Sam found himself a young man working for the Indian government’s Foreign Service in Baghdad. Whenever diplomats and dignitaries from around the world arrived in Iraq, and needed to speak with Indian officials stationed there, it was Sam’s job to show them around the best restaurants and drinking holes within “the Cradle of Civilization” had to offer. The assignment gave him the opportunity to begin tasting the greatest wines in the world.

One night in 1981, on a floating restaurant on the Tigris River, he got to know the Iraqi woman who would become his partner in life. Lamya worked in air travel in Baghdad and was a bit of an internationalist herself.

Sam and Lamya were eventually married, and though each had good careers in the East they eventually began to turn their gaze to the United States. In 1991 they arrived in Sacramento with a small stipend of cash and their one-year-old son, John.

“We were starting from zero again,” Lamya remembered.

In Baghdad, Sam had developed his wine palate for years on bottles from France, Italy and Spain. He decided it would be invigorating to open a wine and spirits store in Carmichael. After an established run of success, he and Lamya set their hearts on opening a similar business in Granite Bay.

Lakeside Beverage arrived in 1997 on Douglas Boulevard on the quiet side of the Folsom-Auburn Road intersection. By then the Malhorta family had grown to include a daughter, Zina. Sam soon had the novel idea of fusing his wine and spirits store with an in-house tasting bar. He saw a chance to allow locals to sample wine varietals from around the state and whiskeys from across the world. The idea stirred immediate excitement in Granite Bay.

“Before you knew it, it was like a revolution,” Lamya explained. “People were loving it. The concept was incredibly well received.”

The ever-flowing wine at Lakeside led young John and Zina to some star-struck moments as entertainers like Eddie Murphy and members of the Sacramento Kings’ famed “Dream Team” – including Chris Webber, Peja Stojakovic and Brad Miller – began making the store a regular hangout. It was a fun experience, but for Sam and Lamya, getting to know multiple generations of South Placer families was the most rewarding aspect.

“I’ve had people start learning about wine here, who used to come in with the store with their parents when they were children,” Sam observed. “We’re on our second generation of customers, and I can certainly say this area has been good to us.”

Sam’s years selling and recommending California wines had also brought him into the orbit of Napa County vintner Henry Work, who owned Work Vineyard in Calistoga. In 2007, Work decided to retire. If he was going to sell his vineyard, he wanted to sell it to a friend and wine expert he respected: Thus Sam and Lamya were allowed to purchase it. The couple threw themselves into every aspect of the wine-making process, and after 8 years of being immersed in it, they claim the benefits have transferred to their Granite Bay customers on numerous levels.

“It was a platform we were always looking for from the other side of the fence,” Sam said. “It really lifted us from the status of a retailer to someone who understands Napa from another perspective.”

Lamya agreed, adding, “It’s brought so much to our knowledge and expertise of the wine industry: We’re involved in every aspect of wine now, from growing the grapes, the fermenting, tasting and the bottling process, to getting products on the shelves.”

Numerous Granite Bay wine lovers have now traveled to Work Vineyard, finding that quintessential Calistoga view of sunny, vine-studded valleys sprawling under the foot of rustic, California hills. They’ve also found glasses of Work’s highly acclaimed Sauvignon Blanc, which has consistently grabbed high marks from Wine Enthusiast Magazine. People ravenous for red wine can tip a glass of Work’s Cabernet Reserve, a smooth flavor-swirl of deep, earthy hues and satin touches of liquorish. It’s one Cab that doesn’t have an over-the-top tannin bite.

Lakeside Beverage hosts wine tastings every Friday and Saturday evening, pouring selections not only from Work Vineyard, but from grape appellations across the Golden State. Sam samples wine varietals from more than 300 different vineyards every year. Of those, only a dozen end up getting showcased for customers at Lakeside Beverage. As Sam moves closer to having a decade of winemaking under his own belt, he says that in the rare cases when other vintners are trying to sell wines to him with a low-quality taste or nonsensical price point, the excuses just don’t pass muster.

“Every wine we sell at the store is good,” Sam emphasized. “Customers come in and they tell us what they’re looking for – what kind of meal they’re pairing with, or dinner party they are hosting – and then they let us know their budget. We work with them on finding the right bottle from there, but we know that whether they are leaving with a $25 bottle or $200 bottle, they are going home with a wine selection they are going to like.”

Scott Thomas Anderson can be reached at scotta@goldcountrymedia.com. Follow him on Twitter at ScottA_RsvPT or on Facebook at www.facebook.com/STAndersonJournalist