Comedian Paul Rodriguez previously performed May 9, 2015 at the Visalia Fox Theatre. He returns Wednesday to perform at the Tulare County Fair. (Photo: Submitted)

Comedian Paul Rodriguez is no stranger to the Central Valley, much less Tulare County.

In May of this year he paid a visit, and subsequently had his Central Valley audience rolling in the isles at the Visalia Fox Theatre.

Only four months later, he's back, and this time his audience doesn't need to rush to grab their tickets, but rather rush through the gates of the Tulare County Fair to save their seats at the Budweiser Stage where Paul Rodriguez performs at 8 p.m. Wednesday, Sept. 16.

Then again, county fairs themselves are no stranger to Paul Rodriguez, who has been performing comedy on stages across the country for over 30 years.

"I've eaten so much cotton candy," Rodriguez said. "I remember going with my uncle, my mother — now as a comedian I've been to all the fairs."

He gets around, and come Wednesday he'll be traveling from San Diego after performing on-stage in "The Pitch," a play that he also wrote.

"I wrote a play. I've done everything else and I figured this was the last thing I needed to do. I figured here's an opportunity," he said.

Centered around a pitch meeting for a new television show, the play firmly sets its focus on the troubling ordeal of making the Latino voice heard on commercial television.

"Between what you think is good and what they think is good — there's a vast chasm," Rodriguez said on the subject of bringing Latino programming to television producers. "The guy on the other side of the table might have just made 'Sharknado,' and you find yourself making compromises."

Finding compromises is ironically one of the highest priorities for the notoriously uncompromising comedian who is known for his routines that relentlessly tackle tricky subjects from immigration to Obamacare.

In the case of the Tulare County Fair, much of his material may be going all organic.

"I'll be like Carrot Top but not as cocky," he said with a laugh. "I'll have real carrots. Carrots that I grew. I'll be like the 4-H Club."

He kids, but agriculture is something Rodriguez holds dear to his heart, especially in the Central Valley where he owns operations, serves as the chairman of the California Latino Water Coalition, and where he was acknowledged with the 2010 "Humanitarian of the Year Award" in Fresno for his work in water conservation.

For Rodriguez, water is no joke.

"Everyone said that the farmers are wasting water, but everyone's job is dependent upon agriculture," Rodriguez said. "The people in the inner cities need to realize that farming is for all of us. No matter how many times I hear about botulism the fact is that we are very fortunate to live in the San Joaquin — the breadbasket of the world."

With relatives in Visalia, and memories of growing up in the Valley, Central California is an area he is determined to defend at all costs.

"You've got to be more protective. You've got to fight for what you have and fight to keep it. The green Valleys that I knew as a child are turning brown," he said.

"I know, I know, I'm Cesar Chavez," he said jokingly.

Don't even get him started on the California high-speed rail.

"We've got $2 billion dollars and I hope they don't take it from us to build a railroad that goes to nowhere," he said. "People say you should support it from Riverside to Chowchilla. No one goes to take a honeymoon in Chowchilla! We're just wasting a lot of money."

Politics clearly gives the man a lot of material to work with — especially in the case of Donald Trump. But not even that odd head of hair can shift his focus from our current president.

"Obama has been disastrous," Rodriguez said. "He's never come through on a promise. The man comes in looking like Denzel and turns out to be Uncle Ben. He's not taking care of the farmers, not the Latinos. There's no excuse for it."

"You know, they say in the land of the blind the one-eyed man is king — well I have one good eye thanks to glaucoma," he said.

Age takes its toll on everyone, but the mind of Rodriguez is as active as ever, quickly darting from topic to topic so swiftly that his audience members are left with heads spinning and chests hurting from laughter.

Fitting with the Tulare County Fair, his act is carnival ride in itself.

"They can expect to see about 60 minutes of a nervous old guy trying to be hip," Rodriguez said of his act. "I'm going to talk about changes to me. The fact I shop at 'Forever 51,' that my back is going out and my front is coming in. All with a touch of amnesia. People are laughing and I'll keep at it. That's it. You know?"

He noted that one of these days he will have to retire, mainly because he wouldn't technically be a stand-up comedian anymore if he was in a wheelchair.

When the day comes though, he hopes a different message echoes rather than just the ones regarding his waist-line.

"I took about eight years off and I concentrated on the water issue. If I'm ever known for anything I want them to say this guy stood for the water issue. That would be better than any Oscar or Grammy," he said. "That's what I would love to be remembered for."

Details

Paul Rodriguez performs 8 p.m. Wednesday, Sept 16 at the Budweiser Stage of the Tulare County Fair. Admission to the performance is included with admission to the Tulare County Fair. Tickets are $8 for adults; $5 for children ages 6-12.

Read or Share this story: http://vtd-tar.co/1URAmak