What do you get when you bring a Republican governor, State senator, a tattooed biker and a serial home-schooler together to debate politics? Some would call the result a lively democratic discourse…others, a circus.

This past Wednesday, Idaho gubernatorial candidates faced off in a debate aired on the state’s public television network. The debate was meant to be a charged conservative showdown between the current Republican governor, C.L. “Butch” Otter, and his primary challenger, Russ Fulcher, who is currently a conservative state senator. In the spirit of inclusivity or democracy or whatever, Governor Otter insisted that his somewhat less reputable challengers also join in for the debate. The candidates, Walt Bayes and Harley Brown, were happy to join and take the ensuing discussion to a whole new level of entertaining.

The four conservative candidates were set to use their solitary scheduled debate to discuss key issues in Idaho – the economy, state control of federal lands, and Obamacare. As a deeply conservative state, all the candidates are pushing for progress in the GOP agenda. But their ways of getting there vary quite widely.

Current two-term governor Otter used his time to speak in favor of furthering economic improvement for his state, claiming that he led Idaho through the recession and successfully managed to shrink the role of government while lowering taxes and balancing the state budget – all central goals of Republican policy. His primary contender, Fulcher, countered with questions of whether or not Idaho had actually weathered the economic crisis as well as Otter claimed it did. Fulcher stated that the US economy remains “stagnant,” and that there is a need to for new representation to “shake up the government.”

Fulcher went on to challenge the governor’s policy decision of creating a state healthcare exchange under Obamacare. Echoing other conservative dissenters of the ACA, Fulcher pointed out that the decision served to make Idaho more dependent on the federal government, which he claims has been spending money it simply does not have. In terms of his personal stance, Fulcher’s approach would entail developing a free market health care alternative that would decrease Idaho’s reliance on the government’s faltering finances. He also proposed strengthening the state’s finances by pushing for greater state control of federal lands and harvesting timber, natural gas and other resources to increase revenues.

Let’s not forget the other candidates, however. While relatively unknown contender Mr. Walt Bayes may sound unremarkable, being a staunch Bible-thumper with no experience in politics or governance, he did “go to jail for homeschoolin.’“ He also has 16 children. So that’s something. During his allotted time, Bayes read from the Bible, praised the Lord, and generously attacked abortion, stating that if he were governor, he would prohibit “murdering babies” in Idaho altogether. It seems that Mr. Bayes is a picture of how the public characterizes the religious right – an old White guy with God in his heart and a magnificent beard that puts Santa’s to shame, complimented by a deep hatred of women’s reproductive liberty.

Mr. Harley Brown’s contributions were equally compelling and totally legitimate. As evidenced by his highly offensive, racist, and sexist campaign website, Brown’s candidacy centers around fighting political correctness. Mr. Brown wants the “real voters,” those who can stomach his gritty opinions and can appreciate that he doesn’t quite look, dress, or act the part of governor. Brown’s policy stances were traditionally conservative – less federal control of state lands, more fiscal responsibility – but his primary tactics as governor would be to use “spiritual warfare” to “bind the evil spirits that are behind the feds.” Clad in his biker get-up and somewhat surprising tie, he seems to present a worthy threat.

Overall, the guv’nors debate did serve to educate the public on the stances of the two primary contenders looking to secure their term in the upcoming gubernatorial election in Idaho. But it also served to show us all in a most unusual and amusing fashion that really anybody can make it to the political stage in our spirited democracy. All you need is passion, a compelling message, and maybe a leather outfit.

[Image via]