They’re called the “invincibles” — young, healthy people who might not think they need health insurance but are critical to the success of Obamacare.

But they were invisibles on Friday at a Harrisburg University event intended to enroll them before the end of the first Obamacare enrollment period March 31.

No students enrolled or even stopped by during the first hour of the event, which coincided with lunch time. Lynn Keltz, an organizer of the event, said such events have been hit or miss in terms of attracting people, and similar events held elsewhere have drawn better. She’ll be involved with another event Sunday, as advocates around the country continue a final push until the deadline.

Once the March 31 deadline passes and the data is scrutinized, much will be made of the success, or failure, in attracting young people to Obamacare coverage. Since their health care costs are the lowest, their premiums are needed to offset the cost of older, sicker people, and prevent overall costs from spiking.

Overall, about 160,000 Pennsylvania residents have enrolled in Obamacare coverage. Most enrolled by way of the federally-run exchange that was plagued by glitches for months following its launch in October.

Nationally, about five million people enrolled as of mid-March, according to federal officials, who said the pace of enrollment has picked up substantially as the deadline nears. Before the glitches, the Obama administration had hoped to enroll seven million people during the 2014 enrollment period.

Most people who don’t have health insurance by March 31 will have to pay a fine.

While people can still buy health insurance from health insurers and brokers, March 31 is the deadline for buying 2014 coverage through the exchange, which also provides the only path for obtaining government subsidies toward coverage. The exchange will begin selling 2015 coverage in October.

Keltz is director the Pennsylvania Mental Health Consumers’ Organization, which employs federally-funded navigators to spread word about coverage available through the exchange and provide enrollment help.

She said Obamacare has enabled many previously-uninsured Harrisburg-area residents, including many who work full-time, to finally obtain affordable health insurance. She tells of encountering local cancer patients who previously had no coverage. She considers Obamacare a success, and believes that view will spread as more people see the results.

“I see the people coming in here. Some are getting insurance for the first time in ten years. Some are laid off and now they can get insurance again. They are getting affordable insurance and it is very rewarding to see them,” she said.

Michael Consedine, Pennsylvania’s insurance commissioner, offered a less enthusiastic assessment this week.

He said insurance premiums have gone up for many younger people, including some whose previous policies were canceled because they lacked “essential benefits” required by Obamacare. While he agreed some older, sicker people are finding more affordable coverage, he said it remains to be seen if the overall impact on premiums will be positive.

He further said that while the function of the exchange has improved, his department still receives complaints daily. Moreover, he said Obama reversals such as the one that allows insurers to resume selling non-compliant policies for a limited period are causing confusion for businesses and consumers.

“So far it has been a pretty bumbled roll-out and we have had our challenges to keep people apprised of the changes … I have a feeling we are going to have our hands full of that for the foreseeable future,” said Consedine, an appointee of Gov. Tom Corbett, who has opposed Obamacare.

Consedine also expressed concern about “back end” problems such as insurance cards being issued to people who don’t follow through with payment of premiums, and therefore aren't officially insured. He said some Pennsylvania doctors are encountering people who have cards but don’t actually have coverage, resulting in reimbursement and administrative burdens.

Capital Blue Cross has handled about 4,000 enrollments, and 90 percent or more followed through on payment, PinnacleHealth System has several employees devoted to helping people enroll. They have provided information to 325 people, and helped 60 to enroll. Others might have enrolled on their own, spokeswoman Kelly McCall wrote in an email.

McCall noted that two people who recently received help at PinnacleHealth learned they qualified for tax credits of $300 per month, and their premiums turned out to be lower than they expected.

Highmark said it has enrolled 108,390 people in Pennsylvania. Fifty-three percent were new members, meaning they previously were uninsured, or changed insurers, a spokesman said.

Darcel Kimble is a volunteer with a pro-Obama organization that spent a lunch hour in downtown Carlisle this week urging people to become informed about Obamacare and how they might benefit. Kimble said she and her husband, who live in Manchester Twp. in York County, are self-employed. They found coverage on the exchange that costs substantially less than they were previously paying, she said

“We can’t tell anyone what to do, but we can urge people to get information and make decisions that are in the best interests of themselves and their families,” she said of the Carlisle informational effort.