Buy Photo Theresa Irvin says drinking water from the Census Buereau's National Processing Center has a funny smell and taste. The federal EPA has found that the water contains traces of tetrachloroethylene, a volatile chemical compound used in dry-cleaning clothes and degreasing metal. By Matt Stone, The Courier-Journal June 25, 2014 (Photo: By Matt Stone/The Courier-Journal )Buy Photo Story Highlights Results show water at the Census Bureau's complex exceed contaminant level for tetrachloroethylene

Studies show also may increase risks of lung and bladder cancers when consumed in water.

Teresa Irvin is convinced drinking the water from work dispensers led to her lung cancer

Latoscia Mason, a spokeswoman said it has continued to keep workers posted about water test results

Some U.S. Census Bureau workers at the National Processing Center in Jeffersonville, Ind., believe they may have a higher risk for cancer after drinking contaminated well water from fountains and ice dispensers at the campus for years.

The latest test results from April show water at the Census Bureau's main data complex continues to exceed the federal maximum contaminant level for tetrachloroethylene, a volatile, likely carcinogenic compound used for dry-cleaning clothes that studies show may increase risks of lung and bladder cancers when consumed in water.

Barry Sneed, a spokesman for the Indiana Department of Environmental Management, said the presence of the chemical was initially identified during a cleanup at a nearby auto sales lot in 2006. IDEM began looking for an additional potential source.

IDEM sent a request for information to the owner of One Hour Martinizing, 1324 E. 10th St. The dry cleaning company hired an environmental consultant to begin investigating in 2007, but the source of the chemical wasn't positively identified as the dry cleaner until 2010.

The Census Bureau first found out from IDEM in September 2013 that its water exceeded maximum levels of the man-made chemical. Sneed said the agency usually requires four consecutive samples showing excessive readings to trigger an action plan, but in this case, IDEM decided to notify the Census Bureau early that it should shut off its drinking water as a precaution.

"Ongoing investigation of the contamination has continued since then to the point that we are today where a source removal has taken place, a remediation system is in place and cleanup is underway," Sneed said.

IDEM is concerned for the workers' health, Sneed said, but its main charge is to make sure the Census Bureau and other parties involved help resolve the violation of drinking water standards.

On its website, the Census Bureau touts its National Processing Center as a flexible workforce that can rapidly expand to more than 5,000 employees — as happened for the 2010 census — or scale back to its current staff of about 1,250.

'No one knows anything'

Teresa Irvin, who began working at the Census Bureau in 1997, is convinced that drinking the water and eating crushed ice from work dispensers led to her lung cancer. She had half of her right lung removed last year and her cancer has since remained in remission, though she remains bitter toward her employer, who she feels worked slowly to fix the problem and downplayed the contamination.

"I'm with a lung-and-a-half. I'm not as whole as I came in here and it's all because of their negligence," she said.

Latoscia Mason, a Census Bureau spokeswoman, denied any cover-up, saying it has continued to inform workers about the water test results, as required.

Mason emailed a copy of an April employee newsletter to The Courier-Journal. It outlines the steps the Census Bureau has taken, including shutting off drinking fountains and ice machines, posting test results since becoming aware of the problem and providing water dispensers as an alternative.

The issue is expected to be resolved later this year after Indiana American Water Co. workers switch the complex and other neighboring buildings connected to its water system from well water to its lines. Sneed said work to connect the main Census Bureau building was tentatively slated to begin early this month.

Irvin, who has not filed suit against her employer, has at least two other cancer predispositions: she smoked until her recent surgery and cancer runs in her family. But Irvin remains convinced the water played a role, saying she's seen at least eight co-workers die from cancer since January, deaths she believes were accelerated by the contaminated water.

"We just had one die (last week). ... Many people are walking around here don't know they've got it," Irvin said.

When workers have asked questions in staff meetings, Irvin said "no one knows anything, they'll get back with us."

'Not an immediate risk'

Sneed said no other businesses in the immediate area are known to have used the chemical and the dry cleaning business has since changed ownership.

Sneed initially told The Courier-Journal there had been no fines because the spill had been reported. On Friday, he confirmed the spill was unreported but the owner of the current business, Sharps Dry Cleaners, "likely was not aware of it" since it happened before she bought the property.

"The responsible party was not fined, but they are required to clean it up. Sharps Cleaners has been proactive about cleaning up the contamination attributed to their property," Sneed said.

A woman who answered the phone at Sharps last week and identified herself as the owner declined to comment.

Test results given to workers show levels exceeding the maximum as early as April 2013.

However, IDEM has records from two decades ago that show similar contamination at the Census Bureau. In 1992, the EPA began regulating tetrachloroethylene, setting its maximum level at 5 micrograms per liter or 5 parts per billion. It required all water suppliers to test for the chemical between 1993 and 1995.

Records from IDEM's online "Virtual File Cabinet" show Census Bureau water taken from the site's four wells — near Buildings 102, 103, 104 and 105 — were tested several times by Clarksville-based Environmental Consultants Inc. Results from November 1994 found levels of tetrachloroethylene of up to 5.2 micrograms per liter.

The 1994 tests also found other harmful chemicals, such as similarly high levels of dichloroethylene and trichloroethylene, two other volatile, man-made compounds known to damage the liver or lungs damage or possibly cause cancer.

Sneed said he wasn't aware of any previous incidents and IDEM doesn't believe workers have been drinking contaminated water for years.

"The U.S. EPA models on which the 5 parts per billion MCL are based are extremely conservative. They figure that a person is exposed to the chemical for eight hours a day, five days per week, for 30 years. The model figures a constant exposure for these time frames rather than a fluctuation. We know that the levels at the monitoring wells have fluctuated up and down," Sneed said.

The level of tetrachloroethylene was 5.5 micrograms per liter in April, dipped to 4.4 in January and rose as high as 7.1 in July 2013, according to a required notification of results provided to Census Bureau workers.

"This is not an immediate risk. If it had been, you would have been notified immediately. However, some people who drink water containing tetrachloroethylene in excess of the MCL over many years, could experience problems with their liver or may have an increased risk of getting cancer," the quarterly notifications read.

Irvin said she believes the issue is far more pressing: "Everybody's keeping stuff underneath the rug, hush hush, and there's people around here dying of this stuff. I'm very angry."

Other neighboring businesses that use the same well water, such as ones in America Place Business Park and Kitchen Kompact, also were notified to make sure employees weren't using the drinking water. The complex is part of the former Quartermaster Depot that once bustled with government warehouses where workers made shirts and many other military goods for the Spanish-American War, World War I, World War II and the Korean War.

Shorter-term exposure may not have drastic effects and coupled with the fact that Census Bureau workers don't cook, shower and bathe in the water, it seems likely that the risk is lessened, Sneed said.

"Remember that off and on during the times of sampling, levels of contamination have not exceeded" maximum containment levels, he said.

The cleanup project, Sneed said, has "moved along at steady pace."

But for Irvin and some other workers, a resolution hasn't come quickly enough. Some workers say they feel lied to after the June deadline to fix the problem passed, though Sneed said it was not a hard deadline.

"It's still not corrected and (the water is) still not on a year after they said it would be," Irvin said.

Reporter Charlie White can be reached at (812) 949-4026 or on Twitter @c_write.

What's in the water?

The latest test results from April show water at the Census Bureau's main data complex continues to exceed the federal maximum contaminant level for tetrachloroethylene.

• What is it? A volatile, likely carcinogenic compound used for dry cleaning

• Dangers: Studies show the chemical may increase risks of lung and bladder cancers when consumed in water.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1m6x9Gs