. (Photo: File Image)

HealthVisions Delmarva, LLC, a partnership between Bayhealth and the Peninsula Regional Health System designed to improve the overall health care experience for Delmarva residents, is one of 39 health care collaborative networks selected to participate in the Transforming Clinical Practice Initiative. The initiative was announced on September 29 by Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell.

HealthVisions Delmarva will receive up to $1,299,206 annually for four years, $5,196,824 total award, to provide technical assistance support to equip clinicians on the Delmarva Peninsula with tools, information and network support needed to improve quality of care, increase patients’ access to information and spend health care dollars more wisely.

“Supporting doctors and other health care professionals changes the way they work and is critical to improving quality and spending our health care dollars more wisely,” said Secretary Burwell. “These awards will give patients more of the information they need to make informed decisions about their care and give clinicians access to information and support to improve care coordination and quality outcomes.”

As a Practice Transformation Network, HealthVisions Delmarva can, geographically, support as many as 1,600 participating regional clinicians to expand their quality improvement capacity, learn from one another and achieve common goals of improved care, better health and reduced cost. The team will help participating clinicians meet the initiative’s phases of transformation and associated milestones, clinical and operational results.

“Using this grant, HealthVisions Delmarva will engage clinicians to increase physician alignment, improve quality and share health information technology," said Karen Poisker, vice president of population health at Peninsula Regional Medical Center. "The network will provide participating clinicians direct technical support to make the required transformation.”

These awards are part of a comprehensive strategy advanced by the Affordable Care Act that enable new levels of coordination, continuity and integration of care, while transitioning volume-driven systems to value-based, patient-centered health care services. It builds upon successful models and programs such as the Hospital Value-Based Purchasing Organization Program, Partnership for Patients with Hospital Engagement Networks, and Accountable Care Organizations.

“The network will also provide clinicians with access to problem-solving, peer-directed groups to share in and learn about quality improvement and cost reduction; access to nationally-recognized faculty and access to robust data, analytic and care management,” added Evan Polansky, executive director of the Bayhealth Physician Alliance.

In 2014, the Peninsula Regional Health System of Salisbury joined with Bayhealth of Dover to form HealthVisions Delmarva, LLC. The two health systems have been working collaboratively to identify new opportunities to improve patient outcomes and innovative ways to share services, while reducing expenses. The alliance is focused on designing tools and processes for clinical improvement using the shared knowledge of both organizations. HealthVisions Delmarva also brings together community providers to enhance integrated care that focuses on the health of the community as a whole.

For more information on the Transforming Clinical Practice Initiative, please visit: http://innovation.cms.gov/initiatives/Transforming-Clinical-Practices/.

Read or Share this story: http://www.delmarvanow.com/story/news/local/maryland/2015/10/20/healthvisions-delmarva-grant/74278088/