ANALYSIS/OPINION:

Christians need to engage in peaceful civil disobedience against President Obama’s signature health care law. The reason is simple and macabre: Obamacare enables U.S. taxpayer funds to pay for abortions for members of Congress and their staff. That’s right. Pro-life Christians will be forced to subsidize the slaughter of unborn children.

Mr. Obama publicly vowed that Obamacare would not allocate taxpayer dollars to fund abortions. In fact, he convinced pro-life Democrats, such as then-Rep. Bart Stupak of Michigan, to support the 2009 health care overhaul on this very promise. Mr. Stupak prevailed on the president to sign an executive order stipulating there would be no taxpayer-funded abortions under Obamacare. As with much else about the law, Mr. Obama lied. He deliberately deceived the American people.

Recently, the Office of Personnel Management released an Obamacare guide, stating that members of Congress and their staff are allowed to now receive U.S. taxpayer funds to get an abortion. Think about this: Christians will be compelled to violate their conscience rights, paying for a practice they find not only morally abominable but goes against their fundamental religious beliefs. This is an assault upon their faith, individual liberties and religious freedom.

Devout Christians are obligated to oppose Obamacare — including those who champion social justice and universal health care. Christian teaching is crystal clear: The killing of innocent human life is wrong, a heinous transgression of one of God’s most sacred commandments. Abortion is murder; it is state-sanctioned infanticide. Obamacare is ensnaring Christians in its nefarious web, making them culpable in the killing of unborn babies. Their tax dollars will pay for the abortionist’s knife. Unwitting Christians will have the blood of innocent children on their hands.

This should come as no surprise. Progressivism is at war with traditional Christianity. Liberals seek to create a society without God. Their goal is personal liberation — the destruction of the family, Christian culture and all the other social bonds that act as bulwarks against radical individualism. Abortion clinics are liberalism’s Gulag Archipelago, death camps scattered across the landscape. For liberals, abortion is key to erecting a society without sexual consequences. If a pregnancy is unwanted, liquidate the baby. Secular progressives believe that nothing — including innocent human life — must stand in the way of the sexual revolution. It is genocide masquerading as “choice.”

Since the 1973 Roe v. Wade decision that legalized abortion nationwide, more than 50 million unborn babies have been butchered. Hence, abortion has taken more lives than murderous dictators, such as Adolf Hitler or Josef Stalin. Liberalism is responsible for more deaths than Nazism or Soviet communism.

The abortion coverage within Obamacare is part of a larger attack upon Christianity. The law’s contraceptive mandate compels Catholic institutions — universities, charities and hospitals — to provide its employees with free contraception and abortion-inducing drugs. The Catholic Church rightly argues it tramples on basic doctrine, abrogating religious liberty. The mandate means that Washington, not the Vatican, should determine the church’s social teaching. Mr. Obama is not the pope. He has no business telling the Catholic Church what it can and can’t do. This is why the U.S. Conference of Bishops is suing the administration, hoping the Supreme Court will nullify the contraceptive mandate. If it is upheld, then the church has said it will close down many of its hospitals and charities rather than betray core religious principles.

Christians must wake up before it’s too late. There is a virulent prejudice still acceptable in America: Christophobia. For decades, liberal elites have sought to purge religion from the public square. Prayer has been banned from schools. The Ten Commandments have been taken down from courthouses. Same-sex “marriage” is becoming encoded in law, overturning marriage between a man and a woman as a sacred, unique institution. Pornography is rampant. The family is breaking down. Our culture is obsessed with sexual promiscuity and moral permissiveness. God and Christians are regularly mocked. Even in the military, Christians are now told to remain in the closet.

Enough is enough. America is a product of English and Christian civilization. Our Founding Fathers were Christian patriots, who understood that individual liberties stem from a higher power. The most important is the right to life. Christians must declare that their allegiance to their faith transcends that of the ideological, secular state. If Obamacare continues to insist that we subsidize abortion, then it’s time for Christians to march on the streets in peaceful opposition. Mr. Obama is not worth the loss of our souls.

Jeffrey T. Kuhner is a radio host on WRKO AM-680 in Boston.