Six months after the United States began the air campaign against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, President Obama finally sent Congress proposed legislation to authorize this military action.

At the same time the president purports to seek congressional authorization, he disclaims the need for it and persists with the constitutional fiction that he has inherent authority to start a war. In the process, he elevates form over substance.

His legal position is that congressional approval to wage war, while important, is unnecessary. As a former professor of constitutional law, he knows the Constitution says otherwise.

On Aug. 8, the president launched the first in a series of “targeted airstrikes” against ISIL, sometimes referred to as ISIS or Islamic State. He said that the strikes were necessary to protect American personnel and for humanitarian reasons. He repeatedly claimed that the Constitution allowed him to act unilaterally as commander-in-chief.

He was wrong. The Constitution vests in Congress the power and responsibility to authorize such military action.

By late September, “discrete military operations” had morphed into a “systematic campaign of airstrikes and other necessary actions” aimed at “degrad[ing], and ultimately defeat[ing], ISIL.” This time, the president argued that Congress need not weigh in because it had already signed off on a broader war – both in 2001 when it authorized force against the Taliban and al Qaeda and in 2002 when it authorized the invasion of Iraq.

At least he noticed that Congress ought to play a role in continuing a war he presumed to start. But he was still wrong.

In his letter transmitting to Congress his newly proposed Authorization for Use of Military Force against ISIL, the president reiterated his claim that “existing statutes” provide him all the authority he needs to continue the current military campaign.

He is wrong again. There is no evidence whatsoever that Congress intended either the 2001 AUMF or the 2002 AUMF to sanction a war nearly a decade and a half later against an enemy that at the time did not even exist.

Yes, the president deserves credit for his willingness to work together with Congress on the use of force abroad.

Having served in Congress, we know this is the most difficult issue an elected representative can face: whether to send U.S. service members to fight, knowing that some, and possibly many, will die. But President Obama continues to miss the fundamental point: if he believes that war is necessary, the Constitution requires him to request Congress to exercise its authority, not to accede to his.

It is against this backdrop that Congress will evaluate and debate the proposed new AUMF over the coming weeks. We hope lawmakers will engage in that debate with appropriate skepticism about the willingness of any president to adhere to limits on the use of force.

If members of Congress decide to continue the war that the president began, they must do so in a way that checks his expansive claims of pre-existing authority. President Obama’s proposal would repeal the 2002 Iraq AUMF. But he ignores the more problematic, post 9/11 2001 AUMF. At minimum, any new war authority must make clear that, going forward, no commander-in-chief may rely on either the 2001 AUMF or the 2002 Iraq AUMF to justify the use of force against ISIL.

If Congress allows either law to stay on the books – and fails to state explicitly that neither applies to the war with ISIL – future presidents will be tempted to seize on what remains to sidestep any new Congressionally-imposed limits on the use of force.

If Congress succeeds in reaching agreement on the specifics of a new force authorization — hopefully with limits on its scope in geography, enemies and duration — it would be ironic if a future president might still rely on the 2001 AUMF to circumvent congressional intent and extend military action beyond the specifics authorized.

Unless Congress confronts President Obama’s current legal position, it risks endorsing and adding to an ambiguous grab-bag of war authorities that simply expands the chief executive’s powers while diminishing those of Congress.

The framers of our Constitution assigned Congress the sole power to decide on war because they believed that young Americans should only be sent into battle when the people, through their representatives’ collective judgment, approved it. The commander-in-chief’s role is to wage war once authorized, but only within the boundaries that Congress sets. It is high time for both branches to discharge those responsibilities.

Mickey Edwards is a former Republican congressman from Oklahoma who served as chair of the House Republican Policy Committee. David Skaggs is a former Democratic congressman from Colorado who served on the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence. They are co-chairmen of the Constitution Project War Powers Committee.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.