Andres Cuartas sits with an agent from Sunshine Life and Health Advisors as he purchases a health insurance plan under the Affordable Care Act. | Getty POLITICO Pro Obamacare advocates refine their pitch to millennials

Gone are the splashy tweets about health coverage from Katy Perry and the “brosurance” ads featuring guys doing keg stands. Fliers in coffee shops and bars are in, as are partnerships with community colleges and job training centers.

Millennials are still a critical demographic for Obamacare, but young adults are being wooed very differently in Year Two of enrollment. They showed last year that they’re not slackers when it comes to the health care law — disproving fears that they’d feel too invincible to want insurance — so the approach now is quieter, better targeted, more local, according to advocates. And the data so far suggest it’s on track, they say.

An HHS report released Tuesday showed millennials enrolling at a slightly higher rate than a year earlier. Individuals ages 18-34 comprised 26 percent of sign-ups in both the federal exchange and state-run exchanges through mid-January, compared to 25 percent of the HealthCare.gov tally during the first four months of the 2014 open enrollment period.

Officially, HHS cautions against drawing any conclusions from the demographic data to date because patterns could change. Yet if last year is any indication, the proportion of young adults will only increase as the Feb. 15 deadline nears. Like many Americans, they waited until the last minute to sign up last year — but they did sign up.

“We’re pretty happy with those numbers, and we expect it to be a surge toward the end as well,” said Erin Hemlin, health care campaign director for the organization Young Invincibles.

That optimism contrasts with the earliest concerns, which included fears that many millennials would pay little attention or decide to forgo coverage because of other expenses such as cellphones or Netflix subscriptions. Plenty of Obamacare critics predicted the latter. They warned that having too few young, presumably healthy people in insurers’ risk pools — to balance out the health care costs of an older, typically sicker population — would throw plans into a “death spiral.”

The Obama administration ultimately fell short of its 2014 goal of having young adults hit 38 percent of total enrollees. But the 28 percent it got apparently provided enough stability for insurers. There’s been virtually no death-spiral talk in 2015.

Sign-ups are the only available measure for this group since HHS has never given an age breakdown for actual policyholders. But between their own exchange plans and the coverage that many millennials obtained through a parent’s plan, the uninsured rate among 19- to 34-year-olds fell from 27 percent in 2010 to 19 percent in 2014, according to the Commonwealth Fund.

Such progress may be a factor in why they’re now getting less attention from the administration. In December 2013, for example, President Barack Obama held a strategy summit that drew more than 160 young people to the White House. A month later, he had lunch at a hangout in Northwest D.C. with representatives from groups such as Generation Progress and Young Invincibles.

By contrast, this season’s youth summit was smaller, and Obama didn’t make an appearance.

Because the Obama administration is talking less about youth enrollment, its foes have also moved on. Last year, Generation Opportunity, a libertarian-leaning group with ties to the Koch brothers, released a series of ads featuring “Creepy Uncle Sam” to discourage young people from enrolling. But this season, the group is putting its energy into other issues like higher education and unemployment, said communications director David Pasch.

“Last time, the White House and its allies spent millions of dollars trying to sucker us into a bad deal, so we felt a responsibility to provide the resources to help young people make the best health care decisions for themselves. Fast forward one year, and the president doesn’t even feel the need to mention it during the State of the Union,” Pasch said.

Obamacare advocates stress that the lower-key strategy reflects what has been learned about their target group’s response to the health care law. A more direct, organic conversation, they say, works better than some broad, national push relying in part on pop stars, pro athletes or other big names.

Buzz is definitely out. Even the Colorado Consumer Health Initiative, the group responsible for those much ballyhooed brosurance spots, has transitioned to more research-driven ads that focus on the message, not the image.

“One of the things we saw last year was engaging local leaders in communities and really having more localized efforts was in some ways even more important than engaging national celebrities,” said Anne Filipic, president of Enroll America, an administration ally. The White House has “taken that to heart, and they’ve done a lot of work to figure out how to amplify this at a local level and how to engage local leaders in the work.”

Partnerships with community colleges are being enhanced because they proved effective last year; in December, second lady Jill Biden met with about a dozen community college presidents to discuss ways, from workshops to one-on-one assistance, to help students get covered.

Enroll America has expanded its own partnerships with schools and asked them to share sign-up information. As Filipic noted, students are much more likely to open an email that comes from their college. And this week, Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc. is hosting a phone bank to reach African-American and Latino students at colleges and universities.

Advocates are also working with other millennial-focused sites or groups that don’t normally deal in health care — from career-training institutes and youth ministries to LGBT groups and places popular with young adults.

The Michigan Primary Care Association, which is spearheading such efforts in that state, has been leaving sign-up information at bars, gyms and other businesses in collaboration with their owners and managers. At some coffee shops, the cardboard sleeves for lattes and other drinks now urge “Get Covered, Stay Covered.” Patrons of tattoo parlors and e-cigarette shops can read about Obamacare while they get inked or vape.

On Thursday, Young Invincibles and Enroll America will host the second annual National Youth Enrollment Day to reel in the procrastinators. The groups and their ally organizations will hold more than 200 events around the country and aim to inundate social media through Twitter chats — with the hashtag #YoEnroll — graphics and success stories.

While these national organizations are sponsoring some city-specific events — including a live-music “Rock Enroll” in Houston that drew over 2,500 people last Saturday and “ACA Block Parties” around Atlanta this week — they’re really trying to equip community leaders to host events tailored to their communities’ specific needs, Hemlin said.

“Those types of events that are more localized and managed more by local leaders tend to have a lot more success,” she said.

As the Feb. 15 deadline approaches, expect the messaging to ramp up, especially online. Young Invincibles and Enroll America found that the availability of premium subsidies and the threat of the individual mandate penalty were big motivators last year, so their final-days messaging will emphasize the financial aspects of Obamacare particularly and health care generally.

Enroll America already has released graphics that calculate the cost of various health conditions in terms designed to hit home with millennials. The cost of a general sprain, for example, is worth 167 chicken burritos from Chipotle. And the cost of a urinary tract infection? As much as 423 gallons of gas.

Authors: