?

Oklahoma freshman running back Joe Mixon has been suspended for the entire upcoming football season after being charged with a misdemeanor stemming from an altercation at a Norman restaurant in late July.

On Monday, OU President David Boren accepted the recommendation of the Director of Athletics and the Head Football Coach Bob Stoops to suspend Mixon from the football team.

A statement from the university stated that Mixon will be excluded from all team activities, including being removed from the team roster. With appropriate conditions, he will be permitted to continue as a student, eligible for financial aid.

Vice President for Athletics Joe Castiglione and Head Football Coach Bob Stoops said, “As the university has demonstrated in the past, we are committed to winning the right way. As an example to others, OU sets the highest possible standards for its student athletes, coaches and staff.”

Mixon was arraigned Monday afternoon where he pled Not Guilty. A judge has ordered him to be booked into the Cleveland County Detention Center by 4 p.m.

Joe Mixon and his attorneys said nothing as they arrived at the Cleveland county courthouse for Mixon's 1:30 pm arraignment. They ignored all reporter questions and would not make eye contact.

Mixon is charged with a misdemeanor count of acts resulting in gross injury. Authorities said he punched Amelia Molitor in the face following an argument at a Norman restaurant back in July.

During the arraignment, the prosecutor for the state asked the judge to set $1,000 bond on Mixon and asked for him to have no contact with Molitor or any state's witnesses. Mixon' s attorneys said Mixon is not a flight risk and started classes at the University of Oklahoma Monday.

The judge asked the state if there was an arrest warrant issued for Mixon, but the state said there was not. The judge chose to deny the state's request for bail, and released Mixon on his own recognizance. His next court appearance is set for September 23.

Mixon still has to be processed through the jail and has until 4 p.m. Monday to do so. He was also ordered not to have any contact with Molitor. The judge told Mixon directly not to contact, call, text, write or anything.

Mixon's attorney asked the judge to place a no-contact order on Molitor, but the judge said he had no jurisdiction over Molitor or her actions.

He also ordered for the state, police and the defense not to release the surveillance video to anyone in this case, not even for the university to view. Judge did not give a reason for the gag order.

Mixon and his attorney quickly left the courthouse and drove away in a black car without making any comments to the media, which swarmed them every step of the way. Mixon's attorney Kevin Finley texted News 9, saying he would have no comment on the case now that it is pending, and referred to the statement he released on Friday on Mixon's behalf.

?

8/15/2014 Related Story: OU's Joe Mixon To Be Charged With Misdemeanor

7/31/2014 Related Story: Joe Mixon Being Withheld From Football Activities At OU

News 9 Reporter Adrianna Iwasinski is following this story. Watch News 9 at 6 p.m., and stay with News9.com for the latest updates.