SNL lampoons the President as his approval rating falls in the wake of Obamacare and revelations that NSA tapped world leaders

In a week when the President's approval ratings fell to a low of 42 per cent, the cast of Saturday Night Live couldn't resist having a dig.

In a skit with host Kerry Washington, the TV show reviewed Barack Obama's tough week in the face of the dismal response to the Obamacare website and latest NSA revelations.



Almost a year after he was reelected, Saturday Night Live asked whether voters still felt like they had made the right choice.



Question time: After a tough week in the White House, SNL reviewed Obama's performance

Twist: Thompson, Pharoah and Washington expressed surprise that, with their love of the Wire, more white people didn't find the phone tapping exciting

Video source SNL

But when asked whether they should have voted for Mitt Romney, Washington and Jay Pharoah fell about laughing, before Kenan Thompson said: 'I always like to start with a joke.'

After pondering over why so many white people feared Obamacare, they concluding that their insurance must be really good if they were that scared of losing it.



Washington added that white people also expected everything to be OK straight away, adding: 'When they arrive at a hotel and the room's not ready they act like there's been a death in the family.'

As the conversation moved on to the NSA tracking scandal, she said: 'You'd have thought white people would have been more excited about the phone tapping seeing as they love the Wire so much.'

The NSA scandal was revisited in a later segment in the show, during a mock interview with German Chancellor Angela Merkel, one of the world leaders the U.S. is accused of listening in on.



Kate McKinnon, playing Merkel, said: 'It was clear violation of privacy und a dark period,' adding that being Chancellor was a lonely job.



Searching for laughs: In a skit about Angela Merkel, the German Chancellor, played by McKinnon, right, feared her Google searches about toe hair had been hacked

'I made many embarrassing calls, several hundred to a bratwurst shop, sometimes to order, sometimes just to chat,' she said in a faux German accent.



She added that she feared her Google searches had been accessed, and proceeded to read them herself to avoid later shame.



'Angela Merkel lame; Angela Merkel boxy; Is toe hair normal? Nickelback tour...' she read, as the news readers looked on embarrassed.