According to the complaint, drivers were typically paid between $1 and $1.50 per delivery, regardless of distance, rather than the 45 to 55 cents per mile rate recommended by AAA and the IRS. That scheme cost the drivers $1.50 to $5.33 per hour, giving them a net hourly pay ranging from $1.48 to $5.75, according to the lawsuit.

Schneiderman won judgments of almost $3 million against two other Papa John's franchises in other wage theft cases this year.

"What a home this is, what grounds these are, the pool, the golf course, you know if a Democrat were here he'd look around and say no one should live like this," said Romney, as the crowd began to laugh. "Republicans come here and say everyone should live like this, all right."

If this story of cutting corners with workers' wages sounds familiar, it should. Just last month, New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman secured a guilty plea from a Bronx franchisee whose nine Papa John stores illegally took wages from his employees. Sentenced to 60 days in jail and owing $460,000 in back wages and a $50,000 fine, "BMY Foods Inc. failed to pay about 300 current and former employees the minimum wage and overtime, and also filed fake quarterly tax returns to hide their actions." And as the New York Times also noted:That Papa John's and its franchisees are in trouble for pumping up profits at employees' expense is unsurprising. Like a fish, the rot starts with the head. In August 2012 , Mitt Romney fundraiser John Schnatter warned that "Obamacare will cost 11 to 14 cents per pizza," adding, "If Obamacare is in fact not repealed, we will find tactics to shallow out any Obamacare costs and core strategies to pass that cost onto consumers in order to protect our shareholders best interests." As a former Papa John's VP dismissed in 2002 described Schnatter, " He has a passion for being wealthy ." That passion is reflected in his stunning mansion , private jet and multimillion dollar St. Regis penthouses . As Mitt Romney put it during an April 2012 fundraiser at Schnatter's estate:No matter what it takes. Especially if it is taken from workers.

UPDATE: As it turns out, Papa John Schnatter isn't just a donor to the Koch brothers Super-PAC and a guest at its secretive retreats. Papa John partnered with Charles Koch on a $6 million contribution to create the the new John H. Schnatter Center for Free Enterprise at the University of Louisville. Its mission? To "engage in teaching and research that explores the role of free enterprise and entrepreneurship in advancing society."