‘Show me the way’

Peter Frampton, holder of one of the biggest selling live rock albums “Frampton Comes Alive,” is partnering with an inventor originally from Norwalk to assist his company raising funds, promoting their new products and finding industry partners.

Neil Skinn, a Norwalk native, founded TransPerformance Inc in Fort Collins, Colo. in 1987 to develop and manufacture “self-tuning” systems for musical instruments.

“I’ve known Neil Skinn for many years. We first met due to my interest in his TransPerformance self-tuning guitar system. I loved this self-tuning method due to its accuracy and also the custom tunings. I’m very excited and can't wait to start using the newly proposed AxCent Tuning system. There are other self-tuning guitar products out there, but none come close to the fail safe accuracy of AxCent Tuning,” Frampton said.

Skinn’s self-tuning guitar systems give artists the ability to change the tension of the strings, in real time, to thousands of alternate tunings and provide the ability to touch up the state of tuning and, most importantly, change the tuning while playing. Skinn said these features are a major advantage to artists in live performance, composing and recording.

Frampton partnered with Skinn to raise funds through the sale of equity. Frampton is the “headliner” for a crowdsource funding investment round through Crowdfunder.com .

Additionally, Frampton is using his stellar reputation as a “guitar player’s guitarist” to promote the company and its products on news outlets, technology spots and late night talk shows. Frampton and his band are doing a national tour in the summer of 2015 and will use Skinn’s self-tuning guitar system for certain songs that he wrote using their systems. Frampton also signed a five-year consulting agreement to help with the sales and marketing.



Skinn first conceived the idea for the tuning system in 1983 and made the breakthrough on how to put it all together in 1985 by employing concepts he learned while performing research at a scientific instrumentation company in the field of nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.



He assembled a team and began developing self-tuning guitar systems in 1987 and founded TransPerformance in 1989. The first working system was delivered to Jimmy Page of Led Zeppelin in early 1991. In 1993, Skinn married Vickie Channel and he and his partners were listed in Guitar Magazine’s Top 100 Most Important People in the Music Industry. The company’s list of endorsers and artists reads like a “who’s who” of the music business and includes legendary artists: Page, Joe Perry, Pete Townshend, Eddie Van Halen, Pat Metheny, Graham Nash, Mick Fleetwood, Kenny Loggins, Peter Buck, Rick Springfield and many more. In 2008 the company was reformed under the name AxCent Tuning Systems LLC.



Skinn said his company was unable to reach commercial success through the years because the technologies needed to get the costs down weren’t available.



“We were ahead of technology, but as the technology advanced, each advancement was applied to the design until recently the final breakthrough came with the advent of the smart phone,” he said.



His new systems are wireless and are controlled by Apple and Android devices. He said removing the user interface components of the system from the guitar body simplified the installation and removed the associated costs making the new systems affordable for the average musician. Skinn said their technology is far superior to anything presently in the marketplace.



Recently, AxCent Tuning Systems, with the help of Frampton, launched a capital raise campaign via Crowdfunder.com . Crowdfunder is a crowd-funding community of accredited investors that has seen tremendous success recently and the company plans to leverage the combination of Crowdfunder’s platform along with Frampton as the headliner to raise the capital necessary to build initial inventory and launch a marketing plan for their affordable, broad market, self tuning guitar systems. Frampton remains one of the most celebrated artists and guitarists in rock history.



At 16, he was lead singer and guitarist for British band the Herd. At 18, he cofounded one of the first supergroups, the seminal rock act Humble Pie. His session work includes collaborations with such legendary artists as George Harrison, Harry Nilsson, David Bowie, Jerry Lee Lewis, Ringo Starr, John Entwistle and many others. His fifth solo album, the electrifying “Frampton Comes Alive!,” is one of the top-selling live records of all time.



Skinn studied industrial electricity at EHOVE Career Center and graduated from St. Paul High School in 1974. He served six years in the Navy, where he studied advanced electronics in the field of SONAR and advanced music theory through the U.S. School of Music in Chicago. Skinn studied mathematics, physics and electrical engineering at Mesa Collage in Grand Junction Colo. and Colorado State University. His company has hundreds of investors in Norwalk. He is the son of the late James and Charlotte Skinn, of Norwalk.



Skinn was indoctrinated into the Museum of Science and Discovery in November 2012 by the city of Fort Collins, Colo. as the “top innovator” in the music field in Northern Colorado.



In 2014, Page released a book titled “Jimmy Page by Jimmy Page” chronicling his musical career in photographs. Skinn said he feels honored that several photos of Page playing and posing with his guitars appear in Page’s book.



A guitar player himself, Skinn is working with some of the legendary guitar greats to produce an interactive software package that will converse with his selftuning guitar systems to teach guitar players how to play in alternate tunings, transpose fingerings among alternate tunings, and incorporate alternate tuning into musical compositions.