Topics: AlterNet, Christianity, Religion, Life News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

Coming out of any proverbial closet can be hard. For those of us who have hidden part of our identities from people we know and love, finally revealing that thing can be daunting. Fear and anxiety, no matter how ungrounded, have a way of clutching our hearts.

When I decided four years ago to write a book aimed at secular parents, I knew that it would require that I disclose my atheism to my friends and family. My own parents were comfortably secular themselves, which no doubt made the task a whole lot easier. But I had plenty of other loved ones who felt strongly about their faith and would surely be offended or uncomfortable with my stance — not to mention worried about my daughter’s eternal soul. So I definitely felt that sense of coming out of a closet.

I took a few days to send a bunch of e-mails and make a few phone calls. And while no one disowned me in the process, the revelation did hurt some people I love, at least a little. And that made it hard.

But now, four years later, I can candidly say that, for me personally, being “out” has been one of the most surprisingly gratifying choices I’ve ever made. Here’s why.

1. It turns out I really enjoy shattering people’s assumptions. I don’t fit the media’s stereotype of a non-believer — who does, right? — so it’s nice to be able to spread the “good word” that atheists, agnostics and other “nones” are just as likely as the next guy to be engaging people, good parents and involved community members. I particularly enjoy slipping my atheism into conversation with religious people who already know and like me; it forces them to confront any stereotypes they might have. Always a good thing.

2. I like religious people more now. When I was closeted, it was way too easy to sit back and become preemptively resentful. I sometimes felt a little pissed that others were “free” to share their views while I had to keep mine to myself. I assumed, as many do, that people’s reactions would be negative if I were to inject my views into these conversations. But once I was out — and because I only brought up my atheism in truly neutral ways, not as a point of conflict — the reactions from religious people have been overwhelming positive. Some quietly disapprove, sure. But, in my experience, religious people have been, outwardly, very lovely about my lack of belief. (As lovely, incidentally, as I am about their belief.) They don’t insult me or shy away from me. They don’t avoid the subject (well, some do, and that’s okay!) or make snide comments. They don’t try to change me. And with every positive experience I have, I am more open and less judgmental of “religious people” myself. I find that the more open I am about myself, the better I feel about the people around me.