Partnership Offers Consumers a Proven High-Tech, High-Touch Approach to Prevent Type 2 Diabetes

PHOENIX, AZ and CHICAGO, IL--(Marketwired - Apr 4, 2016) - Solera Health, Inc., a technology-enabled health community integrator for evidence-based chronic disease prevention, and Retrofit, a leading provider of weight-management solutions, today announced they have partnered to offer health plan clients and their member base a new proactive treatment option for preventing the onset of type 2 diabetes. Retrofit will join the growing number of digital providers in the Solera network that deliver diabetes prevention programs (DPP) as an Affordable Care Act (ACA)-covered benefit.

Retrofit brings extensive weight-management and disease-prevention experience to Solera's network of Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)-recognized digital and community DPP providers. Retrofit's expert coaches and five years of data-driven insights power this unique, personalized program that delivers impressive outcomes and sustainable lifestyle changes for those at risk for type 2 diabetes.

Currently 86 million people, or one in three Americans, are living with prediabetes and only 10 percent are even aware that they have the condition. The good news is that in many cases the condition is reversible with lifestyle changes. According to the CDC, year-long, structured lifestyle change interventions reduced the incidence of diabetes by 58 percent among adults with prediabetes and by 71 percent in those aged 60 years or older.

"Learning to eat healthy, add physical activity, manage stress, stay motivated and solve problems that can get in the way of healthy changes are the cornerstones of the National Diabetes Prevention Program, but as an industry, we must recognize there is no one-size-fits-all solution for successfully making these impactful lifestyle modifications," said Brenda Schmidt, CEO of Solera Health. "Through this partnership with Retrofit, we are pleased to be able to offer patients a personalized weight-loss program for managing their health and wellness to prevent the onset of type 2 diabetes and other chronic diseases."

Retrofit's 52-week virtual offering uses its proven weight-loss formula to encourage healthy behaviors and lasting weight-loss results for individuals at risk for type 2 diabetes. The program offers individuals a convenient digital solution that integrates into daily life.

The company's DPP consists of live or recorded classes, a suite of digital tools (mobile app, online dashboard, digital scale and activity tracker) for self-monitoring, an interactive online community and the support of an expert coach. The program also includes 31 lessons of diabetes prevention-specific curriculum and supporting digital handouts and resources that teach participants how to eat healthy, add physical activity to their routine, manage stress, stay motivated and solve problems that can get in the way of healthy changes.

"The key to preventing type 2 diabetes is weight loss through sustainable lifestyle change," said Mary Pigatti, CEO, Retrofit. "We look forward to bringing our behavior change methodology to Solera's health plan clients and members via our scalable and personalized solution. Our organizations are aligned in transforming lives for the growing population at risk for this disease."

Solera Health was founded with the mission of transforming the chronic disease prevention delivery program model as it exists today by simplifying the contracting and referral process for payers, and creating a sustainable revenue model for community and digital program providers. By integrating a nationwide network of community organizations and digital solutions for chronic disease prevention programs, Solera improves health by simplifying patient choice, access and engagement.

About Solera Health

Solera Health helps health plans and healthcare providers improve outcomes, lower costs and increase patient engagement by consolidating highly fragmented community and digital programs and services into one integrated network. Solera supports value-based care by connecting a nationwide network of community organizations and digital solutions for chronic disease prevention programs with technology that manages service referrals, reimbursement and payment; aggregates data and reporting; simplifies enrollment; and supports increased consumer engagement and choice. Learn more at soleranetwork.com.

About Retrofit

Retrofit offers weight-management and disease-prevention solutions that help tackle obesity and related conditions to deliver proven outcomes and lasting results. Ninety percent of Retrofit participants lose weight and 68 percent keep it off 18 months later. Retrofit clients also are two times happier than those on other weight-loss programs, according to a recent customer satisfaction survey. Retrofit contributes its success to five key factors: 1) a scientifically based program design; 2) highly credentialed experts who drive a personalized experience and true engagement; 3) a data-driven high-tech/ high-touch approach; 4) the adaptability of the program to integrate or run discreetly within broader wellness ecosystems, and 5) "happiness delivered" with proven outcomes that transform lives.