Late last month, the U.S. House of Representative passed H.R. 7, the No Taxpayer Funding for Abortion and Abortion Insurance Full Disclosure Act of 2015.

The people’s representatives have spoken, and Americans do not want their hard-earned taxpayer dollars to fund abortion. Here are some top reasons why we should not be funding the grisly procedure so that others may kill their own children.

We have the Hyde Amendment for a reason.

The Hyde Amendment just recently celebrated its 38th anniversary on September 30 last year. According to a summary of the bill, H.R. 7 would be “making permanent existing federal policies,” which is the the Hyde Amendment.

Although there are exceptions, the Hyde Amendment prohibits abortions being paid for by federal funding from Medicaid.

And, as Dave Andrusko pointed out in National Right to Life News, there are over one million people alive today because of the Hyde Amendment.

H.R. 7 is necessary because, unfortunately, the Hyde Amendment has been circumvented, as evidenced from a GAO report, and notably through ObamaCare.

The states are also in great need of laws. In Oregon, for example, residents are forced to fund abortions.

Protecting consciences is a worthy compromise.

The U.S. Supreme Court decisions of Roe v. Wade and Doe v. Bolton, prime examples of judicial overreach, legalized abortion in all 50 states and up until birth. Isn’t that enough? Abortion advocates hardly have to convince others of their position; the Supreme Court decided over 40 years ago that they were right.

Is it so much to ask for, then, that those against abortion aren’t forced to be complicit in it by helping to pay for it?

We have all heard the eye-roll-inducing phrase “if you don’t like abortion, don’t have one.” But it is these same pro-abortion activists that want our money to be involved in paying for their abortion.

You should be able to pay for your own elective procedure.

Make no mistake. Abortion is widely an elective procedure. According to a report from the Guttmacher Institute, in 1987 and in 2004, rape and incest were at 1 percent and less than 0.5 percent, respectively. And physical health problems went down from 12 percent to 8 percent of abortion with those often being elective abortion of children with conditions like Down Syndrome, not health issues of the mother. Other reports show similar numbers in that abortion is almost always an elective procedure done for personal and socioeconomic reasons.

Americans oppose taxpayer-funded abortions.

The American people have indeed spoken through their elected representatives in Washington, D.C. By passing H.R. 7, the House was honoring the view of over half of Americans, who do not want taxpayer dollars going towards abortion.

From a CNN poll last year, with added emphasis:

Most Americans have never favored using public funds for abortions for women who cannot afford them. According to the survey, 56% remain opposed, with only 39% favoring public funding for abortions.

A poll from the Knights of Columbus conducted just this year shows opposition to funding at 68 percent.

Abortion giant Planned Parenthood does not deserve one cent more.

We may be reminded that the taxpayer dollars Planned Parenthood receives cannot go towards abortions. But does that matter? The organization still provides abortions, and any dollar that helps pay for other services can free up funds for abortion that much more.

The organization hardly deserves our money. With allegations of Medicaid fraud, how can we be assured that our money is not being used improperly?

Planned Parenthood has also been caught lying about services and safety, offering medical misinformation, eagerly accepting racist donations, assisting sex-traffickers, willingly aborting babies based on sex, and failing to report statutory rape. Live Action has devoted an entire website to document all these abuses. And the organization receives $1.4 million a day? It doesn’t sound like they deserve 1 cent!

To sum it all up…

The Constitution has already been incorrectly interpreted so that abortion supporters convinced the Court that the Fourteenth Amendment grants women the right to an abortion. Roe and Doe did not decree was that women have the right to an abortion paid for by someone else, however.

The American people deserve more than having their hard-earned dollars paying for a procedure that causes the death of another. And, perhaps more importantly, future Americans deserve more as well.