What are the 2016 presidential candidates are saying on the campaign trail?

REUTERS



On Kevin McCarthy's withdrawal from the House speaker race:

Jeb Bush: "I'm surprised"

"I'm surprised. I think Kevin McCarthy was a good person, a good man, I'm surprised that he dropped out."

"I just hope that they stay focused on making sure that people know they're trying to solve problems for people. You know, Washington seems so removed everyday life. They talk about things - they talk in language, all the acronyms and stuff that doesn't make any sense. They just don't seem to be relevant to people right now." -- at a campaign event in Indianola, Iowa

Donald Trump: "They're giving me a lot of credit"

"[Y]ou know Kevin McCarthy is out. You know that, right? They're giving me a lot of credit for that because I said you really need somebody very, very tough and very smart. You know smart goes with tough - not just tough. I know tough people. They're not smart, that's the worst, okay. That's the worst. You got to be smart. But, we need smart, we need tough, we need the whole package. And it's a positive." -- at a campaign event in Las Vegas

Chris Christie: Nobody in America could care less

"They don't care who the speaker is going to be. What they want is a Congress who's actually going to do something - who's going to reform the tax system and put it on the president's desk. Reform--repeal and replace Obamacare. Get it on the president's desk." --on CNN's "The Lead with Jake Tapper"





John Kasich on immigration: "Are we going to ship them to the border and yell, 'Get out of our country?'"

"[W]e should have a guest worker program and the people who were here who have abided by the law should be able to have a path to legalization. It is not practical to think we are going to go take 10, 11, 12 million people and what are we going to do? How are we going to get them? Are we going to ship them to the border and yell, 'Get out of our country?' It's not practical. And, by the way, these folks who are here, many of them are creating a wonderful, stronger America. So I think it can pass. I actually think this can pass. In this campaign, we should stop talking about pie in the sky and starting talking about real solutions. I've been a reformer my entire lifetime, but I know how to land a plane and get it done. -- interviewed on "CBS This Morning"

"CBS This Morning"

John Kasich answers some questions from "CBS This Morning" - in his own writing:

Favorite author: "C.S. Lewis and St. Paul"

Morning drink of choice: "coffee"

Rand Paul's ebay listing:

"Hard Choices," by Hillary Rodham Clinton - Signed by Rand Paul and Hillary Clinton is currently $7,950, with one day, 22 hours left to bid. Clinton had sent all of the GOP presidential candidates (except Jim Gilmore) a copy of her book.

CBS News' Katiana Krawchenko, Jack Turman, Sopan Deb and Sean Gallitz contributed to this compilation