While a new study reports most of the nation has seen a decline in the rate of babies delivered by Cesarean section, New Jersey’s rate continues to remain well above the national average.

The study by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention survey of 28 states and New York City — chosen because they use a common birth certificate form — showed an overall Cesarean rate of 21.9 percent in 2012. In other words, one in five babies was born by C-section.

By contrast, New Jersey’s rate was 38.8 percent in 2011, the last year for which statistics were available. That means more than one in three babies are born this way. The state’s C-section rate has been around 39 percent since 2007, according to figures provided by the state Department of Health.

Cesarean delivery is of concern because it is carries with it a longer hospital stay and recuperation, is more expensive and, in the case of scheduled Cesareans, can risk delivery of a baby who is slightly premature.

A statewide coalition of hospital and health care professionals has seen substantial progress in reducing the number of scheduled births, whether those came about by induction of labor or planned Cesareans, said Aline Holmes, senior vice president of clinical affairs for the New Jersey Hospital Association.

Scheduled, or elective, births used to account for 8 percent of all births in New Jersey. Through education and changed policies, that number is now down to 2 percent, she said.

She expects that progress to be reflected in the state’s overall C-section rate by the end of this year.

Initially, the New Jersey medical community argued the state had such a high rate of C-sections because mothers here were older, or had other health problems, she said. But an examination of the data proved that to be incorrect.

“Our moms are not any different from moms in other states,” she said.

Some of the high rate could be blamed on physician fears of malpractice charges.

“Many of the obstetricians in the state are just one lawsuit away from not being able to practice any more,” Holmes said.

Obstetricians have told her they never get sued for doing a C-section, she said; instead, lawsuits stem from cases in which the aggrieved patient claims a C-section should have been performed.

One misconception that had underpinned the rise in C-sections was the notion that the final two or three weeks of gestation don’t make much difference. In fact, doctors now believe that 30 percent to 40 percent of brain development takes place in those final few weeks before 39 weeks.

Educating both obstetricians and parents about the importance of that timetable has helped a lot, said Holmes.

The state’s various ethnic cultures are a factor as well, Holmes said. Hasidic Jewish women will almost always deliver vaginally. Yet women in other cultures will cite the belief that their uterus could be damaged by labor, or labor will ruin their sex lives.

“Trust me, I’ve head women tell me that,” Holmes said. “So it’s very a complicated.”