In 1972, Dr. Stuart Scheckner thought he had it made.

The New Jersey native had fallen in love with Florida's beaches and balmy climate during his two years' service in the U.S. Air Force at Tampa. So when he found a dental practice in Siesta Key Village he could buy, he was delighted.

"I was so fortunate. It was my paradise island," he says.

Six years later, his life went so wrong that he is still trying to make it right.

After an ordinary workplace accident — something he didn't think much of at the time — Scheckner lost his health, his livelihood and his faith in the U.S. medical system.

It began on April 1, 1978. His regular assistant was out, so Scheckner asked his dental secretary to mix a silver amalgam for a filling for one of his patients. (The silver part is actually a misnomer. Amalgams are made up of only 35 percent silver; lesser amounts of copper, tin and zinc; and 50 percent mercury.)

As she was replacing the cap to the dispensing bottle of mercury, she accidentally knocked it off the counter, spilling most of the contents — three quarters of a pound. It sank right into the 1970s shag carpet at the foot of his dental chair.

Scheckner didn't realize that he was working over what was essentially a toxic spill. Mercury is the most poisonous non-radioactive element known on Earth. It doesn't have an odor, and breathing in the fumes is a terrible hazard.

The dentist started to experience physical tremors, nausea, digestive problems and anxiety attacks. He also lost weight. A physician who worked next door to him suggested that he had Graves' disease, a form of hyperthyroidism, which has similar symptoms. So Scheckner went to see an endocrinologist, who agreed.

But taking drugs to suppress the thyroid gland function did not help. He continued to get worse. His doctor concluded that it was all in his head.

"I didn't know what was happening to me, or where to turn," Scheckner says.

THE PENNY DROPS

He attended a professional seminar on body chemistry in Orlando, and learned about the dangers of mercury leaking from amalgam fillings. But he didn't yet make the connection to his own symptoms.

It wasn't until much later — when he read an article by Dr. Alfred Stock, a German chemist who had studied mercury poisoning in the 1920s and listed all of the symptoms — that the penny dropped.

"I thought, 'Oh my God, that's me!'" Scheckner says.

He plunged into further research, accumulating thousands of articles on the subject. But he couldn't find anyone locally to help him. One physician in Venice wanted to put him in a psychiatric hospital.

Mercury poisoning, if not caught early on, is very difficult to diagnose. At first, the element will show up at elevated levels in urine tests. But after it damages the kidneys, they don't filter it out anymore and sufferers will actually show less mercury in their urine than the general population.

In Scheckner's case, his level was zero. At the same time, the mercury residue in his hair was 18 parts per million, while normally it would be no more than 3 or 4 parts per million.

By 1984, things were so bad that Scheckner could no longer work, and he shut down his practice.

"I was just trying to get by day to day," he remembers. "The internal tremors and agitation were so devastating, everything shaking inside me. It was an ordeal. I couldn't sleep at night. I was down to 120 pounds, just skin and bones."

He tried chelation therapy in Tijuana, Mexico, getting intravenous injections of substances that bind mercury to compounds that can be eliminated by the body. Unfortunately, the chelation agents at the time were not the best. According to Scheckner, there are much better chelation substances available now. There also are local doctors familiar with mercury poisoning.

At the time, the chelation distributed the mercury in his body, causing Scheckner joint and muscle pain. As if things weren't distressing enough, his insurance company claimed that his problem was work-related and would no longer cover treatments. Scheckner sued, unsuccessfully.

"I'll never forget the words of the attorney from the insurance company," Scheckner recalls. "He said, 'Dr. Scheckner probably had mercury poising, but it's just too bad. The case is over.'"

A MEDICAL MISSION

For the past two decades, Scheckner has been trying to get better on his own. He has had 20 intravenous treatments and taken a variety of nutritional supplements. Working out at the gym has helped. Gradually, he has healed.

"If you're exposed to a limited amount, your body will get rid of it over time," he explains. "But the half-life of mercury in the brain is up to 30 years! If the damage is prolonged — as in my case — you won't get 100 percent well."

From time to time, he still gets tremors, and he is sensitive to chemicals or pesticides, including house cleaning fluids, fragrances and perfumes.

As he slowly got better, his first marriage ended. But two years ago he married someone he had met online, and they are happy together.

"It's an Internet romance," he says, smiling.

He keeps busy writing articles and promoting his book about the dangers of amalgam fillings, "Time Bomb from Within: Mercury Poisoning in Dentistry." Although most European countries and much of the United States now use porcelain fillings, Scheckner warns that too many dentists in this country are still using mercury fillings, mostly on poorer patients.

“It’s important to help people learn about the impact of heavy metals on our lives,” he insists.

Scheckner is so passionate on the subject that he can sound extreme. But even he would not recommend that people have their old fillings removed.

“You and I may have the same mercury in our bodies,” he says, “but there is a great variation to susceptibility. You may not have problems, while I do. It’s individual make-up.”

Still, he counsels people to inform themselves, especially if they have any of the symptoms he lists at the end of his book.

“The good news is that knowledge is power,” he says. “If we are informed and take steps to have good nutrition, and lessen our exposure to mercury, we can protect ourselves and keep ourselves healthy.”

ABOUT MERCURY POISONING

Three forms of mercury can cause health problems:

Elemental mercury, also known as liquid mercury or quicksilver

• Can be found in glass thermometers, electrical switches, fluorescent light bulbs, dental fillings, some medical equipment.

• Usually quite harmless if touched or swallowed. It usually falls off your skin or out of your stomach without being absorbed. Considerable damage can occur, however, if mercury is made airborne into small droplets and breathed into the lungs. This can often occur by mistake when people try to vacuum up mercury that has spilled onto the ground.

• Breathing in elemental mercury will cause symptoms right away if enough mercury is breathed in. Symptoms will also occur over time if little amounts are inhaled every day. Depending on how much mercury is inhaled, permanent lung damage and death may occur. You may also have some long-term brain damage.

Inorganic mercury salts

• Can be found in batteries, chemistry labs, some disinfectants, folk culture medicines, red cinnabar mineral.

• Unlike elemental mercury, inorganic mercury is usually poisonous when swallowed. Symptoms may include burning in the stomach and throat, or bloody diarrhea and vomiting.

• If inorganic mercury enters your blood stream, it can attack the kidneys and brain. Permanent kidney damage and failure may occur. A large overdose may cause death.

Organic mercury

• Can be found in older germ-killers (antiseptics) such as red mercurochrome (this substance is now banned by the FDA), thimerosal, fumes from burning coal converted by certain organisms, fish that have eaten a form of organic mercury called methylmercury.

• Organic mercury can cause sickness if breathed in, eaten, or placed on the skin for long periods of time. Usually organic mercury causes problems over years or decades, not immediately.

• Long-term exposure will likely cause neurological symptoms, including numbness or pain in certain parts of your skin, uncontrollable shakes or tremors, inability to walk well, blindness and double vision, memory problems.

• Medical evidence suggests that being exposed to large amounts of the organic mercury called methylmercury while pregnant can permanently damage the baby’s developing brain. Most doctors will recommend eating less fish, especially swordfish, while pregnant. These recommendations are made to be extremely cautious.

Source: U.S. National Library of Medicine

ABOUT DENTAL AMALGAM

What is it?

Dental amalgam, sometimes referred to as “silver filling,” is a silver-colored material used to fill cavities. Dental amalgam is made of two nearly equal parts: liquid mercury and a powder containing silver, tin, copper, zinc and other metals.

Is it safe?

When amalgam fillings are placed in or removed from teeth, they can release a small amount of mercury vapor. Amalgam can also release small amounts of mercury vapor during chewing, and people can inhaling or ingest these vapors.

Since the 1990s, several federal agencies have reviewed the scientific literature looking for links between dental amalgam and health problems. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention), there is little scientific evidence that the health of the vast majority of people with dental amalgam is compromised, or that removing amalgam fillings has any beneficial effect on health.

In 2008, the Food and Drug Administration reviewed the best available scientific evidence to determine whether the low levels of mercury vapor associated with dental amalgam fillings are a cause for concern. Based on this evidence, the FDA considers dental amalgam fillings safe for adults and children ages six and above.

Is it avoidable?

The amount of mercury used in consumer products dropped by 83 percent between 1980 and 1997, largely as a result of federal legislation and state limits on mercury usage.

Amalgam use in the U.S. is slowly declining because the incidence of dental decay is decreasing, and because improved substitute materials are now available. The decreasing cost of no-mercury substitutes has contributed to a decline in consumer demand for amalgam.

Source: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency