The Democratic playbook against likely Republican presidential candidate Jeb Bush is taking shape, and it's based on attacking his record as Florida governor, tarnishing him with the unpopular policies of his brother, former President George W. Bush, and portraying him as a politician rooted in the past, not looking toward the future.

Bush is expected to announce his candidacy for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination in the next few weeks.

He is taking steps to counteract the expanding critique, defending his eight-year record as Florida governor, arguing that he governed as a pragmatic conservative and kept the state's economy on a solid footing, cut regulations on business, and improved education. He has also begun to sound more populist. "If you're born poor today, you're more likely to stay poor," Bush told the conservative National Review Institute summit in Washington recently. "We need to deal with this."



[READ: Here’s How Jeb Bush Will Run Against Marco Rubio]

When asked about how his views stack up with his brother's, especially George W. Bush's still-unpopular decision to invade Iraq, Jeb Bush tends to be vague in his replies, noting that he will address such matters later in the campaign if he runs. But he is going on the offensive against the current Democratic administration. On Saturday, he endorsed a more muscular foreign policy than the one President Barack Obama is implementing.

"The basic policy should be our friends know we have their back over the long haul, and our enemies need to fear us again," Bush told a Republican convention in Columbia, South Carolina, according to The Associated Press. Bush said Obama's foreign policy has been an "unmitigated disaster."

Overall, he insists he will show that he is his "own man" and not a clone of his father or his brother.

President George H. W. Bush served one term from 1989-93. George W. Bush served two terms from 2001-2009.



[READ: George W. Bush Opens Up on Jeb, Family, Politics]

Here are some lines of attack that have emerged against Jeb Bush, as described by the Democratic National Committee:

Bush's record as Florida governor was "disastrous," a DNC official told reporters. "Florida income inequality worsened drastically under Jeb Bush. The richest 5 percent of Florida families saw their average income increase by over 20 percent, while the poorest fifth saw no appreciable increase. As governor, Jeb Bush catered tax cuts to the wealthy. Jeb Bush oversaw a 48 percent increase in in-state tuition for college students, trading the financial well-being of students for tax cuts for the wealthy."

Bush's foreign policy would "embrace his brother's failed approach. Jeb Bush is one of the few people left who still stands by his brother's decision to rush into Iraq. He has made it clear that if he were in charge, America's brave men and women would be stationed in Iraq indefinitely." DNC spokeswoman Kristin Sosanie said in a recent news release: "[I]f he were to become president he would have the same disastrous go-it-alone approach as his brother that put our country at risk."