Wellness nurses: Opportunities for RNs continue to grow

Photo: Fuse Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Depending on the setting, wellness nurses - or RN wellness coaches, nurse case managers and health advocates - earn anywhere from $50,000 to $70,000 annually. Depending on the setting, wellness nurses - or RN wellness coaches, nurse case managers and health advocates - earn anywhere from $50,000 to $70,000 annually. Photo: Fuse Wellness nurses: Opportunities for RNs continue to grow 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

The impact of registered nurses continues to reach beyond traditional health care settings as wellness and prevention are emphasized, not only by the Affordable Care Act, but also by health care providers seeking to prevent patients from falling through the cracks of the system.

Peter McMenamin, Ph.D, senior policy fellow and health economist for the American Nurses Association, said nurses, as a group, are spending more time as educators and guides to optimum patient wellness.

"In one study, RNs called patients scheduled for surgery and conducted a pre-admission check-up. During the call, the RN made sure the patient understood the surgeon's pre-op instructions and answered questions about what the patient could expect, before and after surgery," McMenamin said. "At the end of the study, hospitals found the number of surgical cancellations went down, simply by making sure the patient knew what to do and what was going on. After discharge, the patient received another call, making sure the patient was doing well, had filled prescriptions and was aware an office follow-up appointment was necessary."

Insurance companies have hired 25,170 RNs and nurse practitioners to fill wellness and patient advocacy roles, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. In these jobs, they monitor patients after discharge, check in with those who are on new treatments, visit chronically ill patients in their homes and help patients connect with resources their conditions dictate.

"Better outcomes and keeping patients well is good for the patient as well as for the insurance company," McMenamin said.

Depending on the setting, these nurses ­­- called wellness nurses, RN wellness coaches, nurse case managers and health advocates - earn anywhere from $50,000 to $70,000 annually.

Generally, nurses come into these roles with five years of experience or more. However, McMenamin said nurses always have filled the gaps in health care systems. For example, nurse midwives and nurse practitioners have strong backgrounds in patient care and know how to interact with and motivate patients needing guidance with lifestyle changes, taking medications correctly and regularly and avoiding placing themselves in jeopardy.

Talar Glover, director of Diabetes Service Line and Patient Education for Harris Health, has been a diabetes/wellness coach for 20 years.

"I started doing diabetes education before there was a certification," she said.

Glover helps care for patients with diabetes, guiding them through lifestyle changes and losing weight.

"It takes a village to teach and motivate people to achieve the necessary lifestyle changes - RNs, social workers, dietitians, clinical pharmacists, exercise therapists and physicians," Glover said.

"In most health care systems, we're called educators, but in truth, we are coaches, advocates and assure everyone has the patient's viewpoint. In health care today, we are there to make sure it is possible for patients to make the life changes needed to control their disease."

There are 70,000 diabetic patients being seen at Harris Health, and in Harris County, 238,000 people (ages 18 and up) have been diagnosed with the disease.

"In many cases, patients fall through the cracks because of a low health literacy level," Glover said, "and because of this, they sometimes have a difficult time following health instructions, so a first step ... is to simplify what they need to do with the doctor's help."

The RN said lifestyle changes are difficult in our culture, which is food-oriented.

"When you think about it, without someone helping, reminding and cheering you on, our society is not conducive to good health practices and healthy lifestyles," she said.

Along with the on-site diabetic care clinics, there are nurse educators/patient advocates in each of the 15 Harris Health Community Clinics. Classes are available, as is individual counseling.

McMenamin said nurses also work in the area of care coordination, making sure details don't fall through the gaps.

"ANA has suggested coordination and education skills need to be a larger part of an RN's education, working with patients, not only to help them understand what's going on but also to give them the peace of mind in knowing someone is walking with them through this journey," he said.

He said recently, mature nurses have been putting off retirement.

"Over the past several years, this has made it more difficult for RNs with associate degrees and some bachelor's-trained nurses to find jobs, but the situation is gradually improving.

"According to the BLS, 555,000 RNs will leave the labor force by 2020 and an additional 500,000 will be needed to meet the demand of growing populations around the U.S.

"We're moving in the direction of building better bonds between patients, and the RNs who make it possible for patients to move through the health care system," he said.