Gila River Indian Community police are searching for a man who shot and killed a retired police officer in front of a casino on Christmas Eve.

Police on Saturday identified the suspect as 47-year-old John Albert Campos Sr. He is considered armed and dangerous.

Police said about 8:47 p.m. Thursday, they were contacted by Wild Horse Pass Hotel & Casino concerning a suspicious man with a gun. Moments later, police said, the man shot and killed 52-year-old Frank Pascua in the casino’s parking lot. Police said that following the shooting, the shooter stole someone’s vehicle and fled.

Authorities had previously identified Campos' son-in-law, 25-year-old Frank Rojas, as a person of interest but have cleared him of any involvement.

Police said Pascua was a retired Bakersfield, CA, police officer.

A spokesperson for Wild Horse Pass said Pascua may have tried to prevent the shooter from stealing a car.

“[He was] a very friendly guy. Always wanted to come over and watch football, hang out. That kind of stuff,” said Kelly Ankrom, Pascua’s neighbor.

Ankrom said she lived across the street from Pascua and his wife in San Tan Valley.

“They just came over to introduce themselves. They asked us to come over. They were barbecuing, wanted us to come over and hang out and watch TV. They had a ping pong table out front and wanted us to play ping pong,” Ankrom said.

According to a Facebook page identified as belonging to Pascua, he joined the Marines in 1981. He later spent more than six years with the Bakersfield Police Department before retiring in 2003.

“[The incident] must have been something really crazy because I can’t imagine he would instigate anything,” Ankrom said. “He seemed like a really fun, happy, loving guy. Never wanted to harm anything. I can’t imagine why somebody would do that.”

Anyone with further information concerning this crime was asked to call Det. Vanessa Turner at 520-610-9000 or Det. Rob Hawkes at 520-610-2791.

Copyright 2015 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.