Q: I was reading a lot of the coverage from the Consumer Electronics Show earlier in the month and it seems like one of the biggest areas of electronics are flying drones with cameras. Are they safe and easy to fly?

A: You've seen them in movies, read about their use by the military and can search sites like YouTube to find hundreds of really interesting aerial videos from above almost anywhere in the world. They started out as tiny helicopters with a video camera in their bellies, but modern drones are far more stable, characterized by having three, four or even more rotors.

In fact, at the CES show in Las Vegas, most of the drones that were being demonstrated were of the quadcopter variety: four propellers on a horizontal plane with a streaming video camera suspended between them.

Dave Taylor For the Camera

These aren't cheap toys either, like radio controlled helicopters. Heck, we've gone through a half-dozen RC copters and they last about 30-45 minutes and then inevitably crash into something and break apart. But not these modern drones: at $300 or more, they're built to survive banging into trees, bouncy landings on pavement, etc.

Most of them either have a proper radio control unit as the controller or work with your iPhone or other smartphone. The latter are my favorites because they can also show you the video being captured on the fancier units, so you know what you're doing rather than just flying blind, hoping you are hovering over a point of interest.

Advertisement

The very latest generation also have some auto-stabilization systems so they are a lot easier to fly. Even the little guys can auto-level, though, leading to some fun demos where you throw the drone up in the air then turn it on and level it out while it's falling. And I've seen this done with units smaller than an iPad Mini!

In terms of whether they're legal to fly, well, that's something that the Federal Aviation Administration is trying to figure out. The current laws relate to anything that flies more than 400 feet above the ground, but drones pose a safety — and privacy — challenge too, particularly around airports. I expect that we'll see new laws and regulations appear in the next year and that right now drones are legal because of the absence of laws constraining their use and application.

Finally, drones aren't just for flying over your neighborhood either: there's a company selling a tiny quadcopter that you can wear as a bracelet and when you want to use it, the device can hover in front of you, letting you take the perfect selfie. Yes, a wearable selfie drone.

Ain't technology grand?

Dave Taylor has been involved with the online world for long enough to remember dialup modems and floppy disks. When he's not stuck in Colo. 36 construction, he covers the tech industry at www.AskDaveTaylor.com and welcomes email from readers.