Topics: 2016 Elections, conservative media, Donald Trump, Fox News, Immigration, Kate Steinle, Nativism, Racism, Rush Limbaugh, The Republican Party, The Republican Primary, Xenophobia, News, Politics News

After so many years of what felt like endless conservative success it’s sometimes hard to wrap your mind around the fact that progressivism is having quite a good run. This week the Obama administration announced a nuclear non-proliferation agreement with Iran after years of arduous negotiation. Last month the Supreme Court affirmed the concept of reason by rejecting the absurd Obamacare typo case and upholding the basic human right to marry the person you love. After the searing tragedy of a mass murder by a white supremacist, South Carolina was finally shamed into removing the Confederate battle flag from the state house grounds; and the national discussion about police tactics in the wake of the Michael Brown, Eric Garner and Freddie Gray incidents opened up possibilities for criminal justice reform. And now Donald Trump has arrived on the scene just in time to vividly illustrate the GOP base’s irrational hostility to immigrants, clarifying the issue for the general public and perhaps making it very difficult for the Republican Party to cobble together a national majority any time soon.

But it always pays to remember that progress is most often made by taking two steps forward and one step back, and it’s never a good idea to become too complacent. For every action there is inevitably a reaction. It is unlikely that the right is going to give up on shrieking about Obamacare any time soon. (If nothing else, it’s a marvelous organizing and fundraising issue for them.) In addition, the debate over the flag has shifted to confederate monuments, so the Lost cause continues to roil. And while marriage equality is now a matter of settled law, it remains a useful catalyst for the next big right-wing legal strategy: “religious liberty.” Meanwhile, the Iran nuclear agreement already has the Republicans in a total state of hysteria, although the smart money has them unable to muster the super-majority it will take to override the president’s veto of any bill designed to block the deal.

But the immigration issue is where the usual backlash stands to have the most lasting political impact. Donald Trump’s offensive xenophobia, while popular with the base, is clearly very worrisome to the GOP establishment. The numbers do not support a GOP majority as long as they are perceived as intractably hostile to Latinos. And no matter how much they try to protest that their beef is with only with “illegal aliens,” it is not perceived that way by the many Americans of Hispanic descent, for obvious reasons.

On his radio show last week, Rush Limbaugh demonstrated in stark terms the disconnect between Republicans and actual reality on the issue of immigration:

Limbaugh: LA Times has a story today, Census Bureau data, as of July 1st last year, 14.99 million Latinos live in California, 14.92 million whites. So the number of Latinos now outnumbers whites in California, but like Chester said, they’re not all coming here to join our culture. [Emphasis mine]

The Hispanic community would probably argue, and rightly so, that the culture belongs to them as much as it does to Rush Limbaugh. More actually. The state is named California, after a mythical paradise in a 16th century Spanish novel. The four largest cities in the state have Spanish names. I’m not sure what claim Rush Limbaugh has on the culture, but it’s pretty obvious what claim our Californian Latino brothers and sisters have. And while Trump, and others, will toss off asides such as “I’m sure some of them are good people,” these good people aren’t under any illusions that they and their families are exempt from the bigotry that Trump, and to some extent all the other GOP candidates, are exploiting.

But as much as the political establishment understands that this is a terrible strategy, they simply don’t have control of the base — or even of their own media, which is desperate to keep that base happy and attentive. Outlets like Fox News are always looking for a way to get off the defensive and give their audience something to use to counter-attack.

And the use of the tragic murder of San Francisco resident Kate Steinle by an undocumented immigrant is a perfect example.

Nobody can deny the awfulness of the crime. An innocent young woman was randomly shot and killed while walking along a tourist area with her father; that horrifying beyond words. But on Fox and elsewhere in the right-wing media, Steinle wasn’t a victim of the rampant gun violence endemic to this country (which they normally defend as a regrettable price to pay for freedom.) No, according to conservatives, Steinle was the victim of illegal immigration, because the man accused of shooting her had a long history of criminal behavior and previous deportations; and because the city of San Francisco is a so-called “sanctuary city,” meaning it does not allow its local police to assist federal immigration enforcement, except in certain limited circumstances. While such policies are anathema to immigration hawks, “Evidence suggests that these laws don’t just make cities safer for illegal immigrants; they make them safer for everyone,” as Mother Jones explains.

In a nutshell, Fox News and others are crassly using Steinle’s killing as vindication of Donald Trump, and by extension all those members of the base who applaud his nativist agenda.