David and Sarah Shore, a Cherry Hills couple who had their first date at a University of Denver hockey game in the 1980s, recently enjoyed a unique visit to Arizona and California. They watched their eldest son, Drew, make his debut with the Calgary Flames on Jan. 15 in Glendale, Ariz. Four nights later, Drew’s younger bother, Nick, made his NHL debut with the Los Angeles Kings.

The Kings’ opponents that night were the Flames — Drew’s Flames. David and Sarah were thrilled to see their boys come out for warm-ups at the Staples Center, even though they knew Drew was going to be scratched for the game.

Drew, who was traded from Florida to Calgary earlier that week, was “bag” skated by new coach Bob Hartley the day before in a “toughness test” and was still regaining the feeling in his legs.

“We knew he wouldn’t play. But we’re really fortunate to watch Drew’s first game as a Flame and Nick’s first game as a King,” David Shore said. “That would have been awesome if both played in the game, but the Flames and Kings play each other a lot. It’s tremendously exciting to see Nick start his career.”

Nick began his NHL career in style, centering a line with Jeff Carter and Dwight King for the defending Stanley Cup champions — on the night of the jersey retirement ceremony for Hockey Hall of Fame defenseman Rob Blake.

“It was crazy out there,” David Shore said. “And they knew everything about Nick.”

Drew, 23, and Nick, 22, never have played against each other because they’ve always played on different levels or on the same team. They both went through the U.S. national development program in Ann Arbor, Mich., before joining the University of Denver in consecutive years, in 2009 and 2010.

Drew has 68 NHL games under his belt since signing with the Panthers in 2012 after his junior year at DU. Nick signed with the Kings in 2013, also after his junior year in Denver, and spent his entire first pro season with the Kings’ American Hockey League affiliate in New Hampshire, the Manchester Monarchs.

If Drew had not been traded to Calgary and Nick not been called up by the Kings, the brothers would have reunited at Monday’s AHL All-Star Game in Utica, N.Y. Drew was selected an all-star for the San Antonio Rampage, the Panthers’ affiliate, and Nick for Manchester.

Nick is the AHL’s second- leading scorer with 41 points (20 goals) in 37 games. Drew amassed 30 points (nine goals) in 35 games for San Antonio.

Neither is bound for New York because both are expected to be recalled by their NHL teams Monday. Drew and Nick, both on two-way contracts, were reassigned to their AHL teams for the NHL all-star break in cost-cutting measures. The Avalanche made similar temporary moves with forward Dennis Everberg and goalie Calvin Pickard.

Drew, the oldest of four hockey-playing Shore boys — Quentin is a junior at DU and Baker is 15 — was happy to get out of Florida’s organization, which has stockpiled first round-drafted forwards. Drew played 43-of-48 games in the lockout-shortened season of 2013, but only 24-of-82 last season and none this season.

“Change of scenery is going to be awesome for Drew,” David Shore said. “He just didn’t fit into Florida’s plans. He just wants to be in an environment where he can prove himself and earn his ice.”

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers