Topics: Ben Glardon, Feminism, Michigan, Pete Pettalia, Roger Victory, Twitter, War on women, Life News

This week in the Michigan House of Representatives, a bunch of male representatives picked up some women’s magazines. And boy are their arms tired!

In an image that could go straight into the stock photo file labeled “not getting it,” Reps. Roger Victory of Hudsonville, Pete Pettalia of Presque Isle and Ben Glardon of Owosso appeared Thursday on the House floor wittily holding copies of women’s magazines. Michigan Public Radio Network reporter Jake Neher tweeted the image out, noting that Pettalia joked, “a couple of times,” in fact, “Don’t say we don’t understand women.” It’s funny when middle-aged white men do super-emasculating things like holding an issue of Glamour! It’s funny because women’s magazines often foist unrealistic body images upon women and it’s funny because holding a magazine does not in fact indicate an understanding of your female constituency! It works on so many levels!

It gets even more HI-larious when you find out a little more about these guys who josh around about not understanding women. Behold, the guys who recently voted to approve making abortion coverage optional in insurance plans, aka the delightful “rape insurance” provision. They also voted in favor of a bill that would make welfare recipients perform community service, a feat that’s challenging for, say, mothers with young children. Pettalia has also voted against late-term abortion, except to save the life of a mother. A “health of the mother” exemption was not included. Stop, you guys, you’re killing me.

Pettalia later clarified the jokey moment, explaining, “During a short break on the House floor, Republican Rep. Gail Haines, a leading advocate on women’s issues in the Legislature, gave some of us magazines to read and asked to take our photo with them. A member of the media then walked up behind her and snapped another photo. As part of that lighthearted moment, I made an off-the-cuff remark that has since been taken way out of context.” So let’s meet women’s issues advocate Gail Haines, who did indeed two years ago helpfully propose a softened version of Rep. Bruce Rendon’s stricter abortion regulations, suggesting fines instead of imprisonment for violations of stricter abortion clinic regulations. When the state pushed through what Planned Parenthood called “the biggest assault on women’s health in our state’s history,” Haines, as committee chair, was notable for permitting “a very few of the 90 opponents of the bill who packed the committee room to testify or even have their position on the bills read into the record.” And four years ago, in a bill that would force women to have “the opportunity to view the [ultrasound] image before performing abortion,” she introduced a detail requiring “the ultrasound equipment used to be the most technologically advanced equipment in the facility.” Nothing but the finest will do for your abortion-shaming technology. Ladies, you’re welcome.