After a projected victory in the Kentucky Senate Democratic primary on Tuesday, Lexington Mayor Jim Gray will lead the party’s uphill effort to unseat incumbent Republican Rand Paul in November.

The Associated Press called the race for Gray, who – with less than a quarter of the precincts reporting – had won 60 percent of the vote, beating his six Democratic rivals.

Gray had been supported by much of the party’s established infrastructure, including the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee and those in the state who supported Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign. Sellus Wilder, who placed second in the primary, had tried to align himself with the state’s more liberal community and those backing Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders’ insurgent bid for the party’s presidential nomination.

Greg Blair, a spokesman for the National Republican Senatorial Committee, previewed the message the party will use against Gray to defend Paul’s seat in a statement Tuesday evening.

“Rand Paul is a tireless advocate for jobs and limited government and a fierce opponent of the Obama-Clinton war on coal,” he said. “Jim Gray is just the latest in a growing line of Democrats who thought they could run from their party’s toxic policies of the last eight years. Gray should celebrate his primary win because with his support of Obamacare and the rest of Barack Obama’s liberal agenda, his campaign has reached its high water mark.”

Paul re-emerged in Bluegrass State politics when he ended his presidential bid in February after a poor showing in the Iowa caucuses. Though some Republicans in Kentucky were unhappy with his presidential campaign at the time, he appears to have solidified his support among his base – easily beating two minor rivals on Tuesday night.

While the Kentucky Senate seat is viewed as relatively safe for Republicans, Democrats are not ignoring it. Like their support for Democrat Connor Eldridge in Arkansas, the national Democratic support for Gray gives them a chance – just in case – in an election year that has so far proven unpredictable.

With a large personal fortune from his family’s construction business, Gray has said he will be able compete with Paul in the advertising fight.