JERSEY CITY — As the nation readies for another Supreme Court battle over the Affordable Care Act, Obama administration officials visited St. Peter's University as part of a "final push" to get people to sign up for health insurance through the ACA before next month's enrollment deadline.

Katherine Archuletta, director of the federal Office of Personnel Management, said the uninsured should enroll now because "no one can predict" how the Supreme Court will decide later this year in a case that could dismantle the law.

"Signing up now ensures that you will have health care for you family for however long -- hopefully in perpetuity -- this act is in place," Archuletta, national political director for Obama's 2012 re-election campaign, told The Jersey Journal.

Jackie Cornell-Bachelli, a regional director for the federal health department, echoed Archuletta: ignore the looming Supreme Court fight and sign up now.

"We are really striving to live in the here and now," Cornell-Bachelli said. "You shouldn't wait for the Supreme Court decision to come down."

The Supreme Court in March will hear arguments in King v. Burwell, with ACA opponents arguing that the controversial legislation permits enrollees to receive federal subsidies to buy private health insurance only in the 14 states that run their own marketplaces.

In the three dozen states, New Jersey included, where the federal government runs the marketplaces, the subsidies are illegal, the opponents claim. Supporters have said the ACA makes no sense if subsidies are not offered to all enrollees, and fear that a Supreme Court decision in the opponents' favor would destabilize and doom the law.

Roughly 9.6 million consumers have signed up through the marketplaces, federal officials announced this week. Of that number, 7.2 million were signed up through the federal HealthCare.gov site.

Jersey City Mayor Steve Fulop, who was on hand at St. Peter's today to tout his administration's efforts to sign up residents through the ACA, said about 55,000 city residents were eligible for health care but uninsured two years ago. Since then, Fulop said, 16,000 have signed up for health care, either by buying private insurance via the ACA or by signing up for Medicaid, which was expanded under the legislation.

"Our health and human services department is punching above its weight," he said. "There's no other way to classify that."

The deadline to sign up for insurance through the ACA is Feb. 15. Jersey City woman Consuelo Evans, 57, signed up at St. Peter's today. Evans, who survived a bout with ovarian cancer when she was 26, said she's been without medical coverage for two decades.

She'll now pay about $80 per month for a plan. A part-time aide for Hudson County Freeholder E. Junior Maldonado, Evans said she found signing up last year too "cumbersome" and was glad to have help from enrollment experts today.

"It's a relief," she said. "I feel like I have a guarantee that I'm going to live a little longer."

Terrence T. McDonald may be reached at tmcdonald@jjournal.com. Follow him on Twitter @terrencemcd. Find The Jersey Journal on Facebook.