Topics: #notyourshield, arthur chu, Editor's Picks, Race, stuff white people like, Life News

I used to be a fan of the Stuff White People Like blog back in the day — I would even quote it to my then-girlfriend-now-wife in order to embarrass her, since she falls squarely within the “endlessly self-criticizing liberal upper-middle-class white person” stereotype the blog was made to lampoon.

Christian Lander, the creator of the blog, seems like a decent guy. Certainly from reading SWPL from beginning to end I’m fairly certain he shares my politics, that he sees himself as a leftist commenting on his fellow leftists. I have no personal beef with him, or with the creators and cast of “Portlandia” or “Girls,” the spiritual sequels to SWPL. (OK, I have kind of a problem with Lena Dunham, but that’s a whole other column. One that, in fact, several other people have already written, so I won’t bother with it here.)

If Mr. Lander reads this, I apologize profusely. I’m sure we’d get along great if we met in real life. It pains me to say it, but I think Christian Lander — and his colleagues in the “mocking effete white liberals” business — are seriously damaging the culture at large.

Because whether he meant to or not, the SWPL formula updated the old “limousine liberal” stereotype for the digital age, and it’s an extremely powerful, tenacious stereotype once invoked. He made a formula out of shaming the powerful for giving a shit about the powerless. He made being a white person who gives a shit about their own racism seem pathetic, and self-serving, and fake.

Before the sneering term “SJW” (“Social Justice Warrior”) went viral, the Internet version of putting down elitist out-of-touch liberals was frequently just calling people a “SWPL.”

Christian Lander gave a great gift to the right. He made giving a shit seem silly. He popularized a rhetorical stance that makes people feel worried about caring too much about their values in public lest they get mocked as vain blowhards. And nothing makes proponents of the status quo happier than that.

Like most effective mudslinging, it’s rooted in truth. Lander was criticizing something genuinely problematic he saw among white anti-racist liberals — or male feminists, or wealthy people who fight against poverty, or straight allies of LGBT people.

Privileged allies tend to be motivated by their own subjective feelings of discomfort and guilt from witnessing oppression. Which isn’t itself a bad thing — oppression should make us feel uncomfortable and guilty — but it’s a very superficial emotion compared to what people feel whose lives have been defined by oppression. As a superficial emotion, it invites a superficial response.

And so you get people investing a great deal of earnestness in very shallow gestures. Turning your profile photo green to support dissidents in Iran. Wearing a rainbow flag pin as a show of “support” for suicidal closeted gay teenagers. Proudly displaying a bumper sticker saying you voted for Obama in 2008. Hovering around members of oppressed groups with a hungry look on your face, desperate for affirmation and absolution, generally being annoying and getting in the way while doing little that’s of actual use.

We know that stereotype. I’ve been on both ends of it: rolling my eyes with well-meaning white people trying to “help,” and being the clueless guy thinking I can “help” in conversations about feminism. I’ve written before, at length, about why being a male feminist is really hard and prone to constant fuck-ups.

But you know what? Yes, it’s really, really hard to be a “good ally.” It’s quite a bit easier to pretend to try to be a “good ally” and get brownie points. But even that amount of effort of being a fake ally is still more effort than sitting back, lifting your lip in a sneer and indulging in ironic mockery of other people’s fakeness.

But the fact that people who prattle endlessly about their “carbon footprint” and “carbon offsets” can be obnoxious doesn’t change the fact that the ocean levels are rising and the planet warming. The insufferable arrogance of many of the college kids who mouthed Occupy Wall Street jargon doesn’t change the way the recession ruined millions of American lives and real income inequality grows every single day. And the fact that white people engaging in absurd circumlocutions and signaling behaviors to try to appear not racist is funny doesn’t change the fact that racism is real, racism is bad, and trying to be less racist is a noble and worthy goal even if it is often pursued by ignoble means.

Look, I’ll be blunt. People of color need white allies. Women need male allies. LGBT activists need straight allies. Allies matter.

Not in the sense that a movement is only legitimized if a white person joins it or that we need white people to be cool-headed leaders because we’re “too close to the issue” or any of that BS. But in the simple practical sense. Oppressed and marginalized groups already deal with the burden of being oppressed and marginalized. A fight to redress an imbalance of power in society can’t succeed for long if 100 percent of the burden falls on the people who lack power.

So what’s a really, really effective way to strangle any movement for change in the crib? The two-pronged approach of mocking privileged people for their pious hypocrisy in joining it and then letting marginalized people, once they have to stand alone, sink under the weight of being marginalized.

Take the Gamergate debacle. (Yes, you knew I was going there eventually).

Unfortunately, there are few relationships in our society more fraught with muddled signals and ulterior motives and bad faith than the way men and women who don’t know each other well interact. Yes, there are way too many “male feminists” who see spouting their feminist bona fides as a way to boost their status, assuage their guilt and, yes, get laid. Yes, the term “white knight” was invented to describe a real behavior — men barging in to defend women and then take ownership of the interaction so they can get all the credit for “rescuing” them — that is negative and worthy of being mocked.

But when women in the gaming industry are being viciously attacked and harassed by an angry mob and men who try to meet the basic lower bound of human decency by speaking up against it get slammed as “white knights” who are “just trying to get in her pants,” well …