He's just three-years-old, and Jennifer Garner is letting her youngest child Samuel indulge in his imaginative side.

On Sunday, the 43-year-old was spotted leaving church in Pacific Palisades with her and her estranged husband Ben Affleck's son, who was dressed up in a ninja costume equipped with a fake sword.

Jennifer was accompanied by their two other children, Seraphina, six, and Violet, nine, as she walked hand-in-hand with Samuel outside the religious centre.

Dress up! Jennifer Garner held her son Samuel's hand as they left church in Pacific Palisades on Sunday

Jennifer's little tot also wore Velcro trainers and carried a cookie in hand.

The actress was dressed low-key for the occasion as well, with her amber locks pulled away from her face.

She kept it casual with a slouchy white tank top and baggy grey trousers, while topping off the look with stylish sunglasses and silver sandals.

Doting mother: Garner held her youngest child's hand as they made their way outside of the building

Top spirits! Violet smiled as she clutched a water bottle and led the way for her younger sister Seraphina

Quick snack! Garner's tot carried a cookie in his hand

Jennifer's eldest daughter Violet donned a summery print skirt and white top, and she carried a water bottle as she approached the family's car.

Seraphina followed shortly behind as she watched her big sister open the car door for themselves.

After guiding her youngest outside the church by hand, Jennifer lifted Samuel into her arms and placed him inside the car beside her sisters.

And off they go! Donning sandals and white shirt, the eldest reached for the car door

Next in line! The 43-year-old held her son's hand as he awaited his turn to hop inside the vehicle

The outing comes after People reported that she and her 43-year-old husband, Hollywood hunk Ben, are moving forward with their divorce process.

An insider for the weekly dashed hopes that the pair would work it out, claiming: 'There is no reconciliation.

'They are working with a professional because there are emotions involved and they want to make this transition as easy as possible for their family.'

In her arms: The Alias star gingerly lifted her boy up

And it sure seems to be smooth sailing for the couple, as they could not stop smiling while out and about in Santa Monica following a two-hour couples-therapy session on Thursday.

Both were spotted without the their wedding bands after arriving separately to the counseling centre in Brentwood.

Sources for TMZ also reported on Friday that the Good Will Hunting star has moved out of the family house and into a Pacific Palisades home.

Moving on: The outing comes after People reported that the star and her 43-year-old husband, Hollywood hunk Ben Affleck, are moving forward with their divorce process

An insider for the gossip site said: 'The damage is already done. They're leading separate lives.'

The stars announced on June 30 that they were ending their marriage, one day after their ten-year anniversary, but since then, both parents have made their children the priority.

After the couple announced they were divorcing, reports surfaced claiming that Ben was involved with their children's 28-year-old nanny Christine Ouzounian.

Different direction: Sources for TMZ also reported on Friday that the Good Will Hunting star has moved out of the family house and into a Pacific Palisades home

A representative for Ben in a statement released to MailOnline in late July denied the story and said: 'It's garbage'.

His team also told Us Weekly that 'all allegations of a romantic relationship are baseless and untrue'.

On Saturday, People cited a source: 'Jen has really been trying to put all the nanny drama to the side and she is doing well, but there is no way she would ever take Ben back...as soon as she took her wedding ring off, she acted like a different person