Senate To Consider 3 Proposals For Emergency Zika Funding Next Week

Associated Press: Senate deal reached on reduced Zika funding measure

“Top Senate negotiators announced agreement Thursday on a $1.1 billion emergency funding measure to battle the Zika virus. That’s less than President Barack Obama’s $1.9 billion request, which has upset some senior Democrats…” (Taylor, 5/12).

CQ News: Senate Appropriators Forge Bipartisan Deal to Fight Zika

“…The agreement, between Sen. Patty Murray, D-Wash., and Sen. Roy Blunt, R-Mo., conflicts with the insistence of top Democrats in the House and Senate who say the Zika fight needs a full $1.9 billion, as the White House has requested. House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., said earlier Thursday that $1.1 billion would be ‘completely inadequate.’ And Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., issued a statement Thursday afternoon blasting the $1.1 billion funding level…” (Mejdrich, 5/12).

The Hill: Senate to vote on Zika funding

“…Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) filed cloture Thursday on three Zika-related amendments to an appropriations bill that will come up for a vote next week. The funding will be tacked onto a package that combines the transportation and military construction appropriations bills…” (Ferris, 5/12).

New York Times: Senate to Consider 3 Proposals to Finance Fight Against Zika

“…Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, on Thursday initiated procedural steps to take votes on a proposal that would grant the Obama administration’s full $1.9 billion request as well as two other measures that would provide $1.1 billion…” (Herszenhorn, 5/12).

POLITICO: Senate plans vote on Zika money next week

“…Two votes will be on spending plans costing $1.1 billion — one paid for and one not. The plan that will be offset — which is backed by Sen. John Cornyn (R-Texas) — would be paid for by cutting Obamacare’s prevention fund, a move that is all but certain to face opposition from Democrats. The third plan to be voted on will be a larger package of $1.9 billion. While that larger spending measure is not paid for, it will be backed by Florida Sens. Bill Nelson and Marco Rubio, whose home state is likely to face the brunt of the virus. Those votes are scheduled to occur on Tuesday…” (Everett/Haberkorn, 5/12).

Reuters: Senate sets votes on competing Zika funding plans

“…White House spokesman Josh Earnest welcomed ‘any sort of forward momentum in Congress’ while continuing to push for the full $1.9 billion. ‘It could not be clearer that Congress needs to take action to help our states and our local officials fight the Zika virus. That is critical for health and safety of the American people,’ Earnest said…” (Cowan/Gardner, 5/12).

Washington Post: Senate reaches deal on Zika funding, will vote Tuesday

“…Some in the Senate hope that swift action and broad bipartisan support for the compromise will force House leaders to adopt a similar package, according to several aides. There is a strong chance that none of the individual spending bills that pass the Senate will ever become law, but aides said a Senate-passed Zika funding option could also easily be included in negotiations on a year-end spending bill” (Snell, 5/12).