New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie - also serving as chairman of the Republican Governors Association - and South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley attracted a crowd Tuesday afternoon at Moe's Southwest Grill on King Street in downtown Charleston.

It may have been a burrito restaurant, but it also may become known as the place where Chris Christie's South Carolina presidential run began.

The New Jersey governor's first speculative trip of the 2016 presidential season in South Carolina was a 25-minute stop at Moe's Southwest Grill in downtown Charleston, where he fended off talk of a White House run in favor of endorsing Gov. Nikki Haley's re-election.

"She's done an extraordinary job," Christie said. "She's been a great friend and partner to me personally and the work we're doing for the Republican Governors Association." Christie is the RGA chairman.

Political watchers say it was logical that Christie, who is considered among the main-streamers in the likely GOP field, picked Charleston for his first step into South Carolina as opposed to another part of the state.

"Political campaigns are incredibly organized," said College of Charleston political scientist Jordan Ragusa. "I don't think it's an accident that Christie's first stop is in Charleston, where he's likely to find a higher volume of moderate Republicans."

Christie's appearance was part of a day-long swing through the Carolinas on both political and RGA business. It was capped with a closed event for Haley and the state GOP on Kiawah Island. She faces Democrat Vincent Sheheen, independent Tom Ervin and two third-party candidates in November.

How well Christie might be embraced by South Carolina voters in the months to come is hard to gauge, given that GOP voters here are considered among the most conservative in the nation. In the 2012 primary, former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney won only three South Carolina counties - including Charleston - while former House Speaker Newt Gingrich carried the rest.

Christie, however, has been seen as taking several more conservative steps in recent times, including this summer, when he vetoed a gun-control bill that would have limited the maximum size of an ammunition magazine from holding 15 to 10 rounds. Critics said the measure was calculated to gain traction in gun-friendly states.

During a question-and-answer session Tuesday, Haley and Christie downplayed their differences over accepting Medicaid expansion through President Obama's Affordable Care Act; Haley has opposed it, while Christie supported it.

"You don't treat all states the same, and so we did what was right for South Carolina," Haley said. "He did what was right for New Jersey, and at the end of the day, you can see two states that are doing extremely well."

Christie agreed with Haley by saying states should not all be treated the same by way of "some monolithic policy that has come out of Washington, D.C."

While Christie worked a room with mostly college-age Republicans, there were some detractors. Some young people were asked to leave the eatery "mid-burrito" under suspicion of being Democrats, while across King Street, protesters stood in the rain holding up signs.

Even before Christie arrived, a conservative group called the Judicial Crisis Network purchased billboards and five days worth of radio ads in the Charleston media market to highlight what they contend is his poor record on judicial nominations.

State and local Democrats, including Charleston County Democratic Party Chairman Brady Quirk-Garvan, also pointed out that while Christie accepted the Obama Medicaid expansion, Haley did not.

"I hope that in between bites of their burritos, Gov. Christie explains to Nikki Haley that South Carolina could create 44,000 jobs, improve the health of the people in our state, and most importantly make sure that tax dollars South Carolinians are paying don't go to other states if only she would accept Medicaid expansion," Quirk-Garvan said.

Reach Schuyler Kropf at 937-5551.