The American Dental Association estimated in 2006 that only about one-quarter of low-income Americans – about 82 million of them at that time – went to a dentist annually, a reflection on the rising cost of dental care at a time when public and workplace dental insurance plans continued on a 20-year slide when it came to coverage.

Back then, the ADA estimated that the government safety net system when it came to dental care could only help about one in 10 low-income Americans who needed dental care, according to an updated 2011 association study, “Breaking Down Barriers to Oral Health for All Americans: Repairing the Tattered Safety Net.”

Paul Glassman professor of dental practice and director of community oral health at University of the Pacific, told ABC News in 2012 that dental benefits and caps on dental health plans have gone largely unchanged in the last two decades as costs have climbed “dramatically.”

“A plan that covered $1,000 used to get a lot,” he told the network. “Now if you have an exam and get fillings, you’ve used your maximum.”

Maria R. Miecyjak, practice administrator and chief operating officer at Westermeier Martin Dental Care in East Aurora, is marking 20 years with the practice. She is among several dental professionals I’ve talked with about dental costs during the last couple of years. (Read a Refresh Buffalo Blog post here from earlier this year with the owners of Drs. Mark S. Wendling and David Rice, owners of East Amherst Dental Center.)

The Affordable Care Act has begun to change the face of medical insurance – here, too generally making out-of-pocket costs for patients costlier – while a growing number of dental patients who remember getting great company insurance coverage in the 1990s are now shouldering more of the costs.

Bottom line: as health costs rise more than inflation, government officials on both sides of the political aisle have decided (mostly quietly) that the U.S. health system can’t continue unless patients bring more dollars to the table.

Another bottom line: “What’s happening is that medical insurances are so costly that employers have to make a choice and don’t cover so much of the dental,” said Miecyjak, subject of today’s In the Field feature in WNY Refresh.

Dental offices are doing what they can to stay affordable, she said, by offering various scales of service, payment plans and some pro bono work.

Here’s what she told me how Westermeier Martin has addressed the cost realities, including its offer of an individual preventative dental package for $239 a year:

Q. You cover a wide range of services in the office: Dental implants, sedation dentistry, cosmetic, Strickland Facelift Dentures, adult orthodontics, porcelain veneer, teeth whitening, CEREC crowns, emergency dentistry. Which are the most common procedures? Which are the most complicated and costly?

The most common would be your cleaning and your checkup, fillings. The most complicated and costly would be some of the restorative work; for instance, people who come in and need a whole mouthful of teeth. That can be more expensive. Sometimes the doctors say that’s like putting a new car in your mouth, but that’s going to be there the rest of your life. We typically tell patients your care will be anywhere from $100 to $50,000 – and you’ll probably find yourself somewhere in between.

Q. How has the nature of paying for dental care changed over the last 20 years?

It used to be you used to either accept insurance in full or patients would pay you in cash or check. That was it. When I first came here, I thought not too many people can afford that (out of pocket), so we went and found a no-interest payment plan that gave patients up to 12 months to pay off their dental work with no interest. We started to do that and that’s when the practice started to grow because people could afford the type of dental work that people need.

Now we have a whole range – and that’s one of the reasons we brought in the patient advocates. People really do need work that’s comprehensive and complex. How can you make a good decision on something you don’t understand. So patients sit down and the advocates will go through everything with you. They can either phase something out so it’s more affordable or apply for financing programs. We do a courtesy adjustment for people who want to pay us ahead of time. We like that, too, because we know they’re going to show up for their appointments.

It’s been a natural evolution. Every time we would come to a point where we’d say, “What’s stopping patients from getting what they need?,” We would try to find an answer and overcome that.

Q. These days, patients not only to have to worry about the pain associated with dental care, but the cost because of changes in dental health insurance coverage. What do you say to folks concerned about the cost?

We say, “What if we could divide you fee into 12 months interest-free?” “What is the minimum amount we can do so you don’t have to be in pain anymore?”

Q. Are you seeing a lower percentage of patients covered with any form of dental insurance?

Yes. One of the things we did was create our own membership in this practice which for a nominal amount – $239 a year for adults, $269 for children and $807 for a family of four – includes all your cleanings, all your X-rays, your checkups and 15 percent off certain procedures we do here. These are preventive-based.

I once asked one of the insurance companies, “Why aren’t you paying for this?” (A representative) said, “They should have taken better care of their teeth.” I said, “What? Sometimes you can’t help it. Sometimes it’s genetics. It’s what you’re born with. Some people have good teeth, some people have soft teeth. Some people have great gums, other people have terrible gums.”

We’ve also evolved into the body-mouth connection. It’s not that your mouth is one thing and you body is another. We find with some of the new medical insurances that you have to pay the high deductibles (generally up to $6,350 for individuals and $12,700 for families). We’re more affordable for a cleaning and a checkup and our doctors can actually sense some health problems. We take blood pressures. When patients have disease or infections in their mouths, it definitely affects the rest of their body.

Q. Talk about the Dentistry from the Heart program. What kinds of services are provided?

We provide free dental care once a year. We did it June 19 and saw over 100 patients. This was the 11th year. We heard about this at a dental meeting and thought it was a cool way to give back. At first we did it in February because we thought of it as our Valentine’s Day gift to the community. We did not realize that people would be standing in line (for first-come, first-served care). The next year we decided to move it to June. The first person in line this year was at 3 a.m. We let the area churches and soup kitchens know and we put it on the website.

A lot of people, year after year, we are their dentist. They come once a year. People have asked what they can do to thank us and we decided this year, “Let’s pay it forward.” We asked everybody to bring a perishable food donation and we had two huge boxes and we took it across the street to FISH, part of the Nativity Lutheran Church across the street. They have a food pantry.

We do cleanings, exams, checkups. The hygienists do their part and the doctors will do whatever the pressing need is. We do fillings, some extractions, some root canals – depending on the time pressure. We don’t embarrass people here, we don’t lecture and we don’t judge. We’re happy you’re here and we’re here to take care of you.

Q. What are the nuts and bolts of what you do?

I’m in charge of human resources. I’m in charge of finances. I’m in charge of marketing and any projects are happening. We work with a dental coach and I’m the liaison between the dental coach and the practice. We’re always trying to figure out how to be better at what we’re doing. I attend a lot of the dental meetings with the doctors because I’m learning as well. Then we bring things back to the practice and implement them. I report to the two owners and I have four team leaders. I have a team leader who’s responsible for the hygiene department. I have a team leader who’s responsible for the front office and I have a team leader who’s responsible for the clinical department, all the assistants and the doctors, and a team leader for our patient advocates.

Q. How busy is the dental practice and how to you help make it hum?

We have 15 rooms going most days. We see easily 50 to over 100 patients a day, depending on the day and their needs. I try to keep my finger on everything. I walk around, I talk to everybody. We make sure that people we hire have the right temperament, the right attitude. We have to like being here because working here is like being a family. ... We want people to say, “I may not like going to the dentist, but I like going there.”

email: refresh@buffnews.com

Twitter: @BNrefresh