Topics: Girls, Lena Dunham, TV, Entertainment News

Though last night’s episode seemed a little scattered — even for this show — it was nothing if not eventful. Hannah celebrated her twenty-fifth birthday in appropriately grungy fashion, Marnie channeled Edie Brickell and Idina Menzel, and Ray sulked his way into a brawl. The episode also introduced Adam’s wildly unpredictable sister Caroline, played by Gaby Hoffmann. This week, I spoke to another twenty-something fan about internet gaffes, dancing to dubstep, mental illness, and relationships both romantic and familial. (Don’t worry, no tacos this time.)

This Week’s “Girl”: Janelle Clayton, 22

Hometown: Airmont, NY

Job: Freelance production assistant

Adam or Ray: Adam

Favorite “Girls” girl: Jessa

Episode watched: “She Said OK”

So let’s start talking about the episode. It starts with a phone call from Adam’s sister, Caroline, and his immediate response to her is very negative. Do you have any siblings?

I have an older brother–he’s 27–and my younger sister is 21.

So you’re in the middle. Before you actually see the sister, what did you think of Adam’s reaction?

His reaction was negative, but the first thing he did was tell her to come out so he could care for her or address the issue in person. Even though he’s extremely aggressive toward her, I think his instinct was to take care of her immediately. That’s what my first reaction would be: “Come over to my apartment and then we’ll figure out what we need to do.”

What is your relationship like with your siblings?

We’re fine, definitely not like Adam and Caroline. I don’t know, we’re siblings. It’s harder to describe relationships with family members because you don’t know the dynamics between anyone else and their siblings, so I don’t know. Loving. Fine whenever I see them on holidays and vacations and stuff.

Does she seem like his sister to you?

Caroline does seem like Adam’s sister to me because they’re both manic in different ways. I can’t believe how much chaos she brought into that little apartment within the first few moments that she was there. I understand her emergency, but throughout the episode it just gets worse and worse. I hate to admit that Adam was right but, as he said, she vomits on everything.

I guess it was Shoshanna, in the previous episode, who talked about how much of Hannah Adam is willing to put up with– all of her hijinks and antics. A normal person with a normal life wouldn’t have time to put up with that. But it might be that, with the high-maintenance kind of person that his sister is, he’s kind of used to dealing with that. Maybe [that’s why] he’s a little long suffering with Hannah.

We don’t really know much of Adam’s backstory–we see Hannah’s parents, we see Marnie’s mother, and we know that she’s previously divorced–but I’m wondering how Adam’s family is. He was so excited to see Hannah’s parents at her birthday party. I didn’t think he’d meet them with such enthusiasm. He was so happy to see them. It makes me think that they’re a touch of normalcy that he never really gets to experience in his life.

He obviously has some–I don’t know if you’d call it envy–but he appreciates their level of closeness in a way that Hannah doesn’t appreciate her own parents.

He thinks it’s so awesome that they always kind of do a jig together, and when he goes around to dance with them it seems that he really actually wanted to spend time with them.

Then there’s the issue of Marnie’s music video. It is obviously a embarrassing moment for Marnie and a mistake that she wishes wasn’t on YouTube. That’s a very modern problem, people doing things that end up on the Internet and last forever. I didn’t grow up with that problem. There was no YouTube when I was that age. Without being too specific, do you have any regrets or things like that that you’ve done that are just sort of permanently somewhere in the ether?

Fortunately, no. I do understand that concern of doing something whether in public or private and wondering if someone is recording you as a joke. Even when you can be dating someone, you’re also cautious about whether or not people take pictures of the two of you because then they could post it. If something doesn’t work out, it does concern you if it’s going to be on someone’s Instagram or Facebook and you’re not really in a relationship and people start to talk–on the Internet, publicly, because you can see comments. It’s definitely a concern when people document anything and everything. But she was willing to do that music video, as Shoshanna or Hannah mentioned, but she’s just upset that Charlie posted it. She’s too embarrassed to speak to him.

I think it was Shoshanna who said she was complicit in the making of this, which is funny. It probably didn’t take much persuasion to get Marnie to do that video. There’s a great deal of narcissism on that show–it’s difficult to say who’s most narcissistic–but she certainly has a large dose of it. She’s clearly leaning into that song throughout that video. I wonder if she’s more embarrassed that Charlie posted it and now they’re not together, or more disappointed with the way it was received, with all the Internet comments? Despite the fact that she protests the thing, you find her desperately trying to sing in public again by the end of the episode.

I think she’s more upset, not about the comments or about how it’s received, but I think she’s more upset that she’s trying to overcome her relationship with Charlie, and he has the power to enter her life whenever he wants to, because there are so many platforms. They’re not connected to each other, but she searches for him. In the bar scene at Hannah’s party, she mentions that Charlie must check her Instagram, just as she is checking his YouTube channel. Nowadays the internet doesn’t let you forget someone. And if maybe you’re dating someone their pictures are going to show up somewhere months later. She’s just upset that the Internet isn’t letting her forget about this man who she claims ruined her life.

But you don’t have to check those. I don’t think she wants to forget him. I think, like you said, that she’s trying to keep tabs on him. It seems like she doesn’t want to sever that relationship. Maybe I’m an old fogey, but I’m a firm believer that you can stop associating with someone. It seems to me fairly easy–unless you run in the same circles, which it doesn’t seem that they do–it seems fairly easy to just stop checking somebody’s Instagram, stop following them. It seems like she just wants that relationship in some way. She’s very, very concerned about what he’s doing and what he’s up to–she’s clearly not over it.

Their relationship the previous seasons was so superficial. She tried to break up with Charlie multiple times. And each time she ended up figuring that she’d rather be with Charlie — even though she felt suffocated by him — than be alone. I’ve realized a lot of times, with girls my age, that having a boyfriend is a social success. Shoshanna ended up being with Ray. Hannah had Adam. Jessa’s kind of doing her own thing. And Marnie, probably subconsciously–or maybe she was thinking about it–didn’t want to be the girl friend without a boyfriend. I know how that feels and I know how other girls feel when that happens. They are kind of always sympathized with in a really odd way, as if the possibility of being married young is awesome. I think in the back of her head that’s what she’s thinking, even though no one mentions marriage in this show, that’s probably what the dynamic comes down to between girlfriends, nowadays — to mark a success that she wasn’t willing to sacrifice.

So you think that even at that age, even that young, the seeds of the notion of marriage or a permanent partner is in the back of their minds?