Henry (Bud) Hebeler retired from The Boeing Company in 1989 where he was vice-president for corporate strategic and operational planning. Before that he was president of The Boeing Aerospace Company, a division which did all of Boeing’s space work and most of the military products. He now helps people with retirement planning personally and with articles and programs on Analyze Now , a site often referenced by The Wall Street Journal and many financial publications. He has three degrees from MIT, has been on advisory committees to the U.S. Congress, Departments of Interior, Commerce, Energy, and Defense, an economic advisor to the Washington State governor, a member of Washington's Economic Development Council and a member of several university boards.

Getty Images

Boomers have been very poor savers. Over 40% have no retirement savings. This is a consequence of small daily decisions that have a profound influence on the thirty or so years they will live in retirement. Of course we like to blame it on the slow growth of wages and inflation, but low saving has been going on for 30 years. I blame it on what I call "shiny things."

Fishermen know how a little piece of bright flashing metal can attract fish. Some animals collect bright things in their nests. Many humans aren't much different, but the scale is a lot bigger. Lots of shiny things cost big bucks both for their purchase and their subsequent service. It takes money that could have been saved and grown over time to support a more comfortable retirement when free time is abundant.

I sent an email to about 60 responsible people of varying degrees of wealth and evenly spread from an age range of 30 to 85 and asked why boomers had saved so little. I got responses from almost half who thought they had something to contribute — and did they ever. The younger people had observed financial problems of their own or elder associates. Some older people expressed regrets about past spending or seeing younger people wasting money. Here are the results:

Shiny things

Housing: Many felt boomers had bought houses that were too expensive. In contrast to the large, barely affordable homes of most boomers, one of our friends was brought up in a house bought from a Sear’s catalog. Several people listed the supposed need to update their homes, possibly after watching too much HGTV. Vacation homes, time shares and unnecessary interior decorating expenses also made the list.

Lifestyle: Keeping up with the Joneses and their kids was by far the biggest "shiny thing" followed closely by wanting it all now. Also listed were expensive vacations, frequent dining out, fad clothing, partying, personal athletic trainers and kids sport teams that travel every week. Several trends were noticed, including the effects of social media encouraging spending, dependence on service people instead of do-it-yourself, a sense of entitlement, and a couple of surprises: Late to marry (if ever), late to have children, divorce and remarriage or worse, no remarriage. "The government will take care of me."

Transportation: Here we had cars for high school students who could take a bus. High-end cars was listed by a person who was guilty of it himself. Others listed fancy trucks and RVs. Failure to save for a car before purchasing makes a big difference, as does buying used cars instead of new ones.

Money: There were more different entries for this category than any others: There was borrowing instead of living within means. They didn't know about benefits of delayed Social Security. No financial planning. They didn't save in a 401(k). They bought what was supposed to be a sure-fire stock. The availability of "easy" money through home-equity line of credit and/or home refinance. Poor investment choices. Buying on credit. They didn’t pay off credit cards with high interest charges. Low interest paid by savings accounts was discouraging to them.

Then we get into the ease of buying on the Internet. A failure to "pay yourself first" and the disappearance of self-sufficiency life style. The failure to understand benefits of different securities including savings bonds. Job hopping. There were extended auto-loan terms that mask the real depreciation cost of cars/trucks. Failing to create and understand managing to a balance sheet along with keeping track of net worth year over year. Student debt. Having subscription services that can really add up without realizing it. Professional sports tickets. Hope for an inheritance. Lottery tickets as "investments."

Technology: The need for the latest computers, tablets and cellular phones for them and their children. “Needing” large-screen HD televisions and cable. Faster Wi-Fi networks. Cars with lots of gadgets. DS games, Kindles, Xbox, Wii, etc.

Toys: This would include four wheelers, jet skis, boats, trailers, motor homes, electronic toys for children. Antique cars or expensive convertibles. (Guilty.)

Education: Staying in school too long and creating too much debt or getting an education that does not prepare for a well-paying profession was mentioned. Having little financial knowledge. Unaffordable colleges. Parents and schools don't teach their children about the importance of saving and planning for emergencies and retirement. Enrolling children in costly extra-curricular activities hoping for a college scholarship.

It's apparent that these responses reflected things that they observed in others or had done themselves and now regretted. When people think they can't afford to make automatic saving deposits for retirement from their paychecks, they are simply living beyond their means. I realize that there are exceptions to this, but not the population of boomers as a whole. We all can't live like those on television and expect to enjoy retirement on an income that won't do much more than support a meager lifestyle. I believe the message that younger people should learn from this is to make a financial plan and execute it — which translates into living within their means, not someone else's.

More from MarketWatch