COLUMBUS, Ohio -- Gov. John Kasich launched his budget proposal saying Ohio needs to attack of the root causes of poverty and do more to help people lift themselves up to higher jobs and wages.

But while some of his proposals have drawn praise for trying to address the issue, others have stirred criticism as actually harmful to people with lower incomes, while benefiting those more wealthy.

Advocates for the poor say they are encouraged that poverty is at least part of the public dialogue.

"I'm hopeful that we can start having some really serious conversations during this budget process," said Lisa Hamler-Fugitt, executive director of the Ohio Association of Foodbanks.

She cites a figure to illustrate the seriousness of the issue in Ohio -- 3,833,950. That's the number of Ohioans who do not earn a self-sufficiency wage, or 200 percent of the federal poverty level, she said. Ohio's population is nearly 11.6 million, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.

"I believe the governor when he says he wants to address these issues and the folks who live in the shadows. These folks don't live in the shadows. We see them every day," she said. "They are living in poverty, despite work."

While the governor's proposals won't solve all of Ohio's poverty problems, they represents a start toward addressing the issue, said Philip Cole, executive director of the Ohio Association of Community Action Agencies.

"We're just talking about helping people and we're just thrilled that the governor is engaged in such a way," he said. "I've been here now for five governors. They all have talked about this stuff, but only one has done it."

Here's a look at some of the proposals in Kasich's budget that affect low-income Ohioans and what supporters and critics are saying about them.

Drawing praise

Increase in subsidized child care

Kasich's budget proposes to increase the income ceiling on the subsidy for child care to make it more available to Ohioans.

When he unveiled the budget, Kasich said the change is necessary to keep child care from becoming a barrier to working Ohioans with lower wages seeking better employment.

The subsidy is available now to people making up to 200 percent of the federal poverty level -- roughly $39,500 a year for a family of three. Kasich proposes raising the ceiling to 300 percent of poverty -- about $59,000 a year for a family of three -- with it gradually phasing out as income grows.

Cole describes it as a key part of the governor's proposals.

"If you have a child, the highest cost of living for you is child care," he said.

A self-sufficiency calculator prepared by the Ohio Association of Community Action Agencies estimates that the family of three, with one pre-school aged child, would need to earn about $47,600 a year to be self-sufficient.

It calculates that child care would be the family's greatest expense, about $740 a month, followed by housing costs and taxes.

Streamlining welfare and job training

Kasich's proposal to better coordinate welfare benefit programs and training programs through the state's Department of Job and Family Services has won praise from traditional supporters and from groups that have opposed other policies.

The goal is to require counties to establish point people who will make the multi-program system more of a one-stop shop that improves access to benefits for consumers and better connects them to job training and ultimately to employers and work.

"You can't look at that person as just a number or a widget," he said at recent appearance in Columbus. "You have to remember that you are in the process of rehabilitating a life."

Innovation Ohio, a left-leaning policy group in Columbus, has criticized other aspects of the governor's budget plan, particularly tax changes. But its executive director, Keary McCarthy, acknowledged that better coordination and delivery of services could benefit Ohioans.

Drawing fire

Shifting tax burdens

Tax changes in the governor's budget plan would lead to an estimated net tax cut of $500 million over the two-year biennium.

Critics have said that measures that would help pay for the those cuts will adversely affect low-income Ohioans.

The administration is asking for increases in personal exemptions in the state income tax that it estimates would zero out the state tax bill for as many as 200,000 tax filers.

It also proposes eliminating income tax on small business income for pass-through businesses with gross receipts of $2 million a year or less. More than half of Ohio's workers are employed by small businesses.

An analysis of the tax plan by the Washington-based Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy projected that the changes would lower income tax bills across the board. But the increases proposed for the state sales tax and the excise tax on cigarettes would more than make up for those reductions.

The analysis, prepared for Policy Matters Ohio, a liberal-leaning research group, found that for three-fifths of of Ohio's wage earners -- incomes of $57,000 a year or less, the amount paid in tax could actually go up.

The impact was most significant for the bottom 20 percent (incomes of less than $20,000), where the portion of income directed toward state taxes was expected to increase by 0.9 percent, or $116 a year.

McCarthy, of Innovation Ohio, said that shifting tax burden is of concern to his organization, too.

"The governor is greatly accelerating a shift in the tax code that benefits the highest earners in the state to the detriment of the lowest earners in the state," he said.

Cuts to certain Medicaid programs

Democrats and some advocates for women's health have complained about a proposal to change Medicaid coverage available for women earning up to 200 percent of poverty.

The program provided coverage for family planning, breast and cervical cancer services and health and well care coverage for pregnant women.

The state estimates the change would save $7.4 million in its share of the Medicaid costs in 2016 and another $31.4 million in 2017.

And it argues that women in the program should still be covered. Expanded Medicaid should pick up coverage for those with incomes up to 138 percent of federal poverty. Those with incomes above that level should have insurance required by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, perhaps subsidized insurance through the federal exchange.

Critics say about 11 percent of women will remain without insurance and argue the safety net the program offered needs to be kept intact. An uninsured woman who becomes pregnant, for example, could not obtain insurance for well care coverage.

"Inadvertently what they're doing is if a woman gets pregnant and is not in the exchange, she would have to wait until an open enrollment period," said Kellie Copeland, executive director for NARAL Pro-Choice Ohio.

Wishing for more

A refundable Earned Income Tax Credit

One change in the tax code that would benefit the poor but not included in the governor's plan would be to make the Earned Income Tax Credit refundable.

It's federal counterpart was created nearly four decades ago, providing a tax credit for low- and moderate-income families with children. For a family of four with two children, it provides up to $5,460 on tax returns filed in 2015 for tax year 2014. Households with incomes topping $49,000 could qualify for something.

Ohio enacted the EITC in the 2013 budget legislation, but it is limited to 5 percent of the federal EITC, among the smallest in the country. For 2014 taxes, it is 10 percent of the federal EITC. Unlike the federal version, it is not refundable.

For the lowest wage-earners in the state, non-refundable means not available, because once their tax bill is reduced to zero, any remaining credit is lost.

Hamler-Fugitt and others advocate changing Ohio's laws so that the remaining unused tax credit would become part of a tax refund, as federal law allows. The money would effectively be a form of economic stimulus, she says, because it would be spent in the economy immediately.

"It is the most powerful anti-poverty tool there is," she said. "It's money that makes work pay.

"If we really want to address poverty and ensure that work pays, then we have to understand that refundability matters."