ALBANY—The governor’s new $141.6 billion spending plan proposes a number of significant new health care initiatives, including $1.4 billion in capital funds for hospitals and health care facilities, cash reserves to settle a longstanding Medicaid dispute with the federal government, and a new tax on health insurance premiums to pay for the costs of running the state’s health insurance exchange.

Perhaps the most surprising piece of Cuomo’s agenda was the $1.4 billion in hospital infrastructure funding, of which half, or $700 million, would be dedicated to central and eastern Brooklyn, possibly for a new, yet-to-be-announced hospital.

In a budget briefing after Cuomo's speech, outgoing state budget director Bob Megna informed reporters that those funds would likely be used to finance an entirely new hospital in Brooklyn, likely at the site of Brookdale University Hospital in East New York. That proposal did not appear in the state’s financial plan or in Cuomo’s budget book, but a spokesman for the state budget department said the new hospital is part of a plan that Cuomo has been considering. Further details about when such a plan would be announced or who would operate the new hospital were not yet available.

The state’s spending plan also takes steps to resolve at least one potential crisis for the state’s Medicaid program.

This summer, the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (C.M.S.) ordered the state to repay roughly $1.26 billion in prior-year Medicaid payments, after a federal audit found the state had overcharged for services relating to developmentally disabled patients in state-operated facilities.

C.M.S. has warned that it may also seek additional repayments, after it finishes auditing two more years of New York’s Medicaid spending.

Now, under Cuomo’s new budget plan, roughly $850 million out of a $5.4 billion surplus—generated by nearly a dozen major financial settlements finalized last year—would be set aside in reserves to settle “federal risks.”

That amount wouldn’t settle New York’s full tab with the federal government, and Megna said negotiations between the state and C.M.S. are still ongoing. Records of the governor’s former top aide Larry Schwartz’s schedules obtained through a FOIL request show he met twice this fall with federal officials from C.M.S. and the Department of Health and Human Services to talk about the disallowance, including a conference call in October with outgoing C.M.S. director Marilyn Tavenner. On November 17, Schwartz traveled to Washington D.C., and met with C.M.S. officials.

On Wednesday, Megna would not specify how much of the $850 million in reserve was specifically going to be set aside for the prior year Medicaid re-payments.

“I don’t want to get too specific on details that we’re still negotiating with folks but I think the governor was pretty clear in his presentation that a pretty significant amount would be available to settle federal risks,” Megna said.

Asked if lawmakers might try to spend the reserve money this year, instead of holding it, Megna warned that the state’s risks dictate those funds be set aside.

“I actually think that our risks are pretty significant and we’d want to maintain the full amount to handle those risks,” he said.

New York State officials formally requested that C.M.S. reconsider the disallowance, but that request was denied, according to financial plan documents. The state filed a formal appeal with H.H.S., and that appeal has not been ruled on yet. But if the state’s appeal is denied, the final option available to New York State officials is to sue the federal government in court. If New York loses that challenge, it would be required to pay not only the disallowance, but also interest.

Meanwhile, the state expects massive growth in total Medicaid spending, largely for costs associated with the Affordable Care Act, which will be paid for with federal funds.

Total Medicaid spending will grow to $62 billion in the coming year, increasing more than $3.2 billion from last year’s $58.8 billion in Medicaid spending.

That 5.6 percent increase is fueled largely by the explosive growth in New York’s Medicaid population fueled by the A.C.A.The number of Medicaid recipients is set to exceed 6.1 million by the end of fiscal year 2015, a nearly 9 percent increase in the caseload over the prior year.

Cuomo’s budget also settles another question posed by some Republican lawmakers and health insurance industry officials in recent months: how exactly the state would pay for the continued operations of its health insurance exchange, which must become self-sustaining this year, but hasn’t yet generated enough revenue to fund its roughly $150 million in annual operating costs.

The state will levy a “modest” tax on health insurance premiums, according to Cuomo’s budget briefing book, that would average out to roughly $25 per person.

Health Plan Association president Paul Macielak said in a statement that the proposal goes against the idea of “affordable” health insurance.

“In September, the Cuomo Administration trumpeted the reduction in proposed premium rates, a move it said was necessary to make health insurance more affordable. Yet today, the governor proposes to add a new tax on premiums to pay for New York’s health exchange, making health insurance less affordable for New Yorkers,” Macielak said.

“If affordable health coverage is the goal here in New York, the new ‘exchange tax’ should be dropped and the existing state taxes on health insurance, which today total more than five billion dollars and amount to five percent of premium, be reduced.”

Dozens of other health-related initiatives Cuomo proposed in his briefing book, but did not include in his speech, would require new legislation.

Cuomo proposed a package of measures to significantly curb the consumption and sale of e-cigarettes in New York State.

Cuomo's briefing book said the governor would seek to include e-cigarettes under the state's Clean Indoor Air Act, prohibiting people from smoking or “vaping” e-cigarettes anywhere cigarette smoking is already illegal.

He will also seek to prohibit the sale of all flavored nicotine products, and to keep e-cigarette manufacturers from marketing their products to children. He would also seek prohibitions on e-cigarette advertisements on transit systems and in outdoor areas.

Cuomo also plans to “establish a private equity pilot program” that would allow as many as five corporations to invest in health care facilities, which is currently illegal under New York State law. Cuomo has proposed this idea before, and has come up against significant opposition in the Assembly. But Democratic Assemblyman and health committee chairman Richard Gottfried has said he may be willing to consider some form of private equity investment in hospitals this year.