This time of the year can be really tough for thousands of kids across the country who lost their parents as they were serving our country. So, one local group is making sure those children have a way to cope with their grief and connect with a coach or instructor who can mentor them.

It’s called “Angels of America’s Fallen” and they give kids of fallen military or first responders the opportunity to shine through the activities they love. 11 News Reporter Katie Pelton has the story of one little girl who has blossomed thanks to this program.

Four year-old Emma Loughmiller loves to twirl.

"Her little face lights up when she's dancing,” said Adri Loughmiller, Emma’s mother.

It’s something her mom Adri is grateful to see after a tough road.

"She was only four months old when her daddy died while on active duty in the Army,” said Loughmiller.

Emma’s dad died by suicide while he was stationed at Fort Bragg a few years ago.

"The first couple years were definitely just, I call it being in a box, or if I say, just being in a fog that just lifts eventually,” said Loughmiller.

Angels of America’s Fallen helped lift that fog. The Colorado Springs based program supports Emma’s passion for dance.

"She's just a happy little girl and she just, her dad's memory basically lives on,” said Loughmiller.

"It makes me feel fun because of all the dancing,” said Emma.

Founder Joe Lewis came up with the idea when he retired from the military.

"I lost friends in every service and many of those friends had very young children, some even children on the way who they would never get to meet,” said Joe Lewis, Founder and President of Angels of America's Fallen. “And so when I retired, I found myself blessed to be here for my two sons and really felt a calling."

With his wife’s support, they launched the program about three years ago.

"At the end of this year, we'll be serving 300 children nationwide,” said Lewis. “We've got 35 kids that are in El Paso County and 41 in total in Colorado."

That doesn’t include the 120 kids on the wait list and the hundreds of others trying to get on it. The group pays for activities, like dance, until they turn 18.

"We're about getting the kids out of being withdrawn, or maybe fighting invisible wounds themselves but instead go out and write a story of success,” said Lewis.

Allowing this little ballerina to shine.

"It's seeing resiliency and it's seeing a child overcoming a really difficult piece of their life,” said Lewis.

"Honestly, it just almost brings me to tears every time I see her on the stage,” said Loughmiller.

This holiday season, there are 120 kids on the wait list for the Angels of America’s Fallen program. You can help them get off that list. Click the link on the right side of this page to find more information on the Angels of America's Fallen website.

The group is hosting a gala to celebrate and honor all of the children. The Angel Gala will take place on January 16 at the Broadmoor. Our own Dianne Derby will be the emcee for the event. You can purchase tickets and read more about it using the link on this page.