Mike Ferris, left, looks on as teammate Jacob Francis, center, putts during Saturday's inaugural Rain, Snow or Shine Golf Tournament at Sumo Golf Village. (David Wilson / Daily Record)

FLORENCE — While most golfers across the state have set their clubs aside in favor of their skis and snowboards for the winter, 24 golfers took to the links Saturday at Sumo Golf Village to brave the near freezing temperatures and participate in the inaugural Rain, Snow or Shine Golf Tournament.

The four-person scramble tournament, organized by the Florence Chamber of Commerce and KRLN/KSTY Radio, raised an estimated $2,300 for the chamber from player entry fees and event sponsors: Triple Crown Casinos, Waggner Breaks and Auto Repair, B&B Pawn and Antiques, Coal Creek Trading Post and Ron Beckner from Edward Jones.

"We wanted to do something that hadn't been done before," said Cori Stone, office administrator at the Florence Chamber of Commerce, when asked what sparked the idea for the fundraiser. "Late in the season, the tournament brings out all the diehards."

The team of Mark Perez Sr., Terry Swift, Roger Morris and Willard Anthony took home the first "Frozen Bird" honors, and winning four tickets to Royal Gorge High Country Experience, after posting a score of 61.

"It was chilly when we started this morning. But we brought enough layers that we could shed as the day went on and it ended up being really nice out there," Perez said. "This tournament is definitely something I'd love to do again."

Advertisement

The rosy cheeks and red noses were worn likes badges of honor when players filed into the clubhouse. And, considering the time of year, they were relative small consequences after four hours outside in the frigid Florence air.

"We did get pretty lucky," said Stone, referring to the sunny and light wind conditions. "If it's sunny and 75 degrees: perfect. If it's frozen and 12 degrees: perfect. This is just something for people to get together, support the chamber, have some fun, drink some beer or have some brats and play some golf."

After seeing Saturday's success, Stone said the Florence Chamber of Commerce would like to make the tournament an annual event.

But with one minor change.

"Next year, we'll probably shoot for the tournament to be a little earlier, either in October or early November, but definitely not this late in November," Stone said. "We could be under four feet of snow this time next year. You never know."