It’s Back On!

by Staff | May 4, 2016 8:00 am

(5) Comments | Commenting has been closed | E-mail the Author

Posted to: Media, WNHH Radio

This just in: After a day and night of Obamacare-style tech glitches beyond its command, the “Great Give” is back up and running for day two — and we’re broadcasting it all live at the 36-hour WNHH radiothon to make up for lost time. Click on the video to watch it all live. Over 400 not-for-profit organizations have been soliciting donations and competing for prizes in the event since 8 a.m. Tuesday. The Community Foundation for Greater New Haven, who organizes the event, aims to raise $1.5 million for the groups and award $190,000 in prizes. But tech glitches temporarily slowed down and even shut down the giving operation on Tuesday, part of a national failure by a company handling the computer end of these drives being held in 54 separate cities. Hundreds of people were thwarted trying to give money. Tuesday night the Foundation got its donation forms back up. It worked all night on other problems with the donation site. By 8 a.m., it decided to keep the event going—and is extending it through noon Thursday. Stay tuned for announcements about revised prizes. Please donate to WNHH radio here. Please donate to many other groups, too, at the “Great Give” website here. Meanwhile, WNHH radio is holding a 36-hour live radiothon/webathon. Group are coming in to sing for their supper: They’re having a great time singing songs or acting out scripted scenes or reading poems. Then they’re telling us about all the good work they’re up to. You can watch it by clicking on the above video. You can listen at 103.5 FM or online here. Chabaso Bakery/Atticus Cafe is sponsoring the webathon. Tuesday 8 a.m. Will Ginsberg/ Community Foundation for Greater New Haven 8:30 a.m. Sarah Foundation 9 a.m. Neighborhood Housing Services 9:30 a.m. R Kids 10 a.m. Orchard House 10:30 a.m. Animal Shelter 11 a.m. Circle of Care 11:30 a.m. Arts Council Nichole René Noon Shoreline Village 12:30 p.m.108 Monkeys 1 p.m. New Haven Reads 1:30 p.m. Chamber of Commerce Foundation 2 p.m. WNPR’s John Dankosky 2:30 p.m. Circle of Care 3 p.m. Square Foot Theater Company 3:30 p.m. Starfish Girl Anitstalking Campaign 4 p.m. Elm Shakespeare Company 4:30 p.m. New Haven Symphony 5 p.m. Squash Haven 5:15 Happy Hour report (From Christy’s) 5:30 p.m. Junta for Progressive Action 6 p.m. Solar Youth 6:30 p.m. Neighborhood Music School 7 p.m. Best Video 7:30 p.m. Arts & Ideas 8 p.m. Site Projects 8:30 p.m. I’m Possible Project 9 p.m. Institute Library Overnight Pajama party with Brian Slattery & Babz Rawls-Ivy! Wednesday 8:30 a.m. Fellowship Place 9 a.m. Koah USA 9:15 a.m. Fit Haven 9:30 a.m. Christian Community Action 10 a.m. Boys & Girls Club 10:30 a.m. Mary Lou Pursell Nursing Scholarship Fund 11 a.m. Stephanie Chung/ Community Foundation for Greater New Haven 11:30 a.m. Beth El Center (Milford shelter) Noon CT Experiential Learning Center 12:30 p.m. Elm City Internationals 1 p.m. Animal Haven 1:30 p.m. NH Farms Bruce Ditman 2 p.m. Columbus House 4 p.m. LEAP 4:30 New Haven Scholarship Fund 5 p.m. Hope After Loss 5:30 p.m. Land Trust 6:30 p.m. Music Haven 8 p.m. Sleep!



Tags: Great Give, not-for-profits

Share this story with others. Share |

Post a Comment

Commenting has closed for this entry

Comments

posted by: mperezma on May 3, 2016 9:11am Love that poem, Jessica! Neighborhood Housing Services is lucky to have such a talented representative!

posted by: Frank Columbo on May 3, 2016 5:52pm Am a self-proclaimed Philanthropist on a Budget. No Trust Fund Baby scratch, just my hard earned dollars. I donate annually to the United Way, so how is the Great Give different?

posted by: Music Haven “When Doves Cry” on accordion & fiddle — sounds amazing! Thanks, Adam & Brian!

posted by: lauraweirclarke Site Projects got air-play on WNHH last night @ 8 pm. We were expecting to make a pitch, give performance, and be interviewed. Tom Breen did a short interview— thank you, Tom – and our very own Megan Miller did her sit-down, stand-up comedy routine but I didn’t get to make my pitch. Here, then, is my pitch for Site Projects: What makes Site Projects unique and uniquely worthy of your support? Site Projects is the new kid on the block. At 13 years old, we are young with a small staff of part-part- timers and a Board of 15. We are still finding our way, that is, finding the best way to create stunning and iconic artworks in New Haven’s public spaces.Our artworks and events are always free, open and physically accessible. You’ve probably seen what we do. The 110 ft tall red-orange mural in Temple Plaza; the 50 large Erector Set boats with the blue decks in the Farmington Canal almost a decade ago; the balloon sculptures in the Peabody Museum with the Dinosaurs in 2006; or the three SWOON murals: those are just a few of our projects. Site Projects doesn’t do this for our own edification. We do this for the City and the people of NHv. It isn’t easy and it isn’t cheap. When people give money to Site Projects, we give it back in the form of artworks and art- related programs. To date, we have invested over $700,000 in commissioned artworks and related events in New Haven’s cityscape. Our palette is the City’s public spaces: parks, trails, streets and sidewalks, underpasses, abandoned spaces such as the old Farmington Canal. We work all scales from big— covering the City from NE to SW with Night Rainbow—to very small with Whispering Galleries, the interactive digital artwork run on off a computer using the LEAP motion controller and that tells a real story of working life in New Haven in the 1850’s.