COLORADO SPRINGS — At rainy Air Force Academy on Sunday, a sellout and standing room crowd at the Cadet Ice Arena witnessed the Avalanche’s annual Burgundy-White intrasquad scrimmage.

Burgundy forwards Colin Smith, Jamie McGinn and Brad Malone scored midway through the even affair and White goalies Semyon Varlamov and Kieran Millan were each perfect in 20 minutes of action.

It was 3-1 after regulation, before a scheduled shootout in which captain Gabe Landeskog was the only player to score. He used a patient move to roof a forehand past second-year pro goalie Kent Patterson.

P.A. Parenteau, rookie Nathan MacKinnon, Ryan O’Reilly, Matt Duchene and Alex Tanguay failed to score in the entertainment-only shootout.

Avs coach Patrick Roy singled out Millan, the former Boston University four-year starter who began his professional career last season with Denver Cutthroats of the Central Hockey League. He made several excellent saves in the second period.

Veteran Jean-Sebastien Giguere was also perfect in net, stopping all eight Burgundy shots he faced in the first period. And the Burgundy’s Sami Aittokallio didn’t allow a goal until the final minute of the third period, when Bryan Lerg scored on a 6-on-5 attack.

Each of the Avalanche’s six signed goalies played a period, including Calvin Pickard, who has previously been considered the top minor-league prospect. If healthy, Pickard, Aittokallio, Millan and Patterson will complete the rosters for the Lake Erie Monsters of the American Hockey League and the Cutthroats for the second consecutive season, although the order may change.

The starters for the Burgundy team were center Paul Stastny, left wing Landeskog and right wing Tanguay, with Erik Johnson and Chris Bigras on the blue line and Varlamov in net. The White had Giguere between the pipes, Ryan Wilson and Mason Geertsen on D and center Duchene, left wing O’Reilly and right wing Parenteau up front.

Mike Chambers: , mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mchambersdp