by

If you go to Donald Trump’s campaign website, you’ll notice that he has not a single word about policy. There’s no list of his policy positions anywhere on it. Given that he’s been on every side of nearly every issue, that’s not really a surprise. But on the campaign trail, he’s slinging some serious policy:



Billionaire businessman Donald Trump on Wednesday offered a glimpse into his presidential platform on healthcare, saying he would replace ObamaCare with “something terrific.” “It’s gotta go,” Trump said of ObamaCare in an interview Wednesday with CNN. “Repeal and replace with something terrific.”

And it will the biggest and the classiest something terrific you’ve ever seen! No one creates terrific things like Donald Trump! “I went to one of the finest schools in the country for teaching people how to create things that are terrific,” Trump said. In that vein, I present the rest of Trump’s platform:

Economic Growth

In order to make America great again, Donald Trump strongly supports doing something totally awesome. It will be so totally bitchin that everyone in every other country will want to come to the United States to partake in it, but they won’t be allowed to because they’re all rapists and murderers.

Foreign Policy

During a Trump administration, America’s foreign policy will be the most stupendous foreign policy that any nation has ever had. It will be the envy of the world, nay, the entire galaxy.

Military

If Donald Trump is elected, the U.S. military will not only be the biggest and strongest in the world, it will also be the classiest. Every ship, airplane, amphibious vehicle, jeep and tank will be gold-plated and will have the Trump logo, the symbol of the the most abundant and extravagant corporation in the world, painted on the side.

Education

In Donald Trump’s America, every school will have a dress code and each student will be required to wear clothing from the incredibly elegant Donald Trump collection. In the interests of fiscal responsibility, however, this will be limited only to white students. Black and Chinese students, and the Mexican students who aren’t rapists, will devote half their schoolday to making those clothes, thus preparing them for a career in the sweatshops. Those minority students who exceed the number needed for clothing production will be rerouted toward careers working in the gold plating mines or in caring for the lawns at one or more of Trump’s mansions and golf courses, ensuring both opportunities and greater profits.

Donald Trump also promises to establish a new cabinet-level agency, the Department of Incredible Superlatives, which will work to create new adjectives for Trump to use to describe his enormous, amazing, colossal accomplishments. “America cannot fall behind the rest of the world in the race to find new and prodigious ways to describe my overwhelming greatness,” said the next president of the United States.