My Morning Jacket kicked off a two-night Riverside Theater residency with a sold-out show Saturday night. Credit: CJ Foeckler / Riverside Theater

By ,

Alice Cooper once said, "Rock 'n' roll ... ain't for kids." That's probably why the presence of children under 13 at a rock 'n' roll show is ordinarily as disturbing as the presence of children under 13 at a movie that earns its R rating.

Saturday night at the Riverside Theater, however, the handful of kids at the sold-out My Morning Jacket show seemed not only welcome but also too few, because the quintet from Louisville, Ky., imbued its performance — one of two shows at the venue over the weekend — with positive, childlike qualities.

During a set that stretched past two hours, the most useful quality was a loathing of boredom and sameness. With material from seven albums, each reflecting that loathing in its own way, the band kept itself and the audience from fidgeting.

The squirming variety could be epitomized in a single song like "In Its Infancy (The Waterfall)," which skipped from jittery, imploring refrains to jangly, lulling verses as if abrupt jumps were the only logical transitions.

More often, the band shifted smoothly, as when linking "Only Memories Remain," which recalled Paul McCartney's pouting sweetness spiked with the tartness of the other three Beatles, to "I Will Sing You Songs," which pushed into that Pink Floyd-ian realm where inner contemplation sounds like outer-space music.

A child, or inner child, craving guidance through cosmos and imagination could scarcely have had a better conductor than My Morning Jacket frontman Jim James.

Looking every inch — every frizzy follicle, every color splashed like bright paint onto his coat — the wicked genius who could also be a winning uncle, James held forth with a voice that frequently quavered as if coming from a much younger throat.

The sense of wonder James thus imparted to many songs remained one reason My Morning Jacket has been pegged as a Southern-rock Flaming Lips.

For bone-deep rock satisfaction on Saturday night, though, MMJ gave James the edge.

"Circuital" cavorted with the chunky acoustic strumming of Peter Gabriel's "Solsbury Hill," while Carl Broemel spun through the kind of guitar solos the Allman Brothers played during their lighter-than-air moments.

"One Big Holiday," with Tom Blankenship's Sabbath-cribbed bass line, and "Touch Me I'm Going to Scream, Part 2," with its meld of Giorgio Moroder disco and Talking Heads funk (plus a sudden thrust toward Queen's ridiculous majesty), also demonstrated MMJ's willingness to bash out big dumb riffs and beats.

Rock 'n' roll can be for kids. It can also be for adults who, given capacity-crowd license by My Morning Jacket, want to daydream and scream as if they were kids again.