The Avalanche is high on 2013-drafted defensemen Chris Bigras and Mason Geertsen. Bigras will join Geertsen as a professional with the Lake Erie Monsters of the American Hockey League this week.

Bigras’ season with the Owen Sound Attack of the Ontario Hockey League ended Sunday, and Avs coach Patrick Roy said Monday that Bigras will finish the season with Lake Erie.

Bigras, 20, is not a candidate to play in Colorado’s final three NHL games this week, and he might not immediately play at Lake Erie because of a late-season injury. It is unclear if he’ll burn the first year of his entry-level contract or finish the season on a amateur tryout (ATO) contract.

The Monsters, who are not in position to make the AHL playoffs, have seven remaining games beginning Tuesday at Chicago. The season finale is April 18.

Bigras, 20, had 71 points (20 goals) in 62 regular-season games for Owen Sound, plus three points (goal) in five playoff games. He was Colorado’s second pick in 2013 (32nd overall), in a draft class that included forward Nathan MacKinnon (first), major-junior goalie Spencer Martin (63rd), Geertsen (93rd), University of Denver defenseman Will Butcher (123rd) and St. Cloud State defenseman Ben Storm (153rd).

Geertsen recently signed with Colorado and reported to Lake Erie after finishing his junior season with the Vancouver Giants of the Western Hockey League. Geertsen, 6-foot-4, who was named the Giants’ MVP, is scoreless in three games with the Monsters.

“We are excited about having these two guys,” Roy said about Bigras and Geertsen. They’re coming from the same draft. We’re working on building the goaltending with Spencer Martin and the defensemen (at Lake Erie).”

The Avs are equally excited about 2014-drafted 6-5 defenseman Kyle Wood of the OHL’s North Bay Battalion

“We have Wood doing well, Butcher here (at DU) and Storm,” Roy said. “We have a lot of Ds that are coming along. Now we have to look at the forwards.”

Conner Bleackley of the WHL’s Red Deer Rebels is Colorado’s top drafted prospect up front. He was the team’s first-round draft pick (23rd overall) in 2014.

Bleackley has 49 points (27 goals) in 51 games for Red Deer, but has missed 21 games to injury.

“Up-and-down season in Red Deer,” Roy said of Bleackley, 19.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers