All of our numbers come from a category of plan called “silver.” To qualify as silver, a plan has to cover 70 percent of the average patient’s medical costs. The marketplaces contain richer and skimpier categories, but silver plans were the most popular this year.

First we looked at the cheapest silver plan in each geographical market, to give a sense of the best price an insurance shopper could get. Since last year, the price of the cheapest silver plans has barely risen; it’s actually going down in seven states. The average increase was just 1 percent. That’s pretty remarkable considering that health insurance premiums nearly always go up. If you’re the kind of customer who cares only about premiums, it pays in almost every market to go back to the marketplace this year and switch to the cheapest plan.

Prices Aren’t Spiking for the Federal Government Federal tax credits for health insurance purchased on the Affordable Care Act marketplaces are calculated based on the price of a plan in each market known as the “benchmark.” So far, the average benchmark premiums are going down in many of the states with public rates for 2015.

If you stayed with the cheapest silver plan from 2014 — according to the Department of Health and Human Services, it was the most popular choice around the country — those prices are going up almost everywhere. In some cases, they have increased by more than 10 percent. The average increase is 8.4 percent.

Here is an example of how those changes are playing out: In New York City, the cheapest 2014 silver plan was offered by MetroPlus and cost $359 a month, before tax credits, for a 40-year-old single nonsmoker. Renew that plan and the premium will increase by 17.3 percent. But switch to the cheapest plan now listed, offered by Health Republic, and the premium will go up by only 1 percent. The Health Republic network is broad, and includes providers who were in the MetroPlus plan. But consumers in other markets may need to be willing to jettison providers if they want the best price.

The third number we examined is important, too. For people with incomes between 138 percent and 400 percent of the federal poverty level — about $33,000 to $95,000 for a family of three — the federal government will kick in money to help pay for the insurance. Those subsidies are calculated based on the cost of the second-cheapest silver plan and the purchaser’s income. What’s happening in these plans can tell us how much the federal government’s bill for subsidizing health insurance is going to go up. On average, the prices for the second-cheapest plans, called “benchmark plans,” are actually going down by 1.4 percent, and in most places where they are increasing, they are increasing modestly. That’s good news for the federal budget.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The small increases in the cheapest silver plan and the decreases in benchmark plans are a sign the marketplace is working as intended, said Jonathan Gruber, an M.I.T. economist who helped design the marketplace structure in the Affordable Care Act. “The main feature was that competition would bring rates down, and it did,” he said.

A few important caveats about this data: We still don’t know the rates in every state. The McKinsey database includes rates the company has collected from the 18 states and the District of Columbia, which have publicly posted the prices that insurers plan to charge consumers. About 43 percent of Americans eligible to sign up live in those states, which include New York, California, Michigan and Ohio. In many of the states included in this analysis, the rates are still being reviewed by regulators. Even in states where regulators have approved the rates, prices could go down before the marketplaces open on Nov. 15. As more state data becomes available, we plan to update our map.

But to keep premiums from rising, consumers will have to fight inertia. The Obama administration is trying to make it as easy as possible for people to preserve their coverage next year by simply renewing their current health plans. People who don’t choose to shop again on Healthcare.gov will be automatically renewed in the plans they bought in 2014. That’s not true for every state. Some states running their own marketplaces, including Colorado and Rhode Island, are either requiring consumers to log in and update their information before they can renew or recalculating tax credits before sending renewal notices. But the federal rule applies in a majority of states.

Photo

Historical evidence suggests that few customers will return to the marketplace to shop for a new health plan. Customers in the Affordable Care Act marketplace may be more price-sensitive than those in previous government insurance markets. But in those other plans, inertia has tended to set in.

Fewer than 10 percent of seniors change their Medicare Part D drug plans each year, and only 12 percent of federal employees switch plans on the federal benefit exchange. Studies have shown that, in the Medicare Part D market in particular, many more seniors would be better off if they changed plans more frequently.

In the marketplaces, it’s not yet clear why rates on the most popular plans are increasing so much more than their competitors. It’s possible insurers are charging more for these plans to take advantage of inertia and increase profits. It’s also possible that some priced their initial policies unsustainably low, given the new nature of this market, and are now correcting.

Brendan Buck, a spokesman for America’s Health Insurance Plans, an industry group, said the main factor driving premium increases was “who signed up.” Many of the new lowest cost plans are new market entrants, according to McKinsey, which means they may have less data on how expensive these new customers will be to cover. We’re likely to get more insight into the forces driving premiums changes in coming years.

Automatically renewing marketplace plans will be a mistake for many people, but it is an especially risky one for the 85 percent of people who qualified for some sort of subsidy. The Obama administration has chosen not to recalculate the value of tax credits for people who don’t return to the Healthcare.gov site.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

If your subsidy should go down — either because you have received a raise since last year or because the benchmark plan in the market became cheaper — you could end up owing the government a lot more money than you think, and you won’t find out until tax time. Sam Baker at National Journal has a good article walking through the mechanics of how this works.

Not everyone has to worry about these invisible price changes, especially if incomes haven’t changed. But in markets where federal rules apply and the benchmark is going down a lot, it pays to return to the marketplace before renewing. Places where that will be an issue include parts of Georgia, Indiana and Ohio — where benchmark prices are declining by more than 15 percent. For people in those areas, returning to the marketplace could prevent a surprise tax bill.

“The structure makes for a very competitive environment among the insurance carriers,” said Paul Houchens, an actuary at Milliman, who estimates that, in some cases, what looks like a 5 percent premium rise could actually mean an increase of more than 30 percent. “But,” he said, “I can see how it would create more confusion for consumers.”