Montreal, Canada –(PR.com)– This week, CanSanté Inc hosted the first ever Medical Tourism Trade Show of its kind in Palais des Congrès Convention Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Destination Health will be open to the public, attracting national and international exhibitors to promote both national and international medical tourism.

According to Destination Health, over 800,000 Canadians travel from Canada on an annual basis to obtain medical and dental services not pre-approved by their provincial health plans.

Canadians are spending over $400m USD per year since 2009 for out-of-country medical expenses.

Canadian Medical Tourism increased by 26% in 2014.

According to the Fraser Institute, the largest numbers of patients receiving care outside Canada were estimated for Urology, General Surgery and Opthalmology.

Canadians are often faced with wait lists of months or maybe years, forcing Canadians to choose to be medical tourists just to avoid delay and return to normal life quicker. Some patients may actually be sent abroad by the public health care system because of a lack of available resources or that some procedures are not provided in their home jurisdiction. Other Canadians may be seeking more advanced health care facilities or higher tech medicine.

Whatever the reason, it makes complete sense to connect supply and demand to assist Canadians in making informed decisions about their healthcare overseas.

Costa Rica is becoming an increasingly popular destination for Canadian tourists and medical tourists, based on its professional accredited healthcare providers, proximity and destination attractiveness.

MediTourDirect S.A. produces Medical Tourism Directory Costa Rica, which provides users with all the information they need to make informed decisions about their healthcare in Costa Rica. Medical Tourism Directory Costa Rica is a one-stop portal connecting users with quality health and travel providers for Treatment, Travel, Trips and Total Care.

Claire Charnock, CEO of MediTourDirect, commented:

“ Medical Tourism Directory Costa Rica is delighted to be participating in Canada’s first Medical Tourism Congress 13-15 August in Montreal.

The majority of our users at www.medicaltourismcostarica.com are from Canada and particularly from Montreal, so we are delighted at the prospect of connecting with our audience in person and helping them meet their healthcare needs in Costa Rica, through our network of quality healthcare providers and supporting travel services.”

To contact Medical Tourism Directory Costa Rica and set up a personal appointment at Destination Health Montreal, please call Toll Free 1-888-743-3201.

See also Costa Rica dental tourism guide and Costa Rica medical tourism guide