Dozens of people who lived on a river bank for years will continue to have a home for another 30 days.

The Bridge to Housing program, which started providing resources and housing to homeless people at a West Sacramento motel two months ago, was extended Tuesday by the Yolo County Board of Supervisors.

"The project continues to go really well," said Karen Larsen, county mental health director, in an update to supervisors. "We are at 57 of our original 65 residents."

Supervisor Duane Chamberlain asked Larsen where the homeless people that left the program went.

"We have had four picked up on legal issues," Larsen said. "Three of them had warrants and another one of them picked up another legal charge. We've had another three go into substance abuse treatment."

Originally, the program planned to operate on an estimated budget of $100,000 for a 90-day period, with an optional 30-day extension.

But once the project got under way, unforeseen costs associated with the move-in day, such as security and maintenance issues at the motel, such as pests, put the project about $27,000 over budget, according to a staff report.

Supervisors voted unanimously to allocate $30,000 from the Health and Human Services Contingency to continue the project for another 30 days.

"Is that time frame going to be enough?" asked Supervisor Jim Provenza.

Larsen responded, "I can forsee that not 100 percent of our residents will be able to obtain employment or income or find the housing available in Yolo County by the end of February.

However, she thinks the program has already had some "amazing outcomes."

"About 82 percent of our residents now have insurance," she said. "With the Affordable Care Act a lot more people who are chronically homeless are eligible for Medi-Cal. This allows them to get their mental health services, their primary care services and their substance abuse services all covered."

According to Larsen, a local expedited social security project is helping the residents apply for social security benefits.

Larsen said twice a month the state department of Disability Determination Benefits and the Federal Social Security Administration are on site at CommuniCare in West Sacramento for face to face meeting with residents needing to apply for social security.

"This is really unheard of," Larsen said. "The national average time frame for getting social security is about 24 months for SSI and for the homeless population it is usually only about 11 percent that even get the benefits. This local program is taking about 60 days for determination with over a 60 percent approval rating."

Larsen said about 35 percent of the residents at the motel are going through the process of applying for social security.

Following a successful move-in day in November, county staff relocated 65 people and their pets to a West Sacramento motel, pairing them with services such as job placement, health insurance and counseling.

On Oct. 21, the Yolo County Board of Supervisors allocated $50,000 to the cause, which was matched by the city of West Sacramento, for a total of $100,000 in financial support for the project. It is a collaborative effort between Yolo County, Yolo County Housing, the city of West Sacramento and numerous private and nonprofit partners.

Supervisor Matt Rexroad said there were issues that concerned him about the project including residents having down time and people dropping by that don't live there.

"I'm worried that there are too many people sitting around," Rexroad said. "We don't want Marines sitting around; we don't want these folks sitting around. We don't want anyone sitting around because that usually leads to a bad outcome."

Rexroad said people wandering by is also a major concern.

"I'm supporting continuing this for 30 more days, but I think the outcome now needs to be how many people will actually get out of this facility and that's how we need to be measuring it."

Contact Margaret Baum at 530-406-6232.