WASHINGTON (AP) — Anthony Rendon homered and drove in four runs, Jordan Zimmermann pitched seven shutout innings, and the Washington Nationals routed the Philadelphia Phillies 11-0 Saturday night.

Philadelphia starter A.J. Burnett (6-11) and manager Ryne Sandberg didn’t last long. Both were ultimately ejected when Burnett motioned and yelled toward home plate umpire Chris Guccione after a ball call duringWashington’s four-run second inning.

Rendon singled, hit a three-run homer, and doubled in his first three at-bats.

Denard Span, Asdrubal Cabrera and Wilson Ramos each had two of Washington’s 14 hits, and every Nationals starter, including Zimmermann, hit safely.

Zimmermann (7-5) held the Phillies to five singles and struck eight without a walk for his 50th career win, and first since June 30th.

He retired the last 11 batters he faced and left after throwing 97 pitches.

Burnett allowed five runs, one was earned, and three hits in losing his third straight decision.

Marlon Byrd had two hits for Philadelphia, which had won the first two games of the series 10-4 and 2-1.

Washington loaded the bases in the second inning on two walks and an error. After Span drove in a run with a sacrifice fly, Rendon connected on a 3-1 pitch from Burnett for his 14th home run, making it 5-0.

Rendon’s blast snapped a nine-game homerless streak for the Nationals, the longest in team history (2005-present).

When his first pitch to Jayson Werth following the home run was called a ball, Burnett — who had already walked two in the inning — vented his frustration toward Guccione.

After Burnett was tossed, Sandberg raced out and heatedly argued with Guccione near home plate, and was soon ejected as well.

Bryce Harper’s RBI-single in the third made it 6-0.

Rendon’s double was the one of four straight hits that opened a five-run fourth against reliever Phillippe Aumont.

TRAINER’S ROOM:

Phillies: Sandberg said outfielder Domonic Brown, suffering from strep throat, is day-to-day.

ON DECK:

Phillies: Cole Hamels (6-5, 2.55) has won four straight decisions. He makes his 30th career start againstWashington Sunday. He’s 15-6 with a 2.63 ERA versus the Nationals.

Nationals: Stephen Strasburg (7-9, 3.55) is 3-0 with a 1.13 ERA in three home starts against the Phillies dating back to last season.