The Malakpura relief camp for Muslims is the largest set up earlier this year for people fleeing Hindu-Muslim violence in northern India. These children lined up in the camp Dec. 31 to receive food aid. Vivek Singh for The Wall Street Journal …

Families at Malakpura live in Oxfam-donated tarpaulin tents that scarcely keep out the cold and rain. Women wash dishes alongside pools of garbage-lined, stagnant water. Children and adults fight over logs of donated firewood. Vivek Singh for The Wall Street Journal …

Nawab Ali and his wife, here outside their tent at Malakpura, lost their 12-year-old child, Farman, to a persistent fever at the camp. In all, at least 47 people have died at the camp amid unsanitary conditions. Vivek Singh for The Wall Street Journal …

Malakpura residents rushed Dec. 31 to pick up bamboo sticks, brought by relief agencies to be used for the construction of temporary shelters.

Large numbers of people who were directly affected by the riots or belonged to the worst-hit villages received government funds to relocate. Many of them bought land to settle down in Muslim-dominated villages near the camp. Vivek Singh for The Wall Street Journal …

But thousands who aren't eligible for compensation still remain, despite repeated government attempts—and deadlines—to close the camps. These men and women waited for supplies on Dec. 31. Vivek Singh for The Wall Street Journal …

A child played at the camp Dec. 31. Vivek Singh for The Wall Street Journal …

Afsaana, a Malakpura resident who goes by one name and isn't sure how old she is, lost her small daughter to the cold, wet weather at the camp. 'She died in my arms,' Afsaana said. 'We are surviving somehow, but how long could my little girl fight?' Vivek Singh for The Wall Street Journal …

Government doctors tend to the sick at clinics like this one. But officials blame the inhabitants of the camps for refusing to travel to government hospitals for treatment and to give birth. One senior official suggested the situation wasn't alarming as the infant-mortality rate wasn't higher here than in the district overall. Vivek Singh for The Wall Street Journal …

The camp's temporary brick toilets are overflowing and unusable, so a majority instead resort to adjoining sugar-cane fields, where cooking and washing also take place. Vivek Singh for The Wall Street Journal …

An elderly woman worked Dec. 31 to pitch a tent made primarily of rags and pieces of tarp. Vivek Singh for The Wall Street Journal …

Women waited Dec. 31 to see a doctor at a camp clinic. 'We are trying to treat all kinds of diseases,' said Padam Singh, a government doctor, as he tended to a long line of camp residents. Vivek Singh for The Wall Street Journal …

A mother cuddled her infant at the camp. 'There's nothing we can do to save newborn babies in these conditions,' Dr. Singh said. Vivek Singh for The Wall Street Journal …

Gafur, sitting outside a small shop he runs at the camp, recently lost a two-month-old child to the weather. Vivek Singh for The Wall Street Journal …

Aid workers handed out blankets to camp residents on Dec. 31. Vivek Singh for The Wall Street Journal …