Insurance shoppers will have more plans to choose from on Illinois' Obamacare exchange next year.

The second year of the Illinois health insurance exchange will feature three new insurers and more than twice the number of plans than were offered last year.

About 410 plans will be sold, up from 165 plans offered last year through the state's partnership exchange with the federal government, Get Covered Illinois. Cook County residents will have the most plans available to them, with nearly 150, compared with the 50 plans offered in most counties downstate. That's according to new data released today by the Illinois Department of Insurance.

Newcomers to the individual marketplace during the next enrollment period that begins Nov. 15 include IlliniCare Health Plan Inc., UnitedHealthCare of the Midwest Inc. and Time Insurance Co., which is an arm of Milwaukee-based Assurant Health.

“With more carriers offering plans in year two, there are more choices for consumers,” Andrew Boron, director of the Illinois Department of Insurance, said in a statement. “Increased competition has led to competitive pricing and individuals, families and small businesses will have access to an even wider selection of affordable health care options in 2015.”

Aetna Inc. is the only insurer not returning to the Illinois exchange. But its subsidiaries, Coventry Health and Life Insurance Co. and Coventry Health Care of Illinois Inc., are participating.



“We are reviewing our plans to ensure they deliver the greatest possible value to the people we serve,” an Aetna spokesman said in a statement. “We believe that the Coventry plans being offered on the Illinois exchange in 2015 are best positioned to meet the needs of exchange shoppers. “

During the first enrollment period that ended March 31, about 217,000 people got coverage from the marketplace, but competition was sparse, as 92 percent of the enrollees flocked to plans offered by the state's largest insurer, Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Illinois.

Other carriers are looking for ways to attract consumers to their products, with some offering new plans this year.

Land of Lincoln Health, a Chicago insurer that was established under Obamacare, only captured 2 percent, or 3,600, of total enrollments last year. Land of Lincoln is Illinois' only insurance co-op program and was created with $160 million in federal loans to increase the price competition among insurers on the exchange. Last year, Land of Lincoln's prices were not very competitive, however, with its average monthly premiums topping most competitors' prices, according to a Crain's analysis of data released by the federal government.

In an effort to attract more consumers, the co-op partnered with eight hospitals and health systems in the state to offer lower rates on the exchange this year.

NEW YEAR, NEW GAME PLAN

Land of Lincoln is launching the Preferred Partner Plan, which allows patients to receive a bigger discount if they choose a primary care physician at one of the partner hospitals than they would if they were to choose from Land of Lincoln's broader network of doctors. It's a form of a narrower network. Partner health systems are Adventist Midwest Health, Advocate Health Care, Centegra Health System, Chicago Health System, Family Health Network, Illinois Health Partners, Presence Health and Swedish Covenant Hospital.

People who choose a partner plan still will have access to Land of Lincoln's broader state and multistate network of doctors and will receive an in-network rate.

"We focused on what is important to our consumers, and we found that people mostly receive care close to home," said Jason Montrie, president of Land of Lincoln. "They want access and freedom, so we are offering better benefits when they choose their hospital."

Mr. Montrie said Land of Lincoln will provide reduced rates overall in comparison to last year and that will enable them to be competitive on the exchange.

Experts say Land of Lincoln's Preferred Network Plan could attract more enrollments in 2015.

"This is certainly a differentiator," said Nancy Daas, a partner at CMC Advisory Group, a Chicago-based benefits consultancy. While the name recognition of Blue Cross is important, there is sticker shock at how expensive health plans can be, she said. "People want to learn about other insurers and alternate plans that have competitive rates."