BEGIN TRANSCRIPT

RUSH: Georgeann in Bartow, Florida, great to have you on the Rush Limbaugh program. Hello.

CALLER: Hello. Thank you. It's an honor to speak to you.

RUSH: Thank you.

CALLER: Yes. I wanted you to know my husband and I have been listening to you and learning from you since your TV days.

RUSH: Well, I appreciate that.

CALLER: We've learned a lot. We stay right on the cutting edge.

RUSH: Thank you. Thank you very much.

CALLER: I wanted to just disagree with you on one thing, though, while I have your ear, about the comment on your overrated staff, I have to disagree with that. I think they're doing an excellent job for you.

RUSH: Well, there's things that I know that you don't, but I'll take it under advisement.

CALLER: I called to voice my disgust and displeasure with the celebrities I've been seeing lately using their face time to promote Obamacare.

RUSH: Yeah.

CALLER: The most recent one was -- well, I call her a cutesy cook show chick, the Rachael Ray program where she invited I guess crazy Uncle Joe to come on and help her stir up something and put it in the oven.

RUSH: Is that what she does, she hosts a cooking show?

CALLER: Yes, she does.

RUSH: Like on the Food Network or something?

CALLER: She's on the Food Network. I think that's it. And she has a lot of different products. She's even branched out into pet foods and treats and things. Well, I'll have you know, I'm gonna throw out every frying pan that's got her name on it and my puppies will not eat one more treat from her company.

RUSH: Wow. Frying pans.

CALLER: She has a cook show, and she puts in little bits of her personal life from time to time. The latest thing was her brother lost his job.

RUSH: Oh.

CALLER: He suffers from an immune disorder of some sort, autoimmune disorder, and her and Uncle Joe were talking about her mother and her sister just worrying and fretting. She came to tears about how worried they were about her brother losing his insurance, and I must say that worrying about losing your insurance is something to worry about, but she's worth about $60 million. I would think instead of her just being so happy that they finally got the Obamacare for her brother, she would be embarrassed. I'm outraged. I mean, if I had $60 million, I'd buy my brother some insurance.

RUSH: How do you know that she's worth $60 million?

CALLER: Well, there was a talk show yesterday that my husband listens to after yours, and one of their analyst researchers did some research and said that --

RUSH: Well, you know, that's not uncommon. Sarah Jessica Parker is worth a lot of money and she --

CALLER: Yes.

RUSH: -- kept talking about the need for some of her family to be on welfare.

CALLER: Yes. You know --

RUSH: And she supported high taxes for that.

CALLER: Oh, jeepers. My husband and I are both retired. Our income and our budget have changed drastically. But we chose to and still maintain our health insurance at a healthy fee every month, $1,444 a month. And my daughter and her husband cannot afford to buy insurance even through Obamacare, I don't think, but they were duressed into applying. We have for years paid for my grandson's insurance out of our pocket so that he will be covered. And I hope when Big Brother finds out that they've applied for Obamacare, that it doesn't cancel out his insurance.

RUSH: You know, Georgeann, I hear you. When you hear somebody that's got $60 million making this big pitch for everybody to pitch in to buy her family's health insurance or whatever it was, what's the money for? What are you earning this money for if not to help your family, for crying out loud? At least your family. But where's the notion of charity beyond even your family? I hear you.

The answers to this are all psychological. She wants to be in tight with Biden and these guys and be on the team and close to power. (interruption) No, no, no, she didn't. You're thinking of Paula Deen. Right. Yeah. I don't watch the Food Network so I wouldn't know Rachael Ray if I saw her. I thought she was an actress. That's all I know. I don't mean to offend anybody with that. I just didn't know. There are certain elements of pop culture I haven't visited. Food Network's one of them. Sorry, I'd rather eat it than watch it.