In The Arena 4 Rules for Replacing Obamacare Republicans can fix the president’s health-care disaster, but only if they play it smart.

Republicans are in a strong position as the midterm election approaches. They are nearly certain to retain control of the House of Representatives in the next Congress and may pick up a few seats to add to their majority. They are also poised to make gains in the Senate, perhaps even adding the six seats necessary to take control of the upper chamber—and maybe more.

The mere possibility of full Republican control of Congress in 2015 is leading some to wonder what Republicans would do if they found themselves in such a position come January.

Story Continued Below

There is little doubt that doing something about Obamacare would be at the top of the list, and should be. The Republican candidates challenging incumbent Democratic senators are, to a person, running hard against the law. The Affordable Care Act remains extremely unpopular with voters for a whole host of reasons. It has raised premiums for millions of people, forced millions more out of their insurance plans and away from the doctors that they liked and were told they could keep, and is cutting Medicare and raising taxes to pay for a massive new entitlement program.

If a sizeable number of anti-Obamacare candidates win, they will rightfully believe they have a mandate from their voters to take some action. But it will not be easy. Whatever the outcome this November, there will be enough Democrats in the Senate to filibuster legislation or to sustain a presidential veto.

One type of budget legislation (“reconciliation”) can circumvent Senate filibusters, so, in theory, it would be possible to change the budgetary aspects of Obamacare with a simple majority vote. This would be fitting, given how Democrats used the procedure after Scott Brown reduced their majority from 60 to 59 Senators in 2010—and it could allow Congress to eliminate many of the most unsound aspects of Obamacare and then send it to President Obama for a certain veto.

Just getting the legislation to the president would require incredible discipline and a unified party to pull it off. A reconciliation bill is not in order until both the House and Senate pass a budget plan calling for such legislation. It could take six months or more for Congress to come to an agreement on a plan that presumably would reach fiscal balance at some point over the coming decade.

Moreover, any effort to repeal Obamacare would require Republicans to also pass a replacement plan to take the law’s place. The pre-Obamacare status quo is not the solution, as there were deep and systemic problems in the health system before 2010. Moreover, without a replacement plan, Republicans would be accused of harming millions who have, or would soon get, insurance under Obamacare. But a unified replacement plan is unlikely to appear anytime soon. Various Republican factions have deep disagreements about how to proceed with serious reform. More than likely, these differences will only get resolved when the Republican presidential nominee defines the party’s position in the 2016 campaign.

So a Republican-controlled Congress would bring new opportunities to roll back Obamacare, but there would be risks too. It must proceed carefully. Here are a few suggestions:

Keep your eyes on 2016 . A Republican Congress cannot repeal Obamacare while President Obama is in office. Full repeal and replacement, in whatever form that eventually takes, can only happen if a Republican wins the White House in 2016 too. Republicans should therefore ask themselves before every decision: “Will this help or hurt our nominee in 2016?”

Lanhee J. Chen is the David and Diane Steffy research fellow at the Hoover Institution. He served as policy director on the Romney-Ryan presidential campaign.