Politics: As the presidential debate approaches, the Republican establishment is at a loss to figure out Donald Trump’s runaway popularity. That’s easy: The GOP base is fed up with its mealy-mouthed, impotent leaders.

Republican voters see their party’s recently crowned congressional kingpins, as well as the career pols running for the White House, as all talk and no action, while Trump comes across as someone who’d actually get things done.

The real estate magnate is tapping into frustration mainly over GOP Majority Leader Mitch McConnell’s and House Speaker John Boehner’s failure to deliver on promises made during the 2014 campaign.

McConnell and Boehner have the power of the purse, yet they’ve punted on promises to defund executive amnesty for illegal immigrants, the Affordable Care Act, the Dodd-Frank Act, HUD’s plan to remap the suburbs and, most recently, Planned Parenthood.

Repealing ObamaCare was the cornerstone of their message to the GOP faithful in 2014. In October alone, they ran more than 35,000 TV ads promising to scrap it. They also flooded the airways with 10,000 commercials vowing to block Obama’s unconstitutional order suspending enforcement of immigration laws.

On these messages, Republicans were swept back into power. The day after their victory, McConnell and Boehner wrote a national column pledging to make good on their many pledges. But once seated, they agreed with Democrats to fully fund ObamaCare. They also failed to pass a Homeland Security bill blocking Obamamnesty.

McConnell’s impotence was on display again Monday when he failed to pass a bill to end taxpayer funding for organ-harvesting abortion clinics. A week earlier, he forced through an amendment reauthorizing the Export-Import Bank, a bastion of crony capitalism.

Last year he complained “many bills that passed the Republican-led House in recent years were never even brought to a vote by the Democratic Senate majority,” adding “many passed with bipartisan support — only to gather dust in a Democratic-controlled Senate that kept them from ever reaching the president’s desk.”

But nothing’s really changed in McConnell’s Senate, where the now-Democrat minority filibusters bills to death. He could have nuked the filibuster like his predecessor Harry Reid, but he’s refused to wield such power for fear of media backlash. What good is a GOP Congress when Obama has had to veto only four bills, while getting virtually all his radical nominees approved?

Unlike the GOP political class, Trump is not cowed by the inside-the-Beltway crowd. He gives it right back, which is why he’s leading his closest rival by 2-to-1.

That said, Trump is no conservative panacea. Many of his policy positions, past and present, are a problem, as are his generous donations to Democrats.

In fact, his $34,000 gift to Democratic campaign committees in the 2006 election cycle helped put Reid and Rep. Nancy Pelosi in power. Two years later, they rammed through the medical and financial regulations that McConnell and Boehner can’t roll back.

By breaking their word, these two leaders could deliver the presidential nomination to a candidate whose Republican credentials, if not his swagger, are in doubt.