As an independent physician advocate for patients against restrictions of “establishment medicine,” I greatly admire that both Sen. Ted Cruz and Donald Trump have been unafraid to speak the truth about critical issues that affect the very survival of our country.

I applaud Trump and Cruz for boldly stating the obvious: The flood of illegals into America is costing us dearly in lives and social costs. They are right; it must be stopped, and soon.

Trump has also been masterfully successful in business. He understands that the key with countries like Mexico, China, Russia, Iran and others is negotiation from a position of strength, not concession.

But these two men are at opposite ends of the spectrum on health care:

Trump admires the “single-payer” system of Canada and Scotland/U.K., as he noted in the GOP presidential debate last week.

Cruz is for immediate and total repeal of Obamacare.

“Single-payer” is health-care policy jargon. Most people don’t know what it really means: government control of every aspect of medical care delivery, how many doctors, in what specialties, what treatments are allowed and for whom and price controls that drive hospitals, doctors, home health agencies, hospices, medical device makers and pharmaceutical companies out of business. All of the controls implicit in “single-payer” health care mean patients lose access to medical care.

Cruz supports a return to the free market, giving patients more control, and portability, more choices of what insurance to buy and what treatments to use. It is freedom that has allowed the innovation making American medicine the best in the world, with the best survival times for critical illnesses.

I have personally experienced being a patient for major medical emergencies and surgeries in two free-market systems (U.S. and Santiago, Chile) plus three single-payer systems (U.K., Argentina and Canada). I will tell you unequivocally that for top quality, best outcomes, and survival the U.S. and Chile lead the world.

“Single-payer” government-run systems everywhere, as I experienced as a patient, have three consistent, systemic and immutable flaws:

long waits for access to primary medical care, even longer for specialists;

reduced options for state-of-the-art treatment and choice of specialists;

reduced quality of care – simply look at the VA here in the U.S. to see how the single-payer treats our veterans.

To take an approach from business, at which Trump clearly excels: Check the bottom line. In every example of single-payer systems, the bottom line is the same: patients lose.

Some patients lose their lives waiting for care. Some lose critical function unable to get timely treatment. Most lose quality of life.

Here’s the help you’ll need to prepare your household for the realities of living under a centralized health-care system — order “Surviving the Medical Meltdown: Your Guide to Living Through the Disaster of Obamacare”

I doubt that Trump would accept such poor quality outcomes for his business enterprises. Why should we accept these poor results for medical care that affects patients’ lives?

Since Trump’s business success has come from free-market opportunities that would have been denied him in a “single-payer” buyer’s monopoly (or monopsony), I respectfully recommend that he re-evaluate his position on whether single-payer “works incredibly well” for patients with serious medical problems.

On the issue of freedom, and thus excellence in medicine, Sen. Cruz and Dr. Ben Carson are exactly right: Obamacare must be repealed in its monstrous entirety. The GOP members of Congress, and other presidential candidates, have been talking about “tweaking” or “fixing” Obamacare rather than repealing it.

Think about it. You would not want to “tweak” or “fix” a bomb under your house! You’d want it dismantled and removed. Obamacare is a bomb already exploding health-care costs, closing hospitals and doctors’ offices, and reducing patients’ choices of physicians and hospitals.

Mr. Trump’s “single-payer” model of government micro-management, restricted options and price controls do not work any better in medicine than in business.

The first GOP debate certainly created a firestorm on many issues. I work in Arizona and Texas, so I know the border issues in depth, particularly as they place heavy burdens on the medical system and taxpayers. Cruz and Trump are both right on immigration.

On medicine, Cruz and Carson see the most clearly. Free markets are crucial for business – including the business of medical care.

Medicine, however, is more than a business: it is patients’ lives at stake.

Decisions in medicine belong in the hands of patients and the doctors they choose: not in the hands of third parties, such as insurers under Obamacare, or government as “single-payer.” Cruz and Carson support return to patient-centered medicine. I approve this message.

[See data about success rates of single-payer in Canada and Scotland.]