Two Nine North, an apartment community in Boulder that sold for $93.5 million earlier this year, is pictured Dec. 15. ( Mark Leffingwell / Longmont Times-Call )

Despite the ongoing apartment building spree in Boulder County, the booming multifamily market — the rising rents, the falling vacancy rates and broader demographic and economic trends — has only whetted investors' appetites.

Through early December, real estate investment trusts, public retirement trusts and individual buyers have dropped a half a billion dollars on more than two dozen apartment communities in the county, an analysis of property records show.

Even when extracting the pricey $93.5 million Two Nine North apartments sale and the Balfour Senior Living portfolio in Louisville that sold for $104 million, the total value of this year's transactions exceeds that of the comparably busy 2012 by nearly 70 percent.

Top 10 sales 10 largest apartment property sales in Boulder County through Dec. 9, 2014 1. Two Nine North, 1925 30th St., Boulder, $93.5 million 2. Wyndham Apartments, 2540 Sunset Drive, Longmont, $51 million 3. The Boulders, 2850 Kalmia Ave., Boulder, $44.2 million 4. Balfour, 1331 Hecla Drive, Louisville, $40.25 million 5. Strathmore Park Apartments, 440 Strathmore Lane, Lafayette, $39.9 million 6. Balfour, 1855 Plaza Drive Louisville, $33.275 million 7. Wildwood Apartment Homes, 3226 Lake Park Way, Longmont, $30.55 million 8. Balfour, 1310 Hecla Drive, Louisville, $30.25 million 9. Uptown Broadway, 4590 13th St., Boulder, $26.9 million 10. Peakview (Ardenne) Apartments, 601 Merlin Drive, Lafayette, $25.15 million

The investors are buying high and banking on the hot streak continuing.

"If anything, I think there's more money than ever to buy apartment opportunities," said Andy Sands, senior vice president and portfolio manager at Lowe Enterprises Investors.

"Interest rates are low and real estate continues to be a favored asset class," Sands continued. "I see a lot of growth in our economy going forward for the next several years.

"Barring some significant change to the trajectory we're on, I don't see any particular slowdown."

The Los Angeles-based Lowe Enterprises in October snapped up the 161-unit The Boulders apartment community, 28th Street and Kalmia Avenue in Boulder, for $44.2 million. The Boulders previously traded hands for $33.49 million in 2011 and $20.9 million in 2009, according to Boulder County property records.

The Boulders is a long-term play for Lowe Enterprises, which has several properties around Colorado, Sands said. The region's demographics and the property's characteristics made it a compelling buy, he said.

Although it didn't come without a fight as there were several competing bids on the property, Sands said.

The flurry of investment activity could result in beneficial returns for investors and local property owners, but it also has stoked concern among renters such as Amanda King.

King, 28, recently received notice that her Uptown Broadway apartment's monthly rent would climb by $190, an increase of nearly 15 percent.

Uptown Broadway, a 116-unit apartment community at 4590 13th St. in north Boulder, sold in February for $26.9 million to CityView, the Los Angeles-based operator of The Peloton in Boulder. The market-rate complex previously sold for $22.85 million in 2008.

The price hike has forced King back on the apartment hunt in less than a year's time.

"When I did the same process last year, I found it a lot less stressful," she said, adding that the available apartments were more plentiful and affordable.

King widened her criteria — in location and building age — but the initial searches haven't been fruitful.

"I had actually looked at the Wyndham (apartments in Longmont)," she said, noting a recent news article about the complex. "And, I thought, oh my God, someone else bought it; they're going to make the same changes and raise their rent."

Advenir Inc., an Aventura, Fla.-based real estate investment firm, paid $81.55 million for the 210-unit Wildwood Apartment Homes and the 360-unit Wyndham Apartments in Longmont, according to deeds recorded last month with Boulder County.

Amanda King makes coffee while hanging out with her dog Neville at her apartment in Boulder. (Mark Leffingwell / Longmont Times-Call)

In an October announcement about the acquisition, Advenir officials said they plan to "implement a capital improvement program to achieve greater rental premiums."

During the third quarter, Boulder and Broomfield counties posted a 3.3 percent vacancy rate, according to data provided by the Apartment Association of Metro Denver. The Denver metro region, on average, had a 3.9 percent rate, which was down from 4.7 percent in the second quarter.

Boulder and Broomfield counties' average rental rate for the quarter was $1.50 per square foot.

The Denver and Boulder regions remain attractive as potential places to live and they are expected to be one of the top 10 residential markets in 2015, said Gary Bauer, a Littleton-based independent real estate broker and analyst. The ongoing population influx should continue and put additional pressures on both the existing and new rental stock, he said.

"And that new population may or may not have a job," he said. "They're searching for a job; they're making the decision to move out here because of the quality of life."

Those newcomers — mostly recent college graduates or a few years out from school — are flooding the already tight rental market.

"The new rental units that are scheduled to come on board, nowhere come close to the overall demand," he said.

Throw in additional capital from investors flush with cash and the results for an acquired property could be an increase in rent, he said.

As the city centers grow more expensive, portions of the population are being pushed to outlying areas, Bauer said. Additionally, the region has seen a lot of "new household formations," as some finance-strapped renters are forced to double-, triple- or quadruple-up.

"They're being very creative," he said. "At the same time, they're still trying to stay within their income parameters and make the best choices."

Potentially playing a significant role in the multifamily market's current path are ongoing efforts to reform Colorado's construction defects law, which has stifled condominium development, he said. If those efforts are successful, new condo developments could ease the bottleneck that is developing.

"That's going to help the overall market," he said.

Some local real estate industry veterans expressed some cautious tones about the current state of the market.

Lou Barnes, mortgage banker with Boulder-base Premier Mortgage Group, said that overbuilding could become an issue.

"Here you have an apparent need for '5x' perceived by 10 different development groups who simultaneously set out to fill the demand," said Barnes, who also serves as a member of the Daily Camera's editorial advisory board. Barnes pointed to Broomfield as an example where thousands of apartment units are planned for the county.

And if rents continue to rise at their current — in some cases, double-digit— rates and outpace inflation, "that's not sustainable," Barnes said.

Amid a "very strong" multifamily market for the past 18 months, capitalization rates have hovered around the 6 percent to 7 percent range and are trending toward historical lows, local commercial real estate broker Andrew Freeman said, indicating that apartment values are at record highs.

"There still seems to be a lot of money out there," he said, noting low interest rates for financing.

If prices get too steep, then a cool-off might occur, he said.

"I've been through five or six cycles," said Freeman, managing broker with Boulder-based Freeman Myer. "When values get too high, gradually something happens. I'm assuming — probably a few years from now — these values won't maintain, loans will come up and the market will start to soften."

Those heavily leveraged will be hit the hardest, while others less so would have the ability to lower rents to help stave off the losses. The higher-leveraged buyers that might have acquired a property in the 4 percent to 5 percent "cap" range would either lose the building or have to sell for 50 cents on the dollar, he speculated.

"That's when the entrepreneurial buyers come in," he said.

The buying spree is beneficial to the local investors, who are holding steady and refinancing their properties or selling as the market soars.

"They aren't generally sellers," he said. "When it gets to a price that seems unique, they turn into sellers. ... They may be doubling what they originally purchased."

And then they buy the property back in five years when the market corrects, he said.

Alicia Wallace: 303-473-1332, wallacea@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/dc_alicia