The amount of care St. Charles Bend provided but wasn’t paid for dropped more than any other hospital in Oregon between 2013 and 2014, according to state data. The roughly 63 percent decline was nearly double the state average.

Overall, St. Charles Health System’s four Central Oregon hospitals provided half the amount of uncompensated care in 2014 compared to the previous year, according to the health system’s tax form 990, an annual form nonprofit organizations are required to file with the federal government.

Hospitals are expected to care for anyone who walks through their doors regardless of their ability to pay. Because of that, health systems like St. Charles expect they won’t get paid for a certain proportion of services, a figure reported on tax forms as uncompensated care.

But the implementation of the Affordable Care Act has thrown uncompensated care into something of a nosedive both statewide and nationally. A federal report from March estimated uncompensated care fell by an average of 21 percent across all U.S. hospitals in 2014.

That’s simply because many patients who formerly didn’t have health insurance to help with their bills now have insurance, either through the Oregon Health Plan, the state’s version of Medicaid, or a subsidized plan from the state’s health insurance exchange.

In Central Oregon, the number of people covered under OHP went from about 30,000 before it expanded at the beginning of 2014 to roughly 52,000 people last month.

“It was just such a fundamental change in the covered lives and the health care landscape with what happened in 2014,” said Jenn Welander, St. Charles’ chief financial officer. “Now we’re basically having a new normal.”

Government insurers like Medicare, the federal program for seniors and individuals with disabilities, and Medicaid, the state-federal program for low-income individuals, reimburse providers less than the cost of delivering care, but Welander said it’s better than getting no reimbursement. The federal government currently covers at 100 percent the cost of those who joined Medicaid under the expansion. That support drops to 90 percent in 2017.

It’s difficult to pinpoint why St. Charles’ drop was so much higher than other Oregon hospitals, but Welander said she suspects it’s partially because St. Charles is the only hospital provider in Central Oregon.

Whereas hospital providers in the Portland or Eugene areas share the duty of providing uncompensated care, St. Charles is the only system here, so the difference might be more dramatic, she said.

“Many of the other markets, they share it,” Welander said, “so no one system would have had that full burden.”

More eligible for free care

In response to the drop in uncompensated care, St. Charles dramatically broadened eligibility thresholds for free or discounted care in 2014.

To qualify for free care, a patient’s annual income can be no more than 250 percent of federal poverty guidelines, or $29,175 for a one-person household. That’s more than double the income limit in 2013, when free care was limited to 100 percent of federal poverty guidelines, or $11,670 for one person.

The income limit to qualify for discounted care became 400 percent of the federal poverty level in 2014, or $46,680 for a one-person household. In 2013, the limit for discounted care was 300 percent of the federal poverty level, or $35,010 for one person.

There are still a number of Central Oregonians who don’t qualify for OHP but who still struggle to afford medical care, Welander said.

“St. Charles felt that it was important in our communities to have a level that was a bit higher than that, because not everyone is eligible for OHP,” she said. “So that was a change that we made and are committed to.”

Despite the expanded eligibility, however, St. Charles provided less financial assistance for bills in 2014 than 2013: $8.6 million compared with $18 million. Welander said that’s because fewer people needed the help.

Eventually, reduced uncompensated care will trickle down from hospitals and benefit everyone, said Stuart Guterman, senior scholar in residence at AcademyHealth, a Washington, D.C.-based nonprofit that researches health policy.

Health insurers today pay an average of 30 percent more for services than it costs to provide them because hospitals build into contracts the amounts they expect to lose from uncompensated care, he said. Eventually, reduced uncompensated care should cause insurers to pay less for services, eventually bringing down the cost of health insurance, said Guterman, who formerly served as director of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services’ Office of Research, Development, and Information and as a senior analyst at the Congressional Budget Office.

“These things tend to take a while to play out,” he said.

However, Guterman said, “There needs to be some broader awareness that people ought to be able to see savings in private coverage because of the decrease in uncompensated care to hospitals.”

A strong year

Last year was “strong” for St. Charles compared with the past six or seven, when the country was in the depths of the Great Recession, Welander said.

The hospital took in about $620 million in 2014, 11 percent more than the previous year, according to an audited financial statement provided by St. Charles. (The figures in the audited statement differ slightly from the tax form 990, but Welander said they’re more accurate.)

Expenses came to about $582 million, a roughly 7 percent increase from 2013.

The health system made about $38 million in excess revenue over expenses — also known as profit — from its operations in 2014, up from about $12 million the year before.

The stronger financial outlook St. Charles has seen in recent years has allowed it to invest in things like its hybrid operating room, which opened last spring, and its expanded cancer center, which opened last summer.

“After recovering from 2007 and ’08 and ’09 and when things were not as good at St. Charles, we’ve been able to start investing in the provision of care,” Welander said, “and I’m proud of that piece.”

— Reporter: 541-383-0304,

tbannow@bendbulletin.com