ONEIDA NATION HOMELANDS (September 11, 2014) – Turning Stone Resort Casino, a world-class, four-season resort, continues to distinguish itself as a premier destination for poker. With celebrity players, quarter million dollar jackpots, frequent tournaments with $125,000 payouts, high stakes,and low buy-in tables, Turning Stone has the hottest poker room in New York.

The excitement in Turning Stone’s poker room is exploding around the can-hit-any-second bad beat jackpot. Bad beat jackpots are awarded to the player with a hand that typically should have won, but lost to an unlikely stronger hand. With the highest bad beat jackpot in New York, Turning Stone’s jackpot is now more than $215,000, and increasing by the thousands daily. The casino has paid more than $385,000 in bad beat jackpots within the past year, but it’s not just the unbeatable jackpots that set Turning Stone’s poker room apart.

Frequently hosting CBS Sports’ “Poker Night in America” and attracting some of the world’s most famous celebrities and players, including former Major League Baseball player José Canseco, Academy Award nominee and “The Fabulous Baker Boys” star Jennifer Tilly, and 13-time World Series of Poker winner Phil Hellmuth, Turning Stone has quickly emerged as THE destination for poker.

After her “Poker Night in America” debut at Turning Stone, actress Jennifer Tilly said on Twitter, “Thank you [Turning Stone] for hosting Poker Night in America. The resort is beautiful and we had a great time.”

College and amateur players are equally attracted to New York’s largest poker room, with monthly low-cost entry tournaments, knowledgeable and friendly staff, and 24 hours a day, 365 days a year accessibility with tables as low as $20 buy-ins. Turning Stone also invites guests to bring their house games to the safe and secure poker room at the casino, where they are also eligible to win the bad beat jackpot.

In addition to its world-class gaming, Turning Stone Resort Casino also offers award-winning accommodations, luxury spas, PGA-level golf courses, eclectic bars and restaurants and first-class entertainment.

To schedule an interview with Turning Stone’s VP of Gaming Operations and industry veteran Guy Renzi, please contact Kelly Abdo at Kelly.Abdo@TurningStone.com or 315.366.9291

About Turning Stone Resort Casino

A premier four-season, destination resort in Upstate New York, the Oneida Indian Nation’s Turning Stone Resort Casino is conveniently located about 30 miles east of Syracuse at NYS Thruway exit 33. Turning Stone was named “Most Excellent Golf Resort” in 2010 by Condé Nast Johansens. The Academy of Country Music named Turning Stone “Casino of the Year” in 2009. The resort offers world-class gaming, golf, entertainment, accommodations and spa facilities, and has earned AAA Four Diamond ratings for The Lodge, The Tower Hotel, and Wildflowers restaurant.