The city, federal housing officials and the Northland Investment Corp. plan to move all tenants out of the deteriorated Church Street South 800-unit complex stating the apartments are mold-infested and structurally deficient. For decades, there have been plans to upgrade the 47-year-old apartments, but plans have always fallen through. (Catherine Avalone — New Haven Register)

As Emily Dominski recounts in her 2012 prize-winning Yale senior essay on the Church Street South housing project, in 1965 when Mayor Richard Lee announced new plans for the present site of Church Street South, he recalled the reason he had led an urban renewal crusade that now was to include the site opposite Union Station: “The buildings that used to be there were obsolete, inefficient and of a bygone age. Streets were too often littered with refuse and filth and infested with rats and vermin. This was the sight that greeted visitors to New Haven as they left the railroad station.” The idea, in Lee’s words was to create “New Haven’s Fifth Avenue.”

After attempting a commercial solution, Lee went to world-class “starchitect,” Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, to design a relatively “luxury” project (which briefly included a new train station and a school). As funding began to exclude the non-housing components, Mies quit. The effort segued into low-income housing in 1967, this time designed by another world-class figure, Yale Dean Charles Moore.

Inevitably plans do change. Equally renowned architect/planners Cass Gilbert and Frederick Law Olmsted Jr.’s 1910 plan for the same area called for a huge boulevard centered upon the station as its focus and hub. But nothing happened; the ad hoc market at the site devolved into Mayor Lee’s description and the train station’s grand waiting room hall was abandoned.

Amid changing times, New Haven became the poster child for post-World War II grand plans — many stemming from the 1949 Housing Act that spurred urban renewal to create housing for the millions of returning GIs, that provided generous financing the city did not have. Later, legislation virtually mandated clear cutting existing “slums” with even more federal funding options.

Advertisement

Mayor Lee had grown up in the densest of New Haven’s neighborhoods: the Oak Street neighborhood, which he demolished enacting the promise of those federal funds. Zealotry was not conceptual for him: he saw his sickly youth as being caused by that neighborhood’s lack of hygienic amenities — his own home lacking electricity and gas. To Dick Lee, urban renewal was not just policy, it was personal. His zealotry paid off. During his term as mayor the per-capita amount of federal funds was three times that of the next highest recipient, Newark.

Ironically removing the tenements of the Oak Street neighborhood and others meant that low-income families lost housing stock as the Route 34 “disconnector” (as architect Herb Newman coined it) and large commercial buildings replaced hundreds of affordable, if seriously degraded, places to live. Ms. Dominski cites that there were 25,000 people displaced by “urban renewal.”

Even though New Haven lost over 10,000 residents and the suburbs grew by over 100,000 in the 15 years after World War II, low-income people could neither afford the cars nor the buy-in of the free-standing suburban homes being built around the city as I-95 and I-91 drained the middle class into failed farmland. Department stores closed and businesses moved to follow the fleeing.

In a similar voice to Lee’s description, New Haven’s Redevelopment Authority called Church Street South “a cancer” that needed to be cured via “clearance and replanning.” Displaced residents came to be a political liability, but the high intentions for invention were still there: just shifted to a different design sensibility.

Mayor Lee preferred “scattered low-income housing,” but it proved to be difficult to insert it into existing neighborhoods. But on a fully controlled site, with a gifted designer, the attempt was possible. So architect Moore set to designing the low rise low-income units and a high rise tower for the elderly.

It took 32 different site plans to evolve a 400-unit project. Moore advocated larger units combined with provocatively named courtyards — including one named after Malcolm X — and residences with private entries, axial views, and “supergraphics” were all designed in contrast to Mies’s “towers in the park” mid-century Modern scheme. Sadly, Moore’s failed attempt to gain pride in residence by naming has been replaced by the residents’ own names for the project, including “Cinderblock City” and “The Jungle.”

The built project received critical acclaim upon completion. Elizabeth Mills Brown cited in her contemporaneous “New Haven: A Guide to Architecture and Urban Design”: “Moore’s housing attempts to rethink current planning stereotypes with their strong suburban bias and to provide a civilized urban environment, preserving some of the traditional qualities of the urban context — permanence, dignity, festivity, interaction, variety. Georgian terraces face the outer world with impeccable urbanity, while along the spine of the pedestrian street an inner world unfolds of inventive and exciting effects: manholes form a circle defining a plaza, arcaded screens give de Chirico perspectives (“low-moderate baroque” Progressive Architecture has called it). Built to minimum standards, the buildings are simple, the spaces between them exploited for maximum effect. Although the project has not been completed as planned, there is much to study and enjoy.”

But the budget was tiny and architects often trust materials versus common sense and opted for those supergraphics (large geometric abstract shapes painted onto the necessarily blank facades) to add interest, provide zest and hipness to a cheaply built set of concrete block, flat roofed boxes.

This carefully crafted visionary site plan, a block from New Haven’s police headquarters, is now a high crime area of unending building system failure and social collapse. A 2012 $500 million proposal by the complex’s owner, Northland Investment Corp., has never materialized, HUD has applied masterplanning funds, and stop-gap repairs continue — totaling $4.6 million to date.

The consensus now is that the existing complex is becoming untenable. Its dangers are not just crime, but the buildings themselves are being cited by the city as endangering their occupants. It sounds a little like the 1950s mantra of “clearance and replanning.”

Design matters — not just for the things architects celebrate, like the long-gone supergraphics. Design matters in creating places that sustain versus drain cash and hope from those who need both the most. The chickens have come home to roost — and parts of a place built for safe harbor now become condemned by the very government that had them built.

Duo Dickinson, an architect, writes about architecture and urban design for the Register. Readers may write him at 94 Bradley Road, Madison 06443. Email duo.dickinson@snet.net.