SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

On Breitbart News Saturday, hosted by Breitbart News executive chairman Stephen K. Bannon on SiriusXM Patriot, Stephen Miller, the former communications director for Alabama Sen. Jeff Sessions and current senior policy advisor to GOP frontrunner Donald Trump, slammed donor class-favorite Sen. Marco Rubio’s incessant efforts to force mass immigration and open borders on the U.S. at the expense of American lives and jobs.

“First of all, let’s remember the warning of Rush Limbaugh, who said if Rubio is president, within 12 to 18 months, the entirely of the donor class agenda will be implemented,” Miller said.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

He described that agenda in detail as:

Mass immigration, open borders, amnesty, TPP [Trans-Pacific Trade partnership] and even more globalist trade deals, and the destruction of U.S. sovereignty. Understand, everyone listening today: There is a point of no return. It is not far away. It is right in front of you. And if you cross it, there is no going back. Marco Rubio’s career has been a career of deception for the singular purpose of advancing his own ambition and financial standing and campaign fundraising in order to put him in a position to end forever the existence of the United States as a country with sovereign, protected, secure, defined, certain boundaries. In Florida, Mr. Rubio killed a bill to block sanctuary cities. How many Floridians today have been wounded or maimed or lost a loved one because Marco Rubio didn’t fight to help the bill to stop sanctuary cities? Who is their voice? Marco Rubio pushed to give in-state tuition to illegal aliens. How many young people in Florida today are in debt because that money has been held off from them so Marco Rubio could waste the time of the Florida legislature to find a way to discount tuition for illegal immigrants, instead of fighting for his state’s own legal residents? Marco Rubio, when he saw an opportunity, campaigned against Charlie Christ for pushing the DREAM Act. Then he came to the Senate, and the first major thing he pushed was the DREAM Act. Then he joined Dick Durbin, Chuck Schumer, and Barack Obama to push through the Senate the worst immigration bill in the history of these United States. And had it become law, America would be decimated. And he lied about the provisions in that bill not once, not twice, not three times, but day, after day, after day, after day. As Phyllis Schlafly said: Marco Rubio’s claims about amnesty, his deceptions, exceeded Obama’s claims about Obamacare. Think about that for a second. And then he treated law enforcement, in the words of Chris Crane, “like absolute trash.” How can you have a GOP nominee who demonstrates that kind of disrespect?

Miller continued, explaining who Chris Crane is:

[Crane’s] a Marine. He’s a lifetime member of The Veterans of Foreign Wars. And he’s been elected by his peers to be their voice to the country. He’s been elected by his peers, his fellow ICE officers, to be their voice to the nation. And if he wanted to, he could have played the game. He could have gone to Rubio and said, hey, I’ll support your bill if you give me some particular benefit. But he didn’t do that. Instead, he asked Rubio to protect the national security of the United States. He asked Rubio, don’t give amnesty to sex offenders. Don’t give amnesty to child molesters. Don’t give amnesty to gang members. And Rubio said, oh, sure, Chris. I’ll take care of all that. And instead, what did Rubio do? He left in amnesty for the most dangerous aliens in the United States of America. What can you say about a person that treats law enforcement in that way, who misleads law enforcement in that way, and who does so in an effort to put a bill on President Obama’s desk to legalize the most dangerous aliens in the United States of America? Making matters worse, to this day, Rubio says — “Well, I did it because I wanted to get the best bill I could out of the Senate.” His best bill legalizes sex offenders? His best bill legalizes MS-13 gang members? His best bill is supported by every single Senate Democrat? Beloved by Barack Obama? Beloved by Nancy Pelosi? Marco Rubio, to this day, says his best bill, is the bill Luis Gutierrez embraces, the Center for American Progress embraces, that George Soros embraces. That’s his best bill? And he wants to be the president of the United States? And then he goes on TV and in Spanish says he won’t eliminate Obama’s executive amnesty? His unconstitutional, executive amnesty right away? And then he pretends he didn’t say that later, when he’s talking in English? This is the legacy of a man who is committed to an ideology of globalism so extreme it defies explanation.

Bannon asked, “Why has the mainstream conservative media not drilled down on this? Why are they giving Marco Rubio a pass?”

“Because think tank life in Washington, D.C. is comfortable,” Miller said, adding:

I don’t mean that in a mean way. I’ve got lots of friends in Washington, D.C. whom I have extensive admiration for. But the think tank life is a nice life. You can be a Capitol Hill staffer, then you can go work at a particular think tank, and then you can be a so-called GOP strategist on Fox News or some other station, and then you can go be a lobbyist, and then maybe you can go be a consultant, and around and around and around you can go. And you can feel good about yourself because maybe on a Friday night, you go to a townhouse somewhere, and you have an esoteric conversation about the Import-Export bank, and think that you’re really smart and fantastic and fabulous, and give yourself a pat on the back. Meanwhile, Americans are dying in the streets because of our open border. Kate Steinle was murdered in her father’s arms by an illegal immigrant. But our lawmakers in D.C., and our political system in D.C., and our lobbyists in D.C. have become so desensitized to the abuse of Americans that that horrendous slaughter, in broad daylight in the streets of San Francisco, was not enough to stir our political class to meaningful, sustained action. That death was not enough to stir to action Washington, D.C. If you want to stay with that system, if you want to double down on that kind of failure, then there are candidates in this race who can give you that kind of failure for four or eight more years. But if you want to end the fever grip of special interests, and the pollution of donors and lobbyists on our political system, then you have one choice. You have one vote. And you have one chance to put the American citizens back in control of their own future and their own destiny.

Listen to the full audio of Miller’s interview below: