A new national poll conducted by Rasmussen Reports finds Americans strongly support repealing the Obamcare health care law by a 13-point margin. The law has come under heavy criticism from pro-life advocates for abortion funding, sending taxpayer funds to the Planned Parenthood abortion business, and rationing healthcare.

The new survey finds just 35% of likely voters now believe the trouble-plagued health care law is good for America. Fifty-five percent (55%) consider it bad for the country. Only two percent (2%) think it will have no impact.

“This is the highest number of voters who’ve said the law will be bad for the country in regular surveying since March 2011,” Rasmussen said.

Fifty-five percent (55%) also at least somewhat favor repealing the law, while 41% are opposed. This includes 43% who Strongly Favor repeal and 31% who Strongly Oppose it. Eighty-two percent (82%) of Republicans and 58% of unaffiliated voters favor repeal of the health care law. Sixty-five percent (65%) of Democrats oppose repeal.

“Men and women are in general agreement about the health care law’s impact on the country, and most favor repealing it, although men feel slightly stronger about both issues. Married voters are stronger opponents of the law than unmarrieds are,” the polling firm explained. “Voters over 40 are much more likely than those who are younger to view the health care law as bad for the country. Fifty-one percent (51%) of these older voters Strongly Favor repeal. Fifty-six percent (56%) of voters under 40 oppose repeal, with 40% who are Strongly Opposed.”

“Most voters called for the law’s repeal in regular surveying from March 2010, when it was passed by Congress through last November, just before Election Day,” Rasmussen says. “If given a wider choice, 35% would prefer that Congress go through the law piece by piece and improve it. Forty-three percent (43%) still want to repeal the entire law and start over. Just 18% want to leave the law as is.”

According to the poll, 54% of voters now oppose the health care law’s individual mandate which requires every American to have health insurance by January 1 or else face financial penalties. Three weeks ago, voters by a 51% to 34% margin favored delaying the individual mandate because of the website problems, a prior Rasmussen poll noted.

CLICK LIKE IF YOU’RE PRO-LIFE!

The poll also found:

Seventy-eight percent (78%) of voters with health insurance rate their current coverage as good or excellent. Fifty-two percent (52%) of all voters think the U.S. health care system will get worse as a result of the new law. Forty-three percent (43%) have at least a somewhat favorable opinion of the health care law, while 53% view it at least somewhat unfavorably. The passion remains on the side of the opponents. These findings include 18% with a Very Favorable view of the law versus 42% who have a Very Unfavorable one. Voters are evenly divided over whether Kathleen Sebelius, the secretary of Health and Human Services who is responsible for implementing the new law, should be fired or resign over the problems that have resulted.

The survey of 1,000 Likely Voters was conducted on November 9-10, 2013 by Rasmussen Reports. The margin of sampling error is +/- 3 percentage points with a 95% level of confidence.