By Rob Nikolewski │ New Mexico Watchdog

SANTA FE – The love affair the AFL-CIO had with the Affordable Care Act is on the rocks, but the head of the union’s chapter in New Mexico still thinks the troubled marriage could work.

“What we don’t want to see is for us to go backwards,” Jon Hendry, the president of the New Mexico Federation of Labor, AFL-CIO said by phone as he drove back to Albuquerque from the union’s quadrennial convention in Los Angeles. “We don’t want it to be implemented in such a way that we lose what we’ve got. That was not the intention of the ACA.”

Union members made national headlines Wednesday when they passed a resolution complaining that Obamacare will drive up costs of union-sponsored health plans to the point members and employers will abandon them.

The resolution says the AFL-CIO still supports the Affordable Care Act but …

“They’re going to have to change it,” Hendry told New Mexico Watchdog. “I haven’t heard from anyone who thinks this (implementation) is moving smoothly … The rollout has been problematic.”

Some union leaders at the convention were much more vocal.

Terry O’Sullivan, president of the Laborers’ International Union of North America, and Sean McGarvey, head of the AFL-CIO’s Building and Construction Trades Department, even used the “R” word — repeal.

“If the Affordable Care Act is not fixed and it destroys the health and welfare funds that we have fought for and stand for, then I believe it needs to be repealed,” O’Sullivan said. “We don’t want it to be repealed. We want it to be fixed, fixed, fixed.”

Unions have been among President Obama’s biggest supporters and embraced the ACA when it was signed. But they soured on it when the administration delayed for one year the requirement that employers with at least 50 full-time workers offer health coverage.

Plus, the unions complain that the act, as written, will encourage employers to hire fewer union workers or ditch their health plans altogether, forcing union members to seek lower quality coverage in the new health exchanges offered by states.

“We’re not going to blow it up because we don’t like some parts of it,” Hendry said. “It’s a damn lot better than what we had before … If it doesn’t get worked out then less companies will offer insurance and more people will go on Medicare and Medicaid, which is a single-payer system, which I think is a great system.”

For years now, many liberals in the U.S. have called for a single-payer system entirely supported by taxpayers, such as those in Europe.

The White House is starting a national public relations campaign in support of the insurance exchanges, scheduled to launch in about three weeks.

There were reports the Obama administration tried to urge the AFL-CIO to not adopt a resolution criticizing the ACA and sent top officials to smooth things over.

U.S. Labor Secretary Tom Perez and Obama Senior Adviser Valerie Jarrett were in Los Angeles and assured union leaders the administration is working to find solutions.

In the meantime, some Republicans want to muster an effort to stop Obamacare in its tracks by defunding it on Capitol Hill.

Not surprisingly, Hendry is against that.

“We’ve got to figure it out, to implement this thing,” he said. “We’ve got to live with what we’ve got.”

Contact Rob Nikolewski at rob@nmwatchdog.org and follow him on Twitter @robnikolewski