SC-F junior Brandon Anderson wrestles during the Class 2A 182-pound state championship match against Keegan Wentz, Buena Vista, on Saturday inside the Pepsi Center in Denver. Anderson fell by a 2-0 decision to finish second. ( David Wilson / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

»

Sedgwick County-Fleming senior Levi Davis at 220-pounds, and junior Brandon Anderson (182), each took to the mats Saturday evening inside the Pepsi Center for their respective Class 2A state championship matches.

Each put forth strong efforts as they scratched, clawed and bled for a chance at a state title every second the clock was running.

And each wrestler walked off with their arms around their coaches, Anderson with SC-F co-head coach Todd Harrington and Davis with co-head coach Don Schelling, as state runner-ups.

The two tight matches were a microcosm of the three-day CHSAA Colorado State Wrestling Championships for the third-year SC-F program, which qualified nine wrestlers for the state tournament, and left with Anderson and Davis as its lone placers after a slew of close matches went the other way on them over the weekend.

"Both Levi and Brandon had really good opponents and they wrestled their butts off. They gave it everything they could and that's all we can ask. I'm really proud of them," Schelling said. "It was a little disappointing (weekend) for the team, but these two guys also kind of made our weekend by making the finals."

Davis, ranked No. 2 in Class 2A at 220-pounds coming into the tournament, fell by a tight 4-2 decision to No. 1 ranked Nate Finnell from eventual Class 2A team champions, Rocky Ford.

Finnell trailed Davis 2-1 midway through the second period after the SC-F senior scored a reversal, but he was able to escape to tie the match at 2-2 and score a takedown with three seconds remaining in the period to go up 4-2.

Advertisement

Davis, who finished third at 220-pounds last season, tried valiantly to get back in the match, but was unable to get a clean shot at Finnell in the third period to tie the match en route to his second-place finish.

As for Anderson's match, a lone takedown by Buena Vista's Keegan Wentz, ranked No. 1 in Class 2A at 182-pounds, in the second period held up for a 2-0 decision win.

SC-F senior Levi Davis (right) hugs co-head coach, Don Schelling after losing a tight 4-2 decision to Rocky Ford's Nate Finnell in the Class 2A 220-pound state championship match on Saturday inside the Pepsi Center in Denver. (David Wilson / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

A championship loss is never easy to stomach, but just making the finals was an accomplishment in itself for Anderson, who placed fifth at 170-pounds last season, as he was ranked No. 4 at 182-pounds coming into the tournament and exceeded expectations in what was a breakout campaign for the SC-F junior.

"He had a really great year," said Schelling of Anderson. "And he's been really good at beating guys he has previously lost to. Friday night, in the semi-finals against (7-2 win over Logan Schopp, Paonia), who pinned (Anderson) last year, Brandon handled him pretty well."

Anderson headlines a list of seven SC-F state qualifiers — Levi Muller, Keegan Mann, Keith Graham, Koby Mann, McCoy Sullivan and Cade Rober — who will return next season.

This group Schelling said is hungry to improve on the individual and team success the program, which has finished fourth and 10th in the team standings the past two seasons, respectively, has garnered in its brief history.

"We're a young team. We had some tough draws and didn't wrestle quite up to our capabilities in some spots this weekend. But they'll be back," Schelling said. "We have some young guys who stayed home and didn't get here that will fit into the lineup next year. We're going to have a good squad again. We just have to keep working. And the kids are expecting it (to be good) now."

Notes: Former SC-F wrestler, Juan Fraire, who moved during the offseason, earned a sixth-place finish in the Class 5A 182-pound division for Aurora Central. Fraire finished third last season in the Class 2A 160-pound division for SC-F.

David Wilson: 970-526-9285, dwilson@journal-advocate.com