The Justice Department is preparing to bring criminal corruption charges against Sen. Robert Menendez, a New Jersey Democrat, alleging he used his Senate office to push the business interests of a Democratic donor and friend in exchange for gifts.

You could say that the Chicago way met the New Jersey way yesterday, as the Obama administration moved to neutralize a critic who stands in the way of its Iran policy (which seems to be ensuring that the mullahs get their apocalypse-seeking hands on nuclear weapons). In an administration that abhors leaks, CNN was given the story that Senator Robert Menendez (D-NJ) is going to be charged with criminal corruption, just days after he prominently opposed the Obama administration on its Iran policy and supported Obama’s bête noir, Bibi Netanyahu.

People briefed on the case say Attorney General Eric Holder has signed off on prosecutors' request to proceed with charges, CNN first reported. An announcement could come within weeks. Prosecutors are under pressure in part because of the statute of limitation on some of the allegations.

With no specific charges to respond to, Sen. Menendez is unable to defend himself, except in general terms. But now, a cloud hangs over him, casting a shadow on his veracity and weakening his ability to oppose Obama.

New Jersey is not the home of good government squeaky-clean politics, to say the least. Charging corruption in a Jersey pol raises few eyebrows. But then again, Chicago, the president’s adopted hometown, is no slouch in that department, either. But Chicago is also the home of the legendary “Chicago way,” bringing a gun to a knife fight. In this instance, the gun is the Department of Justice’s ability to impugn an Obama foe, and eventually tie that person up in lengthy and expensive court ptoceedings.

Menendez seems to have realized there would be payback. Bridget Johnson writes at PJM:

Sen. Robert Menendez (D-N.J.) foreshadowed today’s news that the Department of Justice is preparing corruption charges against him by hinting to AIPAC that his political enemies would try to “break” him for his resolve on Iran sanctions.

(Video of his speech is here.)

For those who are not up to date on Menendez’s thorn-in-the-side status, below is a montage of clips of him opposing Obama’s foreign policy.

I have no knowledge or opinion in Senator Menendez’s guilt or innocence. But I do have a strong opinion that this leak stinks.