Nashville stocks fund outperforms in first two years

Buy Photo NASH, an exchange-traded fund tracking the performance of Nashville area-based publicly traded companies, turns 2 this month, with returns outperforming the S&P 500 and the Dow Jones industrial average since its launch. (Photo: File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

NASH, an exchange-traded fund tracking the performance of Nashville area-based publicly traded companies, turns 2 this month, with returns outperforming the S&P 500 and the Dow Jones industrial average since its launch.

The ETF, launched by LocalShares Inc., climbed 29 percent since Aug. 1, 2013, through July 31, compared with 23 percent gains by the S&P 500 and 13 percent by the Dow.

"It's been an exceptionally good return," said Stephen Frohsin, a portfolio manager at Woodmont Investment Counsel in Nashville, whose clients have invested in the fund. "It tells you that our local economy is very healthy. It is growing, it is strong, and it's vibrant."

NASH's performance has been boosted by local health care companies included in the fund that have gained investor support amid the Affordable Care Act, but those in other sectors — retail and banking — also have fared well. HCA, the top stock in the fund, rose 138 percent in the past two years.

Based on conversations with Frohsin and Bill Decker, who co-founded and manages the fund, The Tennessean breaks down the basic concepts of exchange-traded funds and NASH, in particular.

What is an ETF?

An exchange-traded fund, like a mutual fund, is a basket of securities that allow investors to own shares of several stocks through a single purchase. While ETFs have gained momentum in the past decades, mutual funds remain the more dominant asset class for retirement funds.

How much has been invested in NASH?

NASH's assets exceed $11.1 million, with 350,000 shares. That's up from $2.5 million when it launched in 2013.

How does it compare with other indexes:

Gains since Aug. 1, 2013:

NASH: 29 percent

S&P 500: 23 percent

Dow Jones industrial average: 13 percent

Russell 2000: 17 percent

Which companies are included?

To be included in NASH, a Middle Tennessee company must have a market capitalization of more than $100 million and the average daily volume of the company's stock must exceed 50,000 shares. As companies have had mergers, IPOs or changes in market capitalization levels, the fund's makeup has changed.

How much of the fund is health care related?

Of the 25 companies, 12 are health care companies.

How does an ETF compare to a mutual fund?

The main differences come down to transparency, cost, liquidity and diversification, Frohsin said.

An ETF investor can check returns daily versus quarterly with a mutual fund. The cost to invest is typically lower, as well. NASH charges 0.49 percent of returns.

Mutual funds are typically managed more actively as well, with managers regularly trading securities as they seek to beat the major indexes. While some mutual funds are able to do so, the indexes tend to outperform over the long run, Frohsin said.

"A lot of money is coming from actively managed mutual funds and being invested in ETFs or index funds," he said.

Are companies equally represented in the fund?

Bill Decker, who manages NASH, determines how much ownership the fund should have of a particular company based on its size, stock performance, liquidity, profitability and other factors, such as whether it pays a dividend. Decker makes changes quarterly.

How common are geography-based ETFs?

While ETFs are often based around a sector — such as energy or industrials — there are few, if any, other region- or city-based ETFs, Frohsin said.

Who is investing in the ETF?

Decker says he is unable to track where investors are or how many investors have contributed to NASH, but he estimates that most live in or around Nashville. Their stakes range from $75 to about $1 million, based on trades.

Reach Jamie McGee at 615-259-8071 and on Twitter @JamieMcGee_.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1T04e8I