The election of any of the Republicans running for President in 2016 is based on the delusional paranoia and legacy of the corporate overlords.

If a Republican President is elected, ObamaCare will continue to be branded a socialist evil but nothing will be done. Health care and health care insurance will be empowered to continue to overcharge and the profits will roll in over the bodies of those who are the true victims.

Energy production and other pillaging of the environment will dramatically increase as our national parks and protected land are sold to the highest bidder. Our traditional energy sources will be given regulatory protection over newer, and more environmentally friendly, energy generation. Costs will remain high as profits soar without any increase in the tax burden on the top 1%.

Our military industrial complex will swell with continued massive spending despite the changing nature of our foes. A Republican President means that we will continue to engage in wars abroad that will decimate our youth.

A Republican President means that we will continue to single out those who are not White or male. A frenzied hunt for the ability to discriminate against those who are “not like me” will be emphasized so that minorities and non-Christians can expect to become second-class citizens.

Investments for the top 1% will expand significantly under a Republican President while the middle class moves toward extinction. Corporations and the elite will continue to dodge their tax burden and our own Congressman will sip his fruity rum drink on his yacht in the Puerto Rico harbor.

Minimal wage jobs will increase and employment readily available for those who will need 2 or 3 jobs just to secure a minimal existence.

A Republican Presidency will return us to a time of wildly profitable opportunistic market forces that will destroy our country. The current crop of Republican Presidency candidates will chase after the Extreme Right agenda in order to secure their party’s nomination. I remain hopeful that their pandering, along with the delusional paranoia of their local representations in May and Perry, will ensure the successful election of Hillary Clinton.

Funny, how two people can see things in an entirely different light.