Daniel Lemke starts a 15-month effort to raise awareness of human trafficking

Daniel Lemke, left, sets off on the first day of his 15-month trip across the United States on Sunday. An entourage of friends and family biked with him for the first mile or two of his excursion to raise awareness about human trafficking in the United States. ( Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Follow Daniel Lemke online Follow Daniel Lemke's travels as he bikes around 12,000 miles on a 15-month journey across the United States and back to raise awareness about sex trafficking. Web: Visit www.bikethroughtraffic.com to follow the map and blog. You can also support him monetarily by donating to his "Go Fund Me" site. Follow him on Twitter and Facebook by searching for "Bike Through Traffic." Support the Cause: Help stop human trafficking by donating to the cause. Bike Through Traffic is donating money to https://love146.org.

Two repacks and about 90 pounds later, and Daniel Lemke was ready to leave on his 15-month bike excursion on Sunday.

"We had a staging room for about a month. Everything kept on getting set out, set out, more organized and more detailed. Yesterday we did two packing go-throughs to try to get it all to fit," said Lemke's mother, Linda Joy Lemke, on Sunday. "I'm still holding a last minute bag that we need to attach. Elijah, one of his board members came by with a GoPro. He is surrounded by great people."

Lemke invited his friends and family to see him off with a potluck lunch at a friend's house on Sunday. Then several friends biked with him as far as Fairgrounds Park about a mile south of where the party was held.

Lemke biked to Longmont on Sunday night and plans to bike to Colorado Springs on Monday.

Advertisement

Lemke will camp and stay in host homes from Colorado to Maine to California and back in a 15-month biking trip.

He hopes to speak to men's groups, church groups, colleges and other venues about the importance of seeing and stopping human trafficking, since it does happen even in the United States.

His mother, Linda Joy, said that his board members are completely in sync with his vision of raising awareness of human and sex trafficking around the country. They helped him get set up with his website, blog and email list, and were giving him last minute instructions on Sunday of how to post videos and blog posts to Facebook.

Daniel Lemke, right, hugs his mother, Linda Joy Lemke, Sunday before he sets off on a 12,000-mile, 15-month bicycle excursion to raise awareness about human trafficking in the United States. (Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"Daniel runs everything off of his phone," Linda Joy said. "Now he's got this wonderful Bluetooth (headphones) and this GoPro..." He also has a Garmin device, iPad and solar panels to charge everything.

Linda Joy said it was amazing the connections that were made by talking about the trip. She met Gail Snyder, who owns a Farmers Insurance company in Loveland with her husband.

"We go to her office and we think we're figuring out how to do insurance. Then we start talking about the bike trip and she looks at his website and started connecting to people, setting up meetings (of ways people can help). And now she has taken over like a managerial position," Linda Joy said.

"My husband calls it throwing grenades," added Snyder with a laugh. "You have the ideas but you don't want to do any of the work. You throw the grenades and you run."

Christopher and Monique Green also were excited to support Daniel's endeavor because their ministry, "Vision for the Children International," helps single mothers keep their children in other countries that might not have that support otherwise.

"Our vision is to help support at-risk children and their (Daniel's) vision is in line with that; just a different way of dealing with it," Christopher Green said. "Just having relationships with people like this is so important."

Lemke prayed with his friends and family members and then everyone counted down and cheered him on as he set off for the first leg of his long journey.

His travels will take him through Oklahoma, Missouri, up through Illinois and by some of the Great Lakes to Michigan, by Niagara Falls and New York State, through Vermont to Maine. He will head down the east coast to the tip of Florida before making a zigzag route west to Texas and Arizona all the way to California and up to Washington.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.