Friday PNJ letters to the editor. (Photo: David De Lossy, Getty Images)

Questions, answers

Question, when will the Republicans stop trying to repeal Obamacare? Answer, when it becomes possible for them to actually repeal it. They really don’t want to explain to 15 million people why they took away their health insurance.

Question, after the Republicans kill the Iran nuclear deal, if they do, which of the Security Council members plus Germany will partner with us to renegotiate? Answer, none of the above; they realize no deal Obama negotiates will be acceptable to our Congress.

Question, how can we reduce the welfare rolls without hurting the poor? Answer, raise the minimum wage then employers will have to pay a living wage instead of making the government provide welfare to subsidize their low wages.

Question, when will get effective gun control. Answer, not anytime soon; first we need our people to put the lives of their children ahead of their need to carry a gun.

Question, who would pay for something and then refuse it? Answer, voters who pay income tax to increase Medicaid nationwide then say they don’t want increased Medicaid in their state.

They just want to pay for it for those states that accept it.

— John Klinger, Lillian

History repeated

Neville Chamberlain tried to make a deal with the devil, Adolf Hitler. Appeasement of radicals has rarely worked as conceived and Chamberlain’s plan failed with global war ensuring.

Today we are may witness the repetition of history if the nuclear agreement with Iran is approved. The Iranians are the world center of radicalism and evil. You cannot make a deal with the devil and hope it will turn out as you planned. The Iranian leader Ali Khamenei has publicly stated their understanding is different than the understanding expressed by our government. Fundamentally, you do not have an agreement if both sides disagree.

Just think what a terrorist state can do with an influx of $100 billion. Iran has violated all prior nuclear proliferation agreements without retribution. Why would they expect the outcome to be different with the current proposal? This so-called agreement is a complete farce. Some installations will be inspected with the advance approval and scheduling by the Iranians and other installations are off limits without any inspection whatsoever. Many more objections could be stated.

Eighty percent of Americans oppose this agreement. Why does Sen. Nelson? Call him!

— Larry Sessions, Gulf Breeze

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1FiRjJc