A political action committee that previously backed state Rep. Margo Davidson endorsed one of her two challengers in the Democratic primary.

The political action arm of Planned Parenthood in Pennsylvania announced Monday that it is supporting Billy Smith to represent the 164th Legislative District. The PAC is backing Smith for his willingness to fight for women’s access to birth control, preventative heath care and reproductive rights.

“Billy is in support of safe, legal abortion, supportive of Planned Parenthood (and) supportive of birth control,” said Sari Stevens, executive director of the PAC. “That’s who we believe should be representing the 164th.”

Smith, a criminal defense attorney from Lansdowne, is trying to unseat Davidson, a two-term incumbent from Upper Darby. Dafan Zhang, a third-year law student from East Lansdowne, also is on the May 20 Democratic primary ballot. Saud Siddiqui, chief executive officer of the Upper Darby Caring Foundation, is running as a Republican.

Advertisement

“My support of women’s health is unequivocal,” Smith said. “It will remain that way. It’s just as equal to my stance against vouchers. My stance against vouchers is also unequivocal and will remain that way.”

Davidson was endorsed by the Planned Parenthood PAC when she first ran for office in 2010. The PAC did not endorse her when she ran for re-election against Republican Earl Toole in 2012.

“Rep. Davidson’s voting record is a stark contrast to the positions that we believe she held when we endorsed her in 2010,” Stevens said.

As part of the endorsement process, Planned Parenthood asks candidates to fill out a questionnaire covering various women’s health issues. Based on Davidson’s 2010 responses, Stevens said the PAC was “surprised” and “disappointed” by her voting record.

“We don’t endorse without a questionnaire,” Stevens said. “The votes that were taken were at odds with what was on the questionnaire.”

Davidson supported a 2011 bill that required abortion clinics to meet the same safety standards as freestanding, ambulatory surgical facilities. Signed into law, Senate Bill 732 caused abortion clinics to spend hundreds of thousands of dollars without actually improving patient safety, Planned Parenthood claimed.

Davidson also voted in support of a 2013 bill that prevented health insurance exchanges offered through the Affordable Care Act from covering most abortions.

About three dozen Democrats backed each bill.

Davidson said she voted to make abortion clinics safer because a “loved one” was among the victims of Kermit Gosnell, a Philadelphia abortion doctor serving a life sentence without parole for murdering babies after failed abortions. Two women also died, allegedly from illegal, late-term procedures.

“Women were butchered and killed at Dr. Gosnell’s clinic over decades while nothing was done,” Davidson said in a statement. “I voted yes on SB 732 to make abortion clinics safer with qualified staff and emergency equipment to save women’s lives and protect their rights to choose. When a woman dies she has no more choices.”

Davidson added that she voted to prevent abortion coverage on ACA health insurance exchanges to uphold a federal law preventing federal money from funding abortions.

“In light of these facts, I am not sure why Planned Parenthood would choose to play politics with my votes and support a man who has literally no idea what it is like to face that choice,” Davidson said. “Only a woman knows.”

Davidson cited her 2012 re-election by a 2-to-1 voting margin as evidence that she has the support of her constituents.

The district boundaries since have changed by removing portions of Upper Darby and adding Lansdowne and part of Yeadon.

Smith also has been endorsed by Philadelphia District Attorney Seth Williams and the Pennsylvania State Educators Association — another group that backed Davidson in 2010. The PSEA withdrew its support after Davidson voted in favor of a vouchers bill in 2011.

Davidson received the endorsement of the Women’s Democratic Club of Delaware County last weekend. She also has the endorsement of the Delaware County Democratic Party, the International Brotherhood of Teamsters Local 830, U.S. Rep. Robert Brady, D-1, of Philadelphia, and state Sen. Anthony Hardy Williams, D-8, of Philadelphia.

Zhang, who did not immediately respond to messages seeking comment, has not announced any endorsements.