There is an energy boom unfolding in the American South that has quietly become a wolf in sheep’s clothing. Energy companies are cutting forests and producing wood pellets to export to European markets – claiming that this biomass fuel is clean and renewable. These exports are driven by the demand of European utilities whose use of biomass is supported by generous EU renewable energy policies that view all biomass as “carbon-neutral.”

But the emerging science continues to show biomass energy is not as clean as advertised, and this science has implications for biomass-burning power plants here in the U.S.

ADVERTISEMENT

The EPA is taking on the task of curbing carbon pollution from U.S. power plants - our single largest source of greenhouse gas emissions - and the agency faces key decisions in drafting new guidance for large biomass-burning facilities. It is important that the agency acknowledge what the scientific community has demonstrated: that an across-the-board pass for biomass as a “carbon neutral” fuel is not supportable. Just as U.S. regulators distinguish between high-sulfur and low-sulfur coal, they now must distinguish between high-carbon biomass and low-carbon biomass.

A growing body of peer-reviewed scientific studies has demonstrated that many forms of forest biomass are not carbon neutral and, in particular, burning whole trees in power plants increases carbon emissions relative to fossil fuels for many decades—anywhere from 35 to 100 years or more. Studies have also found that forest thinning can increase carbon emissions to the atmosphere for decades, even accounting for tree re-growth. These studies point definitively to the need to distinguish among different sources of biomass.

For example, dedicated energy crops like switchgrass and woody residues from sustainable forestry operations (tops and branches) could provide a low carbon source of biomass, while burning whole trees and some larger timber harvest residues can emit more carbon pollution than coal.

Currently the biomass market is heading in the wrong direction: we are seeing industrial-scale production of wood pellets using significant quantities of whole trees, almost all of which come from the U.S. South. Demand is growing exponentially in Europe - where more than 3 million tons of wood pellets from southern forests were burned last year - and it could rapidly expand in the U.S. without the necessary rules in place for power plants on this side of the Atlantic.

And it’s southeastern forests that are in the crosshairs of the industry. Nearly 90 percent of southeastern U.S. forests are privately owned, and few laws or regulations exist in the region to curb even the most damaging forestry practices, such as clearcutting and conversion of natural forests to plantations. The biomass industry likes to argue that it’s only using “residues” and “wastes,” but it has been documented that wood pellet manufacturing giant, Enviva, is using whole trees – including trees from clearcut wetland forests, some over 100 years old. With demand for their trees on the rise, landowners have little incentive to maintain their valuable carbon sinks.

If agencies don’t acknowledge that many forms of biomass fuel have negative impacts on the climate, then we risk repeating the perverse mistake made in Europe: where utilities are rewarded for using fuels that increase carbon emissions. EPA has an opportunity to show tremendous leadership as it develops new rules for domestic biomass facilities. Following the science should make these decisions much clearer.

Yassa is a senior scientist with the Natural Resources Defense Council.