MONTPELIER — Rep. Shapleigh Smith Jr. took his seat in the Vermont House in January 2003, a fresh member of the chamber’s Fish and Wildlife Committee. Early Saturday, now-Speaker Smith gaveled to a close the legislative biennium, closing the book on a major chapter in his life and lingering questions about what his future holds.



Smith, 50, has been widely viewed as a commanding leader as he orchestrated the chamber’s work for the past eight years. Bills making it to the House floor were certain to pass. He’s been known to flash his wit from behind the podium, and offer a stern glare to members who seem to be deviating from the carefully crafted playbook.



Always among the first to arrive at the State House during the legislative session, Smith excelled as speaker by reaching out to his caucus and the other side when needed. He could frequently be seen in the cafeteria moving from table to table to impress upon members what was needed.



“I don’t think that I am a natural glad-hander, but I do think that in many respects, I am naturally a one-on-one politician,” Smith said in an interview in his office last week. “I really enjoy spending time with people on a one-on-one basis and getting to know them, finding out what’s important to them and just finding out what they care about. I think that those things are really important to be an effective speaker.”



Smith credits his ability to reach people in more intimate settings for his success. But it was not always clear that Smith would rise to lead the chamber he was first elected to in 2002. But just six years into his career, he knew that he wanted to succeed former House Speaker Gaye Symington in 2008 when she launched a bid for governor.



His interest in politics emerged in his youth, and he carried it through to the University of Vermont where he served in the student senate. After a stint practicing law in New York City he returned to the community where he was raised. Three years after his return he was elected to the House.



“I think I was a little big for my britches and I was expecting some plum assignment. I ended up on Fish and Wildlife Resources, which is not where I asked to be. But what I found after my initial disappointment was just an incredible level of camaraderie on that committee as well as the ability to make big changes for the people of the state of Vermont — changes around the deer herd, big stormwater changes. My first term was just great. It was also an opportunity for me to sit back and watch how things got done,” he said.



Smith was part of a Lamoille County delegation that included chairs of powerful committees. He used that to his advantage, observing them and studying how to be an effective legislator. He never served as chairman of a committee, and was only an informal part of House leadership. But that didn’t hold him back.



“I think that what happened is that I had spent a lot of time getting to know my colleagues. I had tried to be someone who people felt like they could come to, particularly around money matters, and just had spent a lot of time soaking in the place and getting to know people who I thought were influencers,” he said.



As Symington’s plans became clear, Smith became more interested in running for speaker. The idea seemed out of reach, though.



“At the time I wasn’t really able to see a path when I first started thinking about it, but as I talked to people it became clear that there might be an opportunity,” he said.



Four others were also vying for the job. Reps. Johanna Donovan and Carolyn Partridge were angling, as was former Rep. Mark Larson and now Sen. John Rodgers. Smith turned to a few allies for help. Rep. Tony Klein, the chair of House Energy and Natural Resources, Rep. Donna Sweaney, chair of House Government Operations, and former House Speaker and current Buildings and General Services Commissioner Michael Obuchowski came to his aid.



“All of those people were people who I turned to for advice in how to move forward if I wanted to run for speaker,” he said.



Smith emerged as the victor, laying claim to the House leadership as former Republican Gov. Jim Douglas entered his final term in office and as Vermont and the nation grappled with the Great Recession. He said he began his tenure as speaker in uncertain times but found a Democratic majority that was ready to stick together to help the state.



“You have to remember the time. It was 2009, and we were very concerned about what the economy was looking like, and I think that there was a real cohesion around the fact that we had to address that issue. How we would address it was a different question. I think pretty quickly people realized that we needed to work as a team, together, even people who had not been supporters of mine,” Smith said. “I think that we clearly understood that if we were going to be effective we were going to have to work together.”



As the financial situation worsened, the House also took on gay marriage — a controversial social issue that divided lawmakers by conscience more than party. After Douglas vetoed the legislation to make Vermont the first state to embrace gay marriage through the legislative process, Smith and then-Sen. Peter Shumlin found the votes to override Douglas. That cemented Smith’s position of authority in the House.



“Certainly the passage of marriage equality, I think, helped establish a reputation of someone who could get things done,” he said.



Smith would go on to use his power and the Democratic majority he controlled to pass more legislation. Among the successes he claims are death with dignity, paid sick leave, GMO labeling, the recovery following Tropical Storm Irene and improving the state’s transportation infrastructure. Stabilizing the state’s unemployment trust fund is an accomplishment that “has flown under the radar,” according to Smith.



As “a delegator,” Smith credits his caucus, and in particular the committee chairs he put in place, with much of his success.



“I think that I’m someone who sets broad direction, but who can discuss the details if necessary,” he said. “I place a lot of responsibility and confidence and trust in not only my leadership team but (also) in the chairs, and expect them to come back to me when they have concerns about particular issues. I tried to be someone who would set the broad direction with them dealing with the details.”



House Minority Leader Don Turner, of Milton, has been leading House Republicans for six of Smith’s eight years as speaker. Turner said Smith is “commanding in the way he presents himself and the issues” and has worked well with his leadership team.



“I have a lot of respect for Shap Smith as a person, as a leader,” Turner said. “I respect him. I think he was fair, generally, and when I called him on it he would respond, generally. When he’s leaving I have some concern because you wonder who’s going to be the next speaker. At least in the number of years I’ve worked with him I’ve come to know what to expect. I know I could yell at him if I have to and vice versa.”



“He knows my role. I know his role. He’s a very controlling leader. He rules with a firm hand,” he said. “I’ve known since I’ve been leader that if it comes to the floor it’s passing. No matter what we try to do to it, he’s not going to allow it to change much. He’s had a pretty strong control over those majorities he’s had,” Turner added.



Despite his respect for Smith and his abilities, Turner said the state will be worse off for the policies enacted during Smith’s tenure. The Democratic Party has misfired on health care reform and budgeting, according to Turner.



“For Vermont’s sake, I think we’re in a bad place under his leadership. I think that he was too close to the governor. I think that they were unchecked and single party rule was not good for Vermont. I think that the state is going to pay for the Speaker Smith-Gov. Shumlin era for decades,” Turner said.



The state’s online health insurance marketplace, Vermont Health Connect, created under the federal Affordable Care Act, has been a blight for Shumlin and Democratic lawmakers who have struggled with how to respond. Smith said he regrets that the Legislature was not able to correct issues in a more timely fashion.



“I regret that we were not able to facilitate a better rollout of Vermont Health Connect and I still ask myself the question, given that we were going to do a state exchange, what it is that we could have done better to facilitate the correction of the mistakes earlier?” Smith said. “It’s not clear to me what we could have done. As I leave this office and as I do whatever I do next, I still will think about what we could have done differently.”



Rep. Cynthia Browning, D-Arlington, has been the most persistent thorn in Smith’s side. Like Turner, she praised Smith’s leadership abilities but faulted the outcomes.



“I think in terms of running the House and effectively exerting himself as speaker, I think he’s been a very good speaker,” she said. “In terms of content, not so much. We blew the opportunity to fix the budget, to fix the tax code. One of the strongest agendas for Democrats is to have a simple, fair and effective tax code. We had the Blue Ribbon Tax Commission laid out. To me, that was a fundamental betrayal.”



Wrapping up his speakership without reforming the tax code is a regret, according to Smith.



“I really wish that we could have undertaken a systematic restructuring of our revenue code,” he said. “I don’t think we’ve ever had, not only people in all of the respective offices that would drive that conversation who were on the same page or who wanted to do it, but I also think that we have never been able to engage outside interests in a way that they would be ready for that kind of change.”



As he reflected Wednesday on his time in the House, Smith declared that he was fully engaged in the end-of-session push and had yet to become nostalgic or emotional. He said doing so was not really part of his nature.



“I don’t think anybody would suggest that I’m the most emotive guy in the world, unless they see me when I’m sort of angry about something,” he said. “My sense is that probably as we gavel out it will hit me. I really love this place. I love this job. There is no job that I’ve ever loved more. Bar none. The people that I’ve worked with all across the aisle have been great and I will miss a lot of them,” he said.



As he offered his final remarks to the House late Friday night, the typically reserved Smith finally did show emotion. He may yet join the race for lieutenant governor and look to continue his service to the state. Or, he may go back to his legal career and focus on life with his wife Melissa, and his two children, Eli and Mia. Either way, few will suggest that Smith failed to leave his mark.



neal.goswami @timesargus.com