Sioux Falls, SD

Police say at about 10:45 Thursday night, an officer parked his car after patrolling Tuthill Park when he noticed a man walking up behind him.

The officer got out of his car and says it appeared the man had a gun in his hand. The officer asked him what was in his hand, but he didn't respond. Police say the man held up his hand and pointed the object at the officer. That's when officer drew and fired his gun multiple times.

"The way this guy was acting, he felt his life was in danger. That's why he drew his gun and fired," Sioux Falls Police Public Information Officer Sam Clemens said.

The man ran off into the trees. Police aren't sure if the man actually shot at the officer, or if any of the officer's shots hit him.

Homeowners living near Tuthill Park remain on edge after the officer-involved shooting Thursday.

"We are not exempt from anything but this is a quiet neighborhood," Mike Flyger said.

"We wouldn't have thought there would be someone armed in our backyard," Nicole Hempel said.

As the search continues for a man police believe pointed a gun at an officer, Tuthill Park neighbors are keeping a close eye on their homes.

"We definitely heard five to six shots, rapid fire, and then nothing after that," Hempel said.

Hempel heard the shots Thursday night. Friday, she's keeping her young son inside their home, which backs up to the park.

Flyger also checked his property for any suspicious activity.

"You know, we are concerned for the safety of others and the safety of the person who allegedly did what he did," Flyger said.

Police aren't sure where the suspect ran or whether he's a danger to the public. In the meantime, neighbors here remain uneasy.

"Yeah, I'm concerned that there was someone armed in my backyard. That is a very scary feeling. I do have utmost confidence in our police department so I'm quite certain they will find this person. But until then, yeah, I will feel worried about having something in our backyard," Hempel said.

Some of the neighbors who heard the gunfire called police to help in the investigation.

Police say they are asking for any tips that would help them find the suspect.

News

Crime {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.