Weimer, seniors help get process started in 2014

Head Coach Cami Weimer (center) and the Fort Morgan Mustangs volleyball team huddle. The team went 14-9 on the season in their first year under under the helm of the program. ( Brandon Boles / Fort Morgan Times )

The Fort Morgan Mustangs narrowly missed out on reaching Regionals this weekend, but the team did find their way during the season to get back in the conversation and still turned in a strong season under first-year coach Cami Weimer.

"I could not be more proud of how the girls ended," Weimer said recapping the season. "They all can hold their heads high. They worked hard every single day."

The season got off to a rough start, as Fort Morgan lost four of their first five games on the season. Sitting at 3-5 on the year entering conference play, the Mustangs suddenly found themselves back on track, getting off to a fast start in conference play and becoming one of the teams to beat in the 4A Colorado 7 League.

It started off with a seven-game win streak in the conference, keeping them on pace with Elizabeth for the top spot in the conference before the two schools met with unbeaten conference records. The Cardinals would win and hand the Mustangs their first conference loss, but the team would bounce back with two straight wins.

During the final stretch of the regular season, Fort Morgan faced a tough stretch of three of their five games on the road, with two of those games against top conference teams Elizabeth and Weld Central. They also welcomed Fort Lupton at home during the end of the season. The Mustangs took care of Skyview and Alameda, but dropped to the Rebels, Blue Devils and Cardinals at the end of the season.

After their regular season finale, the Mustangs sat 14-9 on the year, righting the ship after a 1-4 start. The team finished tied for the second best conference record with Fort Lupton and Weld Central, but the tie breakers went to the other two schools who posed better overall records. Despite missing out on Regionals, Weimer felt the team made big strides during the season.

"You can't weigh our season on the outcome, but weigh it on the growth of the team," Weimer said. "We really began hitting our stride, and it was a testament to the hard work the girls put in. I could not be more proud of them."

As for her first season at the helm of the program, Weimer felt her tenure as head coach got off to a good start in 2014.

"I set high expectations on myself, and if you have that, the girls will believe in you," Weimer said on her first season as the head varsity coach. "The girls had a really good season."

Meanwhile, a big part of the success for the team this season was the play of their four seniors. Maddy Linton, Lia Shaver, Isabelle Garver and Ashley Lauck all helped bring the hard work ethic to practice every day, as well as the leadership for the team. The girls not only helped build towards a successful season this year, but also helped with the role of setting the foundation for the future of Fort Morgan volleyball and what is expected.

"Every single one of those girls did not want to waste their last year," Weimer said about her four seniors. "They wanted to be the stepping stone and help set our standards high, which they did."

As some of the girls will transition into preparation for winter or spring sports, the foundation has been set for the Fort Morgan Mustangs volleyball team to build off of a strong first season under Weimer.

Brandon Boles: 970-867-5651, sports@fmtimes.com or Twitter @BrandonBoles