The man managed to get over metal spikes installed this summer because of fence jumpers. A witness took these photos. (Source: Vannesa Pena/CNN)

This man was arrested for jumping the White House fence. He's carrying a binder in his mouth. (Source: Vannesa Pena/CNN)

(RNN) - The all clear has been given after the White House was placed on lockdown after someone jumped the fence, according to CNN.

The jumper, wearing an American flag, was caught by Secret Service and arrested. He was carrying a binder in his mouth.

Security is especially important because the president and his family are actually at the White House today for Thanksgiving.

This is the second lockdown for the White House in a week. On Nov. 21, the White House was locked down because someone threw an apple core over the fence.

So many people have tried to jump over the fence in the past two years that in July the Secret Service added metal spikes onto the fence surrounding the White House, which frequently locks down when suspicious items or people make their way onto the lawn.

This guy standing right next to me jumped the White House fence ?? @washingtonpost get on this pic.twitter.com/LfewNarJ18 — Vanessa Peña (@VanessaVans_) November 26, 2015

In September, the White House was in lockdown for an hour after a suspicious package was found across the street, and in March, the White House went into lockdown when a nearby food truck exploded.

The most concerning fence jumper, U.S. Army Veteran Omar Gonzales, managed to scale the fence and sprint inside an unlocked door while armed with a knife in September 2014.

Gonzales pleaded guilty to one count of unlawful entry and one count of assaulting an officer and was sentenced to 17 months in jail along with 36 months of supervised release.

On March 1, Curtis Smith scaled a stone wall on the southeast corner of the White House. Authorities captured him without resistance, and he reportedly said he did it to pass a message to the president.

Smith was killed at a Pennsylvania courthouse in August by a sheriff's deputy. According to police, he was appearing on a domestic charge unrelated to the White House incident that day when he slashed at a deputy with a knife.

Copyright 2015 Raycom News Network. All rights reserved.