Ex-mayor, 75, killed by train as he tried to rescue his dog from tracks

Louis Terrell was hit by an Amtrak train on Friday afternoon as he leaned over the tracks to save his Labrador

The dog ran off when the nearing train sounded its horn

The former Del Mar mayor died at the scene

Devastating: Louis Terrell, 75, was killed by a train in Del Mar on Friday as he tried to catch his dog which had run across the tracks

A highly-respected former mayor was struck and killed by an Amtrak train as he tried to drag his runaway dog off the tracks on Friday.

Louis Terrell, 75, was walking his Labrador retriever off the leash on a coastal bluff near 11th Street in Del Mar, California when the oncoming train sounded its horn.



The noise startled the dog, Abe, and he ran off.



As the former Del Mar mayor leaned over the tracks to grab his pet about 3.30pm, he was hit by the train.



Del Mar fire paramedics tried to revive Terrell, but he died at the scene.



The dog was not injured and was turned over to Terrell's brother-in-law.



The shocking news has devastated the former councilman's family and friends.



Terrell had walked Abe around the coastal area - a popular surfing spot - every day and adored his pet.



'Lou had one of the kindest hearts and the most positive outlooks on people and life,' his daughter, Amy Isackson, told UT San Diego.



'He was a generous man who loved the ocean and Del Mar.'

Son Joel Isackson said his father was devoted to others, including his family, community and students.

'He was beloved by his family and will be sorely missed,' he said.

Upsetting: Witnesses said Terrell was trying to save his Labrador retriever, Abe, when he was killed

Scene: Terrell was walking his dog off the leash about 3:30 p.m. on the coastal bluff on the west side of the tracks near 11th Street in Del Mar (pictured) when he was struck by the Amtrak train

Terrell, known as Lou, was a retired political science professor and former department chairman at San Diego State University. His wife Juvenile Court Judge Carol Isackson.

Terrell was Del Mar's mayor in the '80s and was highly respected for his involvement in the community.



During his career, he held top leadership positions at Planned Parenthood of San Diego and Riverside Counties, the American Civil Liberties Union of San Diego and Imperial Counties, Foundation for Change, and founded the Del Mar Foundation.

A Louis M. Terrell Scholarship was created as an annual award for undergraduate students attending SDSU and majoring in political science.

Startled Witnesses said Abe the dog was spooked by the loud horn of an oncoming train and ran across the tracks Shockwaves: News of the tragic loss has devastated the close-knit Del Mar community, with police turning Abe over to Terrell's brother-in-law

Many residents of the coastal town are struggling with the loss , particularly as the coastal bluff where Terrell died is a popular crossing spot for surfers and pedestrians.

'If he only had the dog on the leash, it probably wouldn't have happened,' former county Supervisor Pam Slater-Price told ABC 10.



'It's just so sad when something like that happens. To give his life because of the love of an animal … that to me really was what Lou was all about.'



NBC San Diego reported the conductor of the train was extremely shaken up by the incident.

A memorial will be held at Del Mar's Powerhouse Community Center on Sunday.

The Encinitas sheriff’s station Coaster and Railroad Unit is investigating the fatal collision.



Pedestrian access: The coastal bluff where Terrell was killed is a popular crossing spot for surfers and pedestrians