HENDERSONVILLE Pardee Hospital will join the Mission Health Partners accountable care organization in a move officials say will improve patient care, decrease health care costs and improve the overall health of the community.

The ACO was formed last month by Mission Health, the Mountain Area Health Education Center and a group of independent physicians. The aim is to reduce costs and improve care through a network that coordinates health care services among doctors, hospitals and other providers.

Dr. Robert Kiskaddon, chief medical officer at Pardee, said the decision to join the network came after months of planning and evaluation.

“Pardee’s participation and collaboration in the development of this newly formed ACO demonstrates our leadership in the transformation of health care delivery in our region,” he said. “As a result, we will have a healthier community with providers working closely together to help patients manage their health.”

Most health care financing models, commonly called fee for service, reimburse providers only when a patient is sick. The system is blamed for driving up costs because of unnecessary hospitalizations, tests, surgeries and other procedures by rewarding providers for doing more.

President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act encourages the creation of affordable care organizations and allows Medicare to reward the groups with a share of the savings that result from improving care and reducing costs through efficiency.

At the end of 2013, more than 600 ACOs were operating across the country, up from about 40 in 2010.

Doctors and hospitals in the organizations have to meet specific quality benchmarks. Medicare will pay set amounts for patients with certain medical conditions – diabetes for example – and providers get to share in the savings if those patients are kept healthy and out of the hospital.

Reimbursements are based in part on detailed records the federal government keeps on Medicare patients. The agency can use the data to predict the kinds of medical services an individual patient is likely to need based on the patient’s age, health status and previous claims history.

Officials said Mission Health Partners is governed by a board comprised of 60 percent physicians who will lead the development of clinical protocols.

The network also involves the use of care managers, who are primarily nurses, to identify patients who need help navigating a complex health care system. Clinical pharmacists can help patients learn how to use their medications properly and find assistance to pay for them.

Pardee and Mission Health are partners in a joint health campus that opened on Hendersonville Road in Fletcher last year. Pardee operates an urgent care and lab in the new building, while Mission operates a pharmacy and advanced imaging. Physician offices also are at the facility.

Mission also planned moving an endoscopy unit to the location from its downtown campus. But the state denied the move after the proposal sparked strong opposition from Park Ridge Health, which operates its own endoscopy suite nearby.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1rE4FHv