By Dawn Wright

The Affordable Care Act's inability, so far, to make healthcare premiums universally affordable for many small New Jersey businesses has led some to believe that self-insurance — going it alone — is the only option.

Not necessarily so.

In fact, for companies willing to be innovative, opportunities abound.

Small businesses facing exorbitant premiums include "virgin" businesses that have never offered benefits; growing or contracting businesses that face unpredictable premiums; operations for which large insurers aren't affordable; those whose cash-flow needs make setting aside a significant reserve impossible, and those too small to afford stop-loss premiums.

Some of us saw this coming. In 2001, QualCare worked with New Jersey legislators to reduce health care expenditures for such businesses by allowing them to band together to take advantage of synergies and economies of scale. That's when the Multiple Employer Welfare Arrangement (MEWA) concept was born in New Jersey and increased competition came to the market.

A MEWA is a member-owned, self-funded organization of small businesses that pool claims experience to reduce overall risk, allowing the group to provide coverage at lower costs than these member employers could on their own.

This approach enables employers to group employees around common needs to control costs. The move is similar to plans like OMNIA, introduced by Horizon Blue Cross, which takes advantage of existing economic realities (some hospitals provide care more economically than others) to aim patients at the more cost-efficient providers.

It's ultimately about pooling your membership to obtain the best quality and economic outcomes.

Obtaining coverage for the first time isn't easy for some small businesses. Many insurance carriers require significant documentation to determine eligibility and risk. But virgin groups have no prior claims experience on which to base future risk. For them, a MEWA is an appropriate solution.

That's how MEWAs can serve businesses that historically did not offer employees health coverage, such as those in food service, home health care, corporate cleaning, auto dealerships, trucking and manufacturing. MEWAs enable these low-volume, smaller employers to provide an attractive health benefits package that meets minimum essential coverage requirements (to avoid employee and employer-borne penalties) at a cost that won't collapse business margins.

Many health insurance companies offer a menu of funding options where mid-size employers can pay premiums based on claims utilization, but many smaller employers in New Jersey don't have that option.

Even if it was an option, small groups' whose claims experience is higher than average would see larger than normal renewal increases that could make health coverage un-affordable. This is where the multiple employer arrangement is a great alternative.

These clients can realize the benefits of self-funding but have their claims risk spread across the whole MEWA book of business, leading to more predictable renewal increases and less risk. MEWAs also allow employers to choose from a vast menu of benefit options that recognizes and allows employers to offer benefits that meet the individual needs of their employees, rather than the limited options offered in the commercial market.

Not everyone needs a $10 copay, for example, and healthier employees might willingly accept a $6,000 deductible with a $250 monthly premium.

Historically, self-funding is effective — even allowable — only for larger companies (typically with more than 500 employees). MEWA health plans enable small employers (under 50) to take advantage of the benefits of self-funding; one reason self-funding is increasing nationwide. Nearly 60 percent of all companies now at least partly self-fund their healthcare.

For small New Jersey businesses willing to be innovative, opportunities abound.

Dawn Wright is vice president of Insurance Operations at QualCare Management Resources, a subsidiary of Cigna Health and Life Insurance Company.

Follow NJ.com Opinion on Twitter@NJ_Opinion. Find NJ.com Opinion on Facebook.