Story highlights Navarrette: Walker doesn't have the foreign policy credentials or the courage needed for today's era.

He says the only plus if he's nominated is that it would prove America doesn't want a hard-right president

Ruben Navarrette is a CNN contributor and a nationally syndicated columnist with the Washington Post Writers Group. Follow him on Twitter: @rubennavarrette. The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of the author.

(CNN) The 2016 presidential race is just beginning. Yet we already can say this much: Despite a bump in the polls, and the fact that some conservatives consider him the prototype for successful leaders, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker would be a terrible choice for the GOP nomination.

Of course, Republicans have made bad choices before. A recent Des Moines Register survey found Walker to be the first pick of 15% of the GOP faithful likely to attend the Iowa Caucus.

So why would Walker be a bad choice? Three reasons.

The world is a dangerous place. We can't afford another commander-in-chief with no foreign policy experience who doesn't understand America's role in the world. As the governor of Wisconsin -- as opposed to U.S. senator (Rand Paul, Marco Rubio or Ted Cruz) or a former U.N. ambassador (John Bolton) -- Walker's diplomatic experience is limited to settling disputes with Minnesota during football season. He would be learning on the job while rogue actors like ISIS, Iran, Russia and North Korea threaten Americans, create unrest and perpetuate acts of terror. There are times to look to the states and elect leaders who can focus the nation's attention on domestic priorities like the economy, and there are times to look for leaders with a firm handle on foreign policy because the stakes are too high to gamble on that front. Guess which era we're living in.

Built-in enemies are extra baggage. Walker has repeatedly fought organized labor in Wisconsin -- over collective bargaining, an attempted recall, running for re-election -- and scored impressive victories. But Walker has also antagonized that special interest, which will spend tens of millions of dollars in the presidential election to settle the score. Unions might otherwise feel ambivalent about a Hillary Clinton candidacy, especially with the prospect of an insurgent campaign by Sen. Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, who would likely embrace more firmly the divisive rhetoric about income equality that union members love to hear. If Walker is the GOP nominee, ambivalence will be trumped by anger. An activated and animated base of union supporters throwing money at the Democrats is a headache that Republicans don't need.

Read More