Sparse bipartisan crowd watches Obama sign trade bill into law Obama thanks Republican leaders, most of them absent during the congressional July 4th recess, who provided most of the votes.

President Barack Obama remarked on the rarity of a bipartisan bill signing during an East Room ceremony for his trade package on Monday afternoon. And indeed, it still felt elusive as most of the Republicans who sponsored the legislation and drove it over the finish line skipped the Washington ritual in favor of politicking at home over the Fourth of July recess.

Sure, former National Security Council Director Tom Donilon had the opportunity to mingle with the U.S. Chamber of Commerce’s Tom Donohue. And two Republicans, Reps. Dave Reichert of Washington and Pat Tiberi of Ohio, proudly stood behind the president as he signed two bills, one granting him fast-track authority for the Trans-Pacific Partnership and another renewing assistance for displaced workers and funding development programs in Africa.

Story Continued Below

“I thought we’d start off the week with something we should do more often, a truly bipartisan bill signing,” Obama said, going on to thank by name the Republican leaders who helped him override a revolt in his own party, including Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and House Speaker John Boehner. Those name checks were as close as those leaders came to being in the room.

It’s recess, after all. Rep. Paul Ryan, who sponsored the Trade Promotion Authority bill in the House, sent his spokesman, Brendan Buck, to the ceremony. The Ways and Means Committee chairman himself stayed in Wisconsin, Buck explained, to do “constituent meetings, congressman things.”

Some pro-trade Democrats also sent staff in lieu of coming back to Washington — most of the members present were from nearby states. So the crowd was filled out by other longtime allies, along with current and former officials, giving the event an old home week air.

Treasury Secretary Jack Lew schmoozed with Philadelphia Mayor Michael Nutter, and Sacramento Mayor Kevin Johnson was also there. An aide held Commerce Secretary Penny Pritzker’s crutch — made necessary by a triathalon training mishap — while she posed for the signing photo. Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell, fresh off her own Supreme Court victory on Obamacare, worked the room, as did National Economic Council Chairman Jeff Zients. Chief of staff Denis McDonough waited until shortly before the president came in to make his entrance. U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman, Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx and Broderick Johnson, who directs the My Brother’s Keeper initiative, also had prime seats.

Even though he mostly spoke to his traditional cheering section, Obama’s efforts to be gracious to his Republican trade allies were apparent in what he didn’t say.

Much of Obama’s comments were things he’s said repeatedly to sell the deal, touting its benefits for American workers and businesses as a result of “higher standards and tougher protections” that are “enforceable.” But Obama left out his usual promise to make the pact the “most progressive trade agreement in history.”

Boehner, who was completing a three-day tour of Lithuania on Monday, released a statement calling the bill “a big win for American jobs and leadership, and I hope the president will continue to work with us to get more bipartisan, House-passed jobs bills signed into law.”

Obama’s struggles to collaborate with Congress or change business as usual have represented the great unrealized promises of the first hope-filled campaign that swept him into the White House. Intentionally or not, the Marine Corps pianist playing in the Grand Foyer captured this wistful note with her musical selections. As guests walked in and out of the East Room, they were treated to understated renditions of the theme to “Charlie and the Chocolate Factory” and “Puff the Magic Dragon,” songs depicting fantasy worlds undone by cynicism and lost innocence.

Correction: This story has been updated to correct the title of the film "Charlie and the Chocolate Factory."