TEENAGERS say they will be forced to ride their motorbikes in the streets after a youth project closed.

The council-funded Two Wheel Centre in Chapman Street, east Hull, had to close on Thursday following budget cuts.

The youth project, which was set up in 1985, had a four-and-a-half acre motorbike track, where teenagers could ride for £2 a time.

It was run in conjunction with the Bransholme Urban Motor Project (Bumps), in Noddle Hill Way, which has also had to close.

Together, the centres provided an escape for more than 120 children, the majority of whom got involved through outreach projects.

"It is something that keeps us off the streets," said Jordan Richmond, 14, who has used the Two Wheel centre for three years.

"Coming here keeps us out of trouble.

"They let us ride our motorbikes here safely. It is the only place where we can go to ride them legally.

"We have nowhere we can ride them now, so I guess we will just be on them in the streets."

Callum Hooley, 15, said he used the centre every Thursday and Saturday evening.

He started using it after being invited by one of the centre's outreach programmes in 2011.

Callum said he used to ride his bike across playing fields and on the streets before he started going to the Two Wheel Centre.

He said: "My brothers and I used the centre and now they have both got full-time jobs as mechanics.

"You can have a laugh here with people you would not usually meet.

"I don't know what I am going to do without it."

The council tried to privatise the Two Wheel Centre and Bumps in 2012 and transfer them to East Hull Wheels, a similar scheme in Poorhouse Lane.

The proposals fell through this year, and the council cabinet decided in October to shut down the projects altogether.

Although the East Hull Wheels scheme is still open, it charges more than the Two Wheel Centre.

One worker, who did not wish to be named, said: "Everyone is upset that it is closing. The kids, staff and parents are all devastated. There is not another place like this around.

"They work with young people who are often difficult and who have had antisocial behaviour problems. This place gave them somewhere to turn."

A petition against the closures, signed by 2,000 people, has been submitted to the city council and is due to be discussed at the next cabinet meeting.

• Follow us on Facebook and Twitter

• Politics news for Hull and East Riding