“Consider the source” is a basic tenet of good reporting. When someone tells you something, some of the internal questions a reporter must ask are: What is this person’s agenda? Does he or she have an axe to grind, or a financial or political stake in getting this information out? Does that person’s vested interest affect the legitimacy or credibility of the story?

But when a source, no matter how agenda-driven, offers up actual, hard information, based on public records, the motivation becomes meaningless. And this is why Hillary Clinton and Bill Clinton (along with their loyal team of defenders) must expect news outlets to scour and report out every accusation made in a new book by Peter Schweizer, author of “Clinton Cash: The Untold Story of How and Why Foreign Governments and Businesses Helped Make Bill and Hillary Rich.”

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Hillary Clinton]

It’s pretty clear, just from the title, that Schweizer is not an FOB or FOH (Friend of Bill or Hillary). Yes, he was a speechwriting consultant in the George W. Bush administration. And yes, he was paid by Sarah Palin for consulting. So what? These are reasons to question an account Schweizer might provide of, say, an episode recounted by unnamed sources. But if Schweizer has unearthed actual, hard information that raises questions about the Clintons’ foundation and any potential conflicts of interest for the yet-single Democratic announced presidential candidate, then news organizations have an obligation to look through them.

Several news organizations have already written stories based on leads from the book. The New York Times questioned whether Canadian mining donors to the Clinton Foundation were given special treatment from the State Department, one of the parties that had to sign off on a deal involving the Canadian business. The Washington Post noted that Bill Clinton was given hefty speaking fees by entities that also contributed to the foundation.

The reaction of the Clinton campaign has been to go on the offense, attacking not the substance of the allegations, but the man behind them. In a memo obtained by Politico, national press secretary Brian Fallon bemoans the fact that “the book was backed by a Koch Brothers-linked organization and a billionaire family that is bankrolling Ted Cruz’s presidential campaign,” and that the Clintons’ “philanthropic work has become the subject of false, right-wing attacks.”

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

That’s an understandable reaction, but it’s not an answer. Some of the answers should be pretty easy: Of course organizations that contributed to the charity would also want Bill Clinton to speak. That sort of stands to reason. And some might be more difficult to explain, even if nothing untoward was done. The appearance of a conflict of interest is often nearly as damaging as an actual conflict.

The Clinton camp needs to get ahead of this issue, and attempting to direct the attention to the author, instead of at the numbers he has unearthed, is not the way to do it. Address the questions directly and honestly, and then move on. The longer this drags out – and blaming the agenda-driven writer indeed drags it out – the longer Hillary Clinton’s actual campaign message will be drowned out. This is not remotely a campaign-killing issue for her, if for no other reason than that the people who think the Clintons aren’t to be trusted felt that way before, and were never going to vote for her anyway. And the field of GOP candidates will have some answering to do, too, about finances and potential conflicts. Clinton shouldn’t make it easier for them.