SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Fox News Channel host Bill O’Reilly argued that President Obama’s praise of Black Lives Matter is “rhetoric that is driving the Trump vote” and “creates an enormous wedge between his supporters and more traditional Americans, again fueling the rise of a candidate like Donald Trump” on Monday’s “O’Reilly Factor.”

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

O’Reilly said, “The core constituency of Donald Trump is white, working class people, primarily men. They feel the federal government no longer speaks for them, that they are the ones getting hammered by a growing nanny state heavy on grievance, only not their grievance. The president made a passing reference to middle-aged white guys, and how they should be understood. But at this point, words are meaningless. The Obama doctrine of income redistribution has made it tougher on the working and middle classes, as they watch salaries stagnate, and health insurance costs rise under Obamacare.”

He later stated, after playing a clip of President Obama praising Black Lives Matter during his Saturday commencement speech at Howard University, “That was a big mistake, and rhetoric that is driving the Trump vote. That kind of stuff just drives people away from Barack Obama and those who believe as he does. Black Lives Matter is a radical group, that has little use for free speech, as both [Democratic presidential candidate Senator] Bernie Sanders (I-VT) and the Clintons have found out. Most Americans are appalled at intrusions like that, and the president endorses it? Not to mention insanity like this [BLM protesters chanting, ‘Pigs in a blanket! Fry ’em like bacon!’]”

O’Reilly continued, “Barack Obama’s support of Black Lives Matter indirectly tells college graduates that radical intrusions are acceptable. That, of course, creates an enormous wedge between his supporters and more traditional Americans, again fueling the rise of a candidate like Donald Trump. Ironically, earlier in his speech, the president chastised those who disinvite certain people to college campuses, saying all responsible voices deserve to be heard. So what about the Black Lives Matter shout downs, Mr. President? The truth is, some reforms need to be made on the justice, racial, and social fronts, but the core issues of poverty and injustice are not being addressed effectively because of politics, and PC out of control. Until those in power stop pandering, and begin developing tough, fair-to-all policies, the growing divide in America will keep growing. Voters who support Donald Trump are sending a very powerful message that President Obama and young Americans who revere him should seriously think about.”

Follow Ian Hanchett on Twitter @IanHanchett