Posted on October 10, 2013

Krauthammer: Where Is Ted Cruz Now?

Please enable Javascript to watch this video

LAURA INGRAHAM: 'Some in GOP Ready to Back Down' is Karen Tumulty's piece on the front page of the Washington Post today. Most Republicans think the Cruz strategy was a failure.



CHARLES KRAUTHAMMER: Well, can Cruz show us how it was a success? What was his end game? Look, everybody was excited, it was a great a filibuster, a wonderful speech. What exactly -- how exactly was he going to achieve abolition of Obamacare? Explain that to me. Has he ever explained it? And where is he now?



INGRAHAM: Well, he was on, I think, Megyn Kelly's show the first day she --



KRAUTHAMMER: Yeah, but what did he say? I mean his sidekick, Sen. Mike Lee said, 'Oh, we’re past Obamacare. We've moved on.' I mean, you know, these are the generals who lead people into the Battle of Little Bighorn and then go home and have lunch and leave the troops out there? Where are they? Where are the generals? What’s their strategy to get abolition of Obamacare?



I want that. I argued it in '09 and '10. I argued it every week in my writing, on television --



INGRAHAM: Join the club.



KRAUTHAMMER: Exactly. I'm saying all of us were in the trenches. I mean, Cruz arrives on the scene and pretends he's just begun the fight against Obamacare. He wasn't there in '09 and '10, he was doing other things. I understand that. But, everybody was fighting and everybody was in the trenches. You show me a way to abolish it now, I'll do it. But he never did.



INGRAHAM: I'm looking at the Gallup poll today, just came out late yesterday, and now 28% of Americans view the Republican party favorably. That's down 10 points since September.



KRAUTHAMMER: In one month.



INGRAHAM: And the lowest number for either party because both parties have suffered, but it's the lowest number for either party since they began asking the question in 1992. Charles.



KRAUTHAMMER: Believe me, Laura, I've been calling this the kamikaze brigade. You know, I can't think of enough adjectives -- the suicide caucus. You know, I'm all for charging the barricades, but you've got to show me a way to penetrate them. We're simply sacrificing our troops.



###



KRAUTHAMMER: That's how the Japanese approached World War II -- let's do Pearl Harbor and see what happens. It didn't work out too well. You've got to have a strategy and there never was one. People are saying Republicans are in retreat. They're not in retreat. There never was a way to abolish Obamacare now. I think, and I think the real irony of this, the thing that is really regrettable, is if we hadn't had the shutdown, if we hadn't had Pickett's Charge here, what would have been the headlines all week? All over the country?



INGRAHAM: Failure of Obamacare.



KRAUTHAMMER: Exactly. It would have been the biggest story -- the biggest economic, sort of, new product disaster since the Edsel, and we instead stomped on that story. And the whole point of defeating Obamacare is if you do believe, as I do, that it is inherently a disaster, a contradiction, a complication, a system that simply cannot work -- why would you step on the story of a disastrous launch which is a harbinger of where it's going? So, instead we've had these stories of the shutting of the memorials and the kids who can't get the cancer treatment and all that. And that's the irony of going into a battle without having a plan. (Laura Ingraham Show, October 10, 2013)