Courtesy Getty Images

Hillary Clinton made her stance on illegal immigration crystal clear during the Democratic debate. While Republican opponent Donald Trump has fired off plenty of ire towards immigrants, especially from Mexico, Hillary said we must stop ‘demonizing’ them.

Hillary Clinton, 67, wants to dial back some of the scorn that Donald Trump, 69, has heaped upon illegal immigrants. The presidential hopeful made that point clear during the Democratic presidential debate on Oct. 13, and it’s no mystery who she was aiming her comment at. And of course, Donald couldn’t stop himself from making a snarky comment about it on Twitter!

Click to buy Hard Choices on Amazon

Republicans have “demonized hard-working immigrants,” Hillary declared. While the Democratic party has always had a large amount of support from Hispanics, she’s making sure to bolster even more support in light of the Republican party — Donald Trump in particular — taking anti-immigration stands. The remark definitely wasn’t lost on Donald. “Notice that illegal immigrants will be given ObamaCare and free college tuition, but nothing has been mentioned about our VETERANS # DemDebate,” Donald quickly tweeted out, following her statement. Oh, Donald can’t just let anything go.

When announcing his presidential run, Donald famously said, “When Mexico sends its people, they’re not sending their best. They’re not sending you. They’re sending people that have lots of problems, and they’re bringing those problems with us. They’re bringing drugs. They’re bringing crime. They’re rapists. And some, I assume, are good people,” which naturally caused a huge uproar.

“I find it the height of irony that a party which espouses small government would want to unleash a massive law enforcement effort — including perhaps National Guard and others — to go and literally pull people out of their homes and their workplaces,” Hillary said back in August. She doubled down on it by comparing what Nazis did to the Jews back in WWII: “Round them up, put them, I don’t know, in buses…boxcars, in order to take them across our border.”

HollywoodLifers, do you agree with Hillary’s statement that the Republicans should stop demonizing illegal immigrants?

— Beth Shilliday



JavaScript is required to load the comments.