Janis Stephens has fond memories of childhood vacations spent horseback riding on the beaches of Mexico.

But three decades since being diagnosed with multiple sclerosis and six years since she began using a wheelchair, the freedom of galloping in the sunshine felt like it was from another lifetime.

That changed this summer, when Stephens was among a group from the Rocky Mountain MS Center’s King Adult Day Enrichment Program that traveled to Crested Butte.

“We rode horses. We camped,” she said. “It was wonderful, just wonderful.”

Located in a former Westminster elementary school building, the center, known as KDEP, offers a roster of 65 classes and activities each week to keep people with MS and other acquired neurological conditions active and engaged.

Trips like the Crested Butte visit, where therapeutic riding specialists helped the group on their ride, are part of an increased effort by the KDEP staff to add more vacation-style experiential trips. To that end, the center’s staff recently led their first out-of-state trip, taking eight participants to San Diego, where they visited Sea World, went sightseeing, dined out and visited the beach.

“For a lot of our clients, if they weren’t coming to us, they would be watching daytime television and being bored,” said program manager Michelle King, who is not related to the family the center is named for. “We give them a chance to try new things or do those things they used to do.”

The center’s offerings include recreation and exercise classes such as bowling and hydrotherapy, art, cooking, yoga and computer courses.

Many of the classes, such as cooking, focus on using modified equipment and methods to allow clients with decreased motor ability to continue doing the things they love or to acquire new skills to help them be more independent.

“We help them learn ways to do what they’ve always done or wanted to do — just adapted so they can succeed,” King said.

Most of the center’s participants use Medicaid to pay for a portion of their program costs, with the center making up the difference in costs through charitable contributions. The center is a past recipient of Season to Share funding.

KDEP courses are offered through a course catalog and selected by participants based on interest. The average participant visits the center three days a week, and participants can be at any stage in their diagnosis. Breakfast and lunch are served daily at the center.

While the courses are a critical element of KDEP’s mission, Stephens, 60, said the social interaction is a big draw.

“It’s a wonderful place,” said Stephens, 60, a former social worker and counselor. “I’ve made so many friends here, and it gets me out of the house and doing things.”

Kristi Arellano: 303-954-1902, karellano@denverpost.com or twitter.com/karellano_dp

King Adult Day Enrichment Program

Name of agency: Rocky Mountain MS Center’s King Adult Day Enrichment Program

Address: 8845 Wagner St., Westminster

In operation since: Rocky Mountain MS Center, 1978; King Program, 1991

Number served last year: 180

Staff: 16 (13 full time, 3 part time)

Yearly budget: $1.2 million

Percentage of funds directly given to clients and services: 100 percent of Season to Share dollars went to supplement the gap between service fees and program costs at King