In a major win for the industry, health insurers will not be forced to have minimum quantitative standards when designing their networks of hospitals and doctors for 2017, nor will they have to offer standardized options for health plans.

The CMS released a sweeping final rule (PDF)Monday afternoon that solidifies the Affordable Care Act’s coverage policies for 2017. The agency proposed tight network adequacy provisions and standardized health plan options in November, which fueled antipathy from the health insurance industry.

Monday’s rule relaxes those aggressive proposals, a move that likely will raise the ire of consumer groups that have pushed for stronger insurance protections for patients. It does, however, include some victories for transparency advocates. The federal government, for example, will now have to publish all changes to premium rates, not just increases that are subject to review.

The rule addresses several other issues, including surprise medical bills and the 2017 open-enrollment period.

Health insurers that sell plans on the federal marketplace put pressure on the CMS to scale back some of the policies in the draft version of the regulations. Network adequacy was among the most pressing concerns. Many exchange plans use HMOs or narrow networks of hospitals and doctors as a way to keep premiums lower, which most consumers say is at the top of their minds. However, regulators and consumers were concerned that the plans overly restricted where patients could go to receive care.

The agency proposed that all ACA plans on the federal exchange in 2017 be required to have networks in which hospitals and doctors were within certain travel times or distances from members. Some medical specialties, under the proposal, were to have minimum provider-to-member ratios to ensure patients had enough access to care.

Hospitals, physician groups and consumer groups cheered the CMS’ proposal, though some argued for more specific network adequacy standards.

In the final rule, the CMS abandons its proposal in favor of giving states time to “actively implement these provisions” through the NAIC‘s model law. However, the agency said it “will revisit this proposal in future rulemaking.”

Read the full story in Modern Healthcare.