Created: 10/09/2015 6:49 PM KAALtv.com

By: John Doetkott

(ABC 6 NEWS) -- More and more Minnesotans are signing up for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act, but many still lack either the money to pay for insurance, or access to medical care in the first place.



But one group is working to change that with the help of a big white bus.



On Friday, the Open Door Health Center's mobile clinic rolled into Austin for an open house to showcase everything the clinic has to offer.



"There's really a need for our services," said Lauren Mendez McConkey, the group's community outreach manager. "There's folks that have been trying to get us here for years, so we thought it was our chance to get to know the community, offer our services, and just kind of gauge the need."



Organizers said despite more people getting health insurance through the Affordable Care Act, many still lack access to health care and are in need of more affordable options.



"Ninety-five percent of Minnesotans have healthcare, but those 5 percent, they still need access to service. So we're here to make sure that they can get access to that care," Mendez McConkey said. "The other thing we're dealing with, insurance sometimes has really high deductibles, so we don't want that to be a barrier for folks as well."



Organizers said while the bus may be a little less traditional, it can provide a comforting space to those living in poverty who feel as though they have few places to turn in times of need.



"A lot of people seem to appreciate it," said Alonzo Azoca, who works in the clinic. "It seems like a lot of people come and they just feel like they are sometimes forgotten about. So it's nice that we're able to provide services in a nice, friendly environment, and we get a really good, positive reception from every community that we're in."



Though the clinic is mobile, organizers said they hope to leave a permanent impact on a person's health and their life.



"They really like the experience," Mendez McConkey said. "It's a really intimate setting and our patients kind of become our family."



"I just want to let people know that we're here, and that people care. People want to help them, and you're not forgotten about," Azoca said. "Your voices are heard and your needs are here to be taken care of."



The clinic will return to Austin in two weeks to provide full medical exams for those who signed up on Friday.