It’s not just Hobby Lobby. There are one hundred cases that have been filed for the right to discriminate against women’s healthcare. NOW calls them the “Dirty 100”.

Here they are in all of their infamy: The following is a list of plaintiffs in the 100 cases that have been filed in opposition to the birth control mandate in the Affordable Care Act, as provided by the National Organization for Women.

American Family Association

American MFG Co

American Pulverizer Co

Annex Medical

Autocam Corp

Ave Maria School of Law

Ave Maria University

Barron Industries

Beckwith Electric Co

Belmont Abbey College

Bick Holdings, Inc.

Cherry Creek Mortgage Co

CNS Ministries

Colorado Christian University

Conestoga Wood Specialities Corp

Continuum Health Partnership/Management

Criswell College

Doboszenski & Sons

Dordt College

Dr. James Dobson’s Family Talk

East Texas Baptist University

Eden Foods

Encompass, Develop, Design & Construct LLC

Eternal Word Television Network Inc.

Fellowship of Catholic University

Feltl & Co., Inc.

Franciscan University of Steubenville

Freshway Foods

Gilardi

Grace College and Seminary

Grote Industries

Hart electric LLC

Hastings Automotive

Hercules Industries Inc.

Hobby Lobby

Holland Chevrolet

Infrastructure Alternatives

Johnson Welded Products

Korte & Luitjohan Contractors

Liberty University

Lindsay Rappaport and Postel LLC

Little Sisters of the Poor

Louisiana College

M&N Plastics

Mersino Management Company

Michigan Catholic Conference

MK Chambers Company

O’Brien Industrial Holdings

Ozinga

Paul Wieland

Priests for Life

QC Group Inc.

Randy Reed Automotives

Reaching Souls International

Right to Life Michigan

Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Atlanta

Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York

Roman Catholic Archdiocese of St. Louis

Roman Catholic Diocese of Beaumont

Roman Catholic Diocese of Biloxi

Roman Catholic Diocese of Cheyenne

Roman Catholic Diocese of Dallas

Roman Catholic Diocese of Erie

Roman Catholic Diocese of Fort Worth

Roman Catholic Diocese of Fort-Wayne – South Bend

Roman Catholic Diocese of Nashville

Roman Catholic Diocese of Pittsburgh

School of the Ozarks

Seneca Hardwood

Sharpe Holdings, Inc.

Sioux Chief MFG Co

SMA LLC

Southern Nazarene University

The Most Reverend Thomas Wenski

Tonn and Blank Construction

Trijicon, Inc. (AKA Bindon)

Triune Health Group

Tyndale House

University of Notre Dame

Weingartz Supply Co

Wheaton College (Wheaton, IL)

Willis & Willis PLC

WLH Enterprises

Zumbiel

NOW detailed prior to the SCOTUS Hobby Lobby decision that they view this as sex discrimination and a violation of the First Amendment’s Establishment Clause:

The more than 100 lawsuits seeking an exemption from the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act’s (ACA) (P.L. 111-148) mandate for insurance coverage of contraception in employee health plans are the products of a well-organized, professionally -orchestrated and heavily-financed campaign that uses religion as an excuse for discrimination and for placing business practices beyond the reach of governmental laws and regulations. A decision in favor of the plaintiffs could pave the way for certain corporations to deny thousands of employees the same kind of health coverage that employees in most other companies receive. In our view, this is straightforward sex discrimination as well as a violation of the First Amendment’s Establishment Clause.

On Monday, I wrote that this would impact a lot of women. Sure enough, on Tuesday, the AP wrote that the court clarified its position – the ruling will apply broadly. Here it is, via Talking Points Memo, “The Supreme Court on Tuesday confirmed that its decision a day earlier extending religious rights to closely held corporations applies broadly to the contraceptive coverage requirement in the new health care law, not just the handful of methods the justices considered in their ruling.”

The National Advocates for Pregnant Women noted in a statement sent to PoliticusUSA that the silver lining in the ruling is the suggestion of full government funding for contraception, “If there is a silver lining to Justice Alito’s opinion, it is this suggested solution to the problem: full government funding for contraception. Putting aside the current political situation in Congress that makes such funding improbable, the decision does suggest the real solution demanded not by RFRA but by human rights: a system of universal health care that includes everyone and covers all women and all of their health care needs.”

Oh, that’s justice. Definitely. But until we have a Congress that will do a solid for the people, we still have the power of our wallets.

Citizens will have to speak with their wallets and at the ballot box until we get a Congress that will do its job.