SOUTH BEND — Healy Group had 10 employees when it moved into a new building in 1995. Nearly two decades later, 35 people work for the risk-management and financial services firm.

“We’re bursting at the seams,” said Rich Preuss, one of the company’s four owners. “It’s been slow-and-steady growth in all of our divisions. We keep adding clients, and, as we do that, we have to add more support staff.”

So, Healy Group is expanding.

Construction started in June on a new building that will more than double the firm’s space to 12,300 square feet. The $2.4 million project is at the northwest corner of Carmichael Drive and Generations Drive, in the same office park where Healy Group is currently located.

Healy’s owners — Tony Nyers, Randy Raciti, Chris Rowland and Preuss — expect the new building to be ready by the end of January.

Raciti said diversification has been a key to the company’s growth. The firm has four divisions: Healy Benefits, Healy Financial, Healy Insurance and Healy Mortgage. He said that combination provides a “one-stop shop” for clients’ insurance and financial needs.

“We’ve found that’s helpful when you go through difficult economic periods like we did with the Great Recession,” Raciti said. “For instance, our mortgage division boomed during that period of time with all the refinances that were going on.”

Healy Benefits advisers also have been helping businesses and individuals with their health insurance decisions under the Affordable Care Act, the health care overhaul that Congress passed in 2010.

“In the benefits world, health care reform certainly is giving us lots of opportunities to guide our clients through it,” said Rowland, who is a citizen advisory member of the Tribune’s editorial board. “There are some opportunities we want to take advantage of as it continues to unfold.”

Nyers added, “I think we’re going to see consolidation in the benefits world, so there will be opportunities for acquisitions, and that might be where we’d see additional locations. The way we situated our lot (for the new building), we have room to expand with a second building on our property.”

Healy has invested in technology as well to keep up with clients who previously lived in the Michiana area but have retired to warmer climes. The company has clients in at least 25 states.

“We see more of that happening in the future,” Raciti said. “For us, technology has been really important to create Web meetings with our clients to maintain that personal contact, that high touch.”

And Healy’s employees have a good incentive to perform well.

The firm’s founder, Edward Healy, started the company in 1976 and decided in 1984 to open ownership to other partners.

“When you have a path to becoming an owner, I think there’s something that gets people more focused on doing the best possible job,” Preuss said. “Our desire is that we have lots of owners. Ed would say that 25 percent of a really big pie is better than 100 percent of a little pie.”

Raciti added, “Our people are the greatest strength of our organization. Ed Healy used to say you can take everything away from me but my people, and we will be up and going strong again in a short period of time.”

KAllen@SBTinfo.com

574-235-6244

Twitter: @KevinAllenSBT