Nurses' union endorses Newsom, citing his single-payer position

Lt. Gov. Gavin Newsom picked up a major endorsement for his 2018 campaign for governor Wednesday when the 90,000-member California Nurses Association gave him its blessing at a meeting in Los Angeles.

Although the primary election is more than two years away, it wasn’t a hard choice, said Rose Ann DeMoro, executive director of the union.

“It was inevitable that we were going to endorse Gavin,” she said. “It was one of the easiest endorsements we have ever made.”

The key to the endorsement is Newsom’s support for single-payer health care, a.k.a. “Medicare for All,” which means that everyone’s health-care costs would be paid by the government rather than by insurance companies. Newsom has cited his “Healthy San Francisco” plan, which he initiated as mayor, as a model for universal health care coverage.

“We really hope Gavin can do single-payer,” DeMoro said. “We have extremely high hopes he can make it happen.”

Although single-payer plans are found in countries across the world, they’ve found little favor in the United States. President Obama had to drop his support for a publicly run insurance alternative to get his Affordable Care Act passed and Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger twice vetoed single-payer plans passed by the Legislature.

In 2012, with Democrat Jerry Brown as governor, SB810, a single-payer plan by San Francisco state Sen. Mark Leno, didn’t make it out of the state Senate.

One of the main problems is the projected price of the program, which the Legislative Analyst’s Office said could cost the state $210 billion the first year.

But supporters argue the costs are overstated and that health care should be a right for everyone living in California.

If Newsom is elected, DeMoro said, “the Legislature will have a heck of a time ignoring him when he talks about single-payer. He will have the power of government to make it happen.”

The nurses’ union is one of the strongest and most political savvy labor organizations in the state, providing both money and workers to the people it supports.

“When we’re committed, we’re very deeply committed,” DeMoro said. “We’ll do everything we can to make sure (Newsom) wins.”

— John Wildermuth