Good Samaritan Health System and York-based WellSpan Health are close to becoming one. The two organizations announced Tuesday they have signed an agreement to formally explore a transaction that could become final by the end of the year.

WellSpan, with four hospitals, is a much larger entity.

Good Samaritan CEO Robert Longo on Tuesday said the likely final outcome could best be described as “merger.” He said he expects Good Samaritan to retain a large degree of autonomy and to be free to focus on the needs of the Lebanon area.

“We look at it as a partnership in terms of how it will operate,” he said.

Good Samaritan would gain access to WellSpan's substantial financial strength. WellSpan would become a bigger player, and gain access to more patients and territory, in an industry where most players are growing or hoping to grow.

Good Samaritan’s financial assets would become part of WellSpan. It would retain its name, and continue to have its own CEO and board of directors. For example, the local board would continue to be responsible for things such as credentialing doctors. However, major decisions such as those involving borrowing would be made by the WellSpan parent board, although the Good Samaritan board would have input.

Dr. Kevin Mosser, the CEO of WellSpan, stressed that the success of WellSpan and Good Samaritan would be intertwined, giving WellSpan every incentive to help Good Samaritan satisfy the needs of the Lebanon area.

Good Samaritan had announced last summer that, as a smaller hospital system, it could no longer stand independently in hospital landscape that is rapidly shifting toward big.

On Tuesday, Longo said Good Samaritan asked for proposals from ten organizations and received eight responses and five highly-detailed proposals. Longo, who wouldn’t name the other interested parties, said the proposals came from both non-profit and for-profit organizations.

The potential Good Samaritan-WellSpan merger continues the trend toward hospital consolidation in central Pennsylvania as well as the rest of the country. Some experts predict in ten years Pennsylvania will have far fewer individual hospitals and hospital systems than it does today.

Holy Spirit Health System in Cumberland County is in the midst of a similar process with the much larger Geisinger Health System in Danville.

PinnacleHealth System and Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, both based in Dauphin County, are also exploring a stronger affiliation, although they have been less specific about the potential outcome.

Carlisle Regional Medical Center, already part of a multi-state chain, just became part of a much larger chain after its parent was acquired.

The move toward bigger is driven by assorted forces, including the Affordable Care Act and changes in health insurance payments, intended to promote better-coordinated medical care and to pay hospital systems for managing the care of populations rather than individuals.

In that environment, organizations that can serve larger populations, attain economies of scale and make large investments in technology are best positioned for success.

WellSpan operates York Hospital, Gettysburg Hospital, Ephrata Community Hospital and WellSpan Surgery & Rehabilitation Hospital. It finalized the acquisition of Ephrata Community Hospital last fall. It has 11,000 employees and about $1.5 billion in net patient revenues. Good Samaritan, with one hospital, has 1,400 employee and $180 million in net patient revenues.

Longo said Good Samaritan was able to consider several differing but appealing proposals. In evaluating the WellSpan proposal, board members visited Gettsyburg Hospital and were impressed by factors including its local focus, Longo said.

He said of WellSpan, “We speak the same language. We have the same values.”

Good Samaritan is in its 125th year. Longo is in this 31st year as a Good Samaritan executive, and has been CEO for more than 20 years.

He declined to discuss his future plans following a merger with WellSpan, but said, “I see nothing but excitement there … it’s a great way to round out a career in health care.”

Mosser said, “We’re hoping that Bob works for another 20 years, because we’re excited about having him as part of our management team.”