When Jackie McMann-Oliveri started as human—resources director at the Meatball Shop in July 2014, she knew the company had to act quickly to prepare for the requirements of the Affordable Care Act.



The six-restaurant chain would shortly be responsible for providing health benefits to even its lowest-wage workers—dishwashers, busers and other kitchen staff.



“Speaking to people in the restaurant business, nobody had ever offered benefits before. It was a brand-new world,” McMann-Oliveri said.



She brought the problem to her boss with a potential solution: BeneStream, a software company that helps employers enroll low-income workers in Medicaid.



A confluence of three Obamacare attributes has strengthened 4-year-old BeneStream's ability to score financing from investors and land new clients. The healthcare law requires companies to insure their workforce or face fines. Individuals face penalties come tax time if they don't get covered. The third feature is the expansion of Medicaid in 31 states, including New York, to cover people who earn up to 138% of the federal poverty level, or about $33,500 for a family of four.



The scope of the employer mandate to provide health insurance to workers will be even greater in January 2016. Companies with 50 or more staffers will be required to offer coverage to 95% of full-time employees and their dependents up to age 26. The penalty for noncompliance is about $2,000 for each full-timer, although the fines exclude the first 30 employees.



The new requirement puts companies in low-wage industries such as hospitality and home healthcare in a bind. They must offer benefits packages that serve the needs of their high-level executives, but at the same time give low-wage workers access to an affordable health plan.



“Employers are in a difficult position because they're being asked to cover a pretty high portion of the population,” said Mary Clark, practice leader at Cammack Health, a Manhattan benefits consultant. “You may offer rich coverage and it's not affordable to everyone you cover.”



That's a gap that BeneStream exploits. The Meatball Shop is entering its second year of using BeneStream. Every month, McMann-Oliveri provides a list of employees who might be eligible for Medicaid. Bene-Stream contacts the workers, who gather documents, such as rent stubs and children's Social Security cards, and use the company's software to apply for Medicaid. A multilingual call center helps with the application. About 10% of the restaurant chain's 340 employees used the service last year, Ms. McMann-Oliveri said.

Controversial niche

BeneStream recently raised $6.3 million in Series A financing, from investors including BlueCross BlueShield Venture Partners, the VC arm of the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association. The company has grown to 70 employees in seven states, up from only eight workers last year, and has signed up or re-enrolled 5,500 people for Medicaid. The new funding is for sales team expansion.



The company has struck partnerships with more than 30 insurance brokers, including USI Insurance Services and HUB International, which now sell Bene-Stream's products to their clients as part of a benefits package. For an employer with 1,000 workers earning less than $33,500, BeneStream's service costs $35,000 upfront and $4,000 a month to enroll existing employees, handle new hires and process all re-enrollments.



Brokers get a portion of those payments. Among them is Bob Trope, managing director at Crystal & Co. His Manhattan brokerage firm has worked with BeneStream since last year. It recently signed up its first client to use the service.



“Health insurance costs are the second biggest for many companies, after labor,” Trope said. “Anything you can do to control those costs in a way that's not just shifting them to the employee is a good thing.”



But the idea of employers seeking government assistance for their workers is controversial. Medicaid is funded by state and federal governments, and employers don't contribute to premiums as they would with commercial insurance. Some companies fret that referring workers to Medicaid might be seen as a sign that their benefits program isn't strong enough to cover all its employees, said Trope.



“The optics of it can be a hurdle,” he said.



Although Medicaid is an affordable option for employees, the coverage can make it more challenging for them to find doctors who take the insurance, said Tal Gross, an assistant professor of health policy at Columbia University.



“Medicaid is not necessarily health insurance we would all want,” he said. “That's one issue. Another is the cost is shifting to taxpayers.”



Ben Geyerhahn, the company's chief executive, said it has screened 35,000 people for eligibility. He believes his company is fulfilling an Obamacare goal by helping people get coverage and saving out-of-pocket costs, which are limited to nominal amounts for Medicaid -enrollees.



“The employee still gets offered employer-sponsored health insurance,” he said. “What we're trying to do is to provide the employee all of the options that they should have.”

Low-wage workers

Geyerhahn added that many companies that pay workers wages that are low enough to qualify for Medicaid “are running on fairly narrow margins.” One example, he said, is a home-health agency that has no control over what it charges for serving a low-income client base because its reimbursement is set by Medicaid. New York's Medicaid program insured more than 6.3 million people in 2014. After years of rising costs, the program cut its 2014 spending per recipient to its lowest level in more than a decade. This year, the state began a $7.4 billion overhaul of Medicaid.



Geyerhahn said BeneStream encourages a more responsible use of the healthcare system by aligning with the state's goals. “If you're getting enrolled in Medicaid in an emergency room, you're a high cost,” Geyerhahn said. “There's a far greater likelihood that if you're enrolled in Medicaid before you have a need, you're going to use it in a way that's the least expensive.”



New Yorkers eligible for Medicaid often don't enroll. Ms. McMann-Oliveri remembers that in previous jobs she sat with employees for more than two hours to work on Medicaid enrollment. Even when she was able to get the right support on the phone to start the process there was no guarantee an employee would avoid any number of roadblocks to enrollment.



The support BeneStream provides to workers, she said,is its biggest selling point. “I know for a fact that I've had people not apply for benefits because they're afraid and they don't understand the process,” she said. “When they have someone helping them, they're willing to do it.”



Columbia's Gross said he can see BeneStream's appeal to employers adapting to Obamacare.



“Most employers just aren't equipped to deal with this,” he said. “It's nice to have a company that you pay to take the headache away."