The profession’s efforts and successes in achieving provider status recognition at the federal, state, and/or private-payer levels were a focus of the 2016 APhA Annual Meeting & Exposition in Baltimore.

On Friday, Provider Status: It’s Happening was presented by APhA Senior Vice President of Pharmacy Practice and Government Affairs Stacie S. Maass, BSPharm, JD. Pharmacist provider status recognition “is not a singular effort or sprint. We need pharmacists’ long-term engagement,” she said.

Defining provider status as “promoting patient access to, and coverage of, pharmacists’ patient care services,” Maass said that pharmacists’ services, in coordination with other health care team members, include chronic disease management and education, medication management, health and wellness, and care transitions.

Maass explained that pathways to provider status include seeking legislative and regulatory changes at the federal and state levels. Federal-level pathways include opportunities in Medicare Part B and Part D, the CMS Center for Medicare & Medicaid Innovation (CMMI), and Medicare accountable care organizations (ACOs). At the state level, there are a multitude of paths to provider status successes, including pursuing changes in Medicaid, health insurance exchanges, state employee health plans, and existing pharmacy scope and practice acts. Maass added that pharmacists’ provider status is happening in the private sector as well, including opportunities in ACOs and medical homes and with private insurers.

At the state level, in 2015 and thus far in 2016, “we’ve seen a huge uptick in the number of legislation compared with previous years,” Maass said. This shows state policy makers recognize the value of pharmacists and their services.

She discussed scope components and opportunities, including collaborative practice agreements and statewide protocols. She also discussed payment for pharmacists’ services, including recent successes in North Dakota, Washington state, Minnesota, and Ohio.

At the federal level, the Patient Access to Pharmacists’ Care Coalition (PAPCC) has grown to nearly 40 organizations, including APhA. The coalition seeks provider status recognition for pharmacists, including passage of the Pharmacy and Medically Underserved Areas Enhancement Act (H.R. 592/S. 314), which would enable Medicare patients to access pharmacist-provided services under Medicare Part B. Currently, H.R. 592 has one original sponsor plus 269 cosponsors in the House, and S. 314 has one original sponsor plus 41 cosponsors in the Senate.

“To have bipartisan health care legislation in this kind of political environment [that continues to include controversy over the Affordable Care Act] is a big success, and something our profession should be proud of,” Maass said, noting the positive feedback for pharmacists on Capitol Hill.

On Monday, Advancing the Pharmacists’ Role: Will Provider Status Fix Everything? featured presentations by Maass on a summary of her previous provider status talk; Washington State Pharmacy Association CEO Jeff Rochon, PharmD, on how SB 5557 required health plans to recognize pharmacists as patient care providers for covered benefits in Washington state; and Affinity Insurance Services Vice President Mark Buczko, CPCU, CIC, RPLU, on pharmacists’ liability (which may expand as their roles expand, much as it did for nurse practitioners).

“It’s important—when you’re talking to a payer or physician—that you talk about the value pharmacists can provide,” Maass said.

In the Exposition area of the convention center, APhA engaged with attendees on provider status recognition at the Pharmacists Provide Care booth and the Government Affairs Advocacy Action Center booth. Friday’s education session on provider status was recorded for Meeting Highlights Video on Demand, available later this year.