Lost in the dusty rubble that was a disastrous second half in a Nuggets loss at Memphis last Saturday was a player quietly getting his swagger back.

Randy Foye was in the game in an unusual position for him, when it was already out of hand. But he used his seven-plus minutes in the fourth quarter to do something that had been eluding him most of the season: Make shots.

He knocked in 3-of-4 attempts, including a 3-pointer, and scored 11 points in the quarter. Afterward, he wore a confident grin. He had figured things out, he said.

Foye’s next step was to put back-to-back satisfying performances together.

Check.

Against the Miami Heat on Monday night, only Ty Lawson, Wilson Chandler and J.J. Hickson among the Nuggets played more minutes than Foye, who finished with 11 points, seven assists and two rebounds. He played on the ball, giving Lawson a chance to roam off of it, and he played off the ball.

“At the end of the last game, against Memphis we had our young guys in there but we left Randy in there because we kind of wanted him to get his swag back,” Nuggets coach Brian Shaw said. “He got to see some shots go in for him, and I think that carried over. It looks like he’s got his confidence back.”

Whether Foye gets his starting gig back at off guard is another matter altogether, but that’s not a big issue if he’s going to be playing 34 minutes, and in crunch time, the way he did against the Heat. Foye didn’t whine when he was benched. He redoubled his effort to get himself back on the right track.

The result has been improved field-goal percentage (7-for-11 combined the last two games), but there’s been a more subtle development as well. Only one of those field goals was a 3-pointer, and Foye is known for his long-range prowess. But he attempted only one 3-pointer in the Nuggets’ loss to Miami.

Of his overall game Monday, Shaw said Foye “defended fairly well. He made plays. … So that’s what we need out of him and out of that position.”

Foye’s shooting struggles resulted in Shaw inserting Jordan Hamilton in the starting lineup at shooting guard at New Orleans last Friday. Hamilton has started ever since.

“It’s not about me, it’s about the team and what’s going to help the team,” Foye said. “J-Ham, he’s been shooting the ball real well. (Monday) I played really well. We have so many guys. I can’t worry about how many points I score or how many touches I’m getting. Your main focus should be, ‘Am I doing my assignments on defense?’ And if you do that, like coach said, you’re going to be in the game a lot.”

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dempseypost

PHILADELPHIA AT DENVER 7 p.m., ALT; 104.3 FM/950 AM

Spotlight on Michael Carter-Williams: The sensational rookie did not play in the first game between the two teams in Philadelphia on Dec. 7 because of an injury. But now the Nuggets get an up-close look at the early front-runner for the NBA rookie of the year, who comes in averaging 17.8 points, 7.5 assists, 5.5 rebounds and 3.1 steals per game.

NOTEBOOK

Sixers: Defensively, Philadelphia has had its problems this season, but offensively it is averaging 102.7 points per game. The 76ers have five players averaging double figures in scoring. … Leading scorer Evan Turner has had a bit of a rocky December, averaging just 16.5 points per game and shooting 40.2 percent from the field. Both are well under his season averages of 19.4 points and 44.1 percent shooting.

Nuggets: Ty Lawson’s 26 points against Miami was his 13th game of 20 or more points this season. … J.J. Hickson registered his seventh double-double of the season in the loss to the Heat, with 12 points and 11 rebounds. … The Nuggets seven-game losing streak is the team’s longest since they lost the final eight games of the 2002-03 season.