Topics: 2016 Elections, caitlyn jenner, LGBT, Transphobia, Elections News, Life News, Entertainment News

Caitlyn Jenner is having a bad month. The former Olympian and reality star has become persona non grata in the LGBT community since coming out for Ted Cruz earlier this March. In an interview with Dawn Ennis for the Advocate (disclosure: I work there as a reporter), Jenner said, “I like Ted Cruz. I think he’s very conservative and a great constitutionalist and a very articulate man.” She also offered to serve as his “trans ambassador,” should the Senator be elected president in November. During a subsequent episode of “I Am Cait,” Jenner threw more logs on the growing social media firestorm by claiming that racist demagogue Donald Trump “would be very good for women’s issues.”

Jenner, who has never been shy about her Republican views, has attempted to backtrack in recent days by meeting with Hillary Clinton. She had previously been critical of the Democratic frontrunner, calling her a “f**king liar.” Jenner said, “We’re done, if Hillary becomes president, the country is over.” But in a recent Instagram picture taken with the presidential candidate, Ms. Jenner signaled her willingness to evolve politically. The photo was captioned “#learningfrommygirls #willingtolisten.”

But for now, the damage may be done. Trans blogger Monica Robert has referred to Jenner’s remarks as “breathtakingly clueless,” while Joy Behar compared her conservative advocacy to Jewish people supporting Adolf Hitler in a recent episode of “The View.” Even worse is that the public row over her politics is only Jenner’s most recent controversy. In December, Jenner was widely criticized for transphobic comments she made to Time magazine about why she “takes [her] presentation seriously.” Jenner said, “If you’re out there and, to be honest with you, if you look like a man in a dress, it makes people uncomfortable.”

Caitlyn Jenner can and should be criticized, both for these remarks and for her support of Republican candidates like Donald Trump and Ted Cruz. After all, Cruz has been an outspoken opponent of affirming bathroom access for transgender teens. The Texas Senator has referred to the Obama administration’s official stance on the subject—that trans students should allowed to use restrooms that match their gender identity—as “lunacy.” Cruz told radio show host Steven Crowder last November, “[T]he federal government is going after school districts, trying to force them to let boys shower with little girls.”

But what is not fair game when calling out Caitlyn Jenner is attacking her gender identity. The justified public outrage against Jenner’s problematic personal views has led to a revolting strain of transphobia on the Internet, with social media users exploiting the moment to say pretty much whatever they want about her. Last week, a friend tipped me off that after posting about Jenner’s Republican views on Facebook, his feed filled up with critics bashing her with transphobic slurs and misgendering her. One respondent called her a “tranny ass bitch,” while others repeatedly referred to Jenner as a “he.”

This phenomenon, of course, is not isolated to your Facebook networks. On Twitter, soap opera star Nancy Lee Grahn (who you likely remember for trolling Viola Davis’ Emmy speech) wrote that Caitlyn Jenner still “votes like a rich white man.” Twitter user Claudia Martin (@cloudypianos) added, “Caitlyn Jenner saying Trump would be good for women’s issues is like a white man saying Trump would be good for women’s issues oh wait [sic].” Chris Hibbs (@chris_hibbs6) also remarked, “She/he is an attention starved lunatic.”