Monday's episode also features Will Ferrell as Harry Caray

President Barack Obama and David Letterman pose for photographers during Monday's episode of "Late Show with David Letterman." (Photo: AP photo)

Editor's note: Indianapolis native David Letterman will end his 33-year run as a late-night talk show host on May 20. This is a recap of the May 4 episode of "Late Show with David Letterman."

President Barack Obama made his eighth and final appearance on David Letterman's talk show, giving the high-profile Midwesterners a chance to chat about life after their current jobs.

Obama suggested that he and Letterman should launch a recurring game of dominoes at a Starbucks, while Letterman deadpanned that his retirement means teaching law at Columbia University.

CBS devoted 2-1/2 hours of programming to Letterman on Monday, starting with a 90-minute highlight compilation titled "David Letterman: A Life in Television" during prime time.

Tuesday's guests on "Late Show," airing at 11:35 p.m. on WTTV-4, are Reese Witherspoon, Nathan Lane and Mumford & Sons.

Ten highlights of Monday's episode:

1. President Obama and Letterman conversed across four segments of the episode, primarily addressing non-comedic topics of Baltimore unrest, race relations and finding jobs for U.S. soldiers.

2. Obama mentioned that he'll be a relatively young 55 years old when he exits the White House in 2017. The president said he grew up watching Letterman on television, and added that he loved the comedian -- a sentiment that Letterman reciprocated.

3. Best one-liner from the president: "Unlike talk-show hosts, I'm term-limited."

4. Next best one-liner from the president: "Mainly, I came by to say goodbye to Biff and Paul."

5. In a nod to the president, Letterman noted in his monologue that Obamacare facilitates health coverage for the unemployed. "Staff and crew of the 'Late Show,' you're welcome," Letterman said.

6. Letterman's monologue also included an alleged quote from his mother, 93-year-old Carmel resident Dorothy Mengering. Dave said he spoke to Dorothy by phone during the weekend, when she said, "I heard you were fired."

Will Ferrell portrays Harry Caray on "Late Show." (Photo: CBS screencap)

7. Comedic star Will Ferrell spent his final "Late Show" appearance executing a bit in which he resurrected his "Saturday Night Live" impression of iconic baseball broadcaster Harry Caray (1914-1998). Babbling in the studio audience, Farrell interrupted Letterman's monologue and then invited himself onstage.

8. Apparently preserved in the 1980s, Ferrell's Caray fretted about the Berlin Wall and mentioned Chicago Cubs players Shawon Dunston, Andre Dawson, Rick Sutcliffe and Greg Maddux.

9. Fans of South Side Chicago baseball shouldn't feel neglected. Letterman was introduced at the top of the episode as "centerfielder for the Go-Go White Sox," a reference to the 1959 AL champs led by Luis Aparicio, Nellie Fox and Ted Kluszewski.

10. The Avett Brothers and Brandi Carlile collaborated for a musical performance to close the episode. Washington native Carlile turned on perhaps too strong of a Southern accent for a cover of old-time country song "Keep On the Sunny Side."

Call Star reporter David Lindquist at (317) 444-6404. Follow him on Twitter: @317Lindquist.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1Icl2BX