Scottish haggis serving for a Burns Night dinner against a Royal Stuart tartan. Getty Images

BRUSSELS—ONE OF THE inherent absurdities of being an expat is celebrating traditional events from back home with more enthusiasm than you ever did while you lived there. An informal straw poll of British friends confirmed my suspicion that none of us knew when the Queen’s official birthday was when we lived in the U.K. Now I can easily tell you it’s a Saturday in June – the perfect excuse for Pimm’s and canapés at the embassy.

Another example is Burns Night, held every year on Jan. 25 to honor Scotland’s national poet, Robert Burns. Even if you’re not remotely Scottish, who can resist reading a poem to a haggis, drinking Scotch whisky and admiring chaps in kilts? Not your correspondent.

If the food’s not to your taste, there’s always the dancing: at a ceilidh (pronounced kay-lee) the caller will talk you through the steps before you all dance through the moves in beautiful formation. Throwing a language barrier into this process is always fun as well – I once went to a ceilidh at the College of Europe where the enthusiastic dancing, Belgian beer and obscure dance terminology led to more international collisions than CERN. There are expat Burns Nights from Budapest to Dubai happening this weekend, or, if you’re planning your own party, here are some handy pointers.

Haggis

You’re probably too late to order one, though Jack O’Shea’s can get them for you in Brussels. If you’re feeling brave enough to buy a lot of offal, there’s a recipe here, with the ominous-sounding introduction “This is an authentic recipe from Scotland and the ingredients and methods of cooking may be unfamiliar but we hope you enjoy the results.” Or, give it an expat twist: this Scottish-Chinese Burns Night in Canadainvolves “Bonnie Wee Things” or Haggis wontons. However, sad news for expatriate Scots in the U.S.: Haggis is still banned, despite this Braveheart-style plea by Scottish Rural Affairs Secretary Richard Lochhead in 2011 and decades of lobbying by U.S. meat-lovers. That’s because sheep’s lungs – an essential part of the stuffing – are banned under U.S. import rules. Some enterprising Scots have smuggled them in, according to reports (pity the people who sat next to them on the plane). Others hope the issue can be resolved as part of the EU-US trade deal, known as the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership.

Drinks

Obviously, whisky. The Scotch Whisky Association notes that Rabbie Burns’s day job was being a tax man, making a romantic evening of poetry and celebration into a chance to lobby for lower taxes on single malts. They also have some tips on which ones are best to drink. Here are some wine recommendations, or Scottish brewery Belhaven have a Robert Burns Ale.

Poetry

The centerpiece of a good Burns Night is addressing the haggis, “Great chieftain o’ the pudding-race!” You could show off and do it in Russian, like this guy. But what if you can’t remember how the poem goes, or you want to regale your guests with more Scots verse after you’ve done the big number for the main course? There’s an official app for that, made by Scotland.org, which can be downloaded free here.

READ MORE: Pecan Pie in Singapore? Don’t Mind if I Do!

READ MORE: A Brit, at Thanksgiving, in Brussels

READ MORE: Expats & Holidays: His ‘Moveable’ Feast Is Thanksgiving

Email us at expat@wsj.com. Follow us @WSJexpat. Join our Facebook group.