The American Journal of Managed Care celebrated its 20th anniversary at a reception in Orlando, Florida. For 20 years, the journal has provided a unique forum for evaluating the economic value of the best clinical practices. Past News Releases RSS Managed Care Reduced Medicaid...

Clinical Pathways Get an In-Depth...

Technology, Obesity Treatment...

The American Journal of Managed Care last night formally celebrated its 20th year of publication with a celebration that marked highlights from its contributions to the evolution of healthcare’s rapidly changing payment models.

“For 20 years, the journal has provided a unique forum for evaluating the economic value of the best clinical practices,” said Brian Haug, president of The American Journal of Managed Care. “The journal filled a void in the healthcare conversation, and it continues to lead the way in shaping the policy agenda.”

The gathering brought together co-editors in chief Michael Chernew, PhD, and A. Mark Fendrick, MD; members of the editorial board, leadership from the publishing staff, and contributors to the 20th anniversary guest commentary series, which has appeared in the journal throughout 2015. The journal welcomed five new editorial board members added during 2015:



Austin Frakt, PhD. A health economist and creator of The Incidental Economist, Frakt is also a contributor to The Upshot, with appointments to Health Care Financing & Economics (HCFE) at the Boston VA Healthcare System, the US Department of Veterans Affairs and the Department of Psychiatry at Boston University School of Medicine.

Robert W. Dubois, MD, PhD. The chief science officer and executive vice president of the National Pharmaceutical Council, Dubois oversees issues related to comparative effectiveness research and how health outcomes are valued. He is board certified in internal medicine.

Elizabeth Mitchell. President and CEO of the Network for Regional Healthcare Improvement, Mitchell is a board member of the National Quality Forum. A former state legislator in Maine, she has varied experiences in health policy and management.

Alan Rosenberg, MD. The vice president for Clinical Pharmacy and Medical Policy, Anthem, Inc., Rosenberg is the payer representative on the advisory panel on Assessment of Prevention, Diagnosis and Treatment Options for PCORI (Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute).

Daniel B. Wolfson, MHSA. Wolfson is the executive vice president and chief operation officer of the ABIM Foundation, which is well-known for its Choosing Wisely initiative to identify unnecessary tests and procedures across a range of medical specialties. He was previously president and CEO of the Alliance of Community Health Plans.

“We are extremely excited and proud to add such esteemed healthcare voices to our editorial board,” Haug said. “The range of experiences and knowledge shows the journal is well-positioned to direct the conversation about payment reform into the next decade and beyond.”

Those attending the anniversary celebration received a commemorative book featuring all the guest commentaries from the 20th anniversary series, as well as a timeline of milestones in the history of managed care.

About the Journals and AJMC.com

The American Journal of Managed Care celebrates its 20th year in 2015 as the leading peer-reviewed journal dedicated to issues in managed care. AJMC.com distributes healthcare news to leading stakeholders across a variety of platforms. Other titles in the franchise include The American Journal of Pharmacy Benefits, which provides pharmacy and formulary decision-makers with information to improve the efficiency and health outcomes in managing pharmaceutical care, and The American Journal of Accountable Care, which publishes research and commentary on innovative healthcare delivery models facilitated by the 2010 Affordable Care Act. AJMC’s Evidence-Based series brings together stakeholder views from payers, providers, policymakers and pharmaceutical leaders in oncology and diabetes management. To order reprints of articles appearing in AJMC publications, please call (609) 716-7777, x 131.

CONTACT:

Nicole Beagin

(609) 716-7777 x 131

nbeagin(at)ajmc(dot)com

http://www.ajmc.com