(AP Photo)

(CNSNews.com) – The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) announced on Thursday that it is expanding Medicaid coverage to give “access to health care” to 96,000 people who face a prison sentence or have been incarcerated – or “justice-involved” individuals – as part of the federally designated National Re-Entry Week (April 24-30).



“Today, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services strengthened access to health care for individuals transitioning from incarceration back to their communities,” the press release stated. “New Medicaid guidance released today updates decades-old policy and clarifies that individuals who are currently on probation, parole or in home confinement are not considered inmates of a public institution.



“It also extends coverage to Medicaid-eligible individuals living in community halfway houses where they have freedom of movement, improving access to care for as many as 96,000 individuals in Medicaid expansion states over the course of the year,” the press release said, noting that this guidance applies to states that agreed to expand the federal health program through the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare.



“As we celebrate National Re-Entry Week, it is important to understand the critical role access to health care plays in successful returns to the community for so many Americans trying to change their lives,” Richard Frank, HHS assistant secretary for planning and evaluation, said in a statement.



“Today’s actions will immediately begin to give as many as 96,000 of American’s most vulnerable citizens access to needed health care through Medicaid, including mental health and substance use disorder treatment, reducing the risk they will be re-incarcerated or hurt,” Frank added.

According to an issue brief released by HHS in conjunction with the announcement, there are 2.2 million people currently incarcerated and 4.7 million people under probation or parole in the United States.



The issue brief includes this definition of a “justice involved” individual:



“Justice involved individuals include anyone who is currently or has been involved with the criminal justice system. This includes individuals who are awaiting trial, convicted of a crime, on probation, under home confinement, incarcerated in jail or prison, under community residential supervision, or on parole. Many justice involved individuals are eligible for Medicaid if they meet the state’s financial and non-financial eligibility (including citizenship or eligible immigration status and state residency).”



HHS also sent out a letter to state health officials in Medicaid expanding states as “guidance” on the new policy and how “justice-involved” individuals can be eligible for Medicaid.



“The Obama administration has taken major steps to make our criminal justice system fairer, more efficient, and more effective at reducing recidivism and helping formerly incarcerated individuals contribute to their communities,” the press release said.