Something had to be sacrificed.

In retooling their offensive line once again, the Broncos placed a premium on knowledge and experience in exchange for game action.

They signed Evan Mathis, a two-time Pro Bowler and a 10-year veteran guard, pairing him with another all-pro guard in Louis Vasquez, and turning a once-youthful line into one that could prove to be steady and reliable late in the season.

But the move, made midway through preseason, brought a new wave of uncertainty.

The Baltimore Ravens roll into town this week for Sunday’s season opener, when Broncos coach Gary Kubiak will pull the curtains back on a front five that have never played a live snap together.

Risky? Sure. With Terrell Suggs coming off the edge, aiming for 39-year-old Peyton Manning, how could it not be?

“Really, it’s about Evan, right? Evan’s played more football than anybody on that offensive line,” Kubiak said. “If there’s anyone up front who’s the most experienced, it’s him, even though he hasn’t been working with us.”

The danger in starting a line that has yet to work together when the clock is ticking and the games matter was, perhaps, unavoidable. It’s rare to have a player of Mathis’ caliber still available on the open market so late in the preseason. But his delayed arrival guaranteed him zero game action and a month of cramming to learn the playbook.

“A lot of guys got a break around here,” Kubiak said, “but he’s been hanging out with the coaches quite a bit.”

And so they begin anew. Again.

The line dance in Denver has become a common story line in recent seasons. Last year, six players changed positions, resulting in three different right tackles. Through it all, the Broncos allowed only 17 sacks and 42 quarterback hits, both league lows.

This preseason, the Broncos’ line sported two rookies on the left in tackle Ty Sambrailo and guard Max Garcia, a former practice-squad player at center in Matt Paradis, and Vasquez and fellow veteran Ryan Harris on the right. In four games, the Broncos allowed only eight sacks, but the line, according to Pro Football Focus, was blamed for giving up only one, tied for the fewest in the NFL.

The latest iteration of the line is nothing to scoff at — on paper. In the long term, landing Mathis could prove to be a boon for the Broncos. But to start, experimenting on the fly may be necessary.

“I don’t think the learning curve for cohesion is going to be a problem,” Mathis said. “If there’s an issue, or potential issue, we’ll be able to talk that out (in practice). It might be a small adjustment — a step here, a hand there. If there’s something we haven’t seen and it becomes an issue, then we learn from it and keep going.”

Together, the five starters average 27.8 years of age and 4.6 years of NFL experience. But the latter is one that can’t be overlooked, especially for Mathis, as he and the line start over.

“There’s a lot of overlap for me,” he said. “I’ve seen, schematically, versions of everything that we do at one point in my career, whether it be in college or the many offenses I’ve played in in the pros. Earlier in my career, this would have been something that probably would have been very overwhelming to me. But at this point, there’s confidence and a sense of urgency just to get it done.”

Nicki Jhabvala: njhabvala@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickijhabvala