In their Justice, W. Va. home, former coal miner Randall Lester spoke with his wife, Missi, about his job prospects.

GILBERT, W.Va. — A Marilyn Monroe statue still beckons travelers to Happy Days Diner, a reminder of boom times in this Appalachian town at the heart of West Virginia coal country — an area long viewed as reliably Democratic.

The restaurant is now shuttered, along with a string of other storefronts on the two-lane road that snakes through town.

Advertisement

And while Marilyn harkens back, the town’s fading fortunes tell a political tale that could determine the Democratic Party’s future in West Virginia, with ramifications far beyond the state’s borders.

Here in Mingo County, which has lost hundreds of coal industry jobs, a 12.1 percent unemployment rate leads the state and is twice the national average. As a result, a half-century after John F. Kennedy worked to address West Virginia’s poverty and after Democrats have directed billions of dollars in “earmarks” to boost local fortunes, the party faces its biggest challenge here in generations.

Democrats had hoped to make economic opportunity a central theme in November’s election, but it has failed to resonate in places like Gilbert. This disconnect could cost Democrats control of the Senate.

“We’re fed up,” said Randall Lester, a coal miner who grew up, met his wife, and raised his two boys in Gilbert. He has watched the Larry Joe Harless Theater close and the region’s children take jobs elsewhere. After four decades in the mines, Lester lost his own job two weeks ago. A registered Democrat, he plans to vote for Republican candidates.

“Don’t tell me” about change, he said. “Show me.”

Advertisement

His disenchantment goes farther than these southern West Virginia hills. A recent Associated Press-Gfk poll showed nine of out 10 voters consider the economy America’s biggest problem. Democrats have tried to tap into these concerns with a focus on raising the minimum wage and eliminating the gender pay gap amid close races in Kentucky, North Carolina, Alaska, Georgia, and Louisiana.

Natalie Tennant, West Virginia’s secretary of state, embodies that strategy. She is the party’s nominee for the US Senate seat to replace retiring Senator John “Jay” Rockefeller, a Democrat whose name is synonymous with the economic elite but who focused his three-decade career on helping the less fortunate.

Tennant has struggled to follow. A recent poll conducted by RealClearPolitics shows she trails her Republican opponent, Shelley Moore Capito, a multiterm congresswoman, by some 17 points.

Republicans need six seats to win the Senate and have made West Virginia key to their takeover strategy.

Tennant, who runs a media consulting company, frames herself as a small-business owner and her opponent as a shill for rich bankers. She has accused Capito of working for Wall Street by voting for CEOs to keep bonuses during the financial bailout of 2008. She also targets Capito, the daughter of a former governor, for voting against bills that would increase the minimum wage and reduce the gender pay gap.

“West Virginians see and know that this is a real West Virginia issue — income inequality,” Tennant said in an interview.

Capito’s message is simple. “My opponent is supporting the president, who is putting people out of jobs,” she said during a recent debate in Charleston. Capito declined requests for an interview.

RELATED: Sununu: Obama’s energy policy is hurting fellow Democrats’ campaigns

President Obama has never been popular in West Virginia, least of all Mingo County. Residents in 2012 gave more votes to a convicted felon.

Critics blame Obama’s policies for the demise of coal jobs, although the rise of natural gas and increased use of mechanized mining also play a role.

Even Democratic leaders here are critical of the Obama administration.

“The federal government has done nothing to help southern West Virginia,” said Justin Marcum, a Democrat who represents Mingo County in the state’s House of Delegates. “Poverty has grown here due to the war on coal.”

Marcum’s law office is in the county seat of Williamson, across the street from the historic Mountaineer Hotel, which plays constant bluegrass music and markets itself as the place Kennedy stayed during his 1960 presidential election campaign.

“You don’t see the JFKs anymore,” Marcum said, pulling up a digitalized photo of the former president shaking hands. Most everyone in this county of nearly 26,000 people — where “sweet pea” and “honey” are common greetings — knows someone who works in the mines. Marcum wants the region to focus on diversifying and doesn’t see either candidate proposing an adequate solution.

Obama’s administration doesn’t always get due credit. An expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act has meant coverage for about 147,000 people statewide.

But the president’s latest message — the economy’s improvement — is a hard one for people here to grasp.

The West Virginia Center on Budget & Policy estimates 5,000 jobs have disappeared from the southern coal fields since 2011. The state’s unemployment rate hit 6.6 percent this August, up from 4.1 percent at the same period in 2007.

“It’s pretty clear that’s going to impact the Senate race,” said Neil Berch, an associate professor in West Virginia University’s political science department.

Democratic voters have dropped to below 50 percent in the state. If Capito wins, she will become the first Republican senator from West Virginia in more than a half-century. The state GOP hopes to take control of the House of Delegates for the first time in over 80 years.

Many Mingo County residents, reflecting a national frustration, don’t plan to go to the polls. Marcum predicted 13 percent of the county’s residents would vote.

In this climate, lawmakers must prove economic populist ideas are somehow different than policies of the past.

“The sense that there are solutions that would work hasn’t quite taken hold yet,” said Heather Boushey, executive director of the Washington Center for Equitable Growth, a research organization that examines economic inequality.

She doesn’t see the answer in traditional divisions between Democrats who campaign on federal benefits for the poor and Republicans who see the solution in fewer regulations.

“That debate is far too narrow,” she said.

Stephanie Harrison scrapes by on as many hours as she can get at the Gilbert community center’s front desk. The job starts at minimum wage. Her husband, a high school coach, makes $3,000 a season. With four kids, there’s always an unpaid bill.

Harrison, who supports Tennant, believes the town needs more than politics.

“You adapt,” she said, her voice echoing through the empty atrium, “and pray it will get better.”