PORTSMOUTH — Billionaire entrepreneur Donald Trump packed a luncheon event today and then let loose with his legendary bluntness on President Obama, the state of the nation and his fellow Republican candidates.

“People are disgusted with government, they’re disgusted with politicians,” Trump said during an event at the Pease International Tradeport hosted by Renee and Dan Plummer of Two International Group. “They’re ashamed with what’s going on with this country.”

Trump reported that he’s less than a month away from making a decision on whether he’ll run for president, something he’s flirted with doing twice before.

“In my mind I’ve already made it,” Trump said about his decision, which he predicted he’ll announce in mid-June.

Trump lashed out against the abuses of the free trade policy, stating “China is ripping us off.”

“Free trade is great. The problem is with free trade you need smart leaders on our side,” Trump said. “We don’t have smart leaders, we have dumb leaders.”

He also stated that not only is the country being hurt by illegal Mexican immigrants “pouring in (over the border) like it’s water,” but also industrially too.

“They’re also killing us economically, which a lot of people don’t know,” Trump said.

He also stressed that his success will mean he’s immune to the influences of lobbyists, unlike other politicians.

“Lobbyists don’t mean anything to me because I don’t need money,” Trump said.

He pledged that if he runs he will make the country “great again” and said the economy is in terrible shape, and the real unemployment rate is somewhere between 19-21 percent.

“The country has tremendous potential,” Trump said at the event. “We’re really on the wrong track, I think we can be on the right track.”

He pointed to the unrest in urban America, including the recent riots in Baltimore and said “the word job is your best social program.”

“I’ve created tens of thousands of jobs,” Trump said.

If he runs, Trump said he will push for lower taxes, to repeal and replace Obamacare, to strengthen the military, improve how veterans are treated and create a strong border.

After the event ended, he was mobbed by people trying to get a picture of him.

Trump even weighed in on the recent four-game suspension of his friend and Patriots quarterback Tom Brady.

“You can’t allow this to happen,” Trump said of the suspension. “Four games, it’s nonsense. If you use probably in front of a jury you’re innocent.”

Asked who he was going to work with to get things done on the Democratic side if he’s elected president, Trump pointed to the success of the development he built on the west side of Manhattan when everyone said he couldn’t get it done, but working with politicians from both parties, he did.

“All of my life I’ve dealt with politicians. I get along with Democrats. I get along with Republicans,” Trump said. “I get along with everybody.”

He suggested Obama could learn a lesson on getting things done from the way the former Democratic Speaker of the House Tip O’Neill and Republican president Ronald Reagan were able to get things done, despite their political differences.

“He plays hundreds of rounds of golf. Golf is a great game,” Trump said about Obama. “He should play with people on the other side and get friendly with them and get deals done.”

Now, Trump said, Obama can’t get along “with anybody.”

“Even the Democrats don’t like Obama anymore,” Trump said.

The developer also lashed out at Obamacare, repeating what he called the president’s lies about the Affordable Care Act.

“You can have your own plan and you’ll never lose your doctor and you can have your own whatever you want, “ Trump said. “Turned out to be a total lie and he lied 21 times. Some people say 24 but I’m going to give him the benefit of the doubt.”

Trump, who described himself as an “anti-politician,” described Washington politicians as a “bunch of liars.”

Trump also didn’t try to spare the feelings of his possible fellow Republican candidates like former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush.

He reminded the packed audience that he was against going to war in Iraq in 2004, and when Bush was asked recently if he would still support the war in Iraq if he knew what he knew today, Bush said yes.

“I watched Bush on (Fox Television Show) Megyn Kelly the other night and I watched him fumbling around with the simplest questions,” Trump said.

In a short press conference after the event, Trump called Bush’s comments “a disaster.”

He also described U.S. Sen. Marco Antonio Rubio, R-Fla., as “weak on immigration.”

And then Trump smiled and said, “And I have better hair.”

Asked by a Portsmouth Herald reporter if the Republican party had to reach out to African Americans and Latinos to win the next presidential election, Trump said, “I think it’s very important.”

“African Americans are in a position that’s as bad as they’ve ever been in,” Trump said.

Their unemployment rate is through the roof especially (among) the young.”

He repeated his experience with creating jobs throughout the country and the world and said blacks “have been treated horribly under President Obama and with me they’d be treated incredibly well.”