The Chaffee County assistance site for Connect for Health Colorado now has a full staff and has already started setting up appointments to help people once open enrollment in the state’s new state health insurance exchange starts in October.

The newest staff member, certified health guide Shantel Gallegos, started in August, Cheryl Walker, Chaffee County Connect for Health Colorado manager, said Thursday.

While all the staff at the Chaffee County assistance site have training to help people through the process, “I am (the) go-to person,” Gallegos said.

In the upcoming months when people want help or information about how to use Connect for Health Colorado, also known as C4HCO, to get health insurance and figure out any subsidy they can receive, Gallegos can help them.

Gallegos said she can help people from the beginning to the end of the state health insurance exchange enrollment process.

The open enrollment period for the insurance exchange starts Oct. 1, but Walker said people have already set up appointments with Gallegos to get help with the process. People who get their insurance and subsidy through Connect for Health Colorado will have their insurance coverage start as early as Jan. 1, she said.

People must go through Connect for Health Colorado to determine their insurance subsidy and obtain it, Walker said.

In addition to individuals, the exchange will have options for small businesses with fewer than 50 employees, Julie Nutter, small business marketplace coordinator, said. As a part of her job, she said she can work with businesses to help them learn more or go through the process to provide health insurance to their employees.

Walker said she and her staff have now gone through enough training that they can give presentations to groups and organizations about Connect for Health Colorado and how it will work. The staff will hold meetings and forums in upcoming months to talk with the community about the insurance exchange.

Chaffee County Public Health and its Lake County partner received a $250,000 grant in June to provide in-person assistance to customers of the new state health insurance exchange, Walker said previously.

Created by the Colorado Legislature in response to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, Connect for Health Colorado will let individuals and small business access, compare and buy health insurance, Walker said.

For questions call Gallegos at 530-2547 in Salida or at 395-0344, extension 104, in Buena Vista on Tuesdays and Wednesdays.