NAME: Leonard D. Sendelsky

TOWN: Edison Township

PARTY AFFILIATION: Democrat

OFFICE FOR WHICH YOU ARE A CANDIDATE: Edison Township Council

INCUMBENT? No

1. What makes you qualified to do a job better than your opponents?

I am personally dedicated to and care about Edison's future. I may be a political newcomer, but I am proud of my three-decade record of community service.

I am chairman of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and chairman of the nonprofit Edison Memorial Tower Corp. which recently completed a two-year restoration of our most historic site. I am an elder at Oak Tree Presbyterian Church; and I serve as a coach and board member for the Top Gun Girls Softball League and the Edison Angels Softball League.

I have bachelor's and master's degrees in civil engineering from the N.J. Institute of Technology. Since 1987, I have been a principle in my family's Edison-based general contracting and property management business.

2. What would you consider to be the single most important issue you’ll face in office when you win?

Property taxes are the Number One priority for every family, including mine. I want Edison to provide the best possible services at the most reasonable cost to taxpayers.

I support the sensible investments that Town Hall is making to improve our streets, parks, recreation areas and sanitary sewers. These are quality-of-life enhancements for our families, but also make Edison a more attractive destination for businesses seeking to relocate. One of my goals is to help Edison attract new commercial ratables to strengthen our tax base and help stabilize property taxes for homeowners.

3. Why should voters trust you to do what you say you’ll do?

My family and I concerned about Edison's future and personally invested this community. That is a powerful incentive for me to do the best possible job as a Township Council member.

Municipal government must be responsive and accountable its residents. For me, that means listening to people's ideas and suggestions — then putting the best ones into practice. That is what I do in my business and what I would do on Town Council.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1RWVoV1