The Agenda How small-business issues are shaping politics and policy.

For advocates of the Affordable Care Act, a central reform to help small businesses buy health insurance was the creation of state-run exchanges. As the law’s designers intended, a small company could go onto the exchanges and compare the virtues of competing plans. It could then offer its employees a choice from among several policies, even from different carriers — a benefit few companies now use. It could enroll in those plans online, and if the business were small enough, it could get temporary tax credits to offset the cost.

“The marketplace is still the most important provision in the Affordable Care Act for small businesses,” said John Arensmeyer, chief executive of the liberal-leaning Small Business Majority in November, after the Obama administration announced that it would delay online enrollment in the 32 Small Business Health Options exchanges operated by the federal government until next October (the rest are operated by individual states and Washington, D.C.). Earlier in the year, the administration had restricted businesses to choosing just one exchange plan in 2014.

While the travails of the federally run SHOP exchanges have been widely reported, many of the state-run exchanges — which together could serve about two-fifths of the nation’s small businesses — have faced their own problems in attempting to field a small-business health insurance exchange.

Five states have faced delays in implementing important elements of their exchanges. In California, which has by far the largest population of businesses with fewer than 50 employees, small businesses could not enroll in an insurance plan until Nov. 25. Prior to that, businesses could register online, but had to contact an insurance agent to get a rate quote.

Roy Kennedy, a spokesman for Covered California, the state’s exchange, said that the state pushed back SHOP’s enrollment function in order to concentrate on deploying the insurance exchange for the individual market. “We felt comfortable doing this because SHOP is open year round and business owners could work through an agent to get a quote,” Mr. Kennedy said.

Four other states — Idaho, Maryland, Mississippi, and Oregon — have yet to deploy a functioning SHOP exchange at all. A spokesperson for the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange said the small-business exchange will open next April; the other states have yet to announce start-up dates. A spokesperson for the Idaho exchange said the state had hoped to rely on the federal marketplace for the first year, but in its absence, as of last week, businesses can enroll in a SHOP plan through insurance agents and carriers. The state anticipates deploying its own fully functioning portal by next fall.

In Washington State, the SHOP exchange is only available to businesses in two rural counties in the state’s southwest corner. This is because not enough insurance carriers were willing to participate in the exchange, at least at first, according to Bethany Frey, a spokesperson for the Washington Health Benefit Exchange. “Many insurance carriers told us this was a resource issue as they needed to prioritize products for the individual market this first year,” Ms. Frey said, adding that she expected to have a statewide network in 2015. “Our system was fully prepared to offer coverage statewide. This wasn’t a technology issue or delay.”

To be sure, businesses in any state that want to offer health insurance to employees — and no company with fewer than 50 full-time equivalent employees is obliged to provide the coverage — can do so. They can either renew their existing policies or buy new policies that comply with the Affordable Care Act’s various standards on the private market. And last week, the Obama administration made it easier for businesses in Washington state shut out from a SHOP insurance plan to use the tax credits in 2014. (The administration did not make any provisions for businesses in Maryland, Mississippi and Oregon, but Aaron Albright, a spokesman for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, which is administering the federal exchanges, said, “We are examining ways that eligible small businesses in these states can take advantage of the tax credits next year, and those discussions are ongoing.”)

Yet even in states where the roll out appears to have gone relatively smoothly, interest in the SHOP exchanges appears to be low. Lev Ginsburg, of the Business Council of New York, a trade association, said that he had not heard of many problems with implementing the state’s exchange. But, he said, few businesses seem to be interested in using it, and those that do find the process laborious. “The time that brokers are spending with their clients has grown threefold or fourfold,” Mr. Ginsburg said. “And I don’t think the end result is any different — they’re walking away with the product from the broker not from the SHOP, and they’re walking away with the same product that they would have had anyway. They just have dozens and dozens of questions that they didn’t have a year ago.” New York has declined to release figures for how many businesses have enrolled in insurance through its SHOP exchange, or even registered an account, the first step toward obtaining coverage.

Among states that have released that information, the share of businesses eligible to participate in SHOP that have created accounts is often at about 2 percent or less. In New Mexico, where the figure for account creation is higher, at about 4 percent, only 44 businesses have enrolled for coverage beginning Jan. 1, said Debra Hammer, a spokeswoman for the New Mexico Health Insurance Exchange.

In Colorado, about 3,000 businesses have opened accounts on the SHOP exchange, said exchange spokeswoman Myung Oak Kim, out of somewhere between 111,000 to 120,000 eligible businesses, according to Census data. But Fort Collins Nursery is not among them. Its owner, Jesse Eastman, said he chose to renew the existing coverage for a dozen or so full-time employees rather than test the unknown. “We decided to opt to see where the chips are going to fall, and keep the plan we know,” he said.

For now, Mr. Eastman is missing out on the chance to offer his employees a choice of health plans, an efficiency that until now has been largely limited to bigger companies. In recent years, some insurers have quietly begun offering multiple plans to small businesses, but with restrictions, and offering employees choices from more than one insurer remains especially difficult. On a SHOP exchange, however, which is built for comparing policies and centralizing payment and other administrative functions, choice is not only possible, it is required.

“Choice between carriers is a unique value proposition for a SHOP exchange that wants to do that,” said Jon Kingsdale, a consultant and the founding director of the Massachusetts Health Connector, the insurance exchange created by that state’s overhaul in 2006. But, he said, “it’s more complicated for the employer, and it requires a very aggressive, sophisticated sales effort on the part of the SHOP exchange to promote that value. And the exchanges by and large are just having enough trouble getting up and running, so that most of them have not focused on a sophisticated sales effort with SHOP for small employers.” (Some states, like the federal government, are limiting choice across insurers to a single tier of cost-sharing set by the employer.)

Mr. Arensmeyer, of the Small Business Majority, said it would take at least a year to get a true sense of how the exchanges are working. But, he added, “we’re not surprised that the numbers are low, and we’re not expecting a dramatic increase immediately. I think it’s a process to get small-business owners, and perhaps even more importantly, brokers and agents, up to speed on all the processes and how to fully use the new system.

“At the end of the day, the success of the small-business exchanges is going to be very heavily dependent on brokers and agents,” he said. “We do expect over time that the marketplaces will drive more competition, and will provide more choice.”