ROOM TO RECOVER Beginning their rehabilitation at home gives outpatient joint patients additional motivation.

Following knee or hip replacement surgery, patients will be recovering and rehabilitating primarily at home, something that's easy to forget when you're focused solely on the treatment delivered during the perioperative process. But an outpatient total joint replacement program without a coordinated home care component is doomed to failure. These patients demand consistent monitoring, in-home nursing and physical therapy in the days and weeks that follow surgery, care that same-day discharges and non-clinician caregivers can't guarantee. Here's what you need to know about this sometimes overlooked aspect of total joint surgery.

Why home recovery makes sense

Discharging total joint patients within hours of their surgeries and, by association, having them start their recoveries at home, offers advantages on both economical and clinical fronts.

One of the chief aims of the Affordable Care Act — and of Medicare's recently proposed Comprehensive Care for Joint Replacement payment model, slated to take effect in select markets in January — is promoting high-quality health care while reducing the costs of that care. One cost-effective tactic that frequently delivers value is shortening the lengths of hospital stays, when possible.

A hospital stay can cost roughly $2,500 to $3,500 per day, and sometimes insurers dictate a hospital stay, but if not, every day earlier that you can safely discharge a patient saves a substantial sum of money. Certainly you could refer patients to a skilled nursing facility, which is a comparative bargain at about $414 per day, but an adequate home recovery model can cost about $62 per day.

Home recovery also carries benefits for patient outcomes. Studies show that the longer a patient stays in the hospital, the higher the risk of surgical site infection, so speedy discharge and at-home care might actually reduce the risk of post-op complications as well as hospital readmissions.

It's providing them with an encouraging shot of motivation, too. It stands to reason that outpatient total joints programs are seeing such great results because patients aren't staying in the hospital, they're resting comfortably at home. After the rigors of surgery, that's where patients want to be. By bringing the therapy to the patient, there is a higher level of compliance and carry-over of the treatment sessions.