Iran and the P5+1 nations agreed on Sunday to begin a 6-month interim period that may lead to a peaceful resolution over the Islamic republic’s disputed nuclear program.

A date of January 20 was announced as the start of the period, which came out of the much-ballyhooed Geneva deal reached on November 24 of last year. During the six months, Iran will limit its uranium enrichment to 5-percent, the level commonly used to power reactors. The fact that Iran is allowed to enrich uranium at all was a hard-fought point won by Iran’s allies on the U.N. Security Council, Russia and China, reports the Washington Post.

Iran must also make sure its current stockpile of 20-percent enriched uranium is either destoryed or put into a different form so it cannot be used for further enrichment, and essentially freeze much of its critical program by dismantling certain aspects of the Arak plutonium plant and stop adding centrifuges to its plants in Attans and Fordo.

During this interim period, inspectors from the IAEA (International Atomic Energy Agency) will start verifying the roll back is being done.

In return, Iran will get about US$4.2 billion of previously frozen oil revenue over the six-month period. The first installment of US$550 million will be released on February 1, reports the Associated Press. The payments are contingent upon Iran’s compliance with the agreement.

New sanctions and other measures will not be imposed on Iran’s hard-hit currency, reports Now Media.

Sunday’s agreement also means that from January 20, the clock starts ticking on negotiations with Iran for a final comprehensive agreement which would hopefully end all international doubts about Iran’s nuclear program.

Once Iran has met that final point, all the international sanctions levied against Iran would be lifted, and Iran would be viewed as any other nation that has signed on to the non-proliferation treaty.

EU foreign policy chief Katherine Ashton welcomed an invitation to visit Iran to begin hammering out the details of the final deal, her spokesman Michael Mann confirmed late Sunday.

U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry hailed the deal.

“As the United States has made clear many times, our absoute top priority in these negotiations, is preventing Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon, translated making absolutely clear, beyond any doubt, that Iran’s program is a peaceful program,” Secretary Kerry said during a press conference.

“We have been clear all along. President Obama initiated this effort with the belief that diplomacy is our preferred path, because other options carry much greater costs and risks, and are less likley to provide a lasting solution.”

President Obama remained cautiously optimistic, saying in a statement that he has “no illusions about how hard it will be to achieve the objective” of a final deal with Iran.