Updates to fix name of Citizens for Tax Justice, and 10-year cost estimate of Donald Trump’s tax plan.

Reuters Cut the ‘Cadillac tax,’ says Hillary Clinton

Hillary Clinton wants to kill the “Cadillac tax.”

The tax, part of President Barack Obama’s health-care law, is a levy on premium health-insurance plans and is due to take effect in 2018. As the Associated Press writes, it’s unpopular with big corporations and unions alike. Clinton, the frontrunner for the Democratic presidential nomination, backs repeal as part of a series of changes she is proposing to “build on” the Affordable Care Act, AP writes. The tax is 40% of the value of employer-sponsored plans that exceeds $10,200 for individual coverage and $27,500 for family coverage and is to help pay for Obamacare.

Fresh budget talks: Republican leaders are in fresh budget talks with President Barack Obama aimed at avoiding a spending fight in the middle of an election year. The Wall Street Journal writes the talks, which were initiated before House Speaker John Boehner said he would resign, would set overall spending levels for the remainder of fiscal 2016 and through fiscal 2017. The House and Senate, meanwhile, are expected to pass a stopgap spending measure on Wednesday to keep the government running through Dec. 11.

Taking no chances: If Congress doesn’t pass a short-term budget, there would be a partial government shutdown starting Thursday. National Journal writes that while it looks like a shutdown will be averted, federal agencies aren’t taking any chances. The Office of Management and Budget has released shutdown contingency plans, which include which employees would be furloughed and which would be forced to work without immediate pay. Hardest hit would be the National Labor Relations Board, which would send home all but five of its 1,600 employees.

Big price tag for Trump tax plan: Donald Trump’s tax plan would carry a hefty price tag. CNN rounds up estimates of the plan the Republican presidential candidate released Monday, reporting that groups on both sides of the spectrum say it would have a major negative impact on revenue. The left-leaning Citizens for Tax Justicesays Trump’s plan would reduce revenues by almost $900 billion a year, and cost nearly $11 trillion in its first decade. The conservative-leaning Tax Foundation predicts the billionaire’s plan would reduce tax revenue by some $10 trillion over the next 10 years. Trump’s plan would cut income-tax rates across the board, and lower the corporate rate, something Trump says would discourage corporate tax deals known as inversions.

McCarthy’s minimal ties with the influence set: Rep. Kevin McCarthy of California, the favorite to succeed John Boehner as House speaker, has minimal ties with the lobbying world, Politico writes. That sets him apart from the outgoing Ohio Republican, whose extensive web of connections was dubbed “Boehnerland.” Politico says the lack of such a network could prove a liability for McCarthy, who faces pressure to fill the massive fundraising void that will be created with Boehner’s departure.

More from MarketWatch