WASHINGTON, Jan. 8, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Epstein Becker Green is pleased to announce that Robert F. Atlas, a leading health care strategy, management, and policy executive consultant, has joined the firm's affiliate consultancy, EBG Advisors, Inc., as President. The addition of Mr. Atlas to EBG Advisors further positions Epstein Becker Green as a leader in providing cross-disciplinary solutions to clients within the health care industry.

Mr. Atlas, who has been a leader of several health care consulting businesses during the past three decades, joins EBG Advisors following a period of advising North Carolina's Secretary of Health and Human Services on Medicaid reform strategies. Previously, Mr. Atlas was Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer of Avalere Health, where he oversaw Avalere's strategic advisory and research services for the nation's leading health care payers, providers, life sciences companies, foundations, consumer organizations, and government agencies. Earlier in his career, he was President of The Lewin Group. His services include health care strategy, management, and policy to payers, providers, product manufacturers, and public-policy makers.

"We see tremendous synergy between legal and consulting services, and Bob's deep knowledge of public and private health insurance and health services organizations will bring great value to our service portfolio," said Mark E. Lutes, Chair of Epstein Becker Green and a member of EBG Advisors' Board of Directors. "Bob has an exceptional ability to bridge policy, financial, operational, clinical, and technological topics to deliver sensible strategies and practical solutions to our clients who, now more than ever, can benefit from Epstein Becker Green's integrated capabilities."

Bradley Merrill Thompson, a Member of the Firm at Epstein Becker Green and a member of EBG Advisors' Board of Directors said, "In a shifting public policy environment, health care companies of all sizes are eager to seize new business opportunities. EBG Advisors stands ready to assist."

"EBG Advisors is fortunate to have Bob's breadth of experience and deep insights into Medicaid and other governmental programs, which are at the forefront of current policy discussions," said Lynn Shapiro Snyder, a member of Epstein Becker Green's and EBG Advisors' Boards of Directors.

Mr. Atlas said, "This is an exciting time to join EBG Advisors as the health care industry landscape continues to evolve in both the public and private sectors. EBG Advisors has a wide network of consultants with experience in providing strategic and business advice, policy analysis, project implementation, as well as alliance building through its affiliation with National Health Advisors. EBG Advisors is a superb platform from which to help health industry clients address opportunities posed by purchasers' pursuit of value in health care, technological change, and policy developments such as the Affordable Care Act."

Mr. Atlas received a B.A. in Economics from Oberlin College and a M.B.A. in Health Administration and Finance from The University of Chicago Booth School of Business.

About EBG Advisors, Inc.

EBG Advisors, Inc., is a Washington, D.C.-based consultancy that takes a multidisciplinary approach to helping health care and life sciences companies navigate the many obstacles that they face. EBG Advisors is a network of attorneys, policy analysts, strategists, and other professionals who specialize in providing coordinated guidance and solutions across various segments of the health care industry. EBG Advisors is affiliated with Epstein Becker Green, which was founded to serve the health care and life sciences industry more than 40 years ago. For more information, please visit www.ebgadvisors.com.

About National Health Advisors

National Health Advisors is a consultancy dedicated to the provision of legislative and regulatory advocacy. It has deep expertise in helping a wide range of organizations navigate and influence policies that affect the U.S. health care system. National Health Advisors gives health, education, and not-for-profit institutions a strong voice in the halls of Congress and throughout federal administrative agencies. For more information, please visit www.nationalhealthadvisors.com.

About Epstein Becker Green

Epstein Becker & Green, P.C., established in 1973, is a national law firm with approximately 250 lawyers practicing in 10 offices, in Baltimore, Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, Newark, San Francisco, Stamford, and Washington, D.C. The firm's areas of practice include health care and life sciences; employment, labor, and workforce management; and litigation and business disputes. Founded as an industry-focused firm, Epstein Becker Green has decades of experience serving clients in health care, financial services, retail, hospitality, and technology, among other industries, representing entities from startups to Fortune 100 companies. For more information, visit www.ebglaw.com.

SOURCE Epstein Becker Green