Obama to use State of the Union to call for hundreds of billions in tax increases



By Joseph Lawler and Justin Green, Washington Examiner

President Obama will use his state of the union address Tuesday to call for hundreds of billions of dollars in tax hikes in order to pay for programs targeting students, the middle class and retirees, the White House announced Saturday.



The president will propose financing his planned middle class tax cuts with tax hikes targeted at the “1 percent,” as well as a new tax on big banks.



The plan would raise over $300 billion over 10 years altogether. The bulk of that revenue would come through tax increases targeted at the investment income of high income earners and bequests by wealthy Americans.



Obama will propose to raise the tax rate on capital gains for high income earners from 23.8 percent to 28 percent, including the Medicare surtax imposed as part of Obamacare.

Read the full story here

-------------------------------------------

Obama to Seek Billions in New Taxes on Investments and Inheritance



Newmax

President Barack Obama is turning to his biggest television audience of the year to pitch tax increases on the wealthiest Americans and put the new Republican Congress in the position of defending top income earners over the middle class.



As Obama continues to signal what he will propose during Tuesday's State of the Union address, senior administration officials said Saturday that he will call for raising the capital gains rate on top income earners and eliminating a tax break on inheritances. The revenue generated by those changes would fund new tax credits and other cost-saving measures for middle-class taxpayers, officials said.



Tax increases are rarely welcomed by congressional Republicans, who now hold majorities in the House and the Senate for the first time in Obama's presidency. Obama's tax proposals will likely be dismissed, if not outright ignored, by lawmakers outside the Democratic Party's liberal base.