WLFI File Photo

LAFAYETTE, Ind. (WLFI) – Tax season is here, and it’s usually a time that most people dread. However, experts say it can actually be quite simple if you just come prepared.

This year, there are some new dates and stipulations to remember. To alleviate some stress, experts say as you prepare to file the number one thing you need to do is be organized.

“Make sure you have all your documents before you file your return,” said Tanya Storms, co-owner of Hewitt Jackson in Lafayette. “A lot of people will forget that you had a small W-2. Just take your time and wait.”

Storms said while preparing your own taxes may be cheaper and more convenient, it’s always helpful to have an extra set of eyes look over your documents.

“We recommend coming to professionals so that you can get all the credits and deductions you deserve,” Storms said.

This year, Storms indicated that there has been a lot of confusion with the Affordable Care Act.

“Individuals think that they have to wait until they receive a 1095B or 1095C from their employer, if they have health insurance from their employer,” she said. “That’s not the case at all. We can go ahead and still file your tax return.”

However, if you have insurance through the Marketplace, that’s different.

“Then you do need to wait to file until you file your 1095A form. That is the form that shows that you did have insurance and what type of insurance that you had through the Marketplace and what individuals that were covered,” Storms explained.

For those who do not have health insurance, Storms said expect to face a fine. But throughout the year, she said it’s crucial to keep track of all important documents.

“It’s important to keep track of any donations you make. Make sure you have your excise tax, your real estate taxes, all of your mortgage interest statements, all of your co-pays and all of your medicine.”

Typically you have until April 15 to file, but because this year the normal deadline falls on a Friday and a federal holiday, the deadline has been extended until April 18.

Share this: Email

Print

Twitter

Facebook

Google

More

Pinterest

Like this: Like Loading...