.......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... ..........

SANTA FE, N.M. — It’s not all bad news, but still pretty bad.

The 2014 Kids Count data book for New Mexico and produced by New Mexico Voices for Children, says the state saw improvement in just five of the 16 indicators of child well-being.

Worse, child poverty—a main factor in poor outcomes— increased from 28 percent in 2012 to 31 percent in 2013, even as it decreased in most of the rest of the nation.

The data book, released Tuesday, the first day of the state legislative session, criticized members of the Legislature for failing to “consider, let alone adopt, a comprehensive plan of action to address the issue.”

The most recent data book focuses on New Mexico issues and doesn’t change the state’s ranking of 49th among all states in child well-being, previously chronicled in the national Kids Count data book released last July.

Nevertheless, there are measurable improvements in some areas, according to New Mexico Voices for Children, the nonpartisan advocacy organization, whose mission is to champion public policies and push for systemic changes that improve the lives of New Mexico’s children, families and communities.

Much of the research and analysis in the data book was funded by the Annie E. Casey Foundation, a private philanthropy based in Baltimore that supports projects highlighting innovative responses to issues that negatively affect children.

Health insurance coverage for children in New Mexico, though still lower than the national average, has been improving. About 8.7 percent of children lacked health insurance in 2012, a significant improvement over 2008, when 14 percent of children had no insurance. The improvement was largely due to the Legislature’s commitment to fully fund Medicaid, which is the single largest insurer of children in the state.

Without Medicaid, the data book says, more than half of New Mexico’s children under age 18 would lack health insurance. Further, the forecast is looking even better thanks to provisions in the Affordable Care Act that recently came on line, including “the opening of the health insurance exchange, with its tax credits to help moderate-income families pay premiums, and the expansion of Medicaid to low-income adults.”

Child and teen death rates have also fallen from 2012 to 2013. The death rate for children ages 1-14 fell slightly from 18.6 per 100,000, to 17.8 per 100,000, while the rate for teens age 15-19 showed better with a drop from 68.5 deaths per 100,000 to 51.7 per 100,000. Unfortunately, the state’s youth suicide rate has not improved and remains at nearly twice the national rate.

New Mexico registered a slight improvement in adolescent alcohol and drug use, dropping from 10 percent from 2009-10 to 9 percent in 2010-11. According to the data book, New Mexico is ranked “second to last in the nation on this indicator,” and “there is serious concern in the state over the expanded use of opiates by young people.”

That is further complicated by the “disruption of the mental health system in the state in 2013,” resulting in fewer behavioral services available for youth seeking help for their addictions. “Very little legislative progress has been made in addressing this issue. As yet it is unclear how the Affordable Care Act may impact this indicator,” the data book notes.

Although New Mexico still ranks 49th in the nation in teen birth rates, the numbers have been steadily improving over the years but still hover near 40 per 1,000 births among teens age 15-19.

Overall poverty in New Mexico is still high with one-in-five residents living in poverty. The state ranks 48th in the nation for child poverty, which increased from 28 percent in 2012, to 31 percent in 2013.

More than half of working families are poor, meaning a family of three living on an annual income no higher than $19,790. Another quarter are low income, that is a family of three living on no more than $39,580 a year.

A reason so many of New Mexico’s working families can find only low-wage jobs is because they possess lower levels of education. Of workers ages 18 to 64 in New Mexico, 15 percent have not graduated from high school and 69 percent do not have a college degree, the data book says.

Further, single parent families, especially those headed by single mothers, tend to have lower incomes and fewer resources.

More than one-third of New Mexico’s children live in families where no parent has secure, full-time, year-round employment. Still, the rate improved a notch from 37 percent in 2011 to 36 percent in 2012, which improved the status of approximately 7,000 children.

Generally, parents without secure full-time employment receive neither paid sick leave nor company-provided health insurance and are also the most in need of safe and high-quality child care assistance so they can train for better jobs.

Despite research that shows high-quality early childhood care and education – including preschool – prepares children for success in school and life, 62 percent of the state’s youngest children cannot get these services and later enter school with a learning disadvantage.

Based on the state’s standardized testing scores, from school year 2012-13 to 2013-14, the percentage of fourth graders proficient in reading dropped from 46 to 44 percent, and the percentage of eighth graders proficient in math, dropped from 42 to 40 percent.

New Mexico has also fallen nationally from 47th place to 49th in the percentage of teens age 16-19 who are neither in school nor working, the so-called “disconnected youth,” according to the data book.

The data book suggests a “two-generation approach” to reducing child poverty. That would involve coordinating services for children — such as health care, food benefits, and early child care and education — with services that provide parents tools to improve the family’s economic situation. These might include programs that help parents gain more education, job training, and take child care needs into consideration.