JERSEY CITY -- As the 2016 open enrollment period for the Affordable Care Act gets underway, US Secretary of Health and Human Services Sylvia Burwell visited Jersey City on Friday as part of a tour to boost enrollment in targeted states.

"Access to healthcare is a basic human right and in the 21st century nobody should be denied that right based on socioeconomic status," Jersey City Mayor Steve Fulop stated in a press release. "That's why we've done everything we can to reach people in their community, where they are, to get them signed up for affordable health care."

Fulop added, "I couldn't be prouder of the work that we've done, but as always there is so much more to do and I am pleased to welcome Secretary Burwell to Jersey City to highlight some of the important work we still have ahead of us."

During the 2016 open enrollment period, Burwell announced that four states including New Jersey -- in particular northern New Jersey -- are being targeted to boost enrollment in the healthcare plan commonly known as Obamacare, which comes with hefty subsidies for poor individuals and families.

Jersey City has led the state in expanding coverage under the ACA.

At the kickoff of the Affordable Care Act in October 2013, approximately 55,000 Jersey City residents, nearly 20 percent, were without healthcare coverage. Due to the city's aggressive outreach efforts, the city has assisted thousands of residents in receiving healthcare coverage, which is more than any other city in New Jersey, according to a mayor's office.

Burwell visited Metropolitan Health Center in Jersey City's Ward F. After touring the facility, Burwell held a roundtable discussion with Fulop, members of Congress and state legislators, and healthcare professionals from northern New Jersey. The discussion focused on strategies to increase enrollment during the 2016 Open Enrollment period.

Burwell acknowledged a common gripe about Obamacare policies: that they come with high deductibles - the total charges a consumer must pay before any coverage kicks in, NJ Advance Media reported. However, she pointed out they're comparable to the higher deductibles consumers are now encountering in employer-sponsored plans as well.

The 2016 Open Enrollment Period began Nov. 1 and ends Jan. 31, 2016.

Five cabinet-level Obama administration officials have visited Jersey City as part of ACA outreach since Fulop took office.