Reaction mixed to Duggan's idea of city-owned auto insurance company

Detroit Mayor Mike Duggan's proposal to study the feasibility of a city-owned auto insurance company met mixed reactions from the insurance industry, legislators and insurance reform advocates.



In his first State of the City address last week, Duggan repeated campaign promises to look seriously into creating a company he calls D-Insurance.



Duggan is pushing for low-cost options as a way to retain city residents and remove one of the biggest barriers to people moving back to Detroit — the high cost of auto insurance, said Melvin "Butch" Hollowell, Detroit's corporation counsel.



"Detroit's auto insurance average is north of $5,000 a year. That is $1,200 more than the No. 2 highest of Philadelphia," Hollowell told Crain's.



Duggan has often told the story of how his auto insurance premiums doubled to $6,000 annually when he moved to Detroit in 2012 from Livonia.



"At Detroit Medical Center, Mike started a (medical malpractice liability) company for physicians that lowered costs and made a good return. He plans on doing the same thing for drivers and the city of Detroit," Hollowell said.

Besides creating a new insurance entity, other ideas include the city serving as a broker and advocate for city residents or working with an existing insurer as a preferred provider.



Peter Kuhnmuench, executive director of the Insurance Institute of Michigan, a Lansing-based trade group, said starting a new insurance company is not easy, especially for a city going through bankruptcy proceedings.



"Be careful what you ask for. It is a tough business, especially one that includes the health care side of it," Kuhnmuench said. "It is a pretty significant undertaking, especially starting one from ground zero."



Kuhnmuench said it could take the city up to 18 months to get a new company licensed and operational.



Under state insurance regulations, new auto companies are required to file an application that shows they have funding and a solid business plan. Requirements include $7.5 million in minimum capital, access to additional capital based on a state solvency review, a business plan that shows adequate support staff, and systems to collect premiums, pay claims and provide customer service, said Caleb Buhs, public information officer with the Michigan Department of Financial and Insurance Services.





"Reforms that protect (Michigan's) nation-leading benefits while driving down (the state's) nation-leading costs would be necessary to help Detroit's residents," Bolger said.



Last month, Bolger proposed a no-fault auto insurance reform package that includes a pilot plan option for low-income motorists to purchase $50,000 in personal injury protection coverage.



The pilot plan in Bolger's proposal originally was Senate Bill 326, introduced by Sen. Virgil Smith, D-Detroit. Bolger's plan would allow injured motorists who incur injuries above the $50,000 policy limit to be covered by Medicaid or the driver's health insurance policy.



"We should see if this pilot program works," Kuhnmuench said. "Let's test the marketplace and see if it moves the needle" on lowering costs to about $50 per month and insuring more low-income drivers under 133 percent of the federal poverty level.



Michigan offers unlimited health coverage for injuries. Bolger's plan would limit medical claims to $10 million and guarantee 125 percent of workers' compensation rates if claims are paid within 30 days.



Hollowell said Duggan is opposed to Bolger's plan, but the mayor plans to lobby Bolger to include several other methods to lower auto insurance premiums. They include mandating insurers to refund consumers for overcharges and prohibiting the use of credit scores to set premiums, a practice that he said increases costs for Detroit residents.



Some of the no-fault reform proposals were part of a package of bills — the Fair and Affordable Insurance Reform initiative — Hollowell presented in 2009 when he was Michigan's insurance advocate under former Gov. Jennifer Granholm.



George Sinas, legal counsel for the Coalition for Protecting No-Fault Auto, a Lansing-based health care advocacy group, said Duggan's plan could provide an alternative to high-cost auto insurance for Detroiters.





Related Links