Three years ago, Japanese electronics giant Olympus Corp. was in crisis amid a massive accounting scandal and plunging sales of its signature cameras.

Executives vowed to save the 93-year-old firm, whose American headquarters is in Center Valley, by turning aggressively to health care and selling more medical scopes to doctors and hospitals in the United States and worldwide.

The bet paid off: Medical sales soared 25 percent last year, and Olympus boasts a commanding 70 percent share of the global market for gastrointestinal endoscopes.

But now the industry leader finds itself at the center of superbug outbreaks at U.S. hospitals, including UCLA in Los Angeles, where two patients have died and nearly 180 more people may have been exposed to deadly bacteria on contaminated Olympus scopes.

Medical experts, health officials, lawmakers and patients' families are pinning much of the blame for the recent UCLA outbreak and others across the country on the company and one of Olympus' TJF-Q180V duodenoscope.

On Wednesday, Olympus found itself facing a fresh allegation. CNN reported that, according to an official at the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, the company never obtained permission to sell the device.

Olympus started selling its TJF-Q180V duodenoscope in 2010, but the FDA didn't notice until late 2013 or early 2014 that the company had never asked for clearance to put it on the market, according to CNN, which attributed the information to Karen Riley, deputy director of strategy for the FDA's Office of External Affairs.

"Why didn't we notice it? I don't know," Riley told CNN.

Olympus, as the market leader for such scopes, has drawn the most scrutiny but the concerns also apply to the company's main rivals, Pentax Medical and Fujifilm.

Olympus could not be immediately reached for comment Wednesday. But the company has said it gave customers detailed cleaning instructions, and is working closely with regulators, doctors and hospitals to address any concerns about patient safety.

Olympus Corp. of the Americas relocated from Long Island, N.Y., to Upper Saucon Township in 2006 and has 950 employees.

In recent years, the company added more powerful tools at the tip of the scopes, which can cost as much as $40,000 apiece. These include extra guide wires, for instance, that can carry tiny stents and tubes to clear infections or blockages in the digestive tract.

But the extra grooves and channels added to the surface of the scope also can trap antibiotic-resistant superbugs that are difficult to remove and can be passed to other patients.

Despite those risks, the Food and Drug Administration and the specialists who use Olympus scopes say there aren't any viable alternatives and the scopes are too vital to do without.

"Olympus is almost like a bank that's too big to fail now," said hospital safety consultant Lawrence Muscarella, an expert on endoscopes who works near Olympus' U.S. headquarters in Center Valley. "They're brilliant, but I think they took too many risks."

UCLA patient Antonia Torres Cerda may have paid a heavy price for that.

The 48-year-old liver transplant patient and mother of four daughters died Nov. 8 at UCLA after becoming infected from a contaminated Olympus scope, according to a lawsuit her family filed last week against the company.

Her 18-year-old daughter, Cynthia, said her mother was feeling better after the transplant when suddenly the infection hit and there were no antibiotics to stop it. Her family lives in Corcoran, Calif., where her father, Armando, is a farmworker.

"It was irresponsible of the company to have equipment contaminated with bacteria that killed people," said Cynthia, a freshman at the University of California Santa Cruz. "I have a little sister who is 7 years old. Our mom is gone."

The deadly outbreaks came after years of red flags. And government officials now concede that the problem may be even worse because many scope-related infections have gone undetected or unreported.

Since 2007, ECRI Institute, a nonprofit group that evaluates medical devices for hospitals and other organizations, has listed the risk of contaminated endoscopes and other surgical instruments among its top 10 health hazards.

In 2008, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention urged that endoscopes be redesigned so they don't represent a "potential source of infectious agents."

Last year, the Joint Commission, which accredits and inspects hospitals, raised alarms about tainted endoscopes and other equipment posing an immediate threat to patients' lives.

The FDA said it has received 75 reports of contaminated scopes causing possible infections in 135 patients who underwent endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, or ERCP, from January 2013 to December 2014.

"These infections and complications from ERCP have been widely known for a long time and widely ignored," said Helen Haskell, founder of Mothers Against Medical Error in Columbia, S.C. Her son, Lewis, died in 2000 after undergoing a minimally invasive surgery.

"This should have been taken care of years ago," she said.

Olympus said it has told customers that its TJF-Q180V scope "requires careful attention to cleaning and reprocessing steps, including meticulous manual cleaning."

In an alert to customers after the UCLA outbreak became public, Olympus said it was aware of 95 complaints about that duodenoscope related to patient infections.

As the outbreaks continued to unfold, Olympus executives have made presentations to medical professionals emphasizing that infections from reusable scopes are rare if cleaning instructions are followed.

The company's manager of infection control was a featured speaker at a conference in Las Vegas the week before news broke about the UCLA infections. Her topic: "How to Avoid Superbugs and Lawsuits in Your GI Lab."

"Endoscopes reprocessed appropriately pose virtually no risk of patient-borne or environmental organisms," Mary Ann Drosnock, manager of infection control for Olympus America, told the gathered health care professionals.

Some have suggested that hospitals must bear some of the blame for not adequately cleaning these reusable devices.

But CDC officials and other public health departments say they have generally found that hospitals involved in outbreaks were following the manufacturers' cleaning directions.