Certainly, vulnerable Democrats such as Hagan have plenty of reason to want to distance themselves from the new law. The Affordable Care Act’s implementation has been rife with problems, including a botched roll out of healthcare.gov, concerns over negative consequences of the employer mandate that have prompted the administration to delay its enforcement, and fear over cost increases. There was also the president’s promise that people could keep the plan they have, which turned out to be untrue. Additionally, as Politico points out, there’s little recognition among those who are benefiting from new health insurance plans that the Affordable Care Act is the reason.

[SEE: Cartoons on the Democratic Party]

However, despite these challenges, recent studies indicate the Affordable Care Act may be showing some signs of success. Last week, the Commonwealth Fund, Urban Institute and Gallup-Healthways all released surveys showing the rate of uninsured has dropped. The Commonwealth Fund’s study also indicated that some of the beneficiaries of the Affordable Care Act are those who have had difficulty getting health insurance in the past. The Affordable Care Act also reformed the individual insurance market and implemented important insurance market reforms, such as coverage of pre-existing conditions, guaranteed issue, a ban on coverage limitations and a ban on the use of rescissions (except in cases of fraud). While most healthy people may not have felt the full impact of these reforms, most sick people probably did.

Weaknesses remain in the health care law, but the system it replaced was massively unfair to anyone who faced unemployment or a major accident or illness. The longer Democrats avoid talking about the Affordable Care Act and why they voted for it, the more they cede the messaging on the new law to its opponents and allow any good the law has done to be forgotten. Of course the law needs some changes — most laws of that magnitude do once implementation is underway. Meaningful changes, and political gain, will be easier to achieve if the Affordable Care Act’s supporters start speaking up for it.