Buy Photo Benny Horseman, captain of the Tough Luck II, throws his last two lines for a winning time of 25.7 seconds in the Mystery Money Bag contest during the Fifth Annual River Run Boat Dockin' Contest at Brew River in Salisbury in 2012. (Photo: Milt Savage photo)Buy Photo Story Highlights The River Run Boat Dockin’ Contest is a boisterous celebration of watermen culture.

The Salisbury contest is part of a circuit of events across the Eastern Shore.

Boats compete to see who can pull in and tie up the fastest.

Alaska races sled dogs. Wisconsin throws cow chips. Delaware chunks “punkins.”

Meet the Eastern Shore of Maryland’s entrée into the world of unusual sports: boat docking.

Over four decades, it has grown from a curiosity during the annual National Hard Crab Derby in Crisfield into a full-fledged regional activity.

In its seventh year, the River Run Boat Dockin’ Contest on the Wicomico River in Salisbury has distinguished itself as one of the best places on the circuit to get an up-close view of the action.

The competition plays out around the dock bar at Brew River Restaurant. And don’t let the name fool you: There’s nothing slow about the way these drivers dock their boats.

“I hold my breath and say a prayer” every time one of the boats swings past the bar, says Wes Hanna, the restaurant’s owner.

For the uninitiated, Hanna offers this description of the sport: “It’s how fast you can dock your boat, which is hard enough when you’re doing it slow.”

If you’re looking for a deeper meaning, enthusiasts say the contests pay tribute to the rapidly disappearing culture of Chesapeake watermen.

“These guys are blue-collar, hard workers, but they’re extremely skilled at what they do,” Hanna said.

Here’s how it goes down: In separate classes, crews of small boats and big boats must dock and tie up their boats on all four posts. A final shootout round determines the winners.

Festivities get underway Friday, with the Captain’s Party at Brew River, which features practice runs and live music starting at 5 p.m.

The official contest begins at 1 p.m. Saturday. Doors open at 11 a.m. An after-party and live music follow.

jcox6@dmg.gannett.com

410-845-4630

On Twitter @Jeremy_Cox

IF YOU GO

SEVENTH ANNUAL RIVER RUN BOAT DOCKIN' CONTEST

When: 1 p.m. Saturday, Sept. 6, (doors at 11 a.m.)

Where: Brew River, Salisbury

Cost: $10 adults, $5 children 8 and under

Call: 410-677-6757

Web: brewriver.com

Read or Share this story: http://www.delmarvanow.com/story/entertainment/culture/2014/09/01/brew-river-boat-dockin-watermen/14816187/