Topics: Books, Editor's Picks, Magnetic Fields, Music, roz chast, scrabble, Stephin Merritt, Two-letter scrabble words, words with friends

Stephin Merritt is one obsessively good Words With Friends player. That might have something to do with having just written a new book of poems for each of the 101 two-letter words that allow Scrabble players to run words alongside words, multiply their scores, and deploy those valuable X’s and Q’s and Z’s for the most points possible.

Since we had lunch a couple of weeks ago to talk about “101 Two-Letter Words” — a four-line poem for each tiny word, accompanied by a Roz Chast cartoon — each iPhone ding signifying a new word has filled me with dread. “Inveighs” for a triple-word plus the seven-letter bonus. “Moisten” as an opening play. “Zeal” run alongside “piranhas.” Most irritating, a late charge to steal a game by three points, 414-412, when I thought I might have had him.

The book reads as sneaky smart as Merritt’s game, and that shouldn’t be any surprise. As the singer/songwriter of the Magnetic Fields and the mastermind of a bevy of musical offshoots like the Sixths, Gothic Archies and Future Bible Heroes, I’d make the case that Merritt has written more great songs in the last 25 years than most anyone. They’re songs of lust and longing, of jealousy and the heart, sometimes heartbreaking and funny at the same time, and all of which would feel right at home in the Great American Songbook.

“101 Two-Letter Words” has that same mordant wit. They’re pretty irresistible, whether your taste runs to creepy folk tales, sexual perversion, or you just have a dictionary or punctuation fetish. You’ll learn the difference between an “ai” and an “al.” You might finally be able to define “za,” “ka” and “xu.” And it may even improve your Words With Friends game — provided, of course, that you’re not playing with Merritt. Our conversation has been lightly edited and condensed.

How did your obsession with two-letter Scrabble words get started? Was it simply playing lots more Words With Friends while leading a touring musician’s life?

It’s hard to tour carrying a large book because I keep having to carry things on the airplane. So I carry only small books, and then I run out of book in the middle of the flight. Or often we change planes. So, although I read a lot, sometimes I have nothing to do for hours on end on tour, so I started playing a lot of Scrabble and Words With Friends online. I quickly found that I wasn’t very good at it, chiefly because I couldn’t remember all those dang two-letter words. And I started writing myself little mneumonic poems about them — and eventually it occurred to me that I could just write all of them and publish it.

Had you always been a Scrabble person or was this a new hobby?

I was a precocious 10-year-old Scrabble player, but I’m not tournament quality at all.

Serious players probably knew all of these. But it feels like the rest of us started playing that way with Words With Friends. Somehow I played the game different off the board.

I think the tournament players always know all of the two-letter words and always use them in clever ways. The “ax,” “ox,” and “ex” tricks are very important, I think.

And then you learn the other ones …

… where would we be without “xi” and “xu.”

When I Googled the list of two-letter words, I didn’t even know what those meant. Still couldn’t tell you what “ka” or “ki” or “jo” or “xu” means, or even how to pronounce some of them.

The Scottish ones in particular were all new to me …

You simply have to memorize them in some ways, the same way you have to just learn the words that work with a “q” and no “u.” It’s not like the game makes you use them in a sentence.

I was thinking I should do a very small companion book of “q” without “u” …

That could be the online extra. “Qat,” “faqir,” “suq” …

I’m just waiting for them to say, “Oh my god! We need an online extra! Quick, do the ‘q’ without ‘u’.” Or there’s the four new ones — the new Scrabble Dictionary came out with four additional two-letter words. But the online version doesn’t recognize those yet. So I’m safe for now.

We’ll have to update all of our apps. So you must have had a similar process of figuring out this list and realizing you had to have a way to keep them all in mind. That’s when you started working out mneumonic devices for them.

Quickly I had 3 x 5 cards. Then I had 3 x 5 cards on the wall.

Which means it was fun right away if it turns into a project like that. What were the words you didn’t know, that you had to look up and figure out?

The Hebrew letter “pe,” for example. And “xu,” the Vietnamese hundredth of a dong. But you know, foreign currencies are good to know in Scrabble because there’s those Turkish words — the “q’s” without “u’s” that are good to know.

That explains what a “suq” must be.

A “suq” is a bazaar or a marketplace. (laughs) S-U-Q.

See? Another Scrabble word that if I had to use it in a sentence, it would be a massive embarrassment …

Let’s go to the “suq.” Well, I read in the new Scrabble Dictionary there’s a new spelling of “kayak,” which is apparently closer to what’s considered the correct organization of the Inuit word “kayak” — Q-A-J-A-Q.

You’d have to have a free letter for that.

You have to have a blank. Yeah.

You’ve gotten quite obsessed!

Well, yeah, yeah. Actually, I’ve stopped doing the crossword puzzle. I used to do the Times crossword Monday through Friday. I could never quite get Saturday, and Sunday …

What kind of a player are you? Are you aggressive? Defensive? Like to open the board up or use the tw0-letter words and keep it tight?

I like to spoil the triple-word score for the other player.

By putting a “c” close to it or something?

Yes, a “c” or a “v.” A “c” and “v” are the two letters that don’t appear in any of the two letter words.

Not enough people know that trick.

I was thinking I should have put that little tidbit in the book. It doesn’t say that anywhere in the book.

I don’t know, maybe we should keep it a secret and leave it out of the story.

The amazing thing about some of these words is that “xi” or “xu,” however you pronounce that, have such a narrow definition and use that it almost proscribes your verse. You have to define them simply so people know what they are. And then some of the other words are some of the most generic, widely used words in the English language: “is” and “to” and “an” and “he.” And for those you really need to narrow down a universe of infinite possibilities when you go to write, to narrow, these massive words down to four lines.

Well, when I was in sixth grade I was doing a written test and somehow the test was really easy for me — I knew the material really well — but during the test I sort of forgot what the indefinite article was coming before a vowel sound and I had to rework my sentences, all of the sentences, so that the word “an” didn’t appear, because I couldn’t remember what it was. Was it “ab,” “ad,” “ag,” “ah”? Fortunately, that’s the last time that happened.

Did you find that those super-common words were the ones that represented the biggest challenge, or was it the ones that are rarely used and more uncommon?

I think the easier words were easier because I didn’t have to define them so much. Whereas the difference between an “em” and an “en” — the difference between an n-dash and an m-dash — is subtle enough that probably most copy editors couldn’t rattle it off and everyone else seems to get it wrong much of the time.

You’re able to probably work a lot of your own playful obsessions into these. Music, certainly. I imagine punctuation is one of those things that you are super-interested in. Several of these reference philosophy as well.

One thing I get to talk about obliquely is music with “do,” “re,” “mi,” “fa,” “so,” “la,” and “ti.” But I’m not saying the same old thing I usually say in interviews: “Authenticity is a crock of shit” and that kind of thing.

So what’s a crock of shit in the verse, poetry or Scrabble world?

Hmm. I don’t know if there is any analog to the authenticity fetish that affects a very small amount of the music world, but unfortunately it seems like a lot of people are coming into contact with. I discovered last night that someone had written a scholarly paper on me and people allegedly like me in the indie-rock world, and the paper was called “This Little Ukulele Tells the Truth.” Which is a quote from me. But the author seems unaware that it’s a joke.

Are you suggesting the indie-rock world is devoid of humor?

I am. Unfortunately, it’s not the only part of the music world devoid of humor.

Did any of these words stymie you? Or any that you dreaded and delayed and put off to the end?

“Si.” S-I. Kind of a hard concept that “si” is the substitute for “ti” — the seventh degree of the scale. People who don’t know the scale like the back of their hand may not easily remember it. They are mneumonic devices. So I ended up with “Ma could drink a si of tea but then she has to pee.”

Were there favorite discoveries when you learned what some of these were? I didn’t know what the “ai” was — it’s a three-toed sloth. I think that may have been my favorite. And then it pops up in several of the poems.