Herman Cain believes that “stupid people are ruining America” and if things are to really change in the United States, then “informed people” need to starting outvoting the “stupid people,” presumably including Democrats and Independents (and maybe even some Republicans) who voted in President Obama twice.

In a related report by The Inquisitr, somewhat ironically, Herman Cain opposed Obama’s $9 minimum wage plan. I say ironic since Cain is famous for his 9-9-9 tax plan that he conceived during his failed attempt at becoming the GOP candidate instead of Mitt Romney. Of course, Obama now has shifted his goal to a $10.10 minimum wage and no doubt Cain opposes that idea, as well.

Now the idea that stupid people are ruining America is not a new mantra that Cain just invented. He has been saying it for quite a while and even as of last year Cain told Fox News’ Bill O’Reilly that ignorance was the root issue:

“[W]e have a severe ignorance problem with the people who are so mesmerized by [the president’s] popularity that they are not looking at the facts. I still have faith, Bill, in enough people that can wake up and get out of the ignorance zone and we then be able to elect the right kind of people going forward.”

Of course, a lot has changed in a year. The Obama approval rating average is less than George W. Bush’s average approval rating during his full eight years. Even when it comes to a more recent Gallup poll on living U.S. Presidents, Obama is lagging behind the entire crowd. Only 47 percent of Americans are favorable of Mr. Obama while the George W. Bush approval rating stands at 53 percent, and even Jimmy Carter beats Obama with 52 percent. So perhaps Cain would say Americans are becoming more informed?

And that is precisely the problem, according to Cain. Only 58 percent of registered voters in the U.S. showed up during the 2012 presidential election, and Cain believes that is a good thing:

“What about the 42% that stay at home? I have even heard people say, ‘Well, I don’t vote because I don’t know what’s going on, and I say ‘good!’ Stupid people are ruining America and I’m glad some of a them stay home… Those of us that are informed have to out-vote the stupid people. You have got to become ambassadors of intelligence, ambassadors of information. So number one, stay informed!”

What precisely does Cain mean by staying informed?

“[T]he American people can’t hold [Obama] accountable because of Harry Reid…. ObamaCare is a crisis, but they are in denial. Even what the EPA is doing, in terms of trying to put the coal industry out of business, it’s going to create another crisis. They have a crisis of crises. Before you can reverse a train, you must stop it. And before you can stop a train, you must slow it down.”

Presumably, as Herman Cain suggests, by having so-called stupid people stay away from the polls.