Race director confident that 2015 edition will be a success

Bolder Boulder Countdown Race day: Memorial Day, May 25. Start time: Wheelchair race begins at 6:50 a.m. A wave starts at 6:55 a.m. Website: www.Bolderboulder.com. How to register: Visit the website or drop by the BolderBOULDER store at the 29th Street Mall between now and May 22. The website has information on other in-person registration locations. Cost: Starting at $50 through May 10; starting at $60 through May 24; starting at $65 race day. Pick a wave: There are 97 waves, some of which you must qualify to run. Your estimated finish time will help determine which wave is right for you. Notable: If you sign up for the race and can't participate for any reason, the Bolder Boulder will roll over your registration to the 2016 race for $15. ...You can volunteer to work for the race before race day and receive free entry or volunteer on race day to be a part it if you can't participate. ...Visit the Bolder Boulder Sports Exhibit on the Pearl Street Mall on May 23-24. The Millennium Harvest House hotel hosts a pasta buffet (American, Italian and Asian options) Sunday May 24 for $12.50 per person.

Iconic American runner and longtime Boulder resident Frank Shorter will be at the Bolder Boulder once again this year, manning his post near the finish line as race announcer and analyst.

Advertisement

Of course, all of that happens only after Shorter has finished the race himself.

But another version of Shorter will miss the race for the first time in 19 years.

The Bolder Boulder commissioned a statue of Shorter in 1997 to celebrate the 25th anniversary of Shorter winning the Olympic marathon at the 1972 Games in Munich, Germany. On the suggestion of former University of Colorado president John Buechner, the statue of Shorter was placed at the corner of Stadium Drive and Folsom.

For the past 18 years, each Bolder Boulder participant has passed the statue as they turn the corner to complete the homestretch of the race.

The statue had to be moved this year to make way for ongoing construction in and around Folsom Field. A new 600-space underground parking garage and a permanent indoor practice facility are being built at the spot where the Shorter statue has resided since it was completed. Construction is slated to be finished by January, but a new home for the statue has not been determined.

"We're working with the university and with athletic director Rick George to find the best home for Frank in a place that will, if we can, still be connected and a part of the Bolder Boulder experience," race director Cliff Bosley said. "What's hard about being able to nail that down at this point is they're still in the midst of construction."

Last year's Bolder Boulder was run only weeks after the project started. At that point, workers had torn down two sections of the stadium (121 and 122) and had removed the old recycling facility. But the course was largely unaffected. While Bosley is expecting smooth sailing for participants again this year, anyone who has raced in previous years will experience a different finish.

The most dramatic change will be running into a stadium that is largely enclosed at this point. Runners will run through a tunnel of sorts between the Dal Ward Center and the new Champions Center right next to it in the northeast corner.

A slight bend used to exist in Stadium Drive, but the construction has turned that road into more of a straight shot toward the stadium once the turn is made off Folsom. A preliminary re-certification of the course revealed it to be 14-meters shorter than before and race officials are leaning toward getting that distance back at the finish by moving the finish line to around the 50-yard line in Folsom Field instead of the 35-yard line.

Bosley said it is easier to make the change at the finish line because making it at the start would require the race to find the new correct positions for hanging overhead signage at each kilometer and mile marker along the 10k course.

Bosley said he and University of Colorado officials have been talking regularly over the past year about developments in the construction process and any possible affects on the race. He said he's confident the race will be a success again this year despite the unsettled conditions around the stadium and the final quarter-mile of the course.

"The University of Colorado has committed on behalf of their contractor that the site will be ready and clear for the Bolder Boulder," Bosley said.

Kyle Ringo: ringok@dailycamera.com, on Twitter @kyleringo