The family of Jesse Hughes, one of the frontmen for the Eagles of Death Metal band, is speaking with FOX Carolina about how their family member is doing. The Eagles of Death Metal band was performing at the Bataclan concert hall in Paris, where gunmen took hostages and killed concert goers on Friday night.

Band members are safe, according to the family. They are not sure when Jesse Hughes and his band will return to the United States, but they want people to know the kind of person Jesse Hughes is, and how much he is suffering, after what happened at the concert hall.

Mark and Don King were emotional when they spoke to FOX Carolina, and shared how relieved they were to learn the news their family member was alive. Don King described the angst the family went through. “There was an hour and a half we were immobilized because we had no idea whether he was alive or dead, and we were doing everything we could to network with everyone we knew, to get the information and finally, it finally came.”

Both men, and family friend Randy Cole said Hughes will always have a special place in his life for Greenville. "He just never forgot about the Upstate, even though he lived in LA, San Francisco, Australia, some of the most beautiful places in the world." said Mark King.

King also told FOX Carolina, he knows what happened inside the Bataclan will forever leave a mark. “Jesse is a good man didn't ask for this and he was put in a bad situation, one that he will never get over. That's the thing I think about. He will never pick up a guitar or get on a stage without the vision of every one of those people who died at the concert.”

Don King agreed, "Right now he's hurting, he's really hurting over his fans because some of them he knew personally, they followed him around, and some of them perished."

Hughes was born in Greenville and the Upstate was his home until he moved to California. His family said he still owns a home in the Upstate, and told them no matter where he plays in the world, he likes knowing he always has a home in Greenville.

Copyright 2015 FOX Carolina (Meredith Corporation). All rights reserved.