A Canadian-born Texas Republican U.S. Senator, Ted Cruz, was responsible for shutting down the United States federal government just one year ago today on Oct. 1, 2013. Cruz gave as the reason and his motivation for the government shutdown was to use it as a vehicle to repeal and demolish the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010. What that would have meant in the state of Illinois? It would have meant that 685,000 Illinoisans gaining access to not only affordable healthcare, but also any type of healthcare, would have been out of luck. The Chicago Sun Times uncovered a video that surfaced yesterday of Bruce Rauner, the Republican nominee for Governor of Illinois, showing that Rauner is on the same page as the right-wing, extremist Cruz.

(Posted on Patch.com by The Republican National Hispanic Assembly (RNHA) of DuPage.)

Rauner has often been compared to failed republican presidential candidate, Mitt Romney. While the similarities are striking with Romney, it is more than fair to say that in political philosophy Rauner is much closer to the right-wing, extremist views of Ted Cruz. In addition, the extreme position puts Rauner on the side of his Republican "heroes" such as governors Scott Walker, Mitch Daniels and Rick Scott, whose positions have denied vital, life-saving healthcare to millions of people in their respective states.

Just listen to the contents of the above video, when Rauner was asked, "If you were governor of Illinois, would you have accepted Medicaid expansion and what do you think about the other Republican governors around the country that rejected Medicaid expansion?"

“I would not have accepted the expansion,” Rauner responded to the question in Ted Cruz-style. "I’m deeply concerned: We have a massive problem in our Medicaid system in Illinois. It’s full of corruption and abuse, and we are facing a problem that will dwarf our pension problem in about four or five years with our Medicaid system. It’s out of control, it’s corrupt."

Compare those comments made by Rauner, with public comments made by Cruz. "I would do anything, and I will continue to do anything I can, to stop the train wreck that is Obamacare," Cruz told ABC News last year.

Quinn for Illinois Communications Director Brooke Anderson in response to Rauner's latest missive, "If Republican billionaire Bruce Rauner had his way, more than 468,000 Illinoisans would be denied healthcare. This is plain wrong. Rauner's heartless policy would take away health coverage from hundreds of thousands of people in Illinois who need it the most."

Anderson added, "Whether it's eliminating the minimum wage, slashing care at his nursing homes to drive his own profits, or callously denying our most vulnerable the healthcare coverage they need, one thing is clear - Bruce Rauner's agenda is as heartless as the way he made his money."

Just to show that Cruz hasn't learned anything from the Oct. 2013 government shutdown, he says he would do it all over again.

Rauner is aware of the toxicity of being opposed to the ACA in Illinois, which explains why he has refrained from public comments on the issue, as the Chicago Sun Times reports, "sidestepping the question of a possible rollback of the state's Medicaid expansion during a joint appearance in March with U.S. Sen. Mark Kirk, R-Ill., and at a Chicago Tribune editorial board meeting a month earlier."

The news is going from bad to worse for Rauner, as two recent Chicago Sun Times stories do not bode well for the wealthy billionaire. The first is a piece by Dan Mihalopoulos with the headline: Rauner's biggest strength proving to be his greatest weakness. Says Mihalopoulos: "Rauner's track record as a businessman should be the strong point of Bruce Rauner’s sales pitch for the governor’s office. Instead, it’s become possibly the greatest liability for the wealthy Republican nominee."

The other was a new poll showing advantage Quinn: New poll shows Quinn with 44-42 advantage over Rauner. Time is running short for Rauner.