Topics: Cameras, cops, First Amendment, Freedom, GOP, GOP Civil War, Guns, Jason Villalba, Liberty, Police, Texas, The Right, Politics News

One would be hard-pressed to find another state that prides itself more on its commitment to freedom and liberty than Texas. It is so determined to make its citizens “free” that it is now in the process of allowing people to openly carry guns pretty much anywhere they choose, including college campuses. (What could go wrong?) It is, after all, the home of the libertarian elder statesman Ron Paul and it prides itself on its low taxes and low regulations.

But Texas is also a very traditional conservative state with a strong sense of loyalty toward the military and police authority. A belief in law and order doesn’t begin to describe its justice system: It has, for instance, executed nearly five times as many people as any other state in the modern era and its leaders are unapologetic about that. No one can accuse Texas of being soft on criminals.

One might think these two values would clash, what with guns being everywhere and the police having to try to keep order while ducking all the flying bullets. But it doesn’t seem to be a major problem. The police are not putting up much of a fight against gun proliferation, anyway. So “freedom” in Texas seems to be safe, at least as far as the Second Amendment is concerned.

The First Amendment? Not so much.

While gun-toting extremists have nothing to fear from the authorities, the Houston Chronicle reports that some Republicans (are there any other kind?) in the Texas State House are extremely bothered by the idea that a citizen might film the police in the course of their duties:

A bill restricting the rights of citizens to record the police was filed in Texas House of Representatives on Tuesday. The House Bill 2918 introduced by Texas Representative Jason Villalba (R-Dallas) would make private citizens photographing or recording the police within 25 feet of them a class B misdemeanor, and those who are armed would not be able to stand recording within 100 feet of an officer. As defined in the bill, only a radio or television that holds a license issued by the Federal Communications Commission, a newspaper that is qualified under section 2051.044 or a magazine that appears at a regular interval would be allowed to record police.

One does not have to be a political scientist to understand why some police officers don’t care to have themselves filmed in the course of their duties. As we saw in the Eric Garner case in New York and the Tamir Rice case in Cleveland, it can be very “complicating” for authorities to have the public see them be overzealous in the use of force. Even more problematic for the authorities, when there is no record of the event, conservatives can almost always be counted upon to take the word of the police without question and assume any complaints are lies on the part of guilty people. But when these events are filmed, even some of the most hardcore right-wingers can be taken aback.

For instance, the Eric Garner killing, in which a man was slowly choked to death on a sidewalk over the “crime” of selling loose cigarettes appalled even some of the most vociferous defenders of the boys in blue. On the day the grand jury announced they would not indict the officers, Fox News pundit Charles Krauthammer said it was “incomprehensible. The guy actually said ‘I can’t breathe,’ which ought to be a signal, if the guy was unarmed and the crime was as petty as they come.” Red State’s Erick Erickson endorsed a statement from the conservative Ethics & Religious Liberty Commission of the Southern Baptist Convention. “[A] government that can choke a man to death on video for selling cigarettes is not a government living up to a biblical definition of justice or any recognizable definition of justice.” National Review’s Charles W. Cooke tweeted, “Government is simply a word for the things we decide to do together. Like choke men to death over rules governing the sale of cigarettes.”

Granted, there were many conservatives who used the incident to proclaim their horror at cigarette taxes, apparently believing that the wrong committed in this situation was that the police choked a man to death on the sidewalk over something they don’t believe should be a crime. One can only assume they believe summary execution by choking a suspect to death on the sidewalk for something else would be perfectly permissible. Still, it’s quite clear that had that incident not been filmed, up close and within recording distance of Garner’s desperate pleas to be allowed to breathe, it’s highly unlikely those people would have weighed in with those concerns. Let’s just say that as a matter of principle they usually believe that whoever was killed at the hands of a cop probably deserved it.