MICHIGAN BRIEFS State pledges $2 million in grants to improve Flint's water system

The problems for the Flint water system just keep going drip, drip, drip. ... Last week, the Genesee Intermediate School District said it had stopped using city water and was giving bottled water to about 1,300 preschoolers.



Also last week, Gov. Rick Snyder and the state stepped in, pledging $2 million in grants. The money will pay for a contractor to perform a leak detection survey of city water lines and shut down the Water Pollution Control Facility incinerator, replacing it with facilities allowing for waste disposal in landfills, The Associated Press reported.



Flint's emergency manager, Jerry Ambrose, said the financial relief also will free money to accelerate the replacement of major pipelines, which he said will increase water circulation and improve quality.



In January, Flint's system was in violation of the Safe Drinking Water Act because of high levels of a disinfectant byproduct. Flint, formerly a major customer of the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, severed those ties last year to build a pipe into Lake Huron, ostensibly to save money.



Until the pipe is ready in 16 months, Flint gets water from the Flint River, which residents say has the smell, taste and appearance of something that looks less like water and more like, well.



Last year, a General Motors Co. engine plant stopped using water from the Flint River after the automaker said it caused rusting on its engine parts.



The decision is expected to cost the city about $400,000 per year in lost revenue.





Survey: More small firms leave it to workers to buy health coverage

Only 28 percent of small-business owners who offer employee health coverage indicated they intend to continue those benefits into 2016, according to a Grand Valley State University survey that asked how they were reacting to the Affordable Care Act. That move stems in part from the option available for individuals to buy coverage through public health exchanges created under Obamacare, MiBiz reported.



The results confirm much of what insurance carriers have seen and heard from small employers, said Scott Norman, vice president of sales and client services at Priority Health, which sponsored the GVSU survey. The results also point to the expected rise of the individual market.





How can you save a mall? Some developers turn to 'de-malling'

Despite numerous headlines touting the death of the American shopping mall, West Michigan developers have avoided an untimely demise. One key has been a push to effectively "de-mall" the sprawling shopping complexes where stores are connected via interior corridors. Instead, they're rearranging the traditional shopping malls so that the stores are only accessible from outside entrances.



The de-malling strategy effectively breathed new life into Grand Rapids' Centerpointe Mall, now about 98 percent occupied, according to Colliers International. The de-malling of Centerpointe has inspired developers to do a similar project at another mall that has fallen on hard times in recent years: Holland's Westshore Mall on U.S. 31.





Mich-cellaneous

• Amway Corp. President Doug DeVos told The Grand Rapids Press that the direct-sales giant will not cut back on its expansion plans or workforce despite an 8 percent decline in sales last year. Amway attributed the decline to a strong U.S. dollar and lower sales in China, the Ada-based company's largest market.



• The latest quarterly survey of office furniture executives by Michael A. Dunlap & Associates found the industry "very steady" heading in the new year. "We are confident that the industry is still on course to achieve its best year in more than a decade," said Michael Dunlap, head of the Holland consultancy.



• The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers will spend an additional $12 million this year on improvements to the Great Lakes navigational system, The Associated Press reported. The additional money allocated to the Detroit district will pay for eight projects involving dredging of shipping channels or other repairs, replacement or construction.



• A subsidiary of Grand Rapids-based Universal Forest Products Inc. acquired assets of Rapid Wood Mfg. LLC of Caldwell, Idaho, MiBiz reported. In January, Universal acquired a majority stake in Australia's Integra Packaging Proprietary Ltd.



• Carson Health in Montcalm County was acquired by Sparrow Health of Lansing, Sparrow said in a statement. Carson, with 61 beds, had been an affiliate of the Sparrow system since 1997.



• The Daily News in New York City reports that Dow Chemical Co. Chairman and CEO Andrew Liveris bought a condominium in Manhattan's Chelsea neighborhood for $10.75 million. The 2,500-square-foot abode on the 17th floor has three bedrooms, "sweeping views of Midtown ... and 12-foot ceilings." It is said that his neighbors include actress Cameron Diaz.