Will ask for confirmation of employee training

STERLING — The bulk of the discussion at the Logan County Fair Board meeting Thursday centered on the board's response to concerns raised about the carnival.

At their September meeting, the board heard from Paul Lambrecht about an incident in which he said his 11-year-old daughter was sexually assaulted by a carnival worker on a ride. Lambrecht also complained about the number and types of rides at the 2014 carnival.

Thursday, Fair Manager Todd Thomas said he and Board President Ken Meis have met with County Attorney Alan Samber about the situation. He noted that the contract with Carnival America is for one more year. He said Samber has recommended that rather than breaking the contract and seeking a new vendor for next year, the board send a letter to the carnival owner regarding their concerns.

One reason to stick with the contract is that it is late to find a new carnival. "There might be a reason why" a carnival does not already have a contract for next year, Thomas said, alluding to potential quality or safety issues.

Thomas shared the draft of the letter that has been given to Samber and the Logan County Commissioners for review; they have not given him any input. The letter stated that the board has "experienced some concerns with one of your employees," as well as dissatisfaction over "the amount and type of rides" at the 2014 fair.

"We would appreciate your written assurance that the employee in question does not travel with you to the 2015 Logan County Fair, and that you will also assure us that you will have discussed at length with your employees proper, expected behavior."

Advertisement

It goes on to ask for a letter addressing a "plan on adhering to our areas of concern."

Meis noted that the board's income from Carnival America last year was about $35,000. "If we break the contract and look for another carnival, we could end up with something worse than what we've already got," he said. "Or it could be better. ... We need to be diligent about finding another one to replace them if that's the direction that we're going. Not that we shouldn't be looking, to let them know that we're looking and wanting to find something better."

Board member Jim Santomaso asked about specifically addressing the contract requirements on the number of rides. Thomas said he didn't count the number of rides this year, so he didn't feel comfortable raising that point. He said he hoped that by expressing dissatisfaction about the rides, the carnival would make improvements.

Board member Britt Pratt noted that after last month's complaint, the board decided they "didn't have a leg to stand on," regarding the assault, as charges weren't filed on the incident. She felt that the carnival has been fairly consistent over the years, with last year "one bad year."

However, board member Theresa Bartlett said she was concerned about community opinion going against the board over the carnival.

Sheriff Brett Powell suggested changing the phrasing about the employee to say "serious concerns about the conduct of one of your employees."

During the committee reports, Meis read a letter of resignation from Bull Riding Chair Kelly Melvin. The position will be added to the advertisement seeking applications for the board. Terms for Youth and Open Class (Bartlett), Rodeo (Meis), Entertainment (Marilee Johnson) and Advertising (Sarah Matthews) are up. The board members can reapply. Applications are due by Nov. 5.

The board confirmed the 2015 fair will be held July 30-Aug. 9, and set the dates for the 2016 fair at July 28-Aug. 7.

The board moved their November meeting to the second Thursday, Nov. 13.