Ted Cruz paints himself as the tough-guy candidate: He promises to "carpet bomb" ISIS, "repeal every word" of Obamacare, and build a wall between the U.S. and Mexico. In South Carolina, he turned his tough talk to a new foe: gluten-free diets. According to CNN, Cruz lashed out at political correctness inside the Pentagon, saying:

"That's why the last thing any commander should need to worry about is the grades he is getting from some plush-bottomed Pentagon bureaucrat for political correctness or social experiments -- or providing gluten-free MREs."

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

This is a micro-controversy (except, maybe, to the roughly 1 percent of Americans who suffer from Celiac disease; the potential commander-in-chief is saying: Sorry, we don't want you in our military.) But it speaks to the larger perversion of the term "political correctness." Saying you won't poison someone willing to fight and die for you—because for people with Celiac, gluten equals poison—is far from political correctness. It's just good policy: sick soldiers aren't as efficient as healthy ones. But it speaks to the broader narrative of the GOP's misunderstanding, whether willfully or not, of what political correctness actually means.

GIF Pin

Politically correct is, more or less, not saying racist, xenophobic, or sexist shit. It's considering where someone else is coming from before you open your mouth. It is, as The Atlantic's Megan Garber put it, "empathy culture." For a particularly ugly sector of white men, this feels like repression, because until very recently they could casually dismiss minorities as "those people" or jokingly refer to their female co-worker as "sweetheart" or "honey" without repercussions. That language is not just insulting, but taps a deep pool of systemic racism and sexism that ultimately distorts the power structure.

Or, put another way, it helps keep old white men in power.

The argument that in certain corridors political correctness is out of control is a legitimate concern. Silencing someone in the name of political correctness is Orwellian. If we turn our language to mush to avoid offense then we won't advance as a culture. But to be perfectly clear, Donald Trump, Ted Cruz, Ben Carson and the rest of the Republican presidential field are not arguing in favor of intelligent discourse. They just want soundbytes.

Here's how Paul Waldman, writing in The American Prospect, described it:

"The truth is that what conservatives call political correctness is often better described as 'people telling you not to be such a jerk.' But for today's Republican, if people think you're a jerk then you must be doing something right, and the political correctness charge has become an all-purpose answer to criticism of any sort. You say my facts are wrong? I'm not going to knuckle under to your political correctness! You say my beliefs are abominable? Take your political correctness and shove it! It's a way to pose as a brave truth-teller, even if all that's actually happening is that people are pointing out that you're a brave crap-teller."

Ted Cruz suggesting gluten-free MREs are somehow politically correct feeds into this narrative.

It's also ironic.

Cruz suggested that political correctness was to blame for the terrorist attack in San Bernardino. "Political correctness is killing people," he said. It did not kill people in Southern California, but in the kind of twist of fate that only politics allows, political incorrectness—at least as it's defined by Cruz—might kill members of the U.S. military, because forcing people with Celiac disease to eat gluten will, eventually, kill them.