It’s entirely possible you had more important things to attend to Friday, like watching paint dry – blindfolded, but it was the first lady’s 50th birthday and ABC News wanted you to celebrate by doing some of Michelle Obama’s “favorite things,” some of which no self-respecting conservative would ever do.

“Hang out with your friend, Oprah,” “Hug, kiss and fist bump the President of the United States,” “Give a speech at the Democratic National Convention,” “Watch Spike Lee’s ‘Do The Right Thing’ on your first date with your future husband” and “Do the Dougie (with Jimmy Fallon),” ABC’s list of “50 Ways to Celebrate Michelle Obama’s Birthday” read.

Then there were the slightly odd suggestions, a kind of “in your face, you aren’t the first lady living high on the taxpayer hog:”

“Move into a massive new house with your family and invite your mother to move in too,” “Host the most popular boy band in the world at your daughters’ first party in their new home,” “Make the cover of Vogue,” “Buy a Jason Wu dress,” “Take a jog on the White House lawn,” “Travel the world on Air Force One” and “Hang out in Hawaii for an extra week as an early birthday gift.”

Yeah, no thanks.

And one more thing many conservatives said “no thanks” to came on the heels of the American Association of Retired Persons’ tweet welcoming Michelle as its newest member to the “50 plus club,” and encouraging others to sign up.

Excited to join Barack in the 50+ club today… check out my @AARP card! –mo pic.twitter.com/JdbixuLGnb — FLOTUS (@FLOTUS) January 17, 2014

Welcome & happy birthday to our newest member. Over 50? Get your card here: http://t.co/AXUUro7fv5 pic.twitter.com/EVwUbQCYCX — AARP (@AARP) January 17, 2014

But, as the Twitchy Team noted, “Many tweeters remember AARP’s role in securing support for Obamacare by gladly helping sell lies about the law.”

Some responses compiled by Twitchy:

But the best:

You’re retiring?! Happy birthday to us. MT @FLOTUS Excited to join Barack in 50+ club today… check out my @AARP card! pic.twitter.com/9nswSrtoEL — Anthony Bialy (@AnthonyBialy) January 17, 2014

Check out: Rush Limbaugh’s gatekeeper, ‘Snerdley,’ opens up