Obamacare isn’t only hurting Millennials by causing college tuition to rise and offering expensive plans for young individuals, but the health care law is also doing damage to doctors.

Specifically, doctors like Dr. Doug Gerard of Hartford, Connecticut, are receiving lower reimbursements for patient visits because of Obamacare, reports NPR.

Gerard says that, for a routine visit, he would likely be reimbursed $100 by a private insurance company, while he would only receive $80 from Medicare. The reimbursement from Obamacare plans comes in somewhere in between but closer to the lower bound, meaning he could take up to a 20% cut in pay for each routine visit.

“I cannot accept a plan [in which] potentially commercial-type reimbursement rates were now going to be reimbursed at Medicare rates,” the Connecticut internist explained to NPR. “You have to maintain a certain mix in private practice between the low reimbursers and the high reimbursers to be able to keep the lights on.”

According to Gerard, he has rejected two out of the three plans offered by insurers in the state on the exchange, accepting only the one offering the highest reimbursement rate to doctors. Connecticut is one of the states that runs its own health care exchange.

“I don’t think most physicians know what they’re being reimbursed,” said Gerard. “Only when they start seeing some of those rates come through will they realize how low the rates are they agreed to.”

Gerard is not the only one worried about the lower reimbursement rates. Kevin Counihan, chief executive officer of the Connecticut health marketplace, worries that more doctors will follow Gerard’s lead and reject particular insurance plans.

“I think it could lead potentially to this kind of distinction that there are these different tiers of quality of care,” explained Counihan.

Another Connecticut doctor, radiologist Bob Russo, labeled the fact that Obamacare appears to be losing doctors money “a problem.”

“You get what you pay for,” explained Russo, who is also Connecticut State Medical Society president-elect. “If you can’t convince [doctors] that they’re not losing money doing their job, then it’s a problem. And they haven’t been able to convince people of that.”

Alas, not only is Obamacare “not an affordable product” for individuals shopping for insurance, as the chairman and CEO of Aetna pointed out last week, but the health care law is actually costing doctors. And, as a result, it may well cost patients quality care if those doctors decide to reject Obamacare insurance plans that don’t pay them enough.

H/T The Daily Caller.