Buy Photo The University of Iowa is one of dozens of institutions across the country that uses fetal tissue in medical research. (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

Polio was among the most dreaded childhood diseases of the 20th century. The virus spread from person to person, crippling, paralyzing and sometimes killing its victims. A life-saving vaccine was developed using fetal tissue. Researchers infected fetal kidney cells to produce mass quantities of the virus that were collected, purified and used for inoculations. They won a Nobel Prize for medicine in 1954.

Sixty-two years later, some Iowa lawmakers desperately need a refresher on such history. House Study Bill 621 would ban “fetal body parts” from being obtained, provided, transferred or used in this state. Though clearly an anti-abortion stunt, the legislation would prevent fetal tissue from being used by researchers seeking treatments and cures for diseases. Violators — who would likely be none other than medical providers and scientists — could land in the slammer for up to 10 years.

There is no exception in the bill for the University of Iowa, known nationally as a research institution. Rep. Linda Miller, R-Bettendorf, who supports the legislation, said she had recently visited UI and talked with people engaged in research for eye disease. The proposed ban “was not of any concern to them," she said.

That is difficult to believe.

The UI is one of dozens of institutions across the country that has used fetal tissue in medical research. From 2011 through 2014, the National Eye Institute provided UI more than $1 million for glaucoma research, landing it 59th among 97 institutions that received federal funding for research involving fetal tissue, according to data compiled by the Associated Press in 2015. The UI researcher whose project was being funded told a reporter last summer that he was not actively using a fetal cell line in his work because he didn’t need it at that stage, but he was not ruling out using the line again. "We still have it as a backup," he said.

Not if some lawmakers have their way. Anyone else seeking fetal tissue and microscopic cells for medical research wouldn't be getting it either. Rep. Miller said she believes embryonic stem cells, for example, represent the “history” of research. "I don’t think it’s the future of research.”

Really? How about we leave that to scientists, not politicians, to decide? Because it sure seems the cells extracted from fetal tissue are important in work seeking to treat and cure debilitating diseases.

Human fetal cells obtained from two abortions in the early 1960s are still growing in labs and used to replicate viruses for the production of vaccines against communicable diseases. Research using fetal tissue shows promise in treatments for spinal cord injuries, macular degeneration and strokes. In 2014, the Harvard Stem Cell Institute reported that cells extracted from fetal tissue and transplanted in the brains of people with Parkinson’s helped them remain healthy and functional for more than a decade. Scientists use this tissue to understand genetic mutations and how the body develops.

Like many legal surgeries, an abortion produces tissue. That tissue can either be discarded or made available to scientists engaged in medical research. A truly “pro-life” lawmaker would support the latter.

History repeats itself

An Iowan can’t help but feel a bit of nauseating déjà vu when reading House Study Bill 621, which bans the transfer and use of fetal tissue. More than a decade ago, Iowa lawmakers banned the creation of stem cells through a process called somatic nuclear transfer. They gathered at the Statehouse, crying, hugging and patting each other on the back while rambling about cloning babies and implications of science many didn’t even understand. It was quite a scene and certainly painful for any person of science to witness.

Soon after the legislation was adopted, cell biologist Mary Hendrix left the University of Iowa for Illinois, taking her research team and millions of federal dollars for cancer research with her. She cited the law as one of the reasons for leaving.

Fortunately, lawmakers eventually saw the error of their ways and changed the law to make clear cloning to create stem cells for research was allowed. But the damage was done.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1QJkvhD