Former Bronco turns Broadcaster

Former Fort Morgan Mustang Head Football Coach Rick Kahl, left, reminisces with former Mustang and Denver Bronco Joel Dreessen, right, during a Friday night scrimmage at Legion Field. ( Katie Collins / Fort Morgan Times )

The Mustangs got in a formal scrimmage during practice at Legion Field on Friday, in front of a crowd of Fort Morgan fans and families alike as they prepare for the start of the season. (Katie Collins / Fort Morgan Times)

The Friday night lights at Fort Morgan's Legion Field were given a good test of strength as the Mustangs hit the field for a formal scrimmage and the practice provided a unique motivation as former Denver Bronco and Mustang tight end Joel Dreesseen paid a visit.

As he walked back onto his home turf, the hometown hero was met with a familiar face in former Coach Rick Kahl. Kahl headed up the Mustang's coaching staff for 24 years, and continued to help out the program until last year when the beloved coach made the decision to retire.

"I always tell people that before he came to me, Joel knew nothing, and that I taught him everything he knows," jested Coach Kahl as he reminisced with his former prodigy.

For Dreessen, the visit was just as much an inspiration as his presence was to the team.

"It feels great to be out here," said Dreessen. "I haven't been under these Legion field lights for a long time."

After being released from the Denver Broncos in July, the former pro tight end has taken up a new line of work and will be providing insights as an NFL broadcaster. After attending an NFL Broadcasting 'Boot Camp', Dreessen was chosen as one of the better talents in the field and has been asked to join Vic Lombardi and Gary Miller on Channel 4 News.

"It's just something you experience through all the years of interviews with the NFL," said Dreessen on why he's chosen to enter the field of sports broadcasting.

Fans will be able to catch the former Mustang in action each Sunday during Channel4 News' Post-Game show.

For the Mustangs, the Friday scrimmage was just a taste of what's to come, as they ready for the regular season. Their first game will take place at Beetdigger Stadium in Brush on Friday, Aug. 27, with kickoff slated for 7 p.m.

Contact Times Staff Writer Katie Collins at 970-867-5651 ext 231 or kcollins@fmtimes.com