Attorneys for a man accused of stabbing five people to death in a bar are asking a Denver judge to declare the death penalty unconstitutional because they say it is unfairly and inconsistently applied.

Dexter Lewis, 24, faces the death penalty for allegedly killing five people at Fero’s Bar and Grill in October 2012. The 16 charges against him include first-degree murder, felony murder, robbery and arson.

During a hearing in Denver District Court on Monday, the first in a week of motions arguments, defense attorneys worked to counter the prosecution’s claim that there is a long-standing acceptance of the death penalty in Colorado.

Michael Radelet, a sociology professor at the University of Colorado who has researched the death penalty for decades, testified about the death penalty’s history in the state, dating back to 1859. Support for the death penalty in Colorado has steadily decreased since 1992, after life in prison without the possibility of parole became an alternative sentence, he said.

Radelet said the death penalty has played a more controversial role in Colorado than in other states, citing a number of governors — including current Gov. John Hickenlooper — who have questioned the practice of the death penalty. He outlined numerous efforts to abolish capital punishment in the state, including two bills that were introduced, and later failed, in the Colorado legislature in 2009 and 2013.

But Radelet’s study comparing the rate at which prosecutors seek death and the victim’s race sparked some of the hearing’s most intense arguments. The study found that between 1980 and 1999 district attorneys in Colorado sought the death penalty in 110 cases and 81 percent of those cases involved victims who were white.

Prosecutors quickly called Radelet’s findings and research methods into question, arguing that he did not account for key details in each of the cases, including reasons why district attorneys did not seek the death penalty in other cases.

They also challenged Radelet’s claim that the last reliable poll on whether people in Colorado support the death penalty was completed in 2008, which he said found support for capital punishment was roughly split down the middle. When prosecutors presented Radelet with two surveys from 2012 and 2013, which found there more support for the death penalty, Radelet dismissed them.

One of the two reports was released shortly after 12 people were shot and killed inside an Aurora movie theater. The second came out after Hickenlooper granted Nathan Dunlap, who was convicted of killing four people in an Aurora Chuck E. Cheese restaurant in 1993, a “temporary reprieve” months before his scheduled execution.

Radelet said those events caused a spike in the number of people who said they supported the death penalty. Both polls also failed to ask if people supported the alternate of life in prison without the possibility of parole, he said.

Two other men charged in the case, brothers Joseph and Lynell Hill, have accepted plea agreements and received lengthy prison sentences earlier this year.

Lewis’ case marks the first time since 2001 that Denver prosecutors have pursued the death penalty.

Jordan Steffen: 303-954-1794, jsteffen@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jsteffendp