Sen. Bernie Sanders helped Democratic presidential frontrunner Hillary Clinton when he declared that Americans had grown sick and tired of hearing about the controversy surrounding her use of a private email server during her time as secretary of state, defusing some of the tension around the issue.

Who could have guessed that Donald Trump would help her out as well on the same topic?

Related: Trump Warns That Bill Clinton Would Be ‘Fair Game’ in General Election

Amid news that Rep. Trey Gowdy (R-SC) intends to endorse Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida for president and will campaign with him in Iowa, Trump over the weekend denounced Gowdy’s investigation of Clinton as a “total disaster.”

In typical Trump fashion of seeking to destroy anyone who crosses him, the businessman said, “I hope [Gowdy] does a better job than he did, frankly, at the Benghazi hearings because they were a total disaster,” during an interview on Fox And Friends, according to The Hill.

Trump said that clearly Gowdy “did not win those hearings” and that “It was not good for Republicans and for the country.”

“I hope he does a lot better for Marco than he did with the Benghazi hearings,” he added.

Critics said Clinton had shown poor judgment as secretary of state in using a private server to send and receive potentially classified material, including exchanges related to the tragic terrorist attack against a U.S. diplomatic outpost in Benghazi, Libya, that killed four Americans including the U.S. ambassador on Sept. 11, 2012.

Her slow and seemingly deceptive responses to the controversy generated widespread distrust among voters and fueled a number of investigations, including the latest by a special committee of the House chaired by Gowdy.

Clinton got a boost when House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-CA) said in an interview with Fox News in late September that Gowdy investigation had already paid dividends by driving down Clinton’s polling numbers. That huge political misstep not only cost McCarthy the House speakership but totally undercut the committee’s credibility.

During her marathon 11-hour appearance before the committee in late October, Clinton confidently fended off questions about her email and her involvement in decision making before, during and after the Benghazi attacks. Many concluded that Clinton ran circles around Gowdy and escaped the hearing unscathed.

Related: Who Will Be Next to Drop Out of the GOP Presidential Race?

Now Clinton has received even more help from the GOP in burying her emails and Benghazi as an issue – from none other than the GOP presidential frontrunner himself.