The search for consistency and performance can be painstakingly elusive. A basketball player devotes countless time practicing to become a reliable scorer. A surgeon may dedicate more than a decade learning before she's ready for the operating room.

Consistency also can apply to employers, especially those that time and again score well among their employees to earn a ranking among this year's 40 best employers in The Morning Call's Top Workplaces survey.

In the four years since the newspaper has teamed up with Philadelphia area WorkplaceDynamics, six employers have appeared on the list every year. They are: Phoebe Ministries Fellowship Community, Bennett Automotive Group, Norris, McLaughlin & Marcus, Barry Isett & Associates and Kitchen Magic Inc.

Seven employers made the Top Workplaces list for three years, and seven others have made the list two years. Out of 40 employers selected, 20 are first-time winners in the survey.

"We're looking at the best of the best, what separates an average company from an exceptional company," said WorkplaceDynamics spokesman Bob Helbig.

"What we find is pay and benefits are not enough to make people eager to come to work and give their best every day," Helbig said. "It's about whether the company has a clear direction and leadership that is inspiring confidence and a place that's guided by strong value and ethics."

Kenneth Dawson, co-owner of PrideStaff of the Lehigh Valley, a franchised, staffing-placement business, said a consistently good employer is one that listens to employees, and more.

"It's a person who is listened to, who is responded to, who receives constructive or positive feedback," said Dawson, whose business is in Hanover Township, Northampton County. "It's someone who feels they have a purpose for being there and a potential for advancement if they're good."

WorkplaceDynamics said it invited 686 companies to participate in the 2016 survey, and 61 were surveyed. Those companies employ 14,232 in the Lehigh Valley. The firm said 13,734 employees received surveys, and 8,138 responded, or 59 percent.

Top Workplaces 2016: Large employer award winners Top Workplaces Revealed: 2016 Large employer award winners announced at DeSales University on Wednesday night. Top Workplaces Revealed: 2016 Large employer award winners announced at DeSales University on Wednesday night. See more videos

The number of employers and employee responses are record highs in the four years The Morning Call has participated in the survey, Helbig said.

Allentown's Phoebe Ministries ranks No. 4 among large employers, and it is the only company to make that category all four years. It made the 2016 list despite employee-management tension last year when hundreds of union workers threatened to strike at Phoebe campuses in the city and Wernersville, Berks County. The union and Phoebe management announced Jan. 7 that a two-year labor deal had been reached for licensed practical nurses, nursing assistants, housekeepers and other employees.

Brynn Buskirk, Phoebe's marketing and community relations director, said factors such as declining government reimbursement under the Affordable Care Act for patients have prompted Phoebe to be proactive during this "turbulent time" in the long-term-care industry.

"Yes, 2015 had a tough few months. I think we are coming out [in 2016] in a new way. We're excited to be in Top Workplaces again."

Buskirk said Phoebe, which is affiliated with the United Church of Christ, operates a "Faith in Action" cultural initiative to inspire employees to treat others as they would want to be treated. In addition, Phoebe affords workers in-house leadership development training. She said more than 110 employees have participated in the training since it was first started in 2011.

Workers at other regular winners of Top Workplaces credit employers for providing a caring, family-friendly work culture.

"If your employees are happy, your customers are happy," said Deb Yahraes, customer and community relations manager at Allentown-based Bennett Automotive Group, which ranks 13th in the midsize-employer category. "In order to strengthen your business, you need happy employees."

Workers with the top employers receive benefit packages that include tuition reimbursement and 401(k) retirement savings plans. Some unique perks also exist.

At Barry Isett & Associates, which finished 12th in the small-employer category, workers can donate their vacation time for fellow employees in need, said Kimberli Kyra, the firm's human resources manager. Also, "well-behaved" children can visit their offices on school snow days or other child care emergencies.

"It's not like we have a day care here by any means," said Kyra, "but we're not a manufacturing facility [that might prohibit children due to safety concerns]."

asalamone@mcall.com

610-820-6694