New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie’s (R) former deputy chief of staff got the boot from her boss on a national stage. But Democratic strategist James Carville has his own ideas of what Christie should’ve done to Bridget Anne Kelly, and it involves a scrub brush and a rest stop on the New Jersey Turnpike.

Appearing at the National Press Club on Saturday to speak about their new book, “Love & War,” the political world’s odd couple Mary Matalin and Carville discussed an array of topics, from their work on the 1992 Presidential campaign to the recent political scandal involving Christie. When talks of “bridgegate” — the name given to the premeditated closure of lanes onto the George Washington Bridge — arose, the duo was asked how they would have handled it themselves. And Carville’s strategy elicited some laughs for how he thought Christie should’ve responded.

“Yea, I would’ve worked the tollbooth,” the Democratic strategist said of Christie. “And I would’ve had Bridget Anne Kelly scrubbing commodes at the rest stop on the turnpike.”

That, Matalin said, was a “good idea.”

Carville criticized Christie’s decision to go straight to Fort Lee Mayor Mark Sokolich to apologize and said he should’ve gone directly to the residents of Fort Lee instead.

“James thought about this for hours and he had all sorts of strategies and he got to go on Wolf and talk about it…” Matalin joked.

The former Republican strategist, however, said the only thing she would have changed about Christie’s press conference was the duration. The governor spoke for close to two hours, taking nearly every reporter’s questions.

Though Carville and Matalin primarily discussed their 20 years of marriage and two children, politics did come up, albeit in a lighthearted manner.

When discussing how the Republican Party can succeed in future elections, Matalin said the GOP needs to stick to its roots and try “not to be the lesser version of Democrats.” She also said Republicans spend too much time defending strawmen from attacks that just aren’t true, such as the war on women.

“2016 is going to be undergirded by what happens in 2014,” Matalin said.

When it comes to the Democratic Party, Carville noted that the Left should focus on growing incomes.

“Our charge for the future in this country is to somehow or another bring the prosperity across the great forth of this country,” he said.

Watch Matalin and Carville’s whole discussion here.