Ballot measures, changes to hiring policies and wider recruiting haven't moved the needle

Lafayette Fire Department Lt. Noah Harkless, right, and Firefighter Chris Brown care for their ice rescue gear last month. The department is looking to add people of color to the ranks of its professional firefighters. ( Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer )

By the numbers How the diversity of Lafayette's police and fire departments compares to Boulder and Longmont, the only two other municipalities in Boulder County to operate both city-run police and fire departments Lafayette Police Department 38 white 0 Latino 0 black 1 Asian 0 Native American Lafayette Fire Department 27 white 2 Latino (volunteers) 0 black 0 Asian 0 Native American Longmont Police Department 118 white 9 Latino 0 black 0 Asian 0 Native American 10 other Longmont Fire Department 77 white 4 Latino 2 black 0 Asian 0 Native American 5 other Boulder Police Department 243 white 16 Latino 9 black 3 Asian 1 Native American Boulder Fire Department 96 white 15 Latino 5 black 1 Asian 0 Native American

Lafayette officials say they have a problem.

All of the city's paid firefighters are white men, in contrast to every other city-run fire department in Boulder County.

Of Lafayette's 39 police officers, 32 are white men.

While Latinos make up 18 percent of the city's population, it's been a struggle, several officials said, to find Latino candidates to fill those jobs, or to serve on Lafayette's boards and commissions — even its Latino Advisory Board.

There have been efforts to attract minorities to public service, but the current roster still doesn't come close to mirroring the city's Latino community.

Members of that community are challenging the city to dedicate more resources to develop inclusive leadership, while at the same time urging Latino residents to answer the call.

"I don't feel like our community is very well represented, but it's not entirely the city's fault," Lafayette resident Maribel Alderete said. "It's up to us to go out there and get noticed and take a stand. One hand feeds the other."

The roadblock

As Lafayette's police department prepares to hire three new officers early this year, the brass have tried to change its luck in finding minority candidates.

Chief Rick Bashor said additional funding for training could move the needle in the next year, but promised nothing.

City officials and members of the community agree: A good portion of Latino immigrants don't view law enforcement as an honorable profession.

"Obviously not all Mexican police are sketchy," said Lee Shainis, a co-founder and executive director of Boulder County-based Intercambio. "But a lot of immigrants here are used to law enforcement in their country being ineffective, corrupt and not to be trusted. It takes a lot of effort, education and face-to-face outreach to reverse that way of thinking."

Recruiting will be a big part of that effort, for the benefit of the community and the officers, Bashor said. With diversity will come trust.

"It legitimizes the department," he said.

By paying for training, the city is taking an important step toward attracting recruits from local immigrant and Latino communities, Shainis said.

This year the department will get an extra $200,000 to support pay and benefits for the three new positions. The budget includes an additional $17,000 to send all or some of the recruits to police academy training, as a way to attract minority candidates.

Lafayette police Officer Kelly Rader chats with Douglas McCusker on Dec. 14. Women make up about 15 percent of the department, (Kira Horvath / Staff Photographer)

The funding allows the department to broaden the applicant pool to include qualified candidates who lack the means to pay for their own training and certification. Larger departments can afford to train its officers, but Lafayette has traditionally only hired those who come precertified.

"We feel if we hire noncertified individuals, it allows us to cast the net a little wider," he said.

But money isn't the only obstacle tripping up the minority candidates, Bashor said. Certification only gets a candidate's foot in the door. The department still needs to know as much as it can about its rookie officers, and it administers batteries of tests that gauge IQ, mental stability, etc., while conducting investigations into the candidates' histories. And as the chief bluntly told the City Council last fall, this process has become a serious roadblock.

"We've had several (minority candidates) in the queue over the last year," he said. "We get to the backgrounds and they fail the backgrounds."

The competition

Longmont and Boulder are the only other cities in the county that run police and fire departments.

Nearly 25 percent of Longmont's population is Latino, the highest in Boulder County, according to Census data.

The Longmont Police Department has 138 employees, including one black man, nine Latinos and 10 employees the department labeled as "other."

The fire department employs 88 people. Two are black men, four are Latino men and five are "other."

Whites make up the vast majority of Boulder's police department, which employs 272 people. The department includes nine black employees, 16 Latino employees, three Asian employees and one Native American.

Of the Boulder Fire Department's 117 employees, 96 are white, five are black, 15 are Latino and one is Asian.

Latinos compose about 14 percent of Boulder's population. Latinos represent less than 6 percent of the police force but nearly 13 percent of the fire department.

Lafayette's population of about 27,000 is more than 18 percent Latino, so the department would need to add seven to eight Latino officers to mirror the community. The three new officers may or may not move the department in that direction.

The force currently has zero black officers, a demographic that makes up just over 1 percent of the city's population, although Bashor pointed out that the city's animal control officer is a black woman. The Thai police officer reflects the city's Asian population of less than 4 percent and is the only officer to receive a stipend for speaking a second language.

Women make up about 15 percent of the police force, obviously falling far short of the city's population, but reflective of police departments in general. Of the department's nine civilian employees, eight are female.

With no Latino officers comes an obvious language barrier, Bashor said. When dealing with non-English speakers, officers use a telephone hotline called LanguageLine Solutions to provide translators. He described it as cumbersome but effective. When possible, the department seeks out bilingual officers from neighboring cities for assistance.

The department will advertise the new positions, likely to be posted this month, in local Spanish-language newspapers, as they always do. Bashor acknowledged that the efforts probably won't be enough.

As Cmdr. Brian Rosipajla, who is in charge of the department's hiring, put it, bilingual and Latino candidates are in such high demand in every profession that solid applicants have their choice of jobs, especially in the region's booming tech sector. Those jobs pay well and are highly prestigious. And they aren't dangerous.

The cull

The Lafayette Fire Department is in the final stage of hiring six new employees, supported by $429,773 approved under the 2016 budget.

The department didn't receive additional funding to train them, so it had to focus on candidates who come precertified, Chief Gerry Morrell said.

These rookies will allow the department to add a second, staffed ambulance to accommodate the ever-increasing volume of calls.

About 60 candidates applied for the positions. A written, proprietary firefighting test dropped the pool to 16 candidates. Physical agility tests and the interview process further culled it to six. They are currently undergoing background checks and psychological evaluations.

One of the finalists is a woman and the other five are white men, the department said.

The department's 21 paid employees, including three chiefs, plus six of its volunteers, are white men. The two other volunteers are Latino.

Lafayette officials said they didn't know how many of the 60 applicants were minorities, and spokeswoman Debbie Wilmot said the city's human resources department doesn't collect ethnicity information from job applications.

Professional firefighter candidates must hold firefighter, hazmat and EMT certificates before they will be considered, Morrell said, and the cost of the classes and testing ranges from $8,000 to $10,000.

Meanwhile, in an effort to build trust with the community and better communicate with residents, the department is encouraging its firefighters to learn Spanish. "I'll pay for any class they want to go to for that," Morrell said.

"We are doing what we can," he added. "Sometimes illegals think we're there to get them in trouble because they see our badges. We need to be able to communicate that we don't care who you are, we want to help you."

One firefighter was allowed to spend two months in Nicaragua in a Spanish immersion program, and when he passed the Spanish proficiency exam he earned a stipend. The rest of the staff took a Spanish-for-medical-professionals class, Morrell said, and there are apps to supplement their training as needed.

"We're not as racially diverse as we should be," said Battalion Chief Dan Garrett, who is coordinating the department's hiring efforts. "Regardless of gender or racial diversity, anyone can get those certifications if they apply themselves. This is just the hand we were dealt."

The vote

There's little the city can do about the makeup of the City Council, but Lafayette's boards and commissions are flush with white people.

City Councilman Gustavo Reyna, the only Latino member, said that while the city doesn't track ethnicity of its volunteers or officials, he doesn't recall another Latino council member.

"It's one of the motivations I had to run, lack of that perspective in the discussion." he said.

Of the seven sitting council members, four are women, including Mayor Christine Berg.

In an effort to boost diversity and encourage low-income residents to run for council, a proposal was floated in July to double the council's pay.

"I think (money) is definitely a factor when you consider how much time you need to spend away from your family and how that impacts you economically and otherwise," Berg said.

The motion failed, but in November, the day before council elections, the board approved a 65 percent pay hike.

The November ballot included a measure designed to attract minorities and low-income residents to public service.

The ballot measure proposed amending the charter to allow nonresidents and those not registered to vote in Lafayette to serve on boards and commissions, with the exception of the City Council and Planning Commission. It lost in a rout.

The goal

Serving on a city board or committee, not matter how obscure, requires a degree of political savvy. It's not for everybody.

Susana Lopez-Baker is head of Boulder County's People Engaged in Raising Leaders (PERL), a 10-week program focused on training people of color and low-income residents to serve in government. Results have been mixed, she said.

"Joining a board is incredibly intimidating," she said. "Especially if it's not already part of your culture."

Maribel Alderete, who was born in Denver but has lived in Boulder County most of her life, was one of four Lafayette residents that graduated from PERL's latest session Dec. 16. She said she joined the program to become better informed about the political process in order to one day represent the Latino community.

Her experience inspired Alderete to accept the charge as a representative of her community.

Alderete was responsible for translating for her Spanish-speaking mother, who migrated from Mexico in the early 1970s. When she was 7 she had to translate a harried conversation between her mother and first responders.

"I remember as a kid not knowing what was going on and being so scared," Alderete said.

Alderete said she plans to volunteer for Boulder Valley School District and Boulder County programs that provide resources to parents of children with special needs, but her two children in elementary school take priority.

Following this year's stops and starts, Councilman Reyna said he plans to push more initiatives in 2016, in addition to the police department's efforts, to move the needle on progress. To that end, Reyna plans to push sensitivity training for city officials.

"The cultural shift needs to happen from top down," he said.

In order to attract Latino candidates to city service, Reyna aims to create a "clearinghouse," where Spanish-speaking residents can become more informed on such opportunities.

Reyna said enlisting the city's Latino Advisory Board could speed up the process.

"Ultimately," he said, "the goal is for us to co-exist comfortably, to understand each other well."

Whitney Bryen: 303-473-1113, wbryen@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/soonerreporter