'Others need a different way to learn'

A dozen students at Boulder Prep spent their fall break week at school, writing and recording original songs as they learned how to use an audio recording computer program.

"It was cool to see all this creating you can do," said senior Jeff Goertz. "I learned a lot."

The "intensive class" is paid for through a federal 21rst Century Learning grant awarded to the Gunbarrel charter school last year to create an after-school program that focuses on science, technology, engineering and math. The five-year grant provides $146,000 a year for the first three years, then a scaled back amount for the next two.

The year-round school launched its program in the summer of 2012 with the intensive classes. During the school year, the money will pay for after-school classes and field trips.

Students at the small, alternative school attend classes for eight weeks at a time, taking two-to three-week breaks between sessions. During those breaks, students can sign up for four-day intensive classes that focus on science, technology, engineering and math.

"The kids are so engaged," said Rachel Brett, program coordinator for the intensive classes. "The classes tend to be more fun and laid back, but students are still learning a lot. Some students take the classes because they need the credits. Others need a different way to learn."

Students who completed the four-day audio engineering class earned science credits. They'll also get a copy of their song, which they could use as a sample of their work if they decide to go into the industry.

For the class, students split into two groups, then worked together to write the lyrics, the tune, the beats and the instrumentation. They also sang and played instruments before polishing their work in the studio.

Teaching them was Seth Dady from the Listening Well, a Boulder recording studio, and Shane Abrams, a Boulder Prep English teacher who has a music background. Before the class started, Dady brought in his equipment to turn one of the classrooms into a recording studio.

Jeff Goertz, left, is in the groove, while Sean Murnahan and Luigi Elliott, prepare for a recording. Students at Boulder Prep are making music in their audio engineering class. ( CLIFF GRASSMICK )

"It's been awesome," Dady said.

On the last day, he helped one group make final, small changes, making the harmony less prominent and bumping up the trumpets.

Senior Keegan Murnahan said he's already done his own recording and wanted to learn more.

He said the group's song "turned out really well" and he learned a lot about the recording program. He liked it so much, he said, he's planning to save up to buy it for himself.

Junior Lantis Mitchell said she signed up for the class because she's considering playing in a band or trying a career in audio engineering.

"It's a really good mix of technology and music, which are two things I really, really love," she said. "It was a great opportunity. It's something I want to continue with, and I'm really excited for it."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Amy Bounds at 303-473-1341 or boundsa@dailycamera.com.