Two years ago, Obamacare looked like it was in deep trouble. Signups for healthcare plans on the federal marketplace were a disaster because of an extremely dismal and dysfunctional website. It was very difficult to know how many people were actually signing up, how many of them had already had health insurance, and whether or not insurers were even getting the right information about their brand new customers.

Needless to say, there were a lot of doubters. But eventually we learned a lot of people were signing up, they were getting more access to doctors, the cost of the program was less than had been predicted, and health care spending was growing at historically low rates. Not a bad outcome for a law that Ben Carson once called, “the worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery.”

Unfortunately, it’s not all good news. This year, premiums rose an estimated 7.5 percent, a large jump over the previous year’s increase of just 2 percent. It seems that insurance companies found themselves unable to cover their costs over the last year because their customers were sicker, and thus required more health care, than they had expected. The rise in premiums is meant to cover this shortfall.

Some have declared this a disaster for the healthcare law, but this conclusion is overly hasty. With increases in health insurance premiums growing unusually slowly since the law’s implementation, a single year’s spike in the rate of growth is hardly cataclysmic, though certainly unwelcome. Overall, even with the price bump this year, premiums have come in slightly below predictions.

Many people, especially conservative critics of the law, seem to forget: before Obamacare, healthcare premiums was rising rapidly. In part, that was why something had to be done.

And while there have been some cost controlling measures in Obamacare, the primary goal of the law was to expand coverage. On this front, the law is a resounding success. In the second quarter of this year, the uninsured rate continued to plummet to 10.3 percent. Some of the law’s critics roll their eyes at the suggestion that decreasing the uninsured rate is a success, given that the law penalizes those who don’t sign up. But many of these critics doubted that anyone would sign up at all (and many have discouraged citizens from signing up). Whether you like the outcome or not, the law is succeeding at what it aimed to do.

Others point out that fewer people have signed up for the exchanges than expected. This is true, but that’s because more employers have decided to keep health insurance plans for their employees than had been predicted.

This year, however, more people have signed up during the open enrollment period than had been expected. The latest estimate finds that around 8.5 million people have signed up on the federal health exchange. This is significantly higher than the previous year’s 6.4 million signups.

Even more impressive is that more young people appear to be signing up than in previous years. This is extremely significant, because as I stated above, insurance premiums rose this year because customers were sicker than insurance companies had expected. Since younger people tend to be healthier, more of them signing up for health insurance may help keep next year’s rates from continuing to spike.

Politically, there was some bad news for Obamacare this year. The end of the year budget deal extended implementation of some of the central Obamacare taxes, in particular the Cadillac tax (which is actually on expensive health insurance plans, not cars). These taxes are meant to both help keep health care costs from spiraling upwards, while also helping to pay for the vital subsidies in the law. If these tax extensions become permanent, as many observers fear they might, the budget outlook for Obamacare will be less rosy.

Overall, the law is functioning as it was intended to, though not without significant hiccups. Much can be done to improve the law long term, and there are still far too many gaps in coverage for a wealthy country to tolerate. With so many people dependent on the law for health insurance, it’s highly likely that threats to repeal it are vacuous. But there are still many open questions about the future of the law, and we’ll just have to wait and see to get the answers.

Photo Credit: LaDawna Howard