Insure It Forward In 2013 with more and more confusion about ACA, I began to focus all of my energy on health insurance for the community, I also continued my non-profit efforts; donating 50% of all profits to WATERisLIFE and Water4. Past News Releases RSS

The seminar is the first in a series of free seminars Insure It Forward will be offering the public in the upcoming months. The seminars will cover a wide variety of Affordable Care Act questions, including what employers don't know that could cost them or their employees’ money. Attend a seminar to learn how Insure It Forward saved a Blue Cross Chamber plan member nearly $3000 per family annually by making one small change.

With the vast amount of confusion over the Affordable Care Act from business owners to individuals, Insure It Forward offers their services free of charge to Oklahoma City and surrounding communities as a guide and resource to use when signing up for insurance. In addition to the seminars, they help community members regularly choose and enroll in healthcare plans, dental plans, or small business health insurance. They are especially reaching out to employers right now looking for help with the ACA, as the deadline is fast approaching.

Insure It Forward’s owner, Jim Scheihing has been serving the Oklahoma City community’s insurance needs for over twenty years, specializing in small group and individual insurance. “In 2010, with the passing of the Affordable Care Act, I sold my insurance agency and opened Insure It Forward, with the idea of helping people and non-profits,” said Jim. “In 2013 with more and more confusion about ACA, I began to focus all of my energy on health insurance for the community, hoping to help people make sense of it all. I also continued my non-profit efforts; donating 50% of all profits to WATERisLIFE and Water4, non-profits which provide clean water, sanitation and hygiene programs throughout the world.”

For more information and help navigating the Affordable Care Act or other insurance plans, please call Insure It Forward at 405-585-0648. Insure It Forward is located at 3200 East Memorial Road, Suite 900, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73013.

About Insure It Forward

Oklahoma owned and operated independent health insurance brokerage helping individuals, families and businesses (SHOP) the Affordable Care Act, aka “Obamacare”. Providing free online quotes designed around saving time, work and money. Call for help with Health, Dental, Small Business Health Insurance, Employee and Cobra benefits needs.

About NALA™

The NALA is a full service marketing agency for local business owners offering online advertising, marketing and branding expertise, great business benefits, education and money-saving programs, as well as a charity program.

PR Contact: Tiffani Tendell

805.650.6121 x361

ttendell(at)starkartthenala(dot)com