Buy Photo The Horseheads school board met April 22 at Ridge Road School. From left: Vice President Pam Strollo; President Brian Lynch; Superintendent Ralph Marino Jr. (Photo: BOB JAMIESON / STAFF PHOTO)Buy Photo

The $73.6 million Horseheads school budget raises spending less than 2 percent, has less than 1 percent tax increase and adds about a dozen staff members.

The school board adopted the proposal on April 22 and the first of four sessions to explain it was held Monday night.

The public will vote on it May 19, along with propositions to create a capital reserve fund of up to $10 million and to spend up to $3 million to upgrade security and technology at the Intermediate/Middle School complex, and add a softball field there. Six people are also seeking three school board seats.

Spending is up $1.36 million, or 1.9 percent, while the tax rate rises 0.6 percent, the maximum allowed under for the district under the state's property tax cap. The annual tax bill on a property assessed at $100,000 will increase about $11 before the STAR exemption. This assumes the property's assessment did not change from the prior year. The cost of living for the 12-month period ending in March decreased 0.1 percent, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

"We were able to keep the spending increase under 2 percent because of the drop in mandated contributions to the two state retirement plans, the retirement of 10 staff members whose positions will be filled at lower salaries, retirement of bus bond debt, and a reduction in construction debt payments," Superintendent Ralph Marino Jr. said.

Like most districts, Horseheads benefited from a drop in the Gap Elimination Adjustment, and it will see $1.8 million less taken back by the state next school year, money the state uses to balance its own budget. The GEA for 2015-16 is $1.02 million, compared to $2.83 million for the current year.

The district also saw state aid increase $2.4 million, or 8.4 percent, to $31.31 million.

Part of $2.3 million in spending reductions the district said it is making is by hiring 10 lower-paid workers to replace retiring staff. Those positions include three secondary teachers, one elementary position, one social worker, two administrative positions, a senior clerk typist, a building maintenance mechanic and a cleaner.

Hiring more staff is a component of $1.64 million in added spending. The budget plan calls for adding three prekindergarten teachers and three prekindergarten teaching assistants, positions partially funded by state aid, along with technology, equipment and supplies for three prekindergarten classrooms; one teaching position each for special education, autism spectrum disorder consultant and high school STEM (science-technology-engineering-math); English as a Second Language teacher; increases athletic director and physical education teacher from part time to full time; adds a part-time occupational therapist and a cleaner.

The budget contains money for purchasing seven buses at an estimated cost of $875,000. For this reason, no proposition to buy buses will go before voters as in previous years.

The budget also adds spending for a consultant on the Affordable Care Act, the 2010 federal legislation known as "Obamacare."

"With so many regulations coming into effect with the Affordable Care Act, the district feels it needs expert assistance to ensure compliance. It is not a new position within the district — the cost is for contractual fees with an outside consultant," Marino said.

The district's most recent capital reserve fund expired in 2012. Voter approval is needed to create one and close one. The one voters will be asked to create through Proposition No. 2 will likely last 10 years, the district said. The fund is used to finance future construction and repairs, as well as to buy equipment.

Proposition No. 3 is Phase II of a capital project to upgrade building and room security as well as upgrade technology and connectivity to it at the Intermediate/Middle School complex. Including in the permission to spend up to $3 million is building a softball field at the complex to replace one due to the anticipated sale of Broad Street School, where softball games are now held.

The first phase of the capital project, Phase I, is for technology upgrades at the high school complex and will begin when the state's Smart Schools Bond Act funds become available.

Follow Bob Jamieson on Twitter @SGBob

Upcoming

•Budget question-and-answer sessions: 7 p.m. May 4 at Erin Town Hall, 7 p.m. May 13 online session; 7 p.m. May 18 at Big Flats Community Center.

•Budget public hearing: 6 p.m. May 7 at Multi-Media Center in Horsheads High School.

•School board candidates forum: 7 p.m. May 11 at Multi-Media Center at Horseheads High School. Six people seek three unpaid three-year terms. They are incumbents Rose Apgar, Mark Brinthaupt and Doug Johnson and challengers Lisa Christiansen, Kristine Dale and Peter Lotocky. Chemung County League of Women Voters is sponsor.

•Budget, proposition and school board vote: 7 a.m. to 8 p.m. May 19 at Horseheads High School and both the Big Flats and Ridge Road elementary schools.

Read or Share this story: http://stargaz.tt/1Gz34Yx