Original “Falls Heroes, left to right, John “Jack” Gillooly, John Tully and William Devan are shown in a 1903 Courier-Journal photo in the book. (Photo: Courtesy of Butler Books) Story Highlights The boat housing the Belle of Louisville's offices and gift shop was once a Coast Guard station

The Falls of the Ohio at Louisville was considered the most dangerous spot along the Ohio River

The original crew members of the river Life Saving Service had risked their lives to save others

Amid all the attention the Belle of Louisville is receiving during its centennial year, historian Chuck Parrish of Fern Creek wants to make sure the importance of another boat on the wharf is not overlooked.

It's the former Coast Guard rescue boat station built in 1929 next door that houses the Belle's offices and gift shop — which, like the Belle, is a National Historic Landmark.

The floating barge, with a white double-decker building and watchtower aboard, is the last of three river rescue stations at the site, the first two of which were for the old U. S. Life Saving Service at the Falls of the Ohio River that operated from 1881 to 1915, when it became part of the Coast Guard.

A new book by the late historian Leland R. Johnson and edited by Parrish, "Heroes at The Falls: Louisville's Lifesavers," published by Butler Books, looks at the history of the service and the men who risked their lives to save others.

"It's a story of daring and bravery and courage," says Parrish, a retired historian for the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, who also has been a consultant to the Rivers Institute at Hanover College in Indiana.

History

The Louisville life saving station, the only one on inland waters, was placed there because The Falls area was considered the most dangerous point along the 981 miles of the Ohio River. The others were on the Great Lakes and along coastal waters.

From the time it was authorized by Congress in 1881 until 1915, thousands of people were rescued from the treacherous falls area and more than $5 million worth of boats, possessions and cargo were saved, according to the book.

Smaller rescue boats inside the station were deployed through an entrance on the front during emergencies. Later, the station boat was named the Andrew Broaddus for the Louisville mayor in the 1950s.

McAlpine Dam

The Coast Guard operated the station until 1972, after the completion of the newer McAlpine Locks and Dam — formerly the Louisville and Portland Canal — submerged most of the Falls and required that all boat traffic pass through the canal and locks instead of passing over the Falls.

The whitewater rapids were where the river drops 26 feet in a two-mile stretch.

REVITALIZATION: National preservation group to study Louisville

CELEBRATING OUR HISTORY: L&N Railroad

In the days of the Life Saving Service, some boats traveling the Ohio were guided by experts over the falls while others were swept unintentionally through them — sometimes resulting in deaths and injuries. In other cases, the "unwise . . . foolishly attempted passage though the Falls" without the required knowledge and skills, Larry E. DeBuhr, the Rivers Institute director, writes in the book foreword.

Original "Falls Heroes"

The original crew members of the Life Saving Station were William Devan and John "Jack" Gillooly, who worked loading coal at a floating coal dock, and John Tully, a fisherman who sold bait on the riverfront, shown in a 1903 Courier-Journal photo in the book. They had been praised for their earlier voluntary life-saving efforts during river accidents.

Parrish calls them "the first first-responders" to dangers on the river, and they received gold medals for life saving from the federal government and the Kentucky legislature.

They and others endured long periods without incident, "punctuated by the sudden bursts of peril, even sheer terror, of plunging into roaring whitewater falls and over dams in open boats," Johnson wrote in the preface.

Johnson, who lived in Westmoreland, Tenn. and had a Ph.D. from Vanderbilt University in Nashville, wrote 42 histories for the Army Corps and other agencies, collaborating on other book projects with Parrish, too. Johnson died in April.

Book and exhibit

"Heroes at the Falls" ($20) is available at the Belle gift shop, Carmichael's, Barnes & Noble and www.butlerbooks.com. Parrish spoke about "Navigation on the Ohio River" Nov. 6 at the Conrad-Caldwell House Museum in connection with a "Louisville's River" exhibit that runs through May 31 at the museum, 1402 St. James Court in Old Louisville. Other talks scheduled are: Rick Bell on "The Flood of 1937" from 5 to 7 p.m. Feb. 26 and Carl Kramer on "The Bridges of The Falls" from 5 to 7 p.m. March 19. An exhibit closing party will be from 1 to 3 p.m. May 31.

Reporter Martha Elson can be reached at (502) 582-7061, melson@courier-journal.com and on Facebook. Follow her on Twitter at @MarthaElson_cj.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1rsUPtv