Are new leaders born or made? That's one question that the program Leadership Lauderdale hopes to answer, through their monthly classes that help participants better understand how our community works.

For more than 10 years, the program Leadership Lauderdale has been developing the leadership skills necessary to assume leadership roles for those participating. Participants are chosen through an extensive application and interview process and is based off of Stephen Covey's self-help book 7 Habits of Highly Effective People .

"You go through these steps of diversity training, seven habits training, things of that nature," Leadership Lauderdale Coordinator Darren Radcliff said. "They learn so much about Meridian. We want them to come in with an insight of what they think Meridian or Lauderdale County is all about and want them to leave with a bigger and broader vision of Lauderdale County."

Radcliff says participants develop leadership skills within themselves, but more importantly diversity and the background of why things work in Lauderdale County whether it be the good, the bad, or the ugly and for one recent graduate, the class has been an eye opener.

"We talk a lot about how to retain young professionals," Leadership Lauderdale Graduate Aa'Keela Hudnall said. "With this program, I hope that with me that it would instill a greater pride in Meridian and in Mississippi. It encouraged me to encourage others. If you're a young professional you don't have to go outside of Meridian or Mississippi to use your talents. You can use them right here, and by using that hopefully we can make the community and surrounding places better, and encourage other people to stay."

Through the program, participants learn just what it takes to be a leader and if a leader can be born or made.

"A leader can be born, but they've got to be shaped and they've got to be molded," Radcliff said.

Leadership Lauderdale is sponsored by The East Mississippi Business Development Corporation and is jointly presented by the MSU Riley Center, Mississippi Power Company, Anderson Regional Medical Center, and Midway Baptist Church.