PLYMOUTH CO. -- Plymouth County Democrats hope people will vote according to their self-interest, instead of the interests of a given party.

"Hopefully people will vote for their own interests," Mark Sturgeon, member of the Plymouth County Democratic Party, said.

Democrats want to run candidates Democrats will vote for not because they're a Democrat, but because they represent their interests and are qualified for the position, Sturgeon stated.

Plymouth County, traditionally a Republican stronghold, hasn't shown any signs of turning blue in recent years.

In the 2014 midterm elections county Republican voters turned out three to one over their Democratic counterparts.

Voter turnout is an issue, Sturgeon admitted.

Even if the sympathies of younger voters are with the Democrats, which Sturgeon thinks they are, this won't necessarily translate into votes for Democratic candidates.

In fact, sympathy with the Democratic platform doesn't mean younger voters won't support the Republicans.

"I kind of liken that to the people will vote for who their parents voted for," Sturgeon said.

There are always going to be people who vote as their parents do, he continued.

"We're working harder because we have to. We get that," he said.

Young folks are coming to meetings, Sturgeon emphasized, "especially when the presidential campaigns have had surrogates and organizers come in and they'll have an organizing night for Hilary [Clinton] or for Bernie [Sanders] and we'll see a lot of new young folks, and then they're kind of giving us their information and we're bringing them into the party, not just for the candidates," he said.

Once the Democrats pick a presidential candidate, the Plymouth County Democrats will ramp up activities until the get out the vote weekend, in the days before the 2016 election, Sturgeon said.

Yet, no major Democratic presidential candidates have visited Plymouth County in this caucus cycle.

"It's very flyover country in Iowa," Sturgeon commented.

Locally, during the special election to fill Soderberg's House District Five representative seat, Republican candidate Charles Holz ran unopposed.

Sturgeon said this was due to the suddenness of Soderberg's departure and the time commitment of the position, which makes it hard to find candidates.

"Well, it would be great to have a candidate waiting in the wings and have somebody running for every office. But realistically it's just not happening. So all we can do is just work with the people that we're sending to Des Moines," he said.

Plymouth County GOP member Don Kass expressed little surprise the Democrats didn't run a candidate.

"There's no such thing as an entity -- whether it be a county, a city, a town, a state, or a nation -- that's run by democrats that's doing well right now," Kass said.

"You can't find me one. You cannot find me one. And that's become evident to everybody," he said.

According to Kass, Republican control of the area is a question of the demographic being inclined towards conservatism.

Plymouth County has a high percentage of persons of faith, and they're socially and economically conservative, and because of that generally identify with the Republican Party, Kass said.

Of the 16,255 registered voters, 7,683 of them are Republican, according to the Plymouth County auditor's office.

There are only 3,059 registered Democrats, less than the 5,476 registered as "no party."

"I don't foresee us becoming a blue county, probably ever," Sturgeon said.

However, that does not mean the party isn't hopeful.

"We're always hopeful, it's just that we're realistic," Sturgeon said.

Sturgeon said he sees an inevitable splintering of the Republican party.

Fighting within the Republican party can't do anything but help the Democrats, he said.

The more outlandish the things they say, the more it helps the Democrats, he said.

This was evident at the last debate where there was high-fiving in the Clinton camp over Republican comments, he said.

"We don't tell them to say these things. They say them, but we keep shaking our heads and saying I don't see how they think that's going to help," he said.

Sturgeon predicted a long-term decline in the Republican numbers, as the population of the U.S. ages.

"I think the Republicans die off, to put it bluntly," Sturgeon said.

"Well, he's going to die off before that happens," Kass said when told about the prediction.

Kass thinks the prospects of a Democratic turn for Plymouth County, or indeed the nation more broadly, is bleak.

"It's going to take a long time, especially with the damage this administration has done," Kass said.

Kass continued, arguing the Obama administration is turning middle-aged Democrats away from the party.

"Frankly, I think the eight years of Obama may be the biggest disaster for the Democratic party that's ever taken place," Kass said.

To Kass, this seems equally true for the county.

"We're an economically blessed county, so to speak. But we also have a lot of people work hard to make it that way, and those people tend to be Republicans," Kass said.

Kass thinks those factors are more than sufficient to keep Plymouth County red for quite a long time, and when asked Sturgeon didn't disagree.

"Every elected official in Plymouth County is a Republican and we're one of the best run counties in the state, and that's not an accident. Neither of those two facts are an accident," Kass said and laughed.

During an interview, Sturgeon emphasized the importance of bipartisanship. He praised the past bipartisanship of the state legislature, which he contrasted to politics in Washington.

"We can work with those folks. It's not a them or us," Sturgeon said.

However, the bipartisanship in Des Moines has changed a little bit as of late, said Sturgeon.

The bipartisanship and negotiation process has been thwarted by Governor Terry Branstad's recent use of vetoes, Sturgeon said.

"When two sides reach an agreement and then the governor vetoes the bulk of it, that kind of takes away the whole 'why should we bargain' element," he said.

Asked if there was any strongpoints for the Plymouth County Democrats, Sturgeon replied, "Well, no. I mean, we have a core group of folks that are always coming to the meetings and doing the work and putting in the time. And it's an uphill battle but so far we haven't lost heart and we haven't given up the fight because of the uphill nature of the battle."

Kass predicts not only a national turn away from the Democratic party, but that the turnout in northwest Iowa for the Republican candidate -- regardless of which one it is -- will be unprecedented.