What Jesus taught us

On Sunday, a letter writer asked, "What would Jesus do if elected to serve in Congress?" ("How would Jesus vote?").

The writer posed questions regarding how Jesus would vote when deciding such issues as dismantling the Affordable Care Act, deporting illegal immigrants, continuation of tax cuts to the wealthy, and cutting food assistance and welfare — implying that Jesus would vote as the liberals in Congress vote.

I am also a Christian and I believe we should, as voters, not expect government and laws to cure all social ills. It is up to us, as individuals, to do that by supporting our churches, our nonprofits, and ministries. More importantly, we should do that as individual citizens every day. Jesus also taught us to respect and obey laws and authority. I tend to vote for officials who follow the Constitution, which is a divinely inspired document. Jesus was a great teacher in the power of the individual through the exercise of free will and the limitations of governmental control.

Rick Dunn Maitland

Lincoln's words get modern makeover

"... and that government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth."

In those few brilliantly clear words, President Abraham Lincoln defined the moral role of our government. Those citizens elected to public office are sworn to honorably represent we the people.

Today, Lincoln's pinpoint model for our politicians has been prostituted. Perhaps if Lincoln updated his address today, he might have surrendered to something such as, "and that government of big business, paid for by big business, for those oligarchs shall own the earth."

Jim Levie Lake Mary

SeaWorld demise might sink tourism

Animal rights' activists who cheered the announcement of SeaWorld's CEO Jim Atchison stepping down ("SeaWorld CEO will exit; layoffs planned," Friday) may be pounding the first nail in the coffin of the Florida tourism industry. Florida has more marine attractions than any state. In fact, Florida was once nicknamed "Porpoise Show Row" for having so many marine attractions on both coasts.

Atchison remarked how SeaWorld may have dropped the ball when it came to defending itself against allegations prompted by the film "Blackfish," but what would have happened if Disney were in SeaWorld's shoes? And why didn't Disney come to SeaWorld's defense in fighting these activists and their allegations? After all, the Walt Disney World corporation has a stake in this, too — as well as other Florida marine attractions — inasmuch as they operate ''The Living Seas" at EPCOT, which also maintains dolphins and other marine mammals.

If PETA and similar organizations have their way in banning the display of killer whales in captivity, it will only be a matter of time before they propose legislation to ban the display of other animals. It would be most interesting to see how Disney would have handled these issues.

Greg May Orlando

Crime — and lottery — should not pay

Thursday's article, "Sex predator who abused 2 boys wins $3M in lottery," has my blood boiling.

In Florida, the article states, no laws prohibit registered sexual predators from collecting winnings. The Florida Lottery cannot withhold earnings based on someone's criminal record. Withholding earnings is the least of it. The state of Florida needs to address this.

This 450-pound sexual predator pleaded guilty. He also stole almost $20,000 in food stamps, forged checks, and was imprisoned twice. His winnings should be used to make restitution to his victims. The lottery winnings should go toward repaying what he stole and helping the victims of his heinous sexual crimes. It is a sad day when Timothy Poole gets to celebrate this win while those whose lives he ruined remain lost.

Sheila KramerLake Mary

Turnabout is fair play for bicycle riders

Regarding Jim Fry's Monday letter ("Sharing the roads"), let me tell the other side of the story.

As part of my diabetes management, I walk three miles every morning. I have been passed on both sides by bicyclists while I was in a painted crosswalk with the white walk light — a consequence of them blowing through a red light. I have had to jump back on the sidewalk as a cyclist makes a right turn on red without slowing down.

While in a car, I have had to slam on my brakes, after stopping at a four-way stop sign and then entering the intersection only to be met by several bicyclists blowing through the stop sign and turning left in front of my moving car.

I have had to adjust my right-side mirror as a bicyclist has passed a long line of cars and subsequently hit my mirror with his elbow or some part of the bike.

I have had to swerve as a bicyclist blows through a three-way stop sign intersection totally disregarding the signs. These are not isolated cases of a single or small number of renegades. If you want respect, earn it by following the laws.

Fred E. Piering Maitland

This isn't CIA's first questionable rodeo

Regarding Charles Krauthammer's Sunday defense of the CIA interrogation tactics ("CIA report: Successful ends justify sometimes cruel means," Sunday) this is the same CIA that backed Saddam's war with Iran and sent him weapons.

Just like they sent weapons to bin Laden and the Afghan resistance to use against the Russian army. Politicians and so-called "intelligence" agencies get this country in bed with thugs and terrorists in the first place and take no responsibility for the problems they created. Jesse Ventura, a former Navy SEAL has said, "Give me a waterboard and an hour and I will have Dick Cheney confessing to the Sharon Tate murders."

Wes Carr Clermont