Move doubles the center size, allows for more class sessions

Marsha Haugen, middle, assists Brittany McGee with a math problem during a GED class Sept. 16 at the Center for Adult Learning in the new Community Life Center. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Sondra Merk describes the old space for the Center for Adult Learning as a "hand-me down."

Now, the coordinator of the Loveland facility can't get over the natural light and nearly double the space the center has on the second floor of the new Community Life Center, 1511 E. 11th St. The center had access to 2,216 square feet of space and now can spread out over 4,012 square feet.

The Center for Adult Learning in Loveland, or CALL, is an adult education program supported by Front Range Community College and by grants and donations. It moved to the Community Life Center in August with the House of Neighborly Service and two of HNS's tenants, Neighbor to Neighbor and Hand Up Cooperative.

"It was dark and crowded," Merk said about the former space at 565 N. Cleveland Ave. "It kind of looked like secondhand. Now, it feels like we have clothes meant for us. It's fresh here. The light is amazing."

The Center for Adult Learning expanded from three classrooms and three small offices to four large classrooms, a larger main office, a student area with tables and vending machines, and a teacher work area. Instead of storing files, paper, supplies and decorations in each of the classrooms, staff now has access to a storeroom with a sign on it stating The Closet.

"We no longer are surrounded by our storage in our classrooms and our offices," Merk said. "We don't have to have all this busyness in our line of sight. We want our classrooms to be clean and not distracting."

Advertisement

The larger space means the Center for Adult Education can offer more sessions of classes, which includes General Educational Development prep; four levels of remedial math, writing and reading; college and career prep; and English as a Second Language in four levels from basic to advanced. The additional offerings are in the mornings, when there is a higher demand for classes.

Marsha Haugen, instructor for GED and college prep, a remedial math and English and career exploration class, likes that the classrooms are larger and have windows, which were lacking at the prior location.

"It's so much more efficient instead of endless stuff you stumble over," Haugen said.

Haugen compared the old classrooms with garage sales or warehouses that were "crowded and junky." Instead of stuff, students now see books, whiteboards and tables and chairs, she said.

"When you walk in the classroom, you don't see boxes piled up and an assortment of old stuff with nowhere to live," she said.

The new space is " long overdue," said ESL student Maria Flores, who comes from Chihuahua, Mexico, and now lives in Loveland. "The other one, it was all right. Oh the space, just the windows and more space, it's definitely something Loveland needed a long time ago."

Flores' instructor Krista Boddy describes the new space as being more professional.

"It's spacious," she said. "We have room for all of our resources now. Now, we have room to get to everything."

Students describe the space as welcoming and comfortable, Merk said.

"It is more comfortable for everybody, because we have more room to function," she said.

Merk loves everything about the new space, except she's worried prospective students don't know about the move, she said.

"We need people to be able to find us. We've come to a good location, but it's not one you're going to drive past or walk past," Merk said.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Shelley Widhalm at 970-669-5050 or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her at twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.