Early success in White House race a pleasant surprise for Carson

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson has emerged as a leading GOP presidential candidate based on strong showings in national and straw polls by Republican groups in Georgia and Oklahoma, but some experts question whether it can last.

Carson — in Pittsburgh for a reception Sunday at Heinz Field for recipients of a scholarship bearing his name — said his success since entering the race this month caught him off guard.

“I didn't anticipate it this soon,” Carson, 63, told the Tribune-Review.

“I did anticipate that as people began to hear me, as opposed to what people said that I said, that it would begin to resonate,” Carson said. “I think people recognize that I want to bring America back to what it was supposed to be. When we're virtually throwing away everything that we used to believe in so we can be politically correct, that's not America anymore.”

Carson, the first surgeon to separate twins joined at the head, burst onto the political stage in 2013 when he ripped President Obama's health care law during a speech at the annual National Prayer Breakfast — with Obama sitting several feet away.

Carson has compared Obamacare to slavery. In arguing his belief that marriage should be between a man and a woman, Carson has said that no group should “get to change the definition,” and he mentioned gays, pedophiles or people who engage in bestiality. He's called homosexuality a personal choice.

Carson has said America is becoming like “Nazi Germany,” arguing that the government was trying to intimidate the population, with agencies such as the IRS being used to “punish its opponents.”

Carson noted that he's toned down the rhetoric.

“I've learned how to filter what I'm saying so that the words don't block the message. I've learned to get the message out without using words that people can't get past,” he said.

After entering the race, Carson boosted poll numbers that were hovering between 4 and 7 percent to 12 percent (tied for third in a Public Policy Polling poll released May 13) and 13 percent (tied atop a Fox News poll out May 14).

In the past week, Carson led all the Republican candidates, collecting 76 percent of the votes in a straw poll of the Georgia Association of Republican County Chairmen and about 24 percent of the votes at the Southern Republican Leadership Conference in Oklahoma.

Carson has received more than 120,000 donations — totaling more than $6 million — since entering the race, with the average donation being about $50, Politico reported.

“That grassroots support is favorable for him. If you give money to a candidate —whether it's $5, $50 or $500 — you are invested in that candidate, and you are going to work for that candidate,” said Chip Felkel, a Republican strategist in South Carolina, where Carson was traveling after his Pittsburgh appearance.

“But one of the struggles a guy like Carson will have is that in such a crowded field, how does he keep from being drowned out by all the other candidates in the field?” Felkel said.

Some of the higher-profile candidates will raise monumental amounts of money. Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton has said she wants to raise $2.5 billion, more than the combined sum Obama and Republican nominee Mitt Romney raised in 2012, and reports say presumptive Republican candidate Jeb Bush's super political action committee is on track to raise $100 million by the end of the month.

When asked whether he has any fundraising goals, Carson said, “No, because that's a bunch of political people saying how much money you're going to need. I don't listen to political people.”

Some have raised issue with Carson's lack of any political experience, but Carson questioned whether “(voters) want someone who's held a lot of political offices, or do they want somebody who has solved a lot of very complex problems? I just tell the truth, and I'll let them make the decision.”

Iowa State University political science professor Steffen Schmidt pointed out that “running a nation is not exactly like separating twins in surgery. You've got to work with a lot of powerful people in Congress, and you have to balance all kinds of contradictory and conflicting interests in a process we call politics.

“If you hate politics, that's tough luck, because government and Democracy function because of politics, so you have to learn how to make it work,” he said.

Schmidt likened Carson's lack of political experience to placing a person who has never piloted a plane in the cockpit of a Boeing 747.

“The plane may never take off, but if it does, watch out for the landing,” Schmidt said.

During the reception Sunday, 273 Western Pennsylvania students in fourth through 11th grades were recognized as Carson Scholars. First-time scholars, of which there were 108, received $1,000 college scholarships. The returning winners were recognized for their continued academic and humanitarian achievements.

The local contingent represents more than a fifth of the 1,295 Carson Scholars nationwide.

Tom Fontaine is a staff writer for Trib Total Media.