For years, Flor Rosario was caught in a vicious, expensive cycle. Dogged by depression, breathing problems and severe arthritis, the Allentown woman would become short of breath, get scared and then have a panic attack that sent her rushing to the emergency room almost every week.

She says she has visited every hospital in the Lehigh Valley in recent years, racking up astronomical medical bills she'd never be able to pay.

But since being put in the care 18 months ago of a team of medical and community professionals helping her to manage not only her medical problems but her stressful life, she hasn't gone to an emergency room.

Rosario, 69, is one of 44 patients who were part of a three-year pilot program by the Lehigh Valley Super-Utilizer Partnership, a collection of community providers seeking to reduce health care spending by better managing the treatment of the most challenging patients — the super-utilizers.

During an event Friday at Sacred Heart Hospital, the partnership released results that show using the community approach to treating patients can reduce costs. Over a six-month period, super-utilizers reduced their emergency room visits to 63, from 138 before the study.

The drop in in-patient hospital stays was even more dramatic — 64, down from 155. And the total number of days spent in the hospital was reduced to 338 days, down from 687. That translates to a savings of $773,500, said the partnership's medical director, Dr. Abby Letcher.

Many of the patients said the new approach to their care has changed their lives. Before the program, Rosario said she expected her health to get worse.

"I didn't think I'd still be alive," she said through an interpreter. "This has given me my life back. I know I can do this. I know I can survive."

Caption Allentown Super-Utilizer Partnership holds workshops to help high medical users Goal is to cut back on ambulance calls and emergency department visits for highest users. Goal is to cut back on ambulance calls and emergency department visits for highest users. Caption Allentown Super-Utilizer Partnership holds workshops to help high medical users Goal is to cut back on ambulance calls and emergency department visits for highest users. Goal is to cut back on ambulance calls and emergency department visits for highest users. Caption Sandra Lewis, frequent utilizer of medical facilities Sandra Lewis of Allentown is a frequent user of medical facilities Sandra Lewis of Allentown is a frequent user of medical facilities Caption The difficulty dialysis patients face with transportation Elaine Dries, of Allentown undergoes dialysis 3 times a week. Elaine Dries, of Allentown undergoes dialysis 3 times a week. Caption Alvin Bolster: Health care super-utilizer Alvin Bolster, a 'super-utilizer' of the health care system, spends his days living at the Scottish Inn near Allentown. Over the past eight years he has been in and out of the hospital countless times. Alvin Bolster, a 'super-utilizer' of the health care system, spends his days living at the Scottish Inn near Allentown. Over the past eight years he has been in and out of the hospital countless times. Caption Father of the hot-spotting movement Dr. Jeff Brenner is considered the father of the "hot-spotting" movement in healthcare talks about his ideas from his Camden, NJ office. Dr. Jeff Brenner is considered the father of the "hot-spotting" movement in healthcare talks about his ideas from his Camden, NJ office.

After years of being a shut-in who left her home mainly to go to the hospital, Rosario is now a community volunteer who often cooks for other patients.

The federal government estimates that the top 1 percent of patients, ranked by their health care expenses, account for 22 percent of all health care spending. These super-utilizers are often plagued by multiple ailments while facing other obstacles that include poverty, no access to transportation, language barriers and poor life skills.

The goal of the pilot program, funded by a $1.7 million federal grant through the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, was to use a team approach to treat their medical and social needs.

Rosario, for example, was given a breathing machine that prevents her from becoming short of breath and panicking, and a team of people she can call when she has a problem. She proudly boasts that she hasn't had a hospital stay in 18 months.

"I used to spend all week in the hospital, get out on the weekend and by Tuesday I'd be back," Rosario said. "It felt like I was living there."

Sonia Rodriguez of Allentown has a similar story. Chronic back problems, stenosis and depression sent her to the emergency room several times a month, she said. Usually, she'd get a shot, calm down and be sent home, but the bills often approached $50,000 a year.

Now, she's learned to exercise, keep her doctor's visits and take her depression medicine. She had one hospital visit last year for an anxiety attack.

"I've learned how to take care of myself and that there's help if I'm having problems," Rodriguez said. "I feel so much better, so much healthier."

Collaborating on the Super-Utilizer Partnership were Neighborhood Health Centers of the Lehigh Valley, the Community Exchange, Parish Nursing Coalition of the Greater Lehigh Valley, and Pennsylvanians Organized to Witness, Empower and Rebuild. They emulated the work of Dr. Jeffrey Brenner, a Camden, N.J., family doctor and the face of this new approach to providing care to patients like Rosario and Rodriguez.

Letcher said the key has less to do with medicine and more with providing stability in patients' lives. That includes preventive medical care as well as mental health treatment and tackling issues such as transportation and poverty.

Part of the approach involves the Community Exchange, or network of volunteers and patients who band together to help each other. Trading volunteer hours, patients share services. For example, someone might offer to cook, while someone else provides transportation to appointments or does odd jobs. Mostly, this enables people to spend time together, providing a built-in support system none of them had before and that brings stability.

"A lot of this isn't even medical," Letcher said. "Sometimes, it's a matter of giving them a purpose. That's why the exchanges are so effective."

The pilot and grant are due to end June 30, but Letcher said Neighborhood Health Centers will continue the program and she expects other Lehigh Valley providers to do the same. The real task will be taking the results — many are still being collected — and delivering them to local, state and federal officials who can help the movement spread. Similar pilots are also being done in San Diego, Aurora, Colo., and Los Angeles.

Friday's event was a celebration that the study results appear to confirm that providing a support system for the most challenged patients can save money and improve health.

If there was any downside to the study, it is its size. Data from just 44 patients, while encouraging, is not statistically significant, said Phillip M. Burrell, a health care market researcher who had his former colleagues at the Lehigh University School of Engineering analyze the data.

"You guys are on the right track. You're developing a model that is sustainable and applicable across the population," Burrell told the partnership Friday. "But your work is not done. … More data is needed."

massad@mcall.com

Twitter @matthewassad21

610-820-6691

SUPER-UTILIZERS

Patients who are among the top 1 percent based on their health care expenses, not including trauma victims or patients who require regular, expensive care such as chemotherapy, are considered super-utilizers.

They often have multiple, poorly managed chronic and behavioral health illnesses, lack social support and are frequent users of hospital emergency departments. Because their health needs are so complex and their care uncoordinated, these patients frequently require expensive hospitalizations.