Most Popular

1 The Democratic Platform Committee Now Has a Progressive Majority. Thanks, Bernie Sanders.

2 The Real Reason Neocons Are So Upset About Donald Trump

3 Elizabeth Warren Takes On the ‘Gig Economy’

4 Benedict Anderson’s View of Nationalism

5 No, Paul Ryan, Austerity Will Not Fix the Starving Puerto Rican Economy

In a disappointing twist, the Arnold Foundation is among those megafoundations whose larger charitable ambitions fall squarely within the plutocratic agenda. Armed with a staff that includes a former chief of staff to Dick Armey and a Tea Party challenger to Utah Senator Orrin Hatch, John Arnold is a key player in the aggressive anti-government edge of mega-philanthropy. Along with the funding of education reform measures like charter schools, he has made one of his major causes reforming public pensions,, including slashing benefits and moving funds under private management. The Arnold Foundation’s report on pensions suggested that states should “stop promising a defined benefit” to pensioners.

As Matt Taibbi put it in Rolling Stone, while describing the efforts of the Arnold Foundation and others to undermine the legitimacy of pensions,

The battle increasingly centers around public funds like state and municipal pensions. This war isn’t just about money…. it’s also about blame. In state after state, politicians are… using scare tactics and lavishly funded PR campaigns to cast teachers, firefighters and cops—not bankers—as the budget-devouring boogeymen…

Compared to the billions spent on influencing public education reform, the Arnold’s $10 million gift to maintain an existing social program is almost quaint, both in terms of size and in terms of ambition for control (or in this case, lack thereof). According to Chrystia Freeland in her 2012 book Plutocrats,

Arguably the most coveted status symbol isn’t a yacht, a racehorse, or knighthood; it’s a philanthropic foundation…one actively managed in ways that show its sponsor has big ideas for reshaping the world…. the ambition of the philanthro-capitalists doesn’t stop at transforming how charity works. They want to change how the state operates, too…

The futile standoff over the Affordable Care Act is undergirded by a fantasy of a world in which the government’s power is vastly reduced and private citizens step into the breach with better, more innovative ideas for solving social challenges. Rob Reich, a political theorist at Stanford, has researched how philanthropists have become increasingly political, not just in terms of what institutions they fund but in their ideology about the private sector’s qualifications to solve social problems. “A democratic society is committed, at least in principle, to the equality of citizens, but foundations are the voice of plutocracy,” Reich wrote for Boston Review.

That voice is growing louder, as we might expect during this era of inequality. According to Joanne Barkan’s recent reporting for Dissent,

[Big] philanthropy in the United States is booming…. In September 2013 there were sixty-seven private grant-making foundations with assets over $1 billion… Mega-foundations are more powerful now than in the twentieth century—not only because of their greater number, but also because of the context in which they operate: dwindling government resources for public goods and services, [and] the drive to privatize what remains of the public sector…

It’s one thing to fund poor children’s early education, particularly during an emergency. Unfortunately, for the Arnolds this seems to be a fleeting moment of self-awareness that, for all their wealth, they are part of a larger community that requires a major central government to properly care for all its citizens. Otherwise, it’s back to aggressively undermining the legitimacy of public employees and institutions, because billionaires know best. They certainly have quite the head start of their own.

A new poll says Americans blame Republicans for the government shutdown.