Bob Dylan had it wrong: it’s the question that’s blowin’ in the wind.

In fact, it’s a question that’s before the Supreme Court right now: namely, how to adjudicate the squabble between largely Midwestern and Southern (“upwind”) states who belch industrial pollutants into the air, and then “dump” that air – via natural wind currents and the Earth’s rotation – to Northeast and mid-Atlantic (“downwind”) states whose residents have to suck it in.

The downwind states are saying “Hey! Stop dumping your crappy air here!” and are retaliating with the judicial equivalent of blowback.

The Midwestern states are reacting like, “Hey, New York. We know you ostracize smokers by making them stand in forlorn spots at least 25 feet from a doorway, but this is ridiculous. We’re like, hundreds of miles away.”

It’s like an inter-state version of a battle between neighbors in which one keeps his lawn pristine by using his leaf-blower to deposit his leaves onto his neighbor’s property. Or, maybe more to the point, the person in front of you who keeps farting in your face.

Only those altercations don’t usually reach the Supreme Court.

This one did because the Environmental Protection Agency (referred to, ironically, by Tea Party ilk, as an example of “government waste”) tried to address this issue with the Cross-State Air Pollution Rule, which said, in effect, that it’s not enough for upwind states to meet their own air pollution requirements, they have to reduce them even further because their resultant spewings are responsible for the downwind states’ failure to meet their legal polluting limits, and incidentally, the deaths and incapacitation of tens of thousands of people. (More specifically, one in 20 deaths in the US, 200,000 nonfatal heart attacks, 90,000 hospital admissions and 2.5 million cases of aggravated asthma among children.)

The EPA came up with a formula involving cost-benefit analysis, pollution credits and similar measures that no one except accountants and attorneys can possibly understand. What’s germane, though, is that the upwind states challenged the EPA’s approach and last year the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit agreed with them, overturning the regulation by a score of 2-1.

So now the Supreme Court has it.

Many of these same states are already at each other’s throats over a health issue, namely the Affordable Care Act, with many states run by Republican governors opting not to create state exchanges offering coverage, because it’s, you know, Obama-care.

And The New York Times recently reported that a lone 3 Democratic senators stand in the way of the entire South being a solid block of “red.”

So, remember when Obama said, “We’re not red states and blue states, we’re the United States?”

Fuhgeddaboutit.

There’s also a pretty good chance we’ll be subjected to a more entertaining variation of these “air” wars beginning next month in Colorado when recreational use of marijuana becomes legal, and we can look forward to downwind neighbors suing their pot-consuming “upwinders” with causing them second-hand highs, and indirectly getting their children stoned.

All of this finger-pointing sounds vaguely familiar…

I know! It’s because in November, at a U.N. climate summit in Warsaw, 130 nations demanded that wealthy countries, and in particular the U.S., compensate poorer nations for natural disasters like Typhoon Haiyan and droughts because a contributing cause is man-made global warming, which industrial giants are disproportionately responsible for. And the “bad” weather gets dumped on them.

And there you have it. The world in a nutshell. One part is always farting in another part’s face.

And passing the buck on passing the gas.

Related articles