Tony Evers (left) is the state superintendent of public education. Kathleen Cooke (right) is superintendent of the Hamilton School District in suburban Milwaukee.

We're in a sweet spot?

I haven't heard that suggested in connection with power and policy in education perhaps ever.

Isn't everyone always unhappy and demanding change?

But that's the term Tony Evers used last week to describe the relationship between state government and local schools in Wisconsin.

"I may be a dreamer, but I believe, due to our great collaboration, we have found a good balance, a sweet spot, of local control and state control as was envisioned by our constitutional writers in 1848," Evers, the state superintendent of public education, said at a convention in Milwaukee of leaders of school districts across Wisconsin.

Of course, Evers had a less sweet-spot-like reason for saying that. He went on to call for Gov. Scott Walker and Republicans in the Legislature not to mess things up with "divisive mandates" and "constrained revenue."

Evers said, "I am very fearful that the balance will shift under the guise of school reform."

I asked Walker, in a brief conversation Friday, about what Evers said. The governor praised local control — and, a hot theme for him, he emphasized the power parents should have to pick schools.

He said he was resisting proposals from Assembly Republicans for more state involvement in dealing with low-performing schools and said he was more in line with Senate Republicans whose accountability proposals call for less state involvement.

We'll have plenty of opportunity over the next several months — hurray for the state budget process — to talk about these specific matters.

Let's keep the focus here on the broader concept of local control of schools. It's been the professed philosophy of Wisconsin education forever.

Everyone is in favor of it, at least at the slogan level. But as a practice?

So many of the shots are called these days from Washington or Madison that I got to wondering a few months ago what really was left of local control. That led me to write a piece for Marquette Lawyer magazine.

One of the people I interviewed was Michael Kirst, a Stanford-based expert on education policy who is now president of the California State Board of Education.

As part of the administration of President Lyndon B. Johnson, Kirst helped write the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.

Until then, there was little federal education policy or funding. The law — its 50th anniversary was marked a few days ago — was the first broad foray by the federal government into kindergarten through 12th-grade education.

"Leaving civil rights to local control was ridiculous on its face, so this intervention in the 1960s was very justified," Kirst said. But the law set off what Kirst called "vector factors" that have changed the landscape of education decision-making in profound ways.

"I've argued that the imbalance has grown too great," Kirst said. "To me, this has been overkill."

Outside forces, especially from federal and state levels, now set so much policy. Control has moved up the political ladder. Kirst said, "It's been going on in an unrelenting way for decades and there's been very little reversing."

Federal involvement

How involved have the feds become?

There is federal involvement in what your local school serves for lunch. In overseeing whether discipline is handed out fairly. Whether the neediest kids are getting a fair shake when it comes to who their teacher is.

The No Child Left Behind law of 2002 (successor to that 1965 law) requires standardized testing every year for millions of children.

There is also a strong counterreaction underway. Just last week, the Senate Education Committee held a hearing on whether the feds should continue to require so much testing. And many federal rules and initiatives — "adequate yearly progress" for schools, or the Obama administration's Race to the Top — are pretty much dead.

As for the state, the Wisconsin Constitution makes education specifically a state responsibility. But there was minimal state direction given to local school leaders for many decades.

The state role began rising as the feds made new money available and as focus grew on inequality in local spending and inequality in the success of students, going back almost 50 years.

One milestone: Backed by then-Gov. Tommy Thompson in the mid-1990s, state policy became more of a shaping force, built around a "three-legged stool" that held down increases in school spending and increases in teacher compensation while providing state money to cover two-thirds of the general operating budget of schools.

Two of those legs are gone, but the "revenue cap" on public schools continues.

And then you have a long line of other mandates from the state, the feds, court orders and who knows who else.

Months ago, Kathleen Cooke, superintendent of the Hamilton School District in suburban Milwaukee, summarized her request: "Stop the unfunded mandate machine."

The Legislature frequently rewrites the play book for Wisconsin education, particularly during budget seasons. "Stop the merry-go-round" — that's the way one influential person responded when I asked him last week what school leaders from around the state want.

In some important ways, local control is alive and well. That's why different schools and different districts have different cultures and offerings, despite the same federal and state policies.

And there is compelling reason not to turn everything over to local control. There need to be ways to ensure local quality and equality in educational opportunity and funding.

But if we're seeking the best version of local control, perhaps the debate should focus on the most local venue of all, each classroom.

If policy-makers keep their eyes on what can be done to put the best teachers in each classroom, ensure that teachers have high expectations, and give them adequate resources and the latitude and stability to be real pros, we'll be heading toward a genuine sweet spot that balances state and local roles.

Alan J. Borsuk is senior fellow in law and public policy at Marquette University Law School. Reach him at alan.borsuk@marquette.edu.