Employees at the Massachusetts Health Connector are slowly chipping away at a backlog of applications for health insurance coverage.

As of last week, 72,000 people had submitted applications for coverage that had not yet been processed. Since then, the state has enrolled nearly 15,000 of those people in temporary coverage through MassHealth, the state's Medicaid program. It has determined that another 22,000 of those people were already enrolled in a state health insurance plan.

"Fifteen thousand people who didn’t have coverage seven days ago have coverage today," said Sarah Iselin, a special assistant to Gov. Deval Patrick overseeing fixes to the Health Connector. "It doesn't get us to where we need to be ultimately, but it's keeping us pointed in the right direction."

The Massachusetts Health Connector website, the state's health insurance marketplace, went live Oct. 1 as a means for Massachusetts to conform with the federal Affordable Care Act. It has been a technical disaster, with individuals unable to use the site to enroll in health plans or determine their eligibility for subsidies. State officials have blamed an underperforming contractor, CGI, although an independent report also identified flaws with state management.

Patrick earlier this month hired Iselin, a Blue Cross Blue Shield executive, to oversee the project of fixing the website and getting people enrolled in coverage. The Connector hired the health technology company Optum to work on the fixes and to help with data entry of paper applications that the state has been using to work around the website.

The problems have left thousands of consumers who are enrolled in Massachusetts' subsidized health plans or who are applying for subsidies or buying insurance on the individual market for the first time uncertain about the status of their coverage.

Iselin has committed to holding weekly briefings. In a Friday telephone briefing, she said the Connector has been making progress. Of 22,000 applications that had already been entered into the system last week, the state moved 15,000 applicants into temporary coverage and established that the rest were from individuals who were already enrolled, either through MassHealth or Commonwealth Care, which provides subsidized coverage for low-income residents.

Health Connector officials also said last week that they had a backlog of 50,000 paper applications waiting to be processed. Iselin said officials have screened 28,000 of those and identified 3,800 duplicate applications. Another 15,000 people were found to be already enrolled in health insurance. The state is still working to enter the rest into the system.

Anyone enrolled in insurance in February will have coverage retroactive to Feb. 1.

To speed up the processing of applications, Optum already hired nearly 200 staff. Another 100 will be hired by March 3. The state is also developing a new data entry tool that will reduce the two hours that it currently takes to process a paper application.

Iselin said the state is still assessing the long term requirements to fix the website. "For the near term, we have a laser-like focus on getting people the coverage they need now and getting caught up on our backlog," she said.

So far, just 10,748 people have been enrolled in permanent plans, a number that includes those enrolled in subsidized and unsubsidized medical and dental plans. The state has created a fast track way for those seeking unsubsidized plans to enroll, using paper applications and avoiding the Health Insurance Exchange.

Iselin said the state is monitoring the cost of keeping thousands of people on temporary MassHealth plans – who may or may not be eligible – but she did not have any cost figures to report. The state is allowed to keep people on those plans until June. She said there has been a partnership between the state and federal governments so far on health reform. "We are continuing to explore all options, including leveraging our partnership with the federal government, for how we're going to finance and fund what needs to happen to get us where we need to be," Iselin said.

Optum will be paid $9.8 million for the first 30 days of work. Patrick previously said he believed the state could complete the project within its original $68 million budget, since the state is not paying CGI for services it has not delivered. That cost does not include the cost of temporary coverage, which Secretary of Administration and Finance Glen Shor has said could be covered under MassHealth's existing budget.