LANSING, MI — The Obama administration has approved a key waiver that will allow Michigan to continue its unique program for expanded Medicaid coverage under the Affordable Care Act, Gov. Rick Snyder announced Thursday.

Nearly 600,000 residents have signed up for Healthy Michigan since early 2014, but without a federal waiver by the end of the year, state law would have required the program to end by the spring.

"The Healthy Michigan Plan has provided Michiganders with the opportunity to improve their health and wellness by enrolling in health care coverage," Snyder said in a statement.

"I'm proud of this program, our residents, and Michigan's continued leadership in health care innovation. I appreciate the work of the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services and thank it for its partnership and approval of our unique approach to keep Michigan moving forward."

Michigan, in agreeing to accept federal funding to expand Medicaid coverage, tailored the state plan to include personal accountability measures. Those provisions helped win over some Republicans who were otherwise opposed to the Affordable Care Act but required approval from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

"We're a leader when it comes to states. It was a very innovative model," Nick Lyon, director of the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services, said Wednesday before the waiver approval, which his team had been working on with CMS. "And anything we can do to build a more preventive mindset really goes a long way towards saving costs in the future."

Healthy Michigan, as originally designed by state lawmakers, included a soft coverage cap. After 48 months, recipients would have to pay higher out-of-pocket costs or purchase private insurance through an Affordable Care Act exchange.

The waiver approval appears to allow for a modified model. All recipients who earn between 100 and 133 percent of the poverty level will have a coverage choice beginning in April 2018, which is four years after Healthy Michigan began.

To qualify for Healthy Michigan, they'll have to meet healthy behavior requirements. If they enroll in the federal marketplace option, they will pay premiums but would still have the opportunity to enroll in Healthy Michigan if they later meet behavior requirements.

While the waiver is different than what the state requested in November, legislative changes will not be required to allow Healthy Michigan to remain in place, Lyon told reporters in a conference call Thursday afternoon.

"The choices come into play once they've initiative a healthy behavior," he said of recipients. "Then they'll have the choice of remaining on the Healthy Michigan plan with reduced cost-sharing, or moving to the exchange."

The waiver is conditional on the state meeting several special requirements moving forward.

The Healthy Michigan plan has covered more than 1.7 million primary care visits, according to the Snyder administration. More than 59,000 beneficiaries have received mammograms and more than 32,000 have had colon cancer screenings.

The federal waiver is a big win for Michigan families and health care providers, according to U.S. Sen. Debbie Stabenow, ranking Democrat on the Health Subcommittee on Finance, who told reporters she had been also been communicating with CMS about the waiver.

"Frankly, this is incredible news," she said. "We thank them for really being able to thread the needle here and move through a problematic waiver path by the state Legislature in order to ensure that families will be able to have a wonderful Christmas present knowing that their health coverage will continue."

Jonathan Oosting is a Capitol reporter for MLive Media Group. Email him, find him on Facebook or follow him on Twitter.