Recoveries supersede chippy behavior. The Broncos and Texans captured headlines with multiple fights during their three days of joint practices at Dove Valley. Texans defensive end J.J. Watt stood at the epicenter along with Broncos lineman Orlando Franklin. The anger figures to bleed into Saturday’s preseason game at Sports Authority Field at Mile High.

More noteworthy than fists are firsts. Seven months after surgery to repair a torn ACL in his right knee, Von Miller will make his preseason debut. He has been full go in practice, and anxious to return. Look for him to get two-to-three series of work with the starting defense, which could play the first half.

Running back Montee Ball will also see his first action of the preseason, playing 19 days after an emergency appendectomy. Ball ran through drills this week, and took part in pregame activity on Saturday. He tweeted that he was returning. The idea behind his appearance is two-fold: he’s healthy, and the Broncos didn’t want him to experience his first hit since surgery in the Sept. 7 opener against the Colts. Ball lost five pounds during his recovery, and will experiment playing a few pounds lighter, saying he felt faster.

Receiver Emmanuel Sanders’ right quadriceps improved quickly after a less-than-subtle nudge from quarterback Peyton Manning and the Broncos this week. Sanders, a free-agent addition from Pittsburgh, has put in tireless work after practices to accelerate his learning curve in a new offense. However, he hasn’t caught a pass in the preseason, playing briefly against Seattle and sitting at San Francisco. Look for Manning to target him early on Saturday.

As for Manning, he could exit early. He played more than expected the first two weeks — especially the opener — and received game-like conditions in practice this week. He might only take a series or two on Saturday, leaving Brock Osweiler, coming off his best game as a pro, to get some work with the first team.

Footnotes

Wes Welker missed two practices this week, excused for personal reasons. The expectation is that he will play Saturday. He took part in warmups. … Those not expected to play, according to the Broncos, are Kayvon Webster (ankle), Chris Harris (knee, on track for Sept. 1) and tight end Gerrell Robinson.

Troy E. Renck: , trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck

Mobile-friendly LIVE GAMETRACKER The Denver Post’s Broncos-Texans live blog with updating stats and photos