In The Arena Obama Can’t Be Silent on Health Care’s Future It’s up to him to fix the problem he created.

President Obama came to Florida last week to give a big speech, but he didn’t say a word about how 1.6 million Floridians on the federal exchange under Obamacare would continue to access healthcare if the White House loses their argument in the King v. Burwell Supreme Court case over healthcare exchanges this month.

Florida is one of 34 states without a state exchange. That means that 14 insurance companies in Florida receive about $5 billion annually from the federal government to offer Obamacare-compliant policies to about 90 percent of our 1.6 million Floridians on the federal exchange. We could assume from their silence that the White House wants 34 states to set up state exchanges if they lose at the Supreme Court; but state exchanges are collapsing under their own weight throughout the country.

Story Continued Below

California projects that their exchange will run a $4 million deficit this year (2015-2016) and has had to raise premiums, once expected to decline, just to cover the escalating costs. Oregon spent $248 million to set up their state exchange, but found implementing the program so difficult that they decided to eat their losses and abandon the state-run exchange and put their citizens on the federal system.

What is most alarming is that the citizens shouldering the costs of insurance exchanges are living at 100 percent to 400 percent of the federal poverty level (part of Obamacare’s eligibility requirements). That means families who can least afford the rising cost of healthcare will no doubt end up footing the bill through rising premiums passed on to them by insurance companies if the President doesn’t offer an alternative for 1.6 million Floridians should federal exchange subsidies be outlawed by the Supreme Court.

President Obama should come back to Florida and make another speech. This one should map out a plan for how our low-income citizens can access healthcare at a cost they can afford. If President Obama is serious about driving down healthcare costs (which he said was the goal of Obamacare), he will reform the exchange system so around $5 billion in federal funding flows directly to 1.6 million individual healthcare accounts, like Health Savings Accounts, where Floridians currently on the exchange can each receive the $297 a month the Obama administration today pays to the 14 insurance companies who sell policies on the federal exchange in Florida.

To drive down healthcare costs, you simply need to increase competition. Today, there is very little competition within the federal exchange because there is only one person paying—the federal government (HHS). And, this single payer is deciding what plans to sell. We should let individuals decide how they want to spend their healthcare dollars. By setting aside the same amount of money the federal government is spending today in 1.6 million individual healthcare accounts, the President would move the purchasing power from one person, Uncle Sam, to 1.6 million low income people who can best make their own healthcare decisions. High income Americans get to select the healthcare that fits their needs. Shouldn’t the 1.6 million low income Floridians currently on the exchange be given the same right?

Because a current plan on the federal exchange in Florida costs on average around $380 a month, there is about a $90 out-of-pocket charge to our citizens that fills in the gap from what the federal government pays to the total reported “cost” of plans. If the President truly wants to lower insurance costs for the poorest people in our state and give them the same choices higher income citizens have, he will let them keep their federal healthcare payments in individual accounts. This approach could prevent citizens from paying out-of-pocket costs entirely.