Anthem Inc. (NYSE:ANTM) and Humana Inc. (NASDAQ:HUM) seem to be the winners of the latest decision of the US court, which ruled that Obamacare is here to stay. According to Bloomberg, Anthem will receive $742 million and Humana will receive $549 million from the US government as reimbursement of hefty insurance claims covered by these insurers under the Affordable Care Act, which stated that the figures are in line with what these insurers had expected.

The reinsurance payments have also been made to other insurers, including Aetna Inc. (NYSE:AET) and Assurant, Inc. (NYSE:AIZ). The purpose of these reinsurance payments is to stabilize the promising insurance markets designed underObamacare to cover heftier claims.

Details related to the payments and another associated program that is responsible for transferring the payments to the companies were released by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.

The reinsurance program is designed to cover the costs for health insurers in cases when the medical bills for a particular insured individual are very high. According to the US government, the risk-transfer program is “working as intended,” as it has transferred funds to the insurers, which had a higher population of patients suffering from HIV/AIDS or other diseases, which require expensive treatments.

Kevin Counihan, who supervises the health insurance marketplaces at CMS, said in a statement cited by Bloomberg that the programs help “keep premiums stable and encourage insurance companies to compete on quality and price, not who can attract the healthiest enrollees.”

Last year under Obamacare, if a patient’s bill exceeded $45,000, the government would pay the balance left above that, but only up to $250,000. To finance the program, each covered individual paid a fee of $63, according to Bloomberg.

The US government will give approximately $7.9 billion in reinsurance payments for the last year and the government has already made collections of as much as $8.7 billion from insurers in 2015 and has plans to collect further $1 billion by November 15, 2015. Any extra funds collected this year can be used to pay for the claims in the coming years.

The reinsurance program would discontinue in 2015 upon expiration, while the risk adjustment program is permanent. The government announced that some of the payments have been estimated and may depend on the amount of money the government is able to collect from the insurers. The data and figures for the risk adjustment program exclude Massachusetts, as it runs its own program.

The government hasn’t yet revealed information regarding a third program called risk corridors, which has been designed to aid insurers to adjust to Obamacare.

Approximately 6.3 million Americans were covered under the Affordable Care Act, a law passed in 2010. Bloomberg has calculated the payments made to the insurers from the government’s report. The report separately lists individual transfers to subsidiaries. However, representatives from Humana and Anthem did not reply to requests for comments.