Will the real Gov. Rick Scott please stand up?

If the Rick Scott of 2015 is the one seen on the campaign trail over the past six months, his second term will be more responsive and compassionate to average people; less ideologically driven, less partisan, and most of all, less cruel to the vulnerable and needy.

But if it’s the Rick Scott from the beginning of his first term? That’s a different story.

“We need a conservative who is not afraid to upset the apple cart,” he said then.

Voters have short memories. It’s easy to forget that he entered office in 2011 like a bull in a china shop, proposing $3 billion in cuts to public education before the legislature reined him in to $1.3 billion.

Not satisfied with draconian cuts to the budget, he sought to give away an extra $2 billion in tax breaks. Scott called for slashing the corporate income tax rate and reducing what water management districts could assess property owners – a proposal that devastated former Gov. Charlie Crist’s plan to restore the Everglades by sending water southward.

Scott rejected $2.4 billion in federal high-speed rail stimulus money — funds that could have created a rail connector between Orlando and Tampa and thousands of good-paying jobs.

He called for the drug-testing of all state employees and welfare recipients, a policy plainly beneficial to the Solantic Urgent Care chain he founded and later sold.

He pushed for privatization of state prisons, promising savings of $1 billion a year — a promise that never materialized.

He obsessively undermined implementation of the Affordable Care Act, despite Florida’s huge, 4 million population of uninsured residents.

And, he signed a bill Crist vetoed requiring women undergoing abortions to have invasive ultrasounds.

But who was that on the campaign trail this time around? Not the same candidate.

Scott this time sounded kinder, more reasonable themes. Instead of rabble-rouser, he cast himself as a man who had brought order to chaos.

“It’s real clear. I cleaned up Charlie Crist’s mess … I want our state to be No. 1. The No. 1 place where your family can get a job, the No. 1 place for your children to get a great education.”

Who can disagree with that?

New jobs are important. But if they come at the minimum wage, without benefits, they’re really not helping Florida families much.

Improving the business climate is laudable. But slashing consumer protections and paying back donors through crony contracts isn’t.

Promoting real estate development has its place. But destroying growth management rules that forced developers to account for their environmental impacts, and guaranteed communities didn’t cannibalize each other’s access to water and road capacity, isn’t smart growth.

It seems that Scott has learned much in four years, but were his lessons simply about rebranding himself as a centrist, or were they about governing with empathy, compassion and restraint? Time will tell.