When you get sick, you go to the doctor. That is the way we have handled health care in this country for years. Valley Physician Dr. Greg Bell says that is not the best way to handle our health.

"Crisis management, in other words, waiting until a crisis occurs and then intervening, is exceedingly expensive, does not work nearly as well as people think might," he said.

That is one reason the Affordable Care Act has placed such an emphasis on prevention, largely following the guidelines of an independent group called the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.

"The preventative services that are covered by the Affordable Care Act, to a large degree, have been defined by this institution," Bell said.

The task force, which was around long before "Obamacare," focuses both on prevention and evidence-based studies.

Bell said he has followed its recommendations for many years.

"It is my opinion it is one of the most objective institutions, as well," he said.

To make that information valuable to you, the task force recently launched a free app and website.

"You can get really useful information and guidance of what really does work, what really does matter," Bell said.

By punching in some basic information, the app comes up with the screenings specifically looked at for your demographic.

Among those for a 56-year-old man, a colon cancer screening is on the list.

"It talks about the recommendations, the importance of the issue, how to detect," Bell explained.

Those recommendations, of course, change based on age, sex, and factors like whether you use tobacco. Each guideline gets a letter grade -- A, B, C, D or I, which means there is not enough information to make a recommendation. A grade of C means it may be useful but needs further study.

Bell says many screenings also get Ds.

"This institution assigns certain things a D when there is evidence it actually does harm," he said.

That harm could mean actual physical risks, but it also includes exams that frequently come up with false positives.

"The big harm that many people don't understand is they can be labeled with a condition, and it may not even matter. Or they are given information that simply makes them worry," Bell said.

But the A or B grade means two things. First, the screening in question is recommended, and second, it is fully covered by insurance.

"Insurance companies are required to cover the As and the Bs with no additional cost to the patient," Bell said. "So, no co-pay, no deductible."

While those cost savings are significant, he believes the true value is in giving people more control over their health.

"I really feel strongly that individuals need to have this basic information," he said.

Again, the group is called the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. The app is called ePSS (Electronic Preventative Services Selector). You can find it on both the Apple and Android stores. There also is a website with the same information.

[RESOURCE: Affordable Care Act: Preventative Care]

Copyright 2015 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.