The lawmakers, federal appointees and congressional staffers who crafted Obamacare continue to get rich by going to work for the companies subsidized and regulated by the law.

Two weeks ago, Sen. Ben Cardin, D-Md., a member of the Finance Committee's health care subcommittee, bid adieu on the Senate floor to a longtime staffer, Priscilla Ross, with a truly impressive record of public service. After describing Ross's broad range of skills and long list of accomplishments, Cardin said, on the Senate floor:

"Priscilla came to Capitol Hill to improve people's lives. She has succeeded in that regard — far beyond what most of us are able to accomplish. She has had an extraordinary career.

While I am sad that she is leaving the Senate, I take solace in the fact that she is not leaving 'the arena.' She will continue to find ways to make healthcare better, more accessible and more affordable for all Americans in her new post at the AHA."

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

Ross, this week, began as "senior associate director for federal relations" at the American Hospital Association. In other words, she will help run the hospital industry's main lobbying shop. Here's how AHA describes her hire:

"Priscilla’s vast healthcare and Hill experience will serve our members well as hospitals deal with the unprecedented changes happening in the health care field," said AHA Senior Vice President for Federal Relations Tom Nickels. "Her background in health care policy will be an asset to hospitals as they navigate the transformation."

The "unprecedented changes happening in the health care field" are mostly the result of Obamacare, which Ross helped craft — exactly the point Nickels is making when he says, "Her background in health care policy will be an asset to hospitals as they navigate the transformation."