The portion of immigration cases heard in Oklahoma that were closed based on a program that focuses the country's limited deportation resources on removing violent undocumented people from the United States is right in line with the national rate, new federal immigration court data show.

Oklahoma immigration cases are heard in Oklahoma City, where roughly 7 percent of the cases heard there in recent years were closed based on prosecutorial discretion, the same percentage of cases heard nationally that were closed by the same method.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

President Barack Obama started the program, which is intended to best utilize the limited resources of the United States' immigration enforcement system, in late 2011.

Under the prosecutorial discretion program, the country's deportation efforts are focused on removing violent undocumented people from the country before those living in the United States illegally who are considered "low-priority" for deportation. Cases considered to be low-priority include military veterans, spouses of active-duty personnel and young people who were brought to the country as small children.

Closing an immigration case based on prosecutorial discretion does not prevent that person from being deported in the future.

The program sparked heated controversy when it was announced and was a key complaint in a lawsuit a group of immigration agents who opposed the new policies filed against the Obama administration. A federal judge dismissed the lawsuit last summer, stating that the matter was outside the court's jurisdiction.

The level of cases closed based on prosecutorial discretion has increased notably since the program was put in place during fiscal year 2012. Prosecutorial discretion was used to close 4.7 percent of immigration court cases during the program's first year, compared to the 8.5 percent of cases closed with prosecutorial discretion during fiscal year 2013.

During the first three months of fiscal year 2014, the level of cases closed by prosecutorial discretion decreased slightly, down to 7 percent.

The data come from a report published by the Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse, a national research organization based at Syracuse University in New York.

Prosecutorial discretion is being used more frequently than the program was during its first year due to its success, immigration attorney Douglas Stump said.

"It has worked amazingly well," said Stump, who is president of the American Immigration Lawyers Association and describes himself as pro-enforcement. Stump has practiced immigration law for more than three decades and is founder and senior attorney at Stump and Associates P.C., which has offices in Oklahoma City and Tulsa.

"They are having some really significant results in criminal aliens and repeat offenders," he said. "The targeted class of deported aliens is being reached."

Prosecutorial discretion was originally intended to reduce the backlog in the current deportation caseload to clear out "low-priority" cases and "to keep low-priority cases out of the deportation pipeline in the first place," according to a White House blog post published shortly after the administration announced the program.

The number of open cases in the United States' immigration courts has continued to rise since the prosecutorial discretion program was launched, data show, increasing nearly 10 percent between fiscal years 2012 and 2014.

"Perhaps it would have worked (to decrease the backlog) were it not for the (federal budget) sequester," Stump said. "What happens is we are now down 23 immigration judges in the United States, and Congress has not found the ability to fund those positions."

The immigration court system also has a significant shortage of clerical staff, he said.

The rate of Oklahoma City case closures based on the prosecutorial discretion program is much lower than the rates in Seattle, Tucson, Los Angeles, Omaha and Phoenix, where prosecutorial discretion was used to close more than 20 percent of cases.

However, since the program's implementation, prosecutorial discretion has been used more frequently in Oklahoma City cases than it has been used in some other parts of the country, data show.

More than 7 percent of the roughly 1,500 immigration cases heard in Oklahoma City since fiscal year 2012 were closed based on prose cutorial discretion, while in nearly three-quarters of hearing locations nationally, the program was used to close fewer than 1 percent of cases, data show.

The rate of Oklahoma City cases closed based on prosecutorial discretion is due to early adoption of the program, Stump said.

"We saw more successful grants of prosecutorial discretion in Oklahoma at first than did some other, more reluctant, prosecutorial discretion offices," Stump said.

Oklahoma City immigration officers did a good job early on realizing the effectiveness of leveraging resources to remove violent undocumented aliens from the United States before nonviolent people, Stump said.

Oklahoma is included in the North Texas jurisdiction, and Dallas Chief Counsel Paul Hunker did an excellent job of seeing the "vision" of the prosecutorial discretion program and implementing it in the region, Stump said.

"They got the big picture in Oklahoma and Texas," he said.

Immigration Court: Prosecutorial discretion closures

Fiscal Year All closures Prosecutorial discretion closures PD closings percent 2012 206,330 9,684 4.7 percent 2013 191,803 16,306 8.5 percent 2014* 42,816 2,993 7 percent Total 440,949 28,983 6.6 percent

*First quarter, October-December 2013

Source: TRAC Reports Inc.

Immigration Court: Prosecutorial discretion closures

Immigration Court Hearing location Closings (since Oct. 2011) Cases closed based on PD PD closings percent Dallas Oklahoma City 1,540 114 7.4 percent Dallas Dallas 5,492 334 6.1 percent

Note: Eleven hearing locations in Texas and Oklahoma are listed as in the jurisdiction of the Dallas immigration court. Some locations had no cases closed based on prosecutorial discretion.

Source: TRAC Reports Inc.

Immigration Court: Pending cases

Fiscal year Pending cases 2010 262,799 2011 297,551 2012 325,044 2013 344,230 2014* 357,167

*First quarter, October-December 2013

Source: TRAC Reports Inc.