GLASTONBURY, Conn. (AP) - Painted on one wall of Pastor Nancy Butler’s bedroom is a quote from the Bible: “Let us run with perseverance the race marked out for us.” On a wall facing her bed and painted in various colors and fonts are the names of more than 40 inspirational people, from Martin Luther King to Gandhi to Corrie ten Boom. A painting of Jesus Christ holding a sheep hangs on another wall.

“This is where I’m going to die,” Butler said. “And when I die, I don’t want to look at an empty wall.

“I needed to see something inspirational. I will see all the names of the people who inspired me over the years and that’s what I want to see before I leave.”

Butler knows a thing or two about inspiration, and perseverance.

Butler is in a wheelchair, in the late stages of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, ALS, also known as Lou Gehrig’s disease. The progressive and fatal neurological disease attacks nerve cells and robs people of the control over their muscles even as the brain remains strong and intact.

Her 100-member flock at Riverfront Family Church in Glastonbury has watched and prayed for her as the disease takes more and more of her body each week, the children asking all sorts of innocent questions: How does she get dressed each day? How does she eat?

After her diagnosis in February 2015, she ran services and preached the weekly sermon as long as she could, eventually handing over the reins to a team of three, including her daughter, in February.

But don’t look for her to raise her fists in the air and ask: “Why me?”

“Everyone suffers,” she said. “When we suffer, our faith grows.

“We become better, stronger people, and we know Christ better,” she said. “It’s through pain we become like Christ.”

Butler, 57, said she was diagnosed with ALS a few months after she started “tripping over her toes.” She was first told it may be PLS, or primary lateral sclerosis, a primarily non-fatal form of the disease. But on her grandson’s birthday, she learned the truth.

She calls her new home in Marlborough - known as “Camp Gaga” (what her grandchildren call her) - a “house that love built.” She and her husband, Greg Butler, spent much of their retirement money to make life as comfortable as possible for her. The 9-acre property has ribbons of sidewalks filled with flowering shrubs where she can go in her wheelchair. SureHands, a motorized lift system, runs from the bedroom to the bathroom. There’s another system in the living room. Butler has renamed the lifts “the sure hands of God.”

“This is our retirement,” she said. “This was all done so I could be comfy and happy. We have an indoor pool so I can do therapy, but I am too weak. The grandchildren and dogs love it, though.”

With the inspirational names on the wall comes a bookcase filled with multiple copies of their autobiographies and books about them. Whenever someone comes to visit - friends, physical therapists or nurses - she asks them to take a copy.

“It not only helps, but everyone leaves inspired,” she said.

Butler has had her caregiver, Valerie Peters, by her side for much of the past year. When she first received the news she has ALS, the doctor gave her some advice: Anything you want to do, do it now. Do not make your husband your caregiver. And buy a good ceiling lift.

“Really the strength of family has gotten me through this,” she said. “They go together. We take marriage very seriously. Two really did become one. I’m proud of my husband. We both feel we are over our heads sometimes, but we stay committed to each other and I couldn’t have done this without him.”

The disease has progressed faster than doctors and the Butlers expected. Nancy Butler quickly went from a cane to a walker, and by last May she could barely walk, beginning her life in a wheelchair. Last month, she had a feeding tube inserted into her stomach and now sometimes uses a ventilator to help her breathe.

“This disease is utterly dreadful on so many levels,” Greg Butler said. “But there are lovely gifts embedded. We as a family have learned to cherish treasured moments. They are very expensive and have come at a high cost, but they are gifts nonetheless.”

She stopped giving traditional sermons in December as her voice weakened. For the past few months she has been wheeled up to the front of her congregation where she has used a combination of short talks and pre-recorded videos of sermons she made at home the previous week. Her final sermon as lead pastor was on Valentine’s Day.

“Everyone, especially the children, sees me worse and worse each week,” Nancy Butler said. “We have an open conversation and talk about death. Death is part of life. It’s an opportunity to teach everybody. We do not grieve as the world grieves. We believe life is eternal. This isn’t the whole story.”

She promises to attend her church every Sunday, noting all she “needs to stay alive is food and air.” When she had the feeding tube inserted and couldn’t make it during a Sunday in February, Greg used FaceTime on his smartphone so she could watch the service. She joked that she “felt like God looking in.” She plans to participate in the Easter Sunday service.

“I felt like Jesus kept teaching right up until the end, so I will keep teaching until I can’t. You can really turn suffering into a great opportunity if we see it as that. God uses our weaknesses for good,” she said.

Nancy Butler, who grew up in Cazenovia, New York, said her life with God began at Bible camp in Cortland, New York, when she was 9. Her life philosophy came from the words of a song the campers would sing: “to know Christ and then to make him known.”

She said she knew she “wanted to make a difference in this world” and participated in missionary work as a teen.

“How many people give their lives to God when they are 9? It made a big impact in my life,” she said.

After graduating from Duke University, where she majored in religion, she got a job in Washington, D.C., with a defense contractor that made missiles. She married her high school sweetheart, Greg Butler, and believed they would give their lives to God and forgo what was expected: the minivan, the two children, the house with the white picket fence. Or at least that was the plan.

After a year of missionary work in Hong Kong, the pair ended up settling down and raising two girls. But Nancy Butler never gave up on her goal of serving Jesus. After obtaining a master’s degree in divinity studies at Yale University, she looked to rented space in the atrium of the former G. Fox building in Hartford to begin her ministry

Unhappy with the traditional evangelical church views of women and gays that “made me cringe,” Butler wanted to create the first welcoming and affirming evangelical church in the area. The church focuses on being “theologically open minded, diverse, empowering women and affirming of LGBT people.” She also founded the Association of Inclusive Evangelical Churches, whose mission is to increase the quantity and quality of inclusive evangelical churches and college fellowship groups through social networking.

Butler said she believed it was easier to be innovative and start something new rather than to try to turn around an older church and battle with the politics. She wanted something refreshing, something that would draw people in.

Her first attempt began by hiring University of Hartford music theater students to perform skits during her services in the atrium of the G. Fox building. She had a professional sound crew and musicians to provide the inspirational music. As Greg Butler said, “it was a Disney-level, multi-media extravaganza in the G. Fox building.” The church lasted about four years, from 2008 to 2012, and had about 70 members at its height. They were spending $1,000 per service and “it wasn’t financially sustainable,” Nancy Butler said.

“The church didn’t grow. People weren’t looking for the best church in town, they just didn’t go to church. So we picked Glastonbury and we actually saw our membership shrink. I discovered I was trying to create a church with a marketing and business plan. It wasn’t working.”

The church lost half its members and it was time to begin again in the exercise room they rent from the town at the Riverfront Community Center along the Connecticut River in Glastonbury.

Butler kept the same values and vision for the church but took a more hands-off approach and let a team of others help. The result is a church whose membership is growing with a “change the community, change lives” attitude and promotes itself as “Church … Just Different.”

The services are held Sunday mornings at 10:30 a.m. Most people coming into the building can hear the group’s music through the walls of the center. Inside, strollers line the hallways and children run around playfully. Musicians play guitars, keyboards and drums.

The service is a mix of silent prayer and the boisterous singing of hymns. Part of the service is called “testimony time,” when anyone in the congregation can talk about what the sermon meant to them, how Jesus and God affected their lives during the week, or whatever is on their minds.

On Valentine’s Day, Butler officially turned the reins of the church over to her daughter Liza, an ordained Baptist pastor, along with co-lead pastors and church members Ben Dubow and Jen Moyer-Washington. Butler said that during some meetings of the church board, Liza will say, “Sorry founding pastor, you’ve been out-voted.” And Butler, a self-described control freak and introvert, says she’s OK with that.

“I took the hands off the wheel and trust in God’s will,” Butler said. “I feel very proud of the new leadership and proud of the church. I don’t want to see the church drift. I didn’t want it to die. I want it to thrive without me.”

Scott Thumma, a professor of sociology of religion and doctor of ministry director at Hartford Seminary, had Butler as a student and has been impressed with her efforts as a pastor “trying to plant a nontraditional church.”

“She always believed the church needed to be re-invented to attract a new generation,” Thumma said. “She could have taken another church and revitalized it, but she wanted to start from the beginning from the ground up and created something new and original. She wanted something more progressive in social issues while maintaining the deep commitment to the Bible along with faith and worshipping.

“She wanted a church that reflected the God she experienced in daily life,” he said. “She has that deeply spiritual, culturally relevant and progressive church she always wanted.”

Church members have been saddened but inspired as they watched the weekly physical toll the disease has taken on their leader.

“When you are facing a fatal disease there were tears and frustration,” said Cindy Martinez, a member of the church since its formation. “But it is all about how we handle the challenges. Instead of feeling sorry for herself she immersed herself into creating hero stories - people who overcame huge odds when their body, mind and soul were broken. But they did and she’s studied them all.”

Evelyn Mantilla, who attends services with her wife and two young daughters, has been with Butler since the days at the old G. Fox building.

“She’s brought an example of true female leadership, especially in the eyes of my daughter,” Mantilla said. “Being taught about spirituality from a strong woman brings a strong example to our daughter. I can’t begin to describe what that means. She’s given us courage to be different and do what’s right.

“Just watching her walk her path and maintaining her positivity is inspirational. We admire her ability to be open about the process and her condition. She leads by example.”

Nancy Butler said she has always believed in “taking up the cross” and following Jesus. She believes God always has a plan even if it’s “in a very strange way.” If she got the disease earlier, Butler said, she never would have been able to start her new church and see it grow. She believes ALS has only intensified her faith.

“Through all the struggles, we got it right. God took it and did something with it,” she said. “I wanted my life to count and make a difference and to make Christ known.”

Thumma, who as a young man watched an uncle fight ALS and try to make sense of it, said that while there is some of that in Butler, she has “accepted her fate with faith and Godly peace.”

“I think it’s the ultimate Easter story,” he said. “She’s able to express love and joy through her suffering. … She’s an inspiration for all of us facing mortality. The bitter irony of it is just as she gets the dream of her life going and standing on its own, she’s no longer able to stand on her own. But she has handled it with grace and dignity.”

___

Information from: Hartford Courant, http://www.courant.com