Linda Martin

Let me introduce myself briefly! I am an Associate Broker, licensed in Virginia. I am the Managing Broker for Montague Miller in Culpeper, VA. As a full time real estate professional since 1980, I have sold, trained and mentored, managed and owned offices across Northern Virginia. In 1990, having moved to the Warrenton area from Falls Church in 1988, I moved back into sales. While developing my product knowledge and professional contacts in this "country suburban" area, less than an hour from our nation's capital, I have also maintained my Northern Virginia colleagues and contacts. As a result, my daily business includes many cross-town as well as cross-country clients, and many of my past folks are recommending me to their kids, even as I assist them to prepare for their own retirement moves! I am happy to assist you across Fauquier, Fairfax, Loudoun, and Prince William as well as in more rural settings such as Culpeper, Clarke, Rappahannock, Madison and Warren counties. My experience allows me to serve you from the Potomac to the Piedmont as your personal real estate advantage. My goal is to be your personal Realtor® for life! I stay active in my local and state Realtor® Associations not only to serve, but also to stay up to date on laws, issues, and services that help me assist my clients even better! I am a certified Ethics Instructor in Virginia, and beyond the classroom I am mindful of how important the Code of Ethics is to my clients as I conduct daily business! With new Virginia requirements effective in July of 2012, I will also be teaching other agents as well as my own clients about the meaning and the spirit of Agency. I have had the opportunity to help lots of buyers and sellers for over 32 years. Given the opportunity to assist you, whether to rent, buy, sell or build, I will put together the right team to assist you through your entire real estate transaction. My goal is to maximize my client's savings, minimize the "bumps" along the way, and achieve a smooth move, well done!