Posted on September 22, 2013

Pelosi: Republicans Are "Legislative Arsonists" Trying To Burn Down The Government

Please enable Javascript to watch this video

CROWLEY: Do you believe they really want to shut down the government? Because you know if you said to them, they would say, we think this is a disaster because it is hurting businesses. It is causing businesses to go from full time jobs to part time jobs. So, they can get out from under health care.



PELOSI: It is an excuse. It is not a reason. It is an excuse, it is not a reason. Now, for the 42nd time this week, they voted to defund one approach or another, did fund the Affordable Care Act. They know it's not going anyplace. Instead of spending the time of congress to reach an agreement -- now, this is a wolf in wolf's clothing.



It's two nos do not make a yes. On the other hand, now they have a bill. It's sort of disguises what's happening on the budget side where they have a budget figure which their own appropriation's chairman said this is not enough funding to carry on the work of government.



CROWLEY: Well, that was my next question. Is the spending level OK with you? Set aside --



PELOSI: No.



CROWLEY: No.



PELOSI: No.



CROWLEY: How far away are they from what you could deal with?



PELOSI: What we deal with is what we agreed to in the Budget Control act which is a bipartisan agreement. The Budget Control Act was one trillion 57, theirs is $988 billion. That makes a very big difference in the delivery of service to the American people. So, I think it's really important to note that there are lots of excuses that they use.



But for many of them, I call them legislative arsonists. They're there to burn down what we should be building up in terms of investments and education and scientific research and all that it is that make our country great and competitive. I don't paint them all with the same brush. And I certainly don't paint the speaker with that brush. But enough of them in their caucus to shut down government. That would be a victory for them.