Sioux Falls, SD

They're often referred to as the spoilers of any election; the Independent voter.

Over the past five years, there's been a big increase in the number of voters who are registering Independent.

There are still a lot of people who vote Republican or Democrat in South Dakota, but the number of people who have registered Independent has grown.

“I take pride I'm an Independent, because that way I'm not affiliated with any certain party, I don't have to agree with Democrats or Republicans, I can agree with some Democrats and I can agree with some Republicans, based on policy and what I've seen," Independent registered voter Dave Person said.

“When I first registered to vote, I was in high school and I have some Democrats in my family and I have some Republicans, and my family is probably more of a Republican party, but I didn't understand the difference between the two parties, so I went with, I'm right in the middle," Independent registered voter Shaun Boen said.

Person and Boen are part of a growing political trend.

Take a look at these numbers.

In 2009, there were over 81,000 (81,257) registered Independent voters in the state. Today, there are over 100 thousand (100,547).

Dissatisfaction with the two parties, Augustana College Political Science professor Emily Wanless said.

Augustana College Political Science professor Emily Wanless says voters, not only in South Dakota, but across the entire country are moving away from mainstream party affiliation for a number of reasons.

“Whether it's the policy stances of the parties, whether it's the candidates the parties are putting forward, Independents are seeing support from voters, its dissatisfaction," Wanless said.

Some political pundits claim, Independent voters are just uniformed about the candidates and issues and choose Independent as their party preference as to not align themselves with any particular party.

“Voters like the idea of being themselves, independent thinkers, they don't necessarily like the two parties that we have, so we are going to say, 'we are Independent,' but when it comes down to it, typically we see voters having a strong preference for one party or the other," Wanless said,

In other words Wanless says, just because someone is registered Independent, doesn't necessarily mean they'll vote for an Independent candidate.

“They typically don't do very well, I would say less than 10% get about five percent of the vote or more," Wanless said.

The numbers reflect that. There are only two Independents in the Senate right now and none in the house.

Wanless says during an election, Independent candidates usually fight an uphill battle for a number of reasons.

“Financially they don't have the backing from outside organizations that support traditional Republican or Democratic candidates, parties themselves produce a lot of funding, they also have an infrastructure to get voters to the polls," Wanless said.

Congress' approval rating is at an all-time low, but the question is, if there is truly dissatisfaction in Washington, will it be enough to cause change.

“I've always been sick of the politics in Washington," Person said.

"I don't think it has anything to do with that we just need to get the right people into office and take care of that," Boen said.