SAN FRANCISCO — After the Rockies called up three pitchers to make their major-league debuts within six days of each other — the first time that’s happened in the majors since the Padres did it in 1986 — focus turned back to the players the rookies replaced.

Colorado pitchers Brett Anderson and Tyler Chatwood on Friday threw proper bullpen sessions, off a mound, for the first time since they were put on the 60-day disabled lists.

“I feel like a real baseball player again,” Anderson said.

The left-handed Anderson broke his left index finger in an at-bat in San Francisco on April 12.

And the righty Chatwood suffered right flexor tendon inflammation in his right elbow during a game April 29.

“It feels good,” Chatwood said.

Both pitchers ramped up throwing sessions and long-toss on flat ground within the last two weeks, but only at partial strength. Friday’s bullpen session was the first proper pitching since their injuries — but still at less than 100 percent.

But their timelines have meshed.

“I’d rather not have someone in the same situation. But it is nice to feed off each other,” Anderson said. “You have somebody who can tell you if something seems off or not right.”

Anderson and Chatwood will start throwing fastballs and change-ups on Monday in Los Angeles. Anderson is aiming for a return sometime before the all-star break July 13.

Chatwood’s timeline is more difficult to pin down, since he’s rehabbing a more delicate elbow injury.

Their returns could turn the tide of Rockies DL stints.

“We have too many right now,” Anderson said. “Seems like we have half a roster back home.”

CarGo’s biopsy comes back negative. Carlos Gonzalez, who remained in Denver while the Rockies started a weekend series against the Giants, got good news Friday.

A biopsy showed the tumor removed from his left index finger Tuesday in Cleveland was a benign neuroma — a kind of callous of the nerves.

It was likely caused by repeated trauma to the finger in at-bats.

Rockies head trainer Keith Dugger described it as a “fatty mass with tentacles.” It was causing Gonzalez finger to swell too big to wear a batting glove. But the swelling wasn’t normal and it would go away within in an hour.

The Rockies had to pull Gonzalez from the lineup three times before he underwent a surgery that turned from exploratory to excision.