David Gardner For the Camera

While Colorado has long been a beacon for the young, we have seen growth as a retirement hot spot including recognition as No. 2 on Bankrate's 2015 Best States to Retire list. While much of this attention is due to our scenery and quality of life, there are many financial benefits to living in Colorado when retired.

Senior Property Tax Exemption. If you're 65 or over this year and have lived in your own home for ten years, take action today to save about $600 each year in property tax. It's called the Senior Property Tax Homestead Exemption. You qualify through being at least 65, and owning and occupying your primary residence for ten consecutive years. These requirements must be met as of Jan. 1 of the year of application.

To get the exemption for 2016, you should apply by this Wednesday, July 15, with some provisions for stragglers until Sept. 15. The exemption works by halving the amount of property tax on the first $200,000 of home value. So if you live in a $500,000 house, you'll pay tax as if it were a $400,000 house.

Yes if you own a $1 million house you may be under whelmed, but treat it as $600 lying there in the middle of the sidewalk. Pick it up!

Contact your county assessor office in order to apply for the exemption. You only need to apply once in order to receive the exemption. This one form could mean $12,000 or more in savings over your lifetime. In Boulder County you can find information and apply at http://www.bouldercounty.org/dept/assessor/pages/seniors.aspx.

Advertisement

State Retirement Income Exemption. Once you turn 55, Colorado allows you to exempt up to $20,000 a year of retirement income from your state taxes. Once you turn 65, this amount increases to $24,000 a year. These limits apply to each spouse, meaning a couple aged 65 or over could have $48,000 of retirement income exempt from Colorado state income tax. Just how much does this mean to you? It could mean up to $2,200 a year in lower Colorado state income taxes.

You should know that "retirement income" in this context has a rather broad definition. It's considered pension or annuity income, Social Security benefits, or taxable IRA distributions including Roth conversions. In fact, if you're under 55 and have inherited an IRA or annuity and are forced to take distributions, you can qualify for this same exemption.

ACA Subsidies. The latest Supreme Court decision on health insurance subsidies reminded us of this key component of the Affordable Care Act. Not so many years ago if you retired before age 65, to get health insurance you faced costly COBRA premiums. Your alternative was to supply an exhaustive account of any medicine and treatment you have received and cross your fingers on getting coverage without riders. With the ACA in force, not only is guaranteed issue health insurance available to early retirees, but in most cases you can get your insurance subsidized based on your income (not your assets). As we have addressed before, even millionaires can potentially receive $7,000 or more in annual tax free subsidies on their health insurance.

529 Account Tax Deductions. You may not think of 529 education savings plans as a tax benefit for retirees. But in our practice we have seen more grandparents save for their grandchildren's higher education. Even though you're not the parent, if you establish a Colorado 529 account as the owner (the grandchild would be the beneficiary), then you can take a Colorado state income tax deduction. It doesn't matter if your grandchildren live in other states. If you put $15,000 a year away for your grandchildren, this would be $694 in annual savings.

David Gardner is a certified financial planner with a practice in Boulder County and can be reached with questions at dave@yellowstonefinancial.com and on Twitter @Dave_CFP