Buy Photo House Democrats, including Minority Leader Craig Fitzhugh (center), vowed to continue pushing their Republican counterparts to take action on Insure Tennessee. (Photo: Joel Ebert / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

One day after a House subcommittee sent an Insure Tennessee-related bill to summer study, House Democrats reaffirmed their plans to continue pushing similar legislation this year and take the issue to the campaign trail.

Flanked by several of his Democratic colleagues, Rep. John Ray Clemmons of Nashville said Thursday that a bill he is sponsoring will force lawmakers to continue discussing Gov. Bill Haslam's controversial Medicaid expansion plan.

"Republican leadership, especially the governor, has failed to show compassion for those who fall in the coverage gap in the state of Tennessee, and refused to push or promote Insure Tennessee," he said.

Clemmons said his bill, entitled the "Respect for Tennessee Taxpayers Act," seeks to get the state to accept "all federal funds available to provide the full extent of Medicaid eligibility expansion" allowed under the Affordable Care Act.

"As we all know, over $1.7 billion has been turned away in the state of Tennessee," he said. "The source of those reimbursement funds are taxpayer dollars."

Clemmons' bill specifically requires the state treasurer to report to the legislature a summary of "investments that have been made of federal funding received by the state and for which the investments are required by federal law."

"I would hope that my colleagues on both sides of the aisle, especially Republican leadership, would have respect for the taxpayers of Tennessee and make sure that our dollars are spent in Tennessee to ensure that everyone has access to quality and affordable health care," he said.

Republican leaders, including Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey, have said they plan on waiting until after the November presidential election before deciding what to do with the insurance plan.

The Democrats reiterated their disappointment with the House Banking and Insurance Subcommittee’s decision to send House Minority Leader Craig Fitzhugh’s Insure Tennessee bill into political purgatory — bills sent to summer study are often viewed as attempts to defeat the legislation.

Fitzhugh's bill sought to put a non-binding referendum on the November ballot asking whether voters support Medicaid expansion. The effort failed after Rep. Jeremy Durham, R-Franklin, successfully motioned to send the measure to summer study.

Rep. David Shepard, D-Dickson, who serves on the insurance and banking subcommittee, said he met with his Republican counterparts on the committee and they agreed to meet during the summer to discuss Insure Tennessee.

Rep. Larry Miller, D-Memphis, who on Wednesday withdrew a resolution that sought to empower Haslam to enact the Medicaid expansion by whatever means necessary, vowed that Democrats would not give up on the issue, despite the recent setbacks.

"We're going to take it to the voters during this election year," he said.

Reach Joel Ebert at 615-772-1681 and on Twitter @joelebert29.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1px8m3z