Saturday, April 4, event will feature 40-plus speakers, 70-plus vendors

Visitors check out the hemp products at the 2014 NoCo Hemp Expo in Windsor. This year, the event is much bigger and will be held at The Ranch on Saturday, April 4. ( Special to the Reporter-Herald / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

If you go What: NoCo Hemp Expo. When: 10 a.m.-6 p.m. Saturday, April 4. Where: Thomas M. McKee Building at The Ranch, 5260 Arena Circle, Loveland. Cost: $15 for a seed ticket (general admission); $40 for sprout ticket (includes admission, custom hemp box of products, event poster on hemp paper and more); $100 for a harvest ticket (admission, hemp box, poster, event shirt, tote bag and other hemp goodies). More info: Visit nocohempexpo.com for details.

The second year of the NoCo Hemp Expo promises to be big, according to Morris Beegle with Colorado Hemp Company and the organizer of the expo.

In 2014, the event was at a club in Windsor. The expo had 15-20 vendors, speakers and live music.

"We sold out. Everyone really thought it was a great event and the goal this year is to take it to the next level," Beegle said.

And they have.

The NoCo Hemp Expo is at The Ranch this year, with over 70 vendors slated to attend and over 40 speakers, including featured speaker Rep. Jared Polis, D-Colo.

The event will include hemp food, hemp paper products and apparel, hemp beer, artists painting on hemp paper, a sports car with a body made from hemp and activities for children.

Beegle said he had planned to move the event to The Ranch by maybe 2016, but it just worked out to do it this year. He couldn't find a large enough space that had everything they needed.

Advertisement

The expo will be in the McKee building and will include two speaker presentation rooms. Speakers will educate the public about hemp through movie documentaries, hemp instruments, live painting on hemp canvas and more.

"We can build something special here," Beegle said, who envisions Larimer and Weld county farmers growing hemp that is "healthy and good for you, and good for the planet."

"It should never have been illegal in the first place," he said.

Products made from hemp, like this belt photographed Tuesday will be available at the upcoming NoCo Hemp Expo. (Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Beegle is particularly excited to educate the public about hemp, as he explains that, while hemp and marijuana plants are both in the cannabis family, hemp is not a drug.

"There has been a lot of movement in hemp legislation. We have 23 states that have put in hemp legislation this last year. There's a federal bill that's been introduced called the 2015 Hemp Farming Bill. That bill will pull (hemp) off the schedule altogether (that lumps hemp with marijuana)," Beegle said. "This is not a marijuana event. It's all about hemp. That's one thing I definitely want clear."

He said that he did work closely with organizers at The Ranch, and a Larimer County attorney, since the Larimer County Sheriff's Office has concerns with any hemp products that might be illegal at the federal level.

"We have a Larimer County sheriff suing the state for Amendment 64 (which legalized the consumption and growth of small amounts of marijuana in 2012). Amendment 64 has obviously created some issues at the state level with law enforcement so there's some confusion there," Beegle said. "They want to make sure that what we're doing is legal. But you can go into Wal-Mart and Target and buy hemp products. There has been hemp in stores for decades." He said that since hemp is not a drug because its THC level is almost nonexistent, it should not be lumped with marijuana.

After Beegle discussed the expo with a Larimer County lawyer, a conclusion was reached that live hemp plants and viable hemp seeds will not be sold at the expo.

"Their reasoning is you can't tell the difference between marijuana seeds and hemp seeds," Beegle said. "Technically all this is legal under the state constitution of Colorado, but at the federal level, the waters are muddy, so the county is taking that position."

John Manago, patrol captain with the Larimer County Sheriff's Office, said the agency is "opposed to anything against federal law. We remain the same on that. The sheriff's stance on things is that if it is against the federal law, we can't condone that."

However, Beegle doesn't agree that hemp seeds are illegal at the federal level and said that the federal bipartisan Farm Bill of 2013 gives Colorado more rights to make its own laws about hemp. The bill gave individual states that had legalized hemp the rights to produce hemp for research purposes.

"Colorado is well-situated to be a leader in the emerging sector of hemp production," Polis said in a phone interview on Friday. "Currently, the U.S. imports over $3 million in hemp products. I think there are lots of opportunities here and those include consumer products and health products, replacing some of the imports with local northern Colorado production."

Polis said that hemp is a complete protein, which makes it desired as a supplement, especially for vegetarians.

"We have already passed the Farm Bill that allows colleges and universities to do research on industrial hemp. Our main issues now involve making sure we can legally move seeds between states and that's what we're working on now," Polis said.

He added that hemp has been perfectly legal to import throughout history but that it should be produced locally like Americans did at the beginning of the 20th century. It became illegal in 1937 in the marijuana tax act.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.