Let the food fights begin, thanks to a cheeky new report released by a distinguished panel of 14 U.S. nutrition experts.

The Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee — DGAC, for short — recently issued a surprising and controversial 571-page evaluation of what’s gone wrong with the typical American diet. The more I digest it, the more revolutionary it seems.

Hold on to your Whoppers: The report calls for a plant-based diet, much less red meat, taxes on high-sugar products, and personal coaching to help citizens eat smarter and fight their addictions to toxic processed foods. I’m not making this up. The way most Americans eat is making the country sick and fat, the independent advisers concluded. The committee weighed tons of data — including the fact that 70 percent of Americans are overweight or obese — and called for drastic changes in both thinking and policy.

For starters, the report is a giant poke in the eye — or more fitting, a metal spike into the brain — for the U.S. conventional meat industry.

As Politico reported: “If adopted by the departments of Agriculture and Human and Health Service as part of their every-five- year exercise to educate the public about how to eat healthier, the suggestions could not only influence consumer decisions but also be used to guide federal nutrition policy, including the $16 billion school lunch program.”

Fat chance. It’s one thing for the report to emphasize the usual stuff about eating more fruits and veggies; it’s another to imagine the government is actually going to tax desserts or tell the truth about our toxic food supply.

Still, it’s worth taking a closer look at some of the DGAC recommendations. Even if the government refuses to go along, you can still follow along in your own home. Go to DietaryGuidelines.org to see the full report. You have until April 8 to chew it over and make comments.

■ The red meat issue: There are two good reasons the panel wants you to give up red meat. First, conventionally produced meat is laden with chemicals, hormones and additives that are unhealthy to humans. Just because all those burgers and pork chops are legal, don’t assume they’re good for your innards. They’re not; even though the meat industry is going to try its darndest over the next few months to convince you the jury is still out.

DGAC is the jury. It’s telling you you’ll be a lot healthier if you eat a plant-based diet. Believe them.

The second reason the panel came out against red meat has to do with the environment. It’s a first. In the past, no one in charge talked about the obvious link between food policy and environmental policy, but this time the nutrition experts bit the bullet and explained that consuming red meat isn’t just bad for human health, it’s unhealthy and unsustainable for the planet. Animal farts are a leading cause of climate change. Laugh all you want but don’t turn up your nose at the importance of what they’re saying.

■ Eat less sugar: The eat-a-lot-less sugar recommendation is old news. You’re probably tired of hearing it. Too bad.

Sugar causes obesity and serious chronic health problems. Americans consume 22 to 30 teaspoons of added sugar daily, half of it from soda, juices and sugar drinks. The DGAC report tells you to cut that in half, at least. And to help you change your behavior, it’s calling for taxes on high sugar foods and drinks. It also wants the amount of added sugar clearly spelled out on nutrition labels. This may sound like pie in the sky, but think tobacco and how every cigarette box now tells you smoking can kill you.

Look out, Pop-Tarts and Frosted Flakes.

■ The big fat mistake: Since 1980, the DGAC has urged people to cut back on cholesterol and fat.

Surprise! They were wrong — and in this new report, they almost admit it. When people switched to non-fat and low-fat things, they ended up eating loads of grains, pasta, carbs and addictive, oversweetened and processed foods.

It turns out processed foods are the enemy, not fat. Now the panel wants you go back to eating healthy fats — olive oil, nuts, even butter — and forget all the bad things they said about eating eggs and shrimp.

Is it confusing? Absolutely. Is it essential to your health? You betcha.

Marilynn Preston is a fitness expert, personal trainer and speaker on healthy lifestyle issues. She has a website, marilynnpreston.com, and welcomes reader questions, which can be sent to MyEnergyExpress@aol.com.