BUFFALO — Hillary Clinton looked energized by a crowd of more than 1,200 supporters who packed into the Pierce Arrow Museum in Buffalo on Friday and told them as president she won’t forget Western New York.

Many supporters stood outside in temperatures in the mid-30s for up to two hours to see Clinton. A group of protesters with anti-Clinton signs stood across the street from the museum.

The former U.S. senator from New York and secretary of state spoke from a stage surrounded by youths waving American flags and signs such as Buffalo for Hillary, Women for Hillary and Cheektowaga is 4 Hillary.

Politicians from Mayor Bryon Brown, Assemblyman Sean Ryan, State Sen. Tim Kennedy, Erie County Executive Mark Poloncarz and Lt. Gov. Kathy Hochul warmed up the crowd before Clinton took the stage. They all urged a record turnout for Clinton on primary day April 19.

“Don’t worry about Buffalo because we’ve got your back,” the lieutenant governor told Clinton.

“She’s qualified, experienced and is someone who knows how to get things done,” Hochul told the audience. “This is history in the making” with the first woman president, she said, urging supporters to take to social media, the streets and churches to encourage Democratic voters to turn out and vote for Clinton.

The “qualified” remark was left over from Thursday, when Clinton supporters jumped on remarks her primary opponent U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders made when calling her unqualified.

Sanders initially refused to walk back the accusation, while Clinton replied to questions by remarking Sanders was better than either of the top two Republican presidential candidates.

“There’s no doubt in my mind that Buffalo is on the rise,” Clinton told the audience after touring the nearby Buffalo-Niagara Medical Campus where there are 12,000 jobs. “We need more success stories like this across New York and the country.”

Clinton related a story from her 2000 campaign for the U.S. Senate in which a hotel maid gave her a snow globe with a Buffalo in it and told her, “Don’t forget Buffalo.” The Buffalo globe is a fixture in her home, she said. “I see it every day. I’m not going to forget Buffalo.”

Two of the things anyone wanting to be president must consider is: “Can you keep us safe and can you bring our country together instead of driving it apart?” Clinton said.

She said the country needed more infrastructure jobs — roads, water and sewer, and “high-speed internet to all of Western New York and America.”

Advanced manufacturing will be another key sector for jobs, she said. “I want to provide tax incentives to make it in America, not somewhere else.” More funding is needed for research similar to what is happening at the Buffalo-Niagara Medical Campus.

The country can continue to fight climate change by emphasizing green energy such as wind, solar and geothermal. The country’s largest solar-panel factory is being equipped nearby at River Bend in South Buffalo, she noted, promising a half billion solar panels would be installed in her first four-year term as president.

Clinton said she wanted to be “a small-business president” and promised to expand women and minority-owned businesses. Young people have much promise as small-business entrepreneurs as well, she added.

Clinton also said she was proud New York, under Gov. Andrew Cuomo, agreed to raise the minimum wage. She held out hope for equal pay for women as well. “It’s a family issue,” she declared. “We don’t have a gender discount.”

Clinton added, “Everything I just said, Republicans disagree with.”

When her husband, Bill Clinton, first ran for president in 1992 against President George H.W. Bush, his mantra was, “It’s the economy, stupid.” With this election, Clinton told the group, “The economy is going to be at the core of the general election.”

In answer to Sanders’ proposal for a free college education for everyone, Clinton has proposed a “debt-free” college education at any public college or university. Students and parents should be able to refinance student loans. The loans should be pegged at a percentage of income, and become paid up after 20 years, she said.

Clinton reminded the audience that “before there was Obamacare, there was something called Hillarycare. I learned from that loss.” While Obamacare covers 90 percent of Americans, she said, “We can do 100 percent.”

On other health-care issues, Clinton said she would do more to control the cost of prescription drugs and would require mental health be treated like health. “We need to start treating addiction for the health problem it is.”

Clinton described herself as “a progressive who tries to get things done.”

Referring to Donald Trump’s statement last week that a woman and her doctor should be punished for having an abortion, Clinton said she would defend a woman’s right to control her own body. “Don’t just ignore it,” she said of Trump’s comments.

She also defended Planned Parenthood, which came under fire by Republican candidates as well as in Congress.

“I will also work for common-sense gun safety reforms,” she promised.

After the Pierce Arrow Museum rally, Clinton made a visit to an East Side coffee shop, Golden Cup Coffee, and later at Charlie the Butcher in Cheektowaga. She then was on the way to a campaign event in Rochester.

(Contact reporter Rick Miller at rmiller@oleantimesherald.com. Follow him on Twitter, @RMillerOTH)