Domantas Sabonis swiveled his head, looking for a foil. Seven-footers don’t easily disappear. But Gonzaga’s center couldn’t find his antagonist. Then he popped into view.

Utah’s Jakob Poeltl, one of the biggest big men in college basketball, squared up a jump shot. The 7-foot center, a likely NBA lottery pick, was stuck on the perimeter settling for jumpers. And Sabonis tracked him down.

In a battle of two of the best college centers in America, Sabonis settled the score in one quick second-half transition Saturday night in Denver in a second-round NCAA Tournament game. He blocked Poeltl’s shot, raced down the court, then spun around in the post for an easy layup.

And just like that, No. 11 seed Gonzaga stunned No. 3 seed Utah in an impressive 82-59 victory at the Pepsi Center.

“He’s very talented,” Sabonis said of his fellow center. “But our point was to win the game.”

Sabonis scored 19 points and grabbed 10 rebounds. And more important, he held Poeltl to five points, his lowest total of the season. Eric McLellan nailed a game-high 22 and wingman Kyle Wiltjer hit 17 for Gonzaga, which shot 55 percent and was never threatened after breaking to a 15-point halftime lead.

Sabonis was the last center standing in Colorado after the NCAA plopped three of the best bigs in one corner of the tournament bracket. Purdue’s A.J. Hammons fell away in a first-round upset Thursday. And Poeltl will go home early.

“If you haven’t faced and felt him up close like that,” Gonzaga coach Mark Few said of Sabonis, “there’s an adjustment period.”

Gonzaga advanced to a second consecutive Sweet 16 and will look to make it consecutive Elite 8 appearances. Every year, they are the loudest whisper in America, the little school from Washington state that can’t possibly play with the best.

“There’s a little bit of desperation,” Few said. “Our backs have been pressed against the wall. It’s fight or flight.”

And this Gonzaga edition barely got into the tournament. The Zags needed to beat top-seeded Saint Mary’s in the West Coast Conference championship game to even qualify for the NCAA Tournament.

“It’s been really comforting and freeing,” Few said of Gonzaga’s low seed. “We can go into the games and just let it rip.”

The Zags made easy work of the first two rounds, winning by a combined 39 points. They routed Seton Hall by 16 points on Thursday.

Sabonis was in the middle of each rout. He recorded 21 points and 16 rebounds against Seton Hall, the Big East champion. The sophomore son of Arvydas Sabonis will soon follow his father, the Lithuanian legend and a basketball Hall of Famer, to the NBA.

His tournament audition should be swinging in Sabonis’ favor. He dominated the paint, outrebounding Poeltl 10-4. When Poeltl drew a second foul and slinked to the bench midway through the first half, Gonzaga took advantage for a 15-2 run before intermission.

“Sabonis got the best of Jakob,” Utah coach Larry Krystkowiak said, adding that Poeltl played with an injured ankle.

The Bulldogs led by as many as 30 in the second half. Utah held a lead for just 20 seconds early in the game. Wiltjer, a 6-10 forward, hassled the Utes on the perimeter, hitting 3-for-4 from 3-point range.

Few left his starters in until the two-minute mark.

“I wouldn’t be surprised if they’re in the Final Four,” Krystkowiak said.

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or @nickgroke