Shahar Azran Photography Aakash Odedra

The crowd at the Apollo Theater on Tuesday night was dancing even before the curtain went up for “James Brown: Get on the Good Foot,” a tribute in dance that repeats on Oct 25 and 26, then tours the U.S.

Created to celebrate the Godfather of Soul’s extensive influence on performance, “Get on the Good Foot” features 12 short segments that swing from tap to social dance to old-school hip-hop and more – all set to Brown’s tunes re-mixed for a balance of old and new.

But the surprise hit of the evening was dancer and choreographer Aakash Odedra, who performed Indian kathak dance to the form’s traditional music and James Brown vocals. Wearing a long, sheer robe and wide, flowing pants, Mr. Odedra whirled and placed his arms with the precision customary to this classical Indian style. Though the connection to James Brown may seem tenuous, the point was his global reach. “His music touches almost every corner of the world,” said Mr. Odedra.

In creating the dance, Mr. Odedra researched how to create an East-West connection: “He had that sense of ecstasy, which reached upward spiritually, but also goes horizontally to the audience.”

To tap into that, he named his piece “Ecstasy,” and wove in both kathak and movement derived from the Sufi tradition of whirling dervishes. At one point, though, he stops and strikes his bare feet against the floor in homage to Brown’s extraordinary footwork.

“I thought about what is the essence of my dance and James Brown’s? Rhythm,” he said. “He used so much of his feet. And there was so much energy sourced from the ground. I wanted to bring that and uplift it.”

There was also a conceptual link that deepened the dancer’s purpose. Mr. Odedra, 29, is a British citizen who grew up in Leicester, in the U.K. midlands. His parents were born in Africa, and his grandparents are Indian; he returned to India regularly and studied dance related to his heritage. In his research into Brown’s messages of political activism and black pride, Mr. Odedra found a connection to questions of British identity. “James Brown does not finish and end with performance and singing,” he said.

Mr. Odedra’s performance is a featured solo that compliments the show’s ensemble numbers danced by the Philadelphia-based contemporary dance company Philadanco. He was brought into “Get on the Good Foot” by director Otis Sallid, who choreographed for Spike Lee’s “School Daze” and “Do the Right Thing.”

After its debut in Harlem, “Get on the Good Foot” will tour to Baton Rouge, Atlanta and Los Angeles. Additional tour stops will be announced for 2014-2015, including stops in Germany and Europe in 2015.

You can listen to a WSJ Radio interview with the author here.