The FEMA camps are ready… Eight hundred empty secret prisons, detention centers, concentration camps scattered around the U.S.A.—fully operational, surrounded by full-time armed guards, and ready to receive prisoners.

Obama’s Homeland Security Department bought 1.6 billion bullets using your taxpayer dollars. That’s five bullets for every man, woman, and child…five bullets waiting to pierce your skull…hollow-point bullets, sniper bullets, forbidden under international law for use in war. Plus 2,700 military tanks for domestic use, and Obama has created a para-military police force operating under Homeland Security.

Do you think those 1.6 billion bullets were intended for a bunch of Arab terrorists trying to take over a Walmart or an airport? Think again. Do you really believe the FEMA camps were built to house Muslim fanatics or flood victims? Get real. Go ask Hillary Clinton what the FEMA camps are for. Go ask Nancy Pelosi or John Boehner or President Obama/Soetoro. You’re paying billions of dollars for the government to put you away.

Most of the 800 FEMA camps can house up to 20,000 prisoners. That works out to 15 million Americans the government is ready to lock up. All the camps have railroad facilities, and the boxcars have been built to transport the prisoners. Sounds like Auschwitz? The cars have shackles welded in; plastic coffins are stockpiled and ready for use.

What if enough people found out that the 9/11 “terrorist” attack was no terrorist attack at all, but a false-flag event carried out by the U.S. Government to serve as a pretext to invade Iraq and Afghanistan and to install the Surveillance State at home? And what if millions of people demanded that the real perpetrators, the real 9/11 mass murderers—in the White House, the CIA, the Pentagon, the judiciary—be brought to justice in a Nuremberg-style criminal court?

The FEMA camps are ready. To put the movement’s leaders away. To crush the dissent.

What if enough people decided it’s time to dismantle the Federal Reserve (like President John Kennedy attempted to do just before the U.S. Government murdered him)—if enough people said, “This cancerous monster is not even ‘federal’ at all, it’s a scam—a cabal of a few big banks that suck our blood, transferring wealth from the 99 percent to the one percent. Let’s abolish the Fed and change the system by creating rules that benefit the 99 percent. Let’s have economic democracy in this country.”

The FEMA camps are ready. To shut the troublemakers up. Keep them out of sight.

What if the people rose up—fifty million Americans on Food Stamps, tens of millions unemployed (the real unemployment rate around 20% if you look past the government lies), millions homeless, the “middle class” turned into serfs, tired of the poverty, tired of the wars, the lies, the exploitation, the pseudo-progressive usurper who governs to the right of Bush—what if all these people rose up in a peaceful democratic revolution, wave upon wave of protest, and demanded an end to the one-party system of Tweedledee and Tweedledum, an end to the Permanent War Economy?

The FEMA camps are waiting and ready. 1.6 billion bullets…five bullets for every man, woman, child.

Still, it doesn’t hurt to ask “What if…?” And remember, the 99 percent vastly outnumber those who control the police-state apparatus. As Ralph Benko pointed out in that capitalist forum, Forbes magazine, “It’s time for a national conversation” about the FEMA camps. “Spending money this way is beyond absurd well into perverse,” he notes, calling for President Obama to cancel or drastically scale back—by 90% or even 99%—the Homeland Security Department order for ammunition and its deployment of armored personnel carriers.

A more meaningful national discussion might demand answers to the following: “What is the purpose of these secret FEMA camps? Why does the U.S. Government need to make plans to lock up 15 million people? This is a government that does not trust its own citizens and greatly fears popular dissent.

It’s time to abolish the FEMA camps. The government has repeatedly lied about the secret prisons, first denying their existence, then reluctantly admitting they exist. Dismantle the FEMA camps and give the billions of dollars back to the taxpayers.

___________

FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency) is authorized to turn the United States into a police state in the event of a real or manufactured crisis. FEMA is “the most powerful entity in the U.S. FEMA has the power to take complete control over the United States, it can perform the following actions: suspend laws, move entire populations, arrest and detain citizens without a warrant and hold them without trial, seize property, seize food supplies, seize transportation systems, suspend the Constitution…. These camps are to be operated by FEMA should Martial Law need to be implemented in the U.S. and all it would take is a presidential pen on a proclamation and the attorney general’s signature on a warrant to which a list of names is attached.” —“FEMA Camps + 1.6 billion bullets” (http://homment.com/fema-camps). Includes a map showing the concentration camp nearest you.

“All the components of Police State USA are currently in place. They go far beyond government snooping of emails and telephone conversations. They include:

* Extrajudicial assassinations of alleged terrorists including US citizens, in blatant violation of the Fifth amendment “No person shall. .. be deprived of life. .. without due process of law.”

*The indefinite detention of US citizens without trial, namely the repeal of Habeas Corpus….

The FEMA internment camps are part of the Continuity of Government (COG), which would be put in place in the case of martial law. The internment camps are intended to “protect the government” against its citizens, by locking up protesters as well as political activists who might challenge the legitimacy of the Administration’s national security, economic or military agenda.” —Prof. Michel Chossudovsky, “The Inauguration of Police State USA. Towards a Democratic Dictatorship?” (Global Research, June 12, 2013 (http://www.globalresearch.ca/the-inauguration-of-police-state-usa-2012-obama-signs-the-national-defense-authorization-act/28441)

President Obama (legal name: Barry Soetoro) defends the creation of secret FEMA camps and has ordered millions of rounds of hollow-point ammunition for domestic use. Obama/Soetoro has stated that he has the power to keep Americans in prison indefinitely, to imprison people without charging them, with no court of law or military tribunal. This is the most radical decision ever undertaken by any U.S. President to openly flout the Constitution.

“The question of President Obama’s legitimacy is indeed a legitimate question. But exposing ‘Barry Soetoro’ means more than questioning Obama’s birthplace…. It means educating people that he legally changed his name to ‘Barry Soetoro’ and became an Indonesian citizen, and that no records in the public domain show that he ever changed his name or citizenship back…. There is a reason that Obama’s first official act as president on January 21, 2009 was to seal the release of his records with an executive order.” —Aaron Dykes, “President Obama’s real name “Barry Soetoro” tops Google Trends” (Infowars.com, Aug. 9, 2010 http://www.infowars.com/president-obamas-real-name-barry-soetoro-tops-google-trends)

Ralph Benko, “1.6 Billion Rounds Of Ammo For Homeland Security? It’s Time For A National Conversation” (Forbes, March 11, 2013; http://www.forbes.com/sites/ralphbenko/2013/03/11/1-6-billion-rounds-of-ammo-for-homeland-security-its-time-for-a-national-conversation)