More tax information Did you know? You can get an extension of time to file your taxes, according to the IRS. Those who don’t pay by April 15, however, may receive a penalty or interest. Go to http://www.irs.gov/uac/Form-4868,-Application-for-Automatic-Extension-of-Time-To-File-U.S.-Individual-Income-Tax-Return for information about filing an extension. FAQs Visit www.irs.gov/filing for answers to most tax filing and preparation questions, and <URL destination="http://www.irs.gov/Refunds/Tax-Season-Refund-Frequently-Asked-Questions">irs.gov/Refunds/Tax-Season-Refund-Frequently-Asked-Questions </URL> for information about tax refunds.

Michigan residents filing their taxes have higher-than-average tax rates, vehicle property taxes and other factors to thank for a ranking among the lowest states for taxpayer return on investment, according to a recent study.

The study, released by Wallet Hub, shows Michigan ranking 46th in the in-depth look at the states with 2015’s Best and Worst Taxpayer Return on Investment.

That doesn’t sit well with many who are preparing their taxes on or before April 15, the IRS tax filing deadline. Some readers of The Oakland Press agreed with the report’s findings that in many areas, the state doesn’t stack up.

Reader Matt Towers said, “The services and the roads are among the worst in the country.”

Advertisement

Gayle Smith Barton added: “If my grandchildren weren’t here I’d be out if this state in a minute. Roads, services, you name it.”

According to WalletHub spokeswoman Jill Gonzalez, a large reason for the state’s poor ranking is the high rate of taxes in general, which are higher than many other states.

“People are paying 22 percent above the national average for taxes, which equates to about $6,900 annually,” Gonzalez said.

“Property taxes definitely hit Michigan the hardest, and there’s also a vehicle property tax, which 23 states don’t have.”

One area the study said Michigan could improve on is an issue that has been on voters’ minds for some time — infrastructure.

“We see infrastructure every day,” said Gonzalez. “We can always say our roads don’t look good. ... According to the National Transportation Research Group, in Michigan, 41 percent of our roads are in poor condition.

“Only California has more roads in bad shape.”

Gonzalez added the study notes that 28 percent of the state’s bridges were deemed deficient.

State officials are trying to address part of the infrastructure issue with a May 5 ballot question asking voters whether to pass an increase in state sales taxes from 6 percent to 7 percent and boost road funding by $1.2 billion.

Residents, local officials and state legislators have been vocal about the proposal, Proposal 1, since the deal was reached between Gov. Rick Snyder and legislators ahead of the governor’s State of the State speech.

The WalletHub study also used 22 metrics to compare the quality and efficiency of state government services across six distinct categories: Infrastructure, Education, Health, Safety, Economy and Pollution. The report looked at different rates at which citizens are taxed in each state.

According to WalletHub, Michigan ranks:

• 46th in Overall Return on Investment (ROI)

• 45th in Tax Rate

• 46th in Infrastructure

• 33rd in Education

• 47th in Health

• 26th in Safety

• 39th in Economy

• 11th in Pollution

Kathy Walker, owner of Liberty Tax Service in Waterford, said this year, there have been mixed emotions among taxpayers filing their returns.

“The biggest issue I’ve seen is with those who have seen penalties related to the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare,” said Walker, a Waterford resident.

“It’s been a hard pill for them to swallow that their refund went down because they have to pay a penalty for not having health care insurance ... but we’ve been diligent in trying to eliminate or reduce the penalties.”

Walker said she hasn’t seen many making the connection with services from the state compared to how much in taxes they’re paying. However, she has seen some dissatisfaction regarding the pension tax law, which now requires some retirees to pay a state income tax on their pensions.

People have been happy to see the “waver” smiling at passing cars along Dixie Highway, where her business is located, she said.

“I think people are just happy to get their taxes done.”

Gonzalez said that while the state ranked low in some tax areas, Michigan’s sales and excise taxes ranked 11th — likely due to the fact that groceries are excluded from the sales tax, she said.

About 23 percent of the state’s revenue comes from the sales and excise tax, more than 25 percent comes from property taxes, and about 14.5 percent is derived from income taxes, added Gonzalez. The rest of Michigan’s revenue comes from total non-tax sources.

Michigan ranked low in the study’s health category, which looked at out-of-pocket medical expenses, number of state and local hospitals per 1,000 residents, average life expectancy, infant mortality rate per 1,000 births, and average health insurance premiums.

While Michigan’s public hospital system made the top 20, according to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the infant mortality rate ranked 42nd, with four to nine per 1,000 births.

The average out-of-pocket expenses for Michigan residents total about $1,800 per household annually, as well, according to the group Families USA.