Twelve-year-old Will Blythe walked quickly beside one of his prize pigs Saturday afternoon, tapping its sides gently with a pig whip as he guided it down to the end of the pen in Domer Livestock Arena and back.

But as a handful of local celebrities found out after Blythe’s demonstration at the start of the Shawnee County Fair’s celebrity swine show, a no-stakes contest, pigs have minds of their own.

District Attorney Chad Taylor was the first up. He patiently used the pig whip to try to goad his pig toward the orange cone at the other end of the enclosure, but the pig instead began rooting in the dirt at the edge of the pen.

It took 1 minute and 56 seconds for Taylor to successfully nudge the pig forward, around the cone and back to the gate.

“That’s why we went with corn and beans instead of hogs,” Taylor said later, referring to his family’s farm in rural Shawnee County.

Honorary 4-H Queen Diana Hutchison did much better, urging her pig through the ordeal in just 38 seconds.

Hutchison said her kids were involved in 4-H and showed pigs — possibly, she admitted, giving her an edge.

“I knew a bit about how it acts or won’t act,” she said. “Sometimes it’s just the luck of the draw. If it doesn’t want to move, you’re not moving it.”

Recently crowned 4-H Queen Chelsey Johnston learned that too. Her first attempt stalled, and the second pig she tried to show also refused to cooperate.

4-H King Scott Rak did better, coming in a close second to Hutchison at just 42 seconds. Rak, 16, shows dogs as a member of the Deer Trail 4-H Club, and also participates in painting, photography and public speaking.

“I’ve never been around pigs,” he said.

Others participating in the show were The Topeka Capital-Journal’s Ellen Fike, who finished in 1:53; Shawnee County Register of Deeds Becky Nioce, at 1:19; and Honorary 4-H King Charlene Patton, at 1:07.

Blythe, who owns three of the pigs used in the show, said they tend to behave better when he shows them.

“I got champion with my York(shire) and my Hamp(shire), reserve champion with my other York, and third overall,” he said.

Blythe is a member of the Dover 4-H Club.