Ted Cruz’s admiration for rival Donald Trump has its limits.

Throughout the Republican race for the White House, Cruz has consistently heaped praise on Trump, even going as far as saying the tough-talking real estate mogul has been good for Cruz’s campaign.

Now, less than four months before the critical Iowa caucuses, Cruz is carefully crafting a narrative that subtly elevates his candidacy over Trump’s without drawing a blistering response from the GOP front-runner.

“One of the things that I think has been incredibly helpful about Donald Trump’s campaign is he’s framed the central issue in this primary as, who will stand up to Washington,” Cruz said Sunday. “The natural next question is, who has stood up to Washington? And I can’t think of a better question to decide this primary.”

Cruz went on to tout his record as an uncompromising fighter in trying to repeal the Affordable Care Act, stop President Barack Obama’s executive orders on immigration and, most recently, attempting to kill federal funding for Planned Parenthood.

He criticized the rest of the Republican contenders for president for talking about taking on the group but not following through with action.

“It was almost like they were in witness protection,” Cruz said.

At Sunday’s presidential forum at Prestonwood Baptist Church, Cruz said his rivals left him alone in battle.

“How different it would have been if 11 Republican presidential candidates descended on Washington and spoke in unison and said … don’t send $500 million of taxpayer money to Planned Parenthood,” he said.

Cruz’s dance with Trump is a study in high-wire politics.

In heaping praise on The Donald, he avoids the backlash that has befallen candidates like Rick Perry and Jeb Bush.

The former Texas governor was one of the earliest candidates to counterattack Trump, and he became the first contender to drop from the race.

Bush, the former Florida governor, has seen his poll numbers plummet amid a sustained war of words with Trump.

Cruz has taken a different approach. But while his kind words have made him Trump’s buddy, it hasn’t translated to movement in the polls.

He knows that at some point, he must make a clear distinction between him and Trump. If not, Trump could win the race.

On Sunday, Cruz said he was perfectly positioned for the nomination, — unlike his rivals, including retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson.

“I like Donald Trump. I like Ben Carson,” he said. “There are other candidates in this field that throw rocks. I have not been one of them. Indeed, I regularly sing their praises.”

But he predicted GOP voters want “a consistent conservative, someone who’s been the same yesterday, today and tomorrow.”

Cruz has used the term “consistent conservative” in the past. And it’s clear he’s suggesting that Trump isn’t one.

“The reason that I believe our campaign is getting so much energy and momentum on the ground is that there’s between candidates who talk the talk and those who have actually walked the walk and have stood and fought over and over,” he said.

Hear that, Donald Trump?

Notes

GOP contenders visit Texas for fundraisers

The Republican contenders for president haven’t lost their insatiable appetite for Texas cash.

Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush was in Dallas on Monday for fundraisers. On Wednesday, his Sunshine State brother, Sen. Marco Rubio, is at the Park Cities Club for a fundraiser.

Meanwhile, retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson is in Fort Worth and Plano on Tuesday selling and signing copies of his new book, A More Perfect Union.

At 11:30 a.m. he’s at the Barnes & Noble at 4801 Overton Ridge Blvd. Then at 3:30 p.m. he’s at the Sam’s Club at 301 Coit Road in Plano.

Bid to block map could delay March primaries

A group of plaintiffs have asked a federal court to prevent the 2016 Texas congressional elections from being held under boundaries set by the Legislature in 2013.

The federal panel in San Antonio is considering whether maps created in 2011 violated the voting rights of Hispanics and African-Americans. Plaintiffs in that suit point out that the redistricting plan signed by Gov. Rick Perry in 2013 has similarities to the 2011 plan, including potential voting rights violations in South, Central and North Texas.

If the court approves the motion, it could result in a delay of the March 1 Texas primaries, though the judges could seek an expedited solution that would result in the election going forward as planned.

Candidates can start filing for Texas primary races next month.

In 2012 the Texas presidential primary was delayed because of a redistricting fight. What was supposed to be a March primary occurred on May 31, with the runoff at the end of July. That delay was instrumental in Ted Cruz’s defeat of then Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst in the Republican race for Senate.

On Twitter:

@gromerjeffers