You must enter the characters with black color that stand out from the other characters

— The No. 23 Middle Creek Mustangs entered Saturday night’s fourth-round soccer match at Broughton High as the highest remaining seed in North Carolina soccer in any classification, but they couldn't keep their streak of postseason upsets alive as they gave up a halftime lead and fell to the Capitals, 3-2.

Broughton was led with a goal and an assist from senior striker Matt Brickhouse and the No. 3 Capitals will play in the N.C. High School Athletic Association 4-A eastern regional final next week with a trip to the state championship on the line. Boys Soccer: Middle Creek vs. Broughton (Nov. 8, 2014)

The Capitals, who began their postseason run with consecutive conference rematches before taking down two 4-A Southwest Wake Athletic Conference teams, have outscored their opponents 15-3 since the playoffs began.

Broughton (19-1-2, 12-1-1) now has a date with No. 4 New Hanover to decide the 4-A East bracket. The Wildcats shut out Laney 3-0 on Saturday to advance in their side of the bracket.

Despite the large difference in seeding, Middle Creek (13-9-5, 6-7-1) pounced on Broughton early to take a halftime lead and put the Capitals in an unfamiliar position on the scoreboard. The Capitals had given up just one goal through the entire postseason entering Saturday, but gave up two to Middle Creek in the first 20 minutes.

"We knew they were going to be very, very good, so our best option was to come out attacking," said Middle Creek Head Coach Eddie Wasdell. "There's no reason to sit back at this point."

In the 12th minute, Chris Wallace set up a Mustang goal on a long throw-in that Daniel Lutz found and finished for the first score of the game.

Broughton tied things up minutes later on a short and grounded goal from Brandon Gettinger assisted by Brickhouse.

The resilient Mustangs answered again in the 21st minute when Tyler Conrad tracked down a deflected shot and finished it into the net for a 2-1 lead.

In the final two minutes of the first half, Middle Creek caught multiple breaks when Broughton had two opportunities that narrowly missed becoming points on the board. First, a Brickhouse header missed by several feet. With 30 seconds left in the half, a long shot from Ike Drooz narrowly missed the upper right portion of the goal to once again keep Broughton from tying the game.

Facing a deficit, Broughton shut out the Mustangs in the second half and jumpstarted its offense back to familiar levels of play. Nine minutes into the half, Jack Krueger fired in a shot from 20 yards away that slipped in under the crossbar and to the net to tie the game at 2-2.

"We kept it together mentally pretty well," said Broughton Head Coach Nick Wheeler. "We're very happy with the way they responded. Nobody flipped out. They just kept encouraging each other and working harder."

Later in the half, the Capitals scored the go-ahead goal when Brickhouse led a strong attack to the Middle Creek goal and headed a ball over the head of the Mustang goalkeeper who had come out to challenge.

"We've been defending so well," Wasdell said. "It was just one of those balls that took a bounce their way and their guy did a great job. That was an unfortunate one."

Wheeler said after the game that although his team was heavily favored on paper, he never once considered Middle Creek the underdog in the match.

"It was a Raleigh team," Wheeler said. "Anybody in that conference can beat anybody. It's a very strong soccer area, so those rankings are not even close to accurate."

Despite a fifth-place SWAC finish in the regular season, Middle Creek outlasted every other conference team in the state playoffs. The team upset No. 10 Garner in the first round before defeating No. 7 Jordan and No. 15 Northern Durham.

"We knew that nobody expected much from us, so that let us play without a lot of pressure," Wasdell said. "I think that was a good thing for the boys. We definitely embraced the Cinderella story and just couldn't quite keep it going."

Broughton is the lone Triangle-area team remaining in the 4-A bracket. The Capitals will host New Hanover on Tuesday.

Follow Zach Mayo on Twitter at @ZachMayoHSOT