Minus fullback Jacob Hester, the Broncos on Sunday began preparing for Thursday’s NFL opener against the defending Super Bowl champions at Sports Authority Field at Mile High. Hester will not play against the Baltimore Ravens after being waived a day after the team cut down to its 53-man roster.

In his place, the Broncos added linebacker Adrian Robinson off the NFL waiver wire. Robinson, at 6-feet-1, 250 pounds, is in his second NFL year. He played in 12 games last season for Pittsburgh, then was traded to Philadelphia. The Broncos are his third team in nine days.

Hester’s departure leaves the Broncos with four running backs: Ronnie Hillman, Knowshon Moreno and rookies Montee Ball and C.J. Anderson. And Robinson’s addition increases the linebackers to seven, including Nate Irving, Steven Johnson, Paris Lenon, Shawn Phillips, Danny Trevathan and Wesley Woodyard (Von Miller will be on the suspension list for the first six games).

In other news, the Broncos signed seven players to their practice squad, including six that were cut from the team Saturday.

Wide receiver Tavarres King and offensive lineman Vinston Painter, who were drafted in the fifth and sixth rounds this year, respectively, cleared waivers, along with offensive linemen Paul Cornick and Ben Garland, wide receiver Gerell Robinson and defensive end John Youboty.

“We thought enough of them, obviously, to draft them and fortunately for us they cleared waivers and we got them back,” Broncos coach John Fox said.

The newcomer is running back Edwin Baker, a second-year player who was on San Diego’s practice squad (first 15 weeks) and active roster (final two weeks) in 2012.

Cornerback Champ Bailey, meanwhile, lightly participated in positional drills without the boot that supported his injured ankle. Bailey did not don any pads but looked healthy.

Fox declined to say much about Bailey. “No injury updates, as per league (rules), we do not announce those today,” he said. “(Bailey) was at practice . . . It was good to have him out there.”

Quarterback Peyton Manning expects the home crowd to have a big affect on Thursday’s game against the Ravens.

“I think the crowd will play a big role. Glad to be at home, it’s an exciting opportunity starting out the NFL season when everybody is watching you,” Manning said. “I want them as loud sa possible can when Broncos are on defense and as quiet as they can be when the Broncos are on offense … Having played here as an opponent a number of times, it’s an extremely tough place to play.”

Manning said he will undoubtedly have butterflies before his 16th NFL opening day.

“If you don’t, you probably should be doing something else,” he said.

Mike Chambers: , mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mchambersdp