ENLARGE From left, Marco Belinelli, Tim Duncan, Kawhi Leonard, Patty Mills and Danny Green. Associated Press

Patty Mills isn't the first player that comes to mind as a key for Game 3 of the NBA Finals. In fact, if there were a list of 10 such players from the Miami Heat and San Antonio Spurs, Mills still might not make anyone's cut.

As a Spurs role player, though, Mills is far more important than most realize in preventing LeBron James from winning his third straight title. Mills's value to San Antonio's playing style has never been so clear. Now, there is empirical evidence supporting one of the theories for the Spurs' remarkable longevity: Their players work harder than everyone else.

ENLARGE

This season, according to SportVU cameras, no player covered more ground per 48 minutes than Mills, the backup guard who would cover 3.8 miles of ground if he played all 48 minutes of a game—the equivalent of running the length of the floor back and forth 106 times. Mills had company from the Spurs atop that statistical category. Among regular NBA rotation players, Danny Green ranked second in the NBA in distance per 48 minutes, and Tony Parker came in fourth.

As a team, San Antonio ran the most miles per game in the NBA, and its peculiar strength has been even more evident in the playoffs. Mills, Parker, Marco Belinelli and Green lead all postseason players by this metric. While it is a smaller sample, Mills is covering more ground in the playoffs than he did during the regular season, a feat of endurance made possible last off-season, when Mills hired a personal chef and cut favorite delicacies like strawberry milk from his diet.

So how do the Spurs log so many miles? It isn't because of Gregg Popovich's ninja coaching tricks or something funky in the San Antonio water. It is simply the result of the way they like to play. When it's clicking, San Antonio's offense is a blur of passes and cuts, but it only works when the Spurs are in perpetual motion—especially those players that don't have to worry about conserving their energy.

—Ben Cohen