One insurer told CNBC that its sign-up rate last week as the final deadline for 2016 coverage approached was 75 percent of the sign-up rate seen in mid-December — which was the deadline for getting insurance coverage that would take effect Jan. 1.

Insurance analyst Robert Laszewski said he has been in communication with insurers who control about half of the Obamacare market. They have told him that although last week's volume was higher than during the rest of January, it was anemic compared to the surges seen in the last weeks of 2014 and 2015 enrollment.



"Just as we get into high gear for the 2016 elections, the [Affordable Care Act's] growth would appear to have stalled," said Laszewski, who is head of Health Policy and Strategy Associates in Alexandria, Virginia, and a critic of Obamacare.

"One of the big players" told Laszewksi that it expected to see an actual net reduction in sign-ups from its customers from the government-run Obamacare exchanges in the final week compared to the same period for last year, he said. Another told him that while sign-ups spiked on Saturday and Sunday, they were doing so off of a very low base of sign-ups earlier last week.



Laszweski said he also received an ominous email from one large insurer that has been "my bellwether" for Obamacare trends.

That insurer told him that many of its customers who had been automatically re-enrolled for 2016 by the government-run exchanges look like they will be canceling their plans. The same insurer expects to cancel a significant number of plans for new enrollees because they failed to pay their first month's premium in January, Laszewski said.

Laszewski said that while Obamacare has done a good job of enrolling people with lower incomes, who qualify for federal subsidies that can sharply reduce the cost of their plans, it has not done a good job of luring middle-class customers, who often find the premium prices and deductible limits unattractive.

And "what's really obvious," he said, is that the Obamacare fine is not doing much to spur customers to sign up. That fine is growing this year to the higher of $695 per person or 2.5 percent of household income.