Hugo Campos demonstrates a machine used to read the information from implantable cardioverter-defibrillators like the one that he has to control a heart condition at his home in Oakland, Calif., on Wednesday, Nov. 12, 2014. After losing his previous health care, Campos was turned down for coverage twice because of his preexisting condition before becoming eligible under the Affordable Care Act. (Kristopher Skinner/Bay Area News Group) ( Kristopher Skinner )

Sandra Ferreira, a self-employed housecleaner from Livermore, is among the millions of Californians who were eligible last year to sign up for free or subsidized medical insurance under the nation's health care law -- but never did.

She tried once or twice to enroll on her computer, but got frustrated by website glitches. And she didn't follow through.

Ferreira, 45, knows she needs a health plan: She has chronic pain in her legs and high blood pressure, and she occasionally sees a doctor. Interviewed recently at a community clinic, she was initially unaware of Saturday's launch of the second open enrollment period of the Affordable Care Act, better known as Obamacare.

Asked if she'll enroll this time around, Ferreira said, "I'll think about it."

Among the 3.2 million legal California residents who still lack health coverage, Ferreira is an example of how Covered California, the state's health insurance marketplace, has its work cut out for it as Obamacare 2.0 kicks into high gear.

The Golden State last year earned high marks when it sliced the uninsured rate from 22 percent to 11 percent by signing up 3.4 million residents in exchange or Medi-Cal plans -- without any of the systemic website problems that plagued the federal exchange and those of many state-run marketplaces.

Advertisement

But unlike the first open enrollment period, which lasted 6½ months, the second will span only three months. And most health care experts considered the first year's eager applicants to be low-hanging fruit. This year, the California exchange -- like others around the country -- will have to shake a lot more trees to reach its goal of enrolling half a million more people in private insurance plans.

Adding more uncertainty, the Supreme Court announced this month that it will take a case that could unravel Obama's signature legislation by throwing out subsidies that make health care plans more affordable in the three dozen states that don't run their own health insurance exchanges.

"It will be hard," Peter Lee, the exchange's executive director, acknowledged this week in San Jose during a statewide bus tour to promote sign-ups.

Larry Levitt, a senior vice president at the Menlo Park-based Kaiser Family Foundation, said one of the big challenges this year will be grabbing the public's attention.

"Last year, Obamacare was a new thing, and there was a lot of hullabaloo heading into open enrollment," he said. "Even the technical website problems served to increase awareness. So far, things have been much quieter on the eve of open enrollment. Obamacare is no longer novel."

But Lee said California's exchange, like many others across the country, is trying to meet the challenges head-on by applying lessons learned from Obamacare 1.0.

Covered California, he said, has spent $22 million on upgrading its website to provide speedier page loads. It will more than double the number of call center operators to 1,300, expand call center hours and quadruple the number of operators who speak Spanish, Mandarin, Cantonese, Tagalog, Vietnamese and other languages.

The health insurance exchange will also open more than 200 storefronts in malls and other retail locations to serve drop-in customers. And several health plans will allow consumers to make their first premium payments online as soon as they've selected a plan.

In many ways, California is lucky. It's tweaking -- not gutting -- what it did last year.

Maryland's rocky rollout in 2013-14, for example, has prompted that state to adopt the software used by Connecticut, meaning it won't be able to seamlessly re-enroll the people who signed up last year. Nevada and Oregon, whose state-based websites buckled under the pressure, are switching to the federal site, which in the end worked quite smoothly.

Still, Lee worries that the timing of the first half of the enrollment period -- happening over the holidays, when "people have other things to do" -- could delay sign-ups.

He's also concerned that Californians who didn't sign up for a plan "have adapted to a culture of coping."

"They'll say, 'I can go to a community clinic, or when I visit Mexico, I'll stop by a farmacia and get my prescription drugs,' " Lee said. "What they don't understand is that it's possible for them to get insurance today -- and often with a subsidy."

Then there are folks like Cody Wagner, a Republican from Campbell who remains philosophically opposed to Obamacare and its requirement that virtually all Americans buy health insurance.

"I still don't need it, and I still don't want it," said Wagner, 28, a general contractor. "I don't like the government telling me what to do."

Wagner said if he's in a car crash, his auto insurance will cover his medical bills, and workers' compensation will do the same if he's injured on a job site. He called warnings about massive medical bills and debt "scare tactics" promulgated by an industry out to line its pockets.

"People who say it's a life-and-death situation if you don't have insurance -- it's ridiculous," said Wagner, who hopes the Supreme Court will torpedo the law.

He said he's resigned to paying the penalty, which this year jumps from $95 to $325 per person, or 2 percent of modified adjusted gross income -- whichever is higher.

In any case, Wagner said, he isn't paying much attention to the law -- or news about the enrollment period. And in that respect, he's got company.

A recent Kaiser Family Foundation report based on a random survey of 1,503 uninsured Americans in early October showed that 9 in 10 of the uninsured were unaware of when the next open enrollment period began.

Two-thirds of the uninsured said they know "only a little" or "nothing at all" about the marketplaces, where people who don't get coverage through their employers can shop for insurance. And just over half of the uninsured are unaware of the financial assistance available to help low- and moderate-income individuals purchase insurance.

But the Kaiser Family Foundation's Levitt and other experts point out that plenty of Californians remain enthusiastic about Obamacare -- and will share that sentiment with others.

"It's a pretty big deal for me," said Hugo Campos, a 48-year-old self-employed creative director whose heart disease requires an implanted device that needs constant monitoring by a doctor.

For years, the Oakland resident had health insurance through his longtime partner. But when he left his job, the couple's joint health plan disappeared. Campos said he tried for almost 14 months to buy insurance, but was denied coverage by insurers because of his pre-existing condition.

The subsidized Kaiser Permanente plan he bought last fall through Covered California, he said, saved his life.

Added Campos: "It's lifted a dark cloud from over my head."