Jordi Savall

And Juilliard415

Baryshnikov Arts Center

450 W. 37th St.

866-811-4111

Monday

bacnyc.org

Viol player Jordi Savall—also a conductor, scholar, and advocate for the music of his instrument—has been a major influence in the resurgence of Renaissance and early music over the past several decades. On Monday, he joins the historical performance students of the group Juilliard415, so named because the players of early music tuned the note "A" lower than today's 440, for Shakespeare -inspired music. The program includes works of Robert Johnson, Matthew Locke and Henry Purcell, with Juilliard actors reading music-related Shakespearean texts.

Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra and Vienna State Opera

Carnegie Hall

881 Seventh Ave.

(212) 247-7800

Tuesday

carnegiehall.org

ENLARGE Franz Welser-Möst, who will be appearing at Carnegie Hall Tuesday. conducts. Chris Lee

Carnegie Hall continues showcasing the music, art and culture of Vienna this week. As part of Carnegie's "Vienna: City of Dreams" festival, the Vienna Philharmonic and Vienna State Opera tackle European masterpieces, including symphonies by Bruckner, Brahms, Schubert and Mahler, and concert performances of two operas, Alban Berg's "Wozzeck" and Richard Strauss's "Salome." On Tuesday, Franz Welser-Möst conducts two works for orchestra and choir: Beethoven's ninth symphony, with its famous "Ode to Joy," and Schoenberg's "Friede auf Erden," or "Peace on Earth." The Vienna festival, which includes lectures, films and exhibits at cultural institutions around the city, continues through March 16.

Brentano Quartet

And Vijay Iyer

92nd Street Y

1395 Lexington Ave.

(212) 415-5500

Saturday

92y.org

ENLARGE Members of the Brentano String Quartet will perform the New York premiere of Vijay Iyer's 'Time, Place, Action.' Peter Schaaf

As part of its three-concert series at the 92nd Street Y, the Brentano Quartet performs two Beethoven quartets and the New York premiere of Vijay Iyer's "Time, Place, Action" for piano quintet. Mr. Iyer is, among other things, a jazz pianist who has recorded 18 albums, Harvard professor, composer and winner of a 2013 MacArthur "genius" grant. The piano part, played by Mr. Iyer, is largely improvised, while the string quartet parts are mostly notated. "This piece puts the spirit of real-time invention in dialogue with the meticulous interpretative art of the string quartet," Mr. Iyer writes. The concert, which is part of 92Y's "7 Days of Genius" series, will be livestreamed online.

'Enchanted Island'

Metropolitan Opera House

Lincoln Center, (212) 362-6000

Opens Wednesday, through March 20

metopera.org

ENLARGE Danielle de Niese as Ariel and Placido Domingo as Neptune, King of the Seas, in the Baroque pastiche 'The Enchanted Island.' Ken Howard/Metropolitan Opera

This Baroque pastiche, essentially Baroque music stitched together into an opera, had its premiere in 2011. Created by Jeremy Sams, the opera includes music by Handel, Vivaldi, Rameau and lesser-known Baroque composers to create a story that mixes elements of Shakespeare's "A Midsummer Night's Dream" with "The Tempest." In the original program notes, Mr. Sams writes that the idea came from Met general manager Peter Gelb. "Imagine," Mr. Gelb said, "taking the hidden gems from a century of music, and turning them into one opera. Oh, and it has to be in English." Susan Graham joins the cast, and David Daniels, Danielle de Niese, and Plácido Domingo return. Patrick Summers conducts.