In its six-month existence so far, workplace collaboration startup Slack Inc. has gotten some prominent shout-outs on Twitter, acquired customers at a fast pace, broken even as a business and seen its valuation soar, Chief Executive Stewart Butterfield said.

Stewart Butterfield, CEO of Slack.

“Things have really gone, of an order of magnitude, better than expected,” said Mr. Butterfield, who founded Flickr and sold it with his partners to Yahoo in 2004.

Slack might have worked in the normal semi-obscurity that befalls most software-as-a-service companies were it not for a well-timed tweet from company investor Marc Andreessen, who in February tweeted that he had never “seen an enterprise app take off like this before.”

Tweets from other tech luminaries soon fanned the flames, and customer adoption shot up quickly, the CEO said. The company now has 125,000 active daily users, and 25 million messages per week are sent with its platform.

The company brings in $3.5 million in annual recurring revenue, and sees 93% of the 13,000 active teams using the software decide to stick with the product, Mr. Butterfield said.

Slack has never paid for advertising, he added.

The company’s platform is an enterprise collaboration tool that aggregates information from business applications–including Google Drive, Twitter, Trello, MailChimp, GitHub and Dropbox—and makes it easily available to other members of a pre-established team.

The product is designed to give team members access to information without constantly toggling between one application and another, Mr. Butterfield said.

Slack is actually five years old, originally intended to sell games under the name Tiny Speck Inc. Developers based in different cities spent about four years building and launching a multi-player game called Glitch.

After four years of game development, the team working on Glitch was less interested in games and more fascinated with the ’80s era communication tool they were using to collaborate over long distances and over long periods of time. Even though the tool pre-dated the Internet, it was still popular with some developers because it filters out the noise associated with standard email accounts and lets users focus on the project at hand, he said.

The company decided to pivot from games and soon began building a comparable communications tool, albeit one that would work in various industries and one designed for the modern workplace.

The company has gone on to raise nearly $60 million from venture capitalists, including a $42.8 million Series C round that Slack raised in April from the Social+Capital Partnership, Accel Partners, Andreessen Horowitz and angels associated with Twitter Inc., Yelp Inc. and other technology companies.

The company had a post-money valuation of $250 million in April, and the company’s internal valuation has climbed above $500 million since then, Mr. Butterfield said.

The company has thousands of customers, including media giants like Times of London, ESPN, HBO and the Wall Street Journal, and tech companies like Tumblr Inc., Yelp Inc. and Foursquare Inc.

It aims to double its staff of 45 over the next year, the CEO said, and wants to bring aboard sales-support and customer-support specialists.

Write to Timothy Hay at timothy.hay@wsj.com. > Follow him on Twitter at @timwhay