"Who wants to let somebody's liver rot? Nobody," Clinton said. "Who's got $80,000 to spend? Not many. And if you're a small businessperson and you're in a small pool [of employer-based insurers], are you going to fire somebody who needs that treatment? These are all practical problems, and we can solve them."

The trouble is that solutions usually involve money moving from one person or company or sector to another.

The drug industry has moved to so-called specialty medicines because they bring higher profits and, unlike most Western countries, the United States has fewer government-imposed cost controls.

Clinton was the keynote speaker at Klick Ideas Exchange, sponsored by Klick Health, a Toronto-based digital marketing agency, along with Veeva Systems and the Biotechnology Industry Organization. BIO, the Washington-based trade association, is holding its annual convention at the Pennsylvania Convention Center this week, attracting 15,000 people.

Bill Clinton was not the only speaker Monday - or Clinton family member in recent days - to question the price of some drugs. In an interview published Sunday in the Des Moines Register, Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton said she generally supported the Affordable Care Act, but she would look for ways to expand the eligibility of low-income families for plan subsidies and "how to deal with the high cost of deductibles that put such a burden on so many working families, and how to deal with the exploding cost of drugs, particularly the so-called specialty drugs."

Ezekiel Emanuel, chair of the department of medical ethics and health policy at the University of Pennsylvania, spoke at Monday's event and bluntly said he was invited to counteract the "techno utopians," who are gung ho on technology and who filled other speaking slots and many seats in the audience.

"What are the two words you can say to anyone in the health-care system that scare the bejeezus out of them: specialty drugs," Emanuel told the audience, some of whom have or hope to make millions from such medicine. He noted the recent rises and projections that suggest specialty drugs - at current prices - will account for half of the money spent on all medication in the U.S. by 2020.

"All of those high-cost specialty drugs treat about 3 percent of the patients in the United States," said Emanuel, who served in the White House under President Obama and helped formulate the Affordable Care Act.

According to federal financial disclosure statements published by the Washington Post, Hillary Clinton received $235,000 for speaking to the BIO International conference in 2014, before she declared she was running for office.

Those same disclosure forms indicated Bill Clinton received between $225,000 and $275,000 for each of eight speaches delivered between March 31 and May 14 of this year.

Despite his advice to biotech executives, Bill Clinton was not available Monday for questions from reporters, and his foundation did not respond to a request for information about Monday's speaking fee. Hillary Clinton's campaign also did not respond to a similar request. A spokeswoman for Klick Health declined to provide Clinton's fee.

dsell@phillynews.com

215-854-4506@phillypharma

www.philly.com/phillypharma