NEVADA CITY, Calif., Sept. 29, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- The National Rural Accountable Care Consortium is one of 39 health care collaborative networks selected to participate in the Transforming Clinical Practice Initiative, announced today by Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell. The National Rural Accountable Care Consortium will receive up to $31 million to provide technical assistance support to help equip clinicians across rural America with tools, information, and network support needed to improve quality of care, increase patients' access to information, and spend health care dollars more wisely.

"Supporting doctors and other health care professionals change the way they work is critical to improving quality and spending our health care dollars more wisely," said Secretary Burwell. "These awards will give patients more of the information they need to make informed decisions about their care and give clinicians access to information and support to improve care coordination and quality outcomes."

As a Practice Transformation Network, the Consortium will support 525 rural health systems to expand their quality improvement capacity, learn from one another, and achieve common goals of improved care, better health, and reduced cost. The network will set up sustainable care coordination programs, implement 24-hour advice nurse hotlines, and facilitate and optimize ambulatory quality reporting to help participating clinicians meet the initiative's phases of transformation and associated milestones, clinical and operational results.

These awards are part of a comprehensive strategy advanced by the Affordable Care Act that enables new levels of coordination, continuity, and integration of care, while transitioning volume-driven systems to value-based, patient-centered, health care services. It builds upon successful models and programs such as the Hospital Value-Based Purchasing Organization Program, Partnership for Patients with Hospital Engagement Networks, and Accountable Care Organizations.

For more information on the Transforming Clinical Practice Initiative, please visit: http://innovation.cms.gov/initiatives/Transforming-Clinical-Practices/

CONTACT:

Monica Bourgeau

916.500.4777

Email

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/national-rural-accountable-care-consortium-receives-transforming-clinical-practice-initiative-award-300151043.html

SOURCE National Rural Accountable Care Consortium