Let Medcom Help! Complying with the Affordable Care Act requires Business Intelligence PLUS Technology. We deliver both. This is a rigorous and complicated process and not meant to be done at home!

Medcom, a leading provider of Affordable Care Act (ACA) Consulting, Health and Welfare Compliance Services, Flexible Spending Accounts (FSAs), Health Reimbursement Arrangements (HRAs), Health Savings Accounts (HSAs), COBRA and Retiree Billing services, announced today that they have launched their enhanced ACA Employer Reporting Service.

Medcom’s ACA Employer Reporting service is a turn-key solution for employers. It supports all components of the reporting process including data collection, data management, and the preparation and distribution of the required forms to be submitted to the IRS. “Medcom possesses the necessary professional and technical resources to help employers face the challenges of the Affordable Care Act knowledgeably, proactively, and strategically” stated Michelle Barki, J.D., Medcom’s Director of ACA Consulting Services. "Complying with the Affordable Care Act requires 'Business Intelligence Plus Technology'. We deliver both. This is a rigorous and complicated process and is not meant to be done at home”

“Due to the time sensitivity of completing the ACA Reporting in the first quarter of 2016, and the challenge for employers to secure, organize, and file all the proper data, the call to action for employers and employee benefit consultants to secure a valued partner for completing this exercise is now”, offered Michael J. Bracken, President of Medcom. With over 32 years of employee benefit experience, Medcom is equipped and ready to be the strategic partner, adviser, and Affordable Care Act (ACA) Employer Reporting specialist for employers.”

“ACA reporting is complicated and the rules and specifications are still evolving," stated Joe Sullivan, President of Sullivan Benefits in Brandon, Florida. "Medcom is a trusted partner, and we are committed to recommending them as our leading ACA Reporting source for our clients and prospects, so that they are not subject to any penalties or fines with the IRS in 2016.”

Technology alone is not always the answer. Employer’s need experienced and focused experts to help them address all of their questions. Medcom’s solution incorporates the necessary ‘Business Intelligence Plus Technology', supported by a skilled team of attorney’s, actuaries, and other seasoned professionals.

The Affordable Care Act will require all Applicable Large Employers with 50 or more Full Time Employees, including Full Time Equivalents, to report the coverage they offered to employees to the IRS in 2016. The deadline to file these forms is February 29, 2016, if filed manually, or March 31, 2016, if filed electronically.

About Medcom

Medcom is a leading Employee Benefits administrator and Health & Welfare compliance consultant, well-known for specializing in exceptional service and offering a variety of products that are designed to help employers meet the challenges of a rapidly changing workforce. With a professional staff of specialists, Medcom offers consulting services relating to ERISA compliance, COBRA administration, Flexible Spending Account administration, Health Reimbursement Arrangement administration, Health Savings Account administration, and Retiree Billing services.

As regulatory compliance continues to increase in complexity, Medcom has expanded their scope of regulatory compliance services to include educational seminars, technical writing, Form 5500 Reporting, Nondiscrimination Testing, Wrap Plan and Section 125 Cafeteria Plan preparation, Wellness Program Audits, HIPAA Privacy Policy preparation, Comprehensive ERISA Plan Reviews, and employee communications.