Trump: Cruz + C.J. John Roberts = Obamacare



1) LYING: Cruz campaign purposely spread false rumors that Ben Carson was dropping out of the campaign after the Iowa Caucus, therefore urged Carson's voters to vote for Cruz at the Iowa Caucus – a lie Cruz was forced to apologize for to Carson personally and on national TV;



2) VOTE SHAMING: Cruz sent out an official-looking, fake government document warning (or threatening) voters against voting for other candidates and receiving an "F" grade vs. voting for Cruz and getting an "A" grade;



3) FAKE CONSERVATIVE JURISTS: Cruz giving his full support of the George W. Bush nomination of John Roberts as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court in September 2005 leading to his deciding vote for the constitutionality of Obamacare in 2015 – Twice! This act of treason effectively stabbed every conservative Republican in the back who thought Roberts was a real conservative jurist who pledged his fidelity to the U.S. Constitution and not to Socialism slavery called Obamacare.



"You are receiving this election notice because of low expected voter turnout in your area. Your individual voting history as well as your neighbors' are public record. Their scores are published below, and many of them will see your score as well. CAUCUS ON MONDAY TO IMPROVE YOUR SCORE and please encourage your neighbors to caucus as well. A follow-up notice may be issued following Monday's caucuses."



A constitution is, in fact, and must be regarded by the judges, as a fundamental law. ... If there should happen to be an irreconcilable variance between the two, that which has the superior obligation ... the Constitution ought to be preferred to the statute, the intention of the people to the intention of their agents.



<NOSPAM>

By Ellis Washington Trump blames Ted Cruz for picking Chief Justice Roberts who gave U.S. Obamacare... TWICE!~ Trump~ Lawrence P. McDonald,(1976)Donald Trump is on the warpath and his number one enemy facing his new line of attacks is Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX). Trump, speaking to a packed house in Little Rock, Arkansas, of over 12,000 people (breaking the 30-year record held by musician Z.Z. Top), repeatedly brought the crowd to its feet with thunderous applause at his rally Wednesday night, arguing that Sen. Ted Cruz was indirectly responsible for passing Obamacare. Trump's reasoning? – Because Cruz enthusiastically gave his support to the nomination of John Roberts as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court by President George W. Bush in Sept. 2005.Unpredictable Genius: While all the other presidential candidates are bumping into each other, struggling with one another for media attention inside the small state of New Hampshire, once again Trump demonstrates his political penchant for the unpredictable by launching a new series of political frontal attacks against rival Ted Cruz during a packed-out rally at Barton Coliseum in Little Rock, Arkansas. Trump displayed his unconventional style which a growing number of political experts praise as Trump's political genius when he declared to the thousands of Arkansans that Cruz "gave us Obamacare," pointing to the Texas senator's support of John Roberts appointment as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court during the time Cruz was solicitor general of Texas. Chief Justice John Roberts wrote the majority opinion and was the fifth and deciding vote in the case that gave America socialized medicine – euphemistically called 'Obamacare' in the case of King v. Burwell, 576 U.S. ___ (June 25, 2015) Trump continued his political assaults designed to expose Cruz's Christian self-righteousness which is displayed as the backdrop of his campaign in every stump speech – 'TRUSTED' or 'Trust-Ted,' "Ted Cruz goes out – you talk about liars. He goes out and says 'Donald Trump loves Obamacare. I've been fighting this thing for 4-5 years. And by the way, if it weren't for Ted Cruz, he's the one that got Justice Roberts onto the United States Supreme Court. He pushed him. He approved him, and Justice Roberts approved Obamacarewhen it should have been rejected. His vote got it over the top. Ted Cruz did that. Ted Cruz gave us Obamacare, believe me."If it is one thing Trump cannot abide is a liar like Cruz. Also Trumps hates hypocrisy and self-righteousness. "What I hate is when somebody lies," Trump said. "Every single speech I've made, I talk about repealing and replacing Obamacare. Here's a guy, gets up in Iowa and he said, 'Donald Trump wants Obamacare.' You know, it's a flat out lie ... these guys are bad." Trump has a prescient understanding of human nature and when Trump says something negative or positive about a person, he has the uncanny ability to make it come to pass even if at the time he said it the reality was not obvious, true, or self-evident. For example, remember weeks ago Trump called out Cruz as being " a nasty guy " and that "nobody in the Senate likes him"; "Cruz doesn't know how the make deals." Here, the second and third statements everybody now knows about Cruz, however, the first one Trump contended, "[Cruz is] a nasty guy" has recently come to pass in dramatic fashion not only against Trump, but against his fellow Super Christian rival, Ben Carson The list of dirty tricks by Senator Ted Cruz against his political competitors seems to grow by the week. Here are several recent controversies:Regarding the second point, Trump is considering filing a formal complaint against Cruz for sending out a fraudulent voting violation mailer to all the voters on his Iowa voting list literally guilting them to vote for Cruz over Trump. Iowa Gov. Terry Branstad was furious and chastised Ted Cruz's presidential campaign for "unethical and unfair" despite the fact Cruz won the caucuses in Iowa last week beating Trump by 4 points even though 12 out of 13 polls had Trump winning the Iowa Caucuses by 5 points.The Cruz Voting Violation text reads:VOTER FRAUD: Cruz's Voting Violation mailer sent out illegally to all his Iowa voters undoubtedly hurt candidate Ben Carson"It [Socialized medicine] would have been dead if we had a different justice on the United States Supreme Court – put there by him," Trump said. This statement belies Trump's unrestrained courage to tread where no other poll-tested, political apparatchik would dare to go. Think about it: Trump is attacking the Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, a supposed doctrinaire conservative jurist, an honorable man above reproach. No political figure in America has the guts to do what he did – calling out the duplicity of Roberts on such a grand public stage. Not only Roberts, but Trump has decimated most of his political rivals like – Gov. Jindal, Sen. Rand Paul, Santorum, Huckabee, Pataki, Graham, Walker, and Perry. Trump has even triumphed over Fourth Estate apparatchiks like Fox News Megyn Kelly and Fox News CEO Roger Ailes, and commentators, Charles Krauthammer, George Will, Stephen Henderson, and William Kristol. The list of Trump political causalities goes on, and on, and on. This is why the people of all political stripes – from Bernie Sander's Democrat Socialists, to Ronald Reagan conservatives, to George Will-William Kristol-National Review Neocons, to racial minorities, particularly the 25% Blacks like me and the dynamic duo Diamond and Silk , are devoted to Donald Trump for life.This diverse and growing coalition strongly believes he will be our next president and will be, must be a NATIONALIST in order to bring true Revolutionary change to America with the motto – AMERICA FIRST! This paradigm is the diametrical opposite of Obama's Marx/Alinsky/Soros paradigm that has plagued America for his 8 years as president through spreading existential Socialism slavery, weakening America both domestically and internationally, while pitting Americans against one another, dividing and conquering We the People by economics, class, race, politics and religion.As stated earlier, two things Trump hates most is lying and hypocrisy; two evils Trump has repeatedly exposed in the candidacy of Ted Cruz. Thus Trump's attacks are in response to Cruz's remarks against Trump criticizing the New Hampshire frontrunner for his alleged support of single-payer healthcare system, telling voters ahead of the Iowa caucuses that a vote for the real estate mogul is a vote for Obamacare. Of course there is nothing in Trump's background, history, or present political campaign for president in 2016 that would in any way support Obamacare or Socialism of any kind. He's a multi-billionaire for God's sake – Trump isn't a hypocrite billionaire like George Soros or the Koch Brothers!On the contrary, the primary reason why Democrat Socialists and Republican Socialists are on one accord with virtually the entire D.C. Establishment is that these servile apparatchiks know Trump will destroy Crony Capitalism and Crony Socialism on Day One as President. Furthermore, these Cowardly Conservatives know that Trump means what he says and says what he means and will put the legions of D.C. lobbyists and bloodsucking adherents of Crony Capitalism, Crony Socialism, and special interest groups supporting all of the other candidates out of business. In other words, Socialism Slavery against We the People will be a deadletter on Inauguration Day under a President Donald J. Trump.On Inauguration Day Jan. 17, 2017, when that traitor and race demagogue, Barack Obama is formally put out of the White House, Donald Trump will take the office as the 45th President of the United States. It is from that point forward that the Age of Trump will be established in U.S. presidential history and America will be put on the road to "Make America great again." It won't take long either... trust me.Cruz's shameless demagoguery aside, Trump is a constitutionalist who will appoint federal judges to the bench and Justices to the Supreme Court who have a proven record of fidelity to the U.S. Constitution, an aversion to legislating from the bench, and a published record demonstrating an affinity to a jurisprudence in line with Natural Law or the original intent of the constitutional Framers. No more Republicans appointing judicial traitors like Sandra Day O'Connor, David Souter, Anthony Kennedy, and John Roberts. Trump shares the same constitutional worldview as demonstrated by Founding Father Alexander Hamilton's Federalist No. 78:Why did Chief Justice John Roberts, supposedly a doctrinaire conservative jurist and originalist, cast the deciding vote to legalize Obamacare while destroying the best healthcare system in the world? Some judicial watchers think the Obama administration must have had something dirty on Chief Justice John Roberts like exposing the fact that his two blond haired kids he adopted from South America came via Ireland – a country where it is illegal to adopt children from that country. Did the Obama administration threaten to have his two adopted kids taken away from he and his wife? That kind of psychological threat could certainly make a Justice change his vote. Protect two in order to sell out 330,000,000 – An AmericanTragedy!The details of the conspiracy theory regarding why Chief Justice Roberts may have been blackmailed by the Obama administration to become the deciding vote for Obamacare (twice) can be found at this link . Admittedly this theory is pure speculation, however, it is still a very plausible explanation that I've never heard before. What else could cause a seemingly rational and ideologically conservative constitutionalist like Chief Justice Roberts to betray the very constitutional principles he put his right hand on the Bible and swore a sacred oath to uphold on September 29th 2015, only to shock the world by voting twice for the same Slavemaster/Slave healthcare system as in nations all over the world including – Canada, Russia, China, South America, and Socialist Europe?By betraying America to vote for Obamacare Chief Justice John Robert's violated his sacred oath to protect and defend the U.S. Constitution. He also proved true the wise words by legal scholar Lawrence P. McDonald, who in his 1976 book,wrote –Slavery,(legal) racial discrimination,(unofficial) racial discrimination, Woodrow Wilson's purging of federal Black employees, FDR's Welfare State, LBJ's Great Society programs, Abortion, Obama/IRS attacks against Christian groups, Obama's Hitlerian abortion obsession legalizing the selling and boiling of baby body parts ... and yes Obamacare, are just a few of the tens of thousands of historical examples of the Supreme Court's existential war against We the People, their existential war on America which dates as far back as Chief Justice John Marshall's original case of judicial activism (euphemistically called 'Judicial review') and legislating from the bench in the case, Marbury v. Madison (1803) , 576 U.S. ___ (June 25, 2015), the Supreme Court by a 5-4 decision upheld Obamacare subsidies nationwide. The Robert's majority interpreted provisions of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act as a 'tax' contrary to Congress' original intent.Robert's judicial treachery and Cruz's dirty tricks aside, America, ask yourself these simple questions: Who is currently ahead by double digits in 49 of the 50 states? – Donald Trump. Who do you trust as a man who isn't a political professional skilled in lying and appeasing the crowd, a corporate mogul who made his bones in Liberal Mecca – Manhattan, New York City and won? Which candidate's philosophical worldview transcends politics? – Donald Trump. Who took a million-dollar investment from his father, a real estate developer in Queens, New York and parlayed that meager seed money over 40 years ago into one of the most storied real estate and TV media franchises in American history? – Donald J. Trump.The real difference between Trump and Chief Justice John Roberts – Trump vs. Cruz and the Seven Dwarfs, most of whom never even had a paper route or ran a lemonade stand (except Carly Fiorina which Hewlett-Packard fired her), is that Trumpthings using the principles of free market capitalism and his Will to Power. On the other hand, Cruz and the other Conservative Apparatchiks in Congress and Obamal things (We the People) with the socialist slave chains bought and paid for by their D.C. puppet master lobbyists and anti-American special interest groups whose strings they pull behind the scenes; whose millions in bloodmoney tells them allto say,to say it, andto say it.Trump: Cruz + C.J. John Roberts = ObamacareTrump can't be bought. Cruz, Congress, the Courts, and Obama can't be TrusTed!Please purchase my latest opus dedicated to that Conservative Colossus, Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas. Here are the latest two new volumes from my ongoing historical series –(University Press of America, 2015):However, before the book is officially released to the public, I have to place 100 pre-publication orders (50 orders per each volume). I need your help to make this happen ASAP. Please place your order today for Volume 3 & Volume 4. Of course, if you can order all 100 copies today, the book will become official tomorrow.Please circulate this flyer to all your email contacts & Facebook/Twitter followers who may be interested in purchasing this opus which will serve as a ready apologetic against the rampant Marxist-Progressive propaganda taught in America's public schools, colleges, universities, graduate schools, and law schools. Thanks in advance to all my friends, associates and colleagues for your invaluable support! Law and History Blog: www.EllisWashingtonReport.com I am starting a new a program on my blog dedicated to giving young conservatives (ages 14-35) a regular place to display and publish their ideas calledIf you know of any young person who wants to publish their ideas on any subject, have them send their essay manuscripts to my email at ewashington@wnd.com .© Ellis Washington