Project to improve the safety of the intersection and business accesses

Florence Council meets tonight The Florence City Council meets for its regular meeting at 7 p.m. today at the Florence Municipal Center at 600 W. Third St. in Florence. The council will consider second reading of an ordinance calling for an election and setting the ballot title; hold a public hearing in consideration of liquor license requests; consider acceptance of the 2014 audit report and a liquor license renewal for the Green Parrot Lounge; and will consider requests for street closures for upcoming community events. City Manager Mike Patterson is expected to give a report on the cost share allocation of the combined dispatch center.

During its regular meeting this evening, the Cañon City Council will consider an agreement with the State of Colorado/Department of Transportation that would kick off the U.S. 50/Dozier/Steinmeier intersection/signal improvement project. Construction on the project is expected to begin in the winter.

The council will consider the mayor's signature on an agreement that would commit the city's contribution of $300,000 toward the project. The city's contribution will be matching funds in the amount of $220,000 and the in-kind services in the amount of $80,000, according to the meeting agenda. The overall cost of the project is estimated to be $2.5 million. The meeting agenda states the design of the project has been completed.

Advertisement

The City and CDOT hosted a public open house in November 2014 to discuss the project and answer questions. The project goals are to improve the safety of the intersection and business accesses and connect the two north/south thoroughfares Dozier and Steinmeier.

Also during the meeting, the council will:

— Consider an ordinance calling a general election for expiring terms for District 2, District 4, two At-Large council seats and the mayoral seat;

— Consider an ordinance referring the question of whether to increase sales and use tax by 1.5 percent with all revenue therefrom dedicated to street improvements.

— Consider an ordinance referring the question of whether to increase sales and use tax by 1 percent with all revenue therefrom dedicated to street improvements.

— Consider an ordinance referring the question of whether to defer property taxes for 10 years if a sales and use tax rate increase is approved.

— Consider a five-year loan for $600,000 from the Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund to the General Fund for improvements within the 600 block of Main Street.

— Conduct a public hearing in consideration of a renewal application for a Retail Liquor Store License for Thunder Road Liquor.

The meeting will be at 6 p.m. at City Hall, 128 Main St. It is open to the public and televised live on Channel 191.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com