Buy Photo Mt. Juliet Mayor Ed Hagerty and Commissioner Ray Justice walk through Tuscan Gardens, a residential development under construction near Mt. Juliet High School. Mt. Juliet growth is exploding and the city is struggling to control it. Some leaders say they have done a better job than Franklin, but others worry it's out of control. A moratorium on growth failed, but the discussion continues on how fast the city should grow. Monday July 28, 2014, in Mt. Juliet, TN. (Photo: Larry McCormack / THE TENNESSEAN)Buy Photo

At a recent city commission meeting, Mt. Juliet Mayor Ed Hagerty recalled driving seven miles to buy a gallon of milk in the 1980s.

The city had very few conveniences. Only 2,879 people lived there.

“I always made sure I stopped before I got home from work so I didn’t have to go back out,” said Carol Kaelin, a resident of Mt. Juliet since 1974.

RELATED:Mt. Juliet tries to lure large-scale employers

Those days are long gone with Mt. Juliet ranked among the top five fastest-growing cities in Tennessee for 12 straight years. In 2010 Mt. Juliet’s population was 24,548 — up from 12,366 in 2000.

An array of commercial options followed the rooftops. Retail, restaurant and entertainment options abound, and residents no longer have to travel to Nashville to shop or find something to do.

But there are growing pains that have some concerned about how to manage Mt. Juliet’s future as the city remains a mark for developers and builders.

“I am nervous,” Commissioner Ray Justice said. “Growth is a great thing, but it’s the rate, the pace, and all those kind of things I want to look at. We’ve been blessed, but we have to be consistent.”

Justice recently sponsored a resolution for a moratorium on development. He withdrew the resolution in order to study different aspects of growth, but the reaction on both sides was strong.

RELATED:Mt. Juliet growth and development ban stalls

Mt. Juliet West Wilson Chamber of Commerce Director Mark Hinesley stated even a hint of a moratorium could be detrimental to the city’s momentum and fellow commissioners seemed unwilling to go that far, though it never reached a vote.

“I think we’re doing incredibly well,” Hagerty said, pointing to Mt. Juliet’s consistent high rankings in family-friendly, business-friendly and safety rankings as it’s grown. “We’ve made sure we’ve had good quality growth and the proof is in the pudding. People are coming in droves.”

But residents understood why Justice raised the issue.

“Traffic is the main concern,” said resident Mary Rehovsky. “And the more people you have move into the area, the more traffic you create.”

Providence

Mt. Juliet’s growth centers around Providence and Providence Marketplace just off Interstate 40 built in 2006.

Joe Tomlinson, 61, remembers hunting on the property before it was transformed into a sprawling retail and commercial development.

It now has 1,800 of the 2,041 approved single-family homes finished and an outdoor mall with more than 50 retailers, 18 restaurants and a 14-screen movie theater. The residential portion of Providence includes 790 multi-family units that have been approved, but not all of them have been built.

“We could have never stayed Mayberry or it would have died,” Tomlinson said. “I think they’ve done pretty well, but I don’t think they recognized the growth being as quick around Providence.”

The growth has spread around Providence, mostly on the south end of the city with the Paddocks of Mt. Juliet shopping center just north of I-40. It includes a Walmart superstore with a Lowe’s, Academy Sports & Outdoors and a number of restaurants through the strip.

“Mt. Juliet is extremely fortunate because retailers want to be there,” said Jeff Browning of Browning Solutions which has been involved in multiple developments in Mt. Juliet. “If there was a glaring hole (in the Nashville market) it was on the east side, which led to Providence. It has the demographics, the income level and as long as residential growth continues, (developers) will look there.”

The apartment debate

The city has just over 1,200 apartment units, but the amount either under construction or approved would about double that total, with another complex proposing 384 units pending approval.

Hagerty maintains the city has been vigilant in demanding high standards on multi-family housing. Residents who support growth say that will attract young professionals not ready to buy a house who want to live in the suburbs and are missing from Mt. Juliet’s demographics.

Ohio-based Lifestyle Communities is one 451-unit multi-family development planned behind Jonathan’s Grille near Providence that will include amenities such as a restaurant and programs designed to create a community atmosphere.

Developers R. Dudley Smith and Frank Horton of CPS Land recently closed on 18 acres to build a 209-unit apartment complex called Creekside at Providence that will be part of a mixed use development dubbed Providence Central.

“It’s an amazing thought in Nashville, Tennessee, that many people would prefer not to have a car, but people think differently today,” Smith said. “Do you run from growth, or do you embrace growth?’ that’s the question Mt. Juliet has.

But the multi-family projects will strain already problematic traffic near Providence and on the county school system, opponents say,

“My constituents are saying no more,” said Commissioner Jim Bradshaw, who represents the Providence area where the bulk of new apartment complexes are coming.

“The main thing is traffic,” he said. “And, yes, you’re hearing these are on the top end. But if more are built and it becomes saturated, is it going to drop the price down? I keep hearing these references to Antioch and telling me ‘don’t go like Antioch and Hickory Hollow.’ ”

Reach Andy Humbles at 615-726-5939 and on Twitter @AndyHumbles.

What could be in Mt. Juliet’s future

FedEx and Under Armour: The delivery giant and sport apparel company are apparently both interested in separate properties along I-40 for industrial-type operations, which could bring a large number of new jobs to the city.

Bel Air Providence: A massive mixed-use development proposed for about 500 acres in Mt. Juliet and Lebanon along I-40 near Beckwith Road with plans for multi-family and single-family homes and several million square feet of office and retail space. Initial clearing work began in 2012, but stopped abruptly because of a dispute between the cities and Water & Wastewater Authority of Wilson County over who would provide sewer service. Lebanon recently reached an agreement with the Wastewater Authority over service area, and Mt. Juliet believes one is close.

Providence Central: A mixed-use development on 275 acres on the west side of Mt. Juliet Road across from Providence planned for more than 1.5 million square feet of office space with buildings three to six stories that would add white collar jobs important to spending. The project is also approved for around 300,000 square feet of commercial space, with a combination of single family, townhomes and apartments up to 1,000 units.

Lebanon: Mt. Juliet’s eastern neighbor is moving forward on a final design for a new road the city has approved to build along Interstate 40 between Highway 109 and Beckwith Road on the south side of I-40.

The new thoroughfare could essentially extend Providence Marketplace and provide store frontage visible from I-40, as well as spread retail options over multiple exits similar to Cool Springs in Williamson County.

Central Pike interchange: City officials hope to convince the Tennessee Department of Transportation to partner on a new interchange off I-40 to relieve congestion off Mt. Juliet Road around Providence.

Impact fee: Mt. Juliet’s public works staff will conduct a study on anticipated costs related to growth and whether to recommend the city commission consider a comprehensive impact fee on all new construction.

Mt. Juliet Growth

Year/Population

1980; 2,879

2000; 12,366

2010; 24,548

Source: U.S. Census

Read or Share this story: http://www.tennessean.com/story/news/local/wilson/2014/08/11/mt-juliet-seeks-growth-can-live/13870483/