Posted: Monday, September 15, 2014 --- 10:37 p.m.

A proposed funding cut to outpatient services at Journey Mental Health Center is raising concerns for some in the community.

"I'm very concerned because this is another small cut to an agency and system that has received cut after cut," said Journey Mental Health Center President William Greer.

The proposal includes a $60,000 cut to outpatient services, replaced by a $61,000 increase in addiction services funding at Journey Mental Health Center.

"We will continue to still have hundreds of thousands of dollars that we would be funding in outpatient services. This is a very small decrease in a very, very large contracted area," said Lynn Green, Director of Dane County Human Services.

Overall, Green said she has requested a one percent-- equal to about $240,000-- increase in mental health services overall in Dane County.

She feels the $60,000 cut to outpatient services at Journey Mental Health Center is justified because she believes more people should have insurance under the Affordable Care Act and through BadgerCare, and wouldn't need free services.

"We looked at where the needs are, we redistributed and we feel with increase health insurance coverage, this decrease in outpatient services will not be detrimental," Green said.

However, Greer and others believe it will be detrimental. Greer said about 270 existing patients would lose services over the course of a year if the cuts happen. Those services include medications, case management, therapy and support.

"Their lives can be damaged or destroyed by this kind of cut in services," Greer said.

Madison Police Chief Mike Koval also voiced concerns about the cuts, saying they couldn't come at a worse time.

"We've had our own problems with a couple officer-involved shootings where that was an underlying problem, so of course it couldn't be more self evident to those of us who live in Madison," Koval said.

The next step in the funding process will be a meeting with County board members.