Winter is rapidly approaching and your best attempt at making sure you do not catch the flu is to get the flu shot. While the shot is not a guaranteed preventative tactic, it drastically reduces your risk of falling sick from the flu.

Each year, health care professionals calculate which strains are most likely to impact the population and offer a vaccine against the most common strains. The idea behind the flu shot is simple: you get exposed to a small amount of the virus so your body can respond by producing antibodies. This, in turn, ensures that when you do actually come in contact with the virus, your body will be more efficient at producing antibodies and can fight back quicker.

This year, there are four different ways you can get vaccinated: intramuscular, jet injector, intradermal, and nasal spray vaccine. The U.S. market will receive somewhere between 171 to 179 million doses for the 2015-2016 flu season. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the flu season peaks between the months of December and February in the United States. The CDC advises everyone 6 months and older to get vaccinated by October.

Get ready for flue season by taking the flu shot. Learn when and where to get the vaccination for free. Flickr/Daniel Paquet

The price of the flu shot varies from location to location. If you’re insured then you can get it for free (or a small co-pay) from your doctor’s office. There are also several ways to get the flu shot for free or minimal money. To learn more, check out these great options:

University: Most academic institutions offer the flu shot for free with a valid student ID. If you are a student, then talk to health services to see what your options are.

Doctor: Before you go to a local drug store, talk to your doctor to see if their office provides free flu shots. Many healthcare professionals have it for free.

Insurance Provider: If your insurance is good, then you could be eligible for free flu shots. Call your insurance provider before you go to a clinic. According to CNBC, the Affordable Care Act covers the flu shot but it may not be free at every location so you should look into that.