Dozens of airline catering workers gathered at United Airlines' Chicago headquarters today, asking officials to pressure contractors who offer high-cost, high-deductible health care coverage workers can't afford.

The rally was part of a national campaign led by Unite Here, which says it represents 12,000 airline catering workers at 31 U.S. airports, about 900 of in Chicago. Meghan Cohorst, a spokeswoman for Unite Here, said about 40 percent of the union's workers make less than $10.10 per hour. That is not enough to pay for the health insurance plans their employers are offering, she said.

“They can't afford sometimes to pay rent, to buy food, let alone afford the health care coverage that is being offered to them by their employer,” she said. “In 2014 we did a survey, and a quarter of them indicated they didn't have insurance.”

The workers asked major airlines to allocate one nickel per ticket purchased toward affordable health care. Although United does not employ any of the workers Unite Here represents, Cohorst said the airline has a powerful voice in such a process.

“They have a tremendous influence over the whole industry,” she said. “They are dictating what food they prepare . . . and how much they're going to pay for that food.”

United representatives referred questions to Gate Gourmet, the Switzerland-based vendor that employs United's food service workers. Officials at Gate Gourmet's Chicago offices did not respond for comment.

Cohorst said Gate Gourmet employees are offered health care plans with premiums over $1,900 for individuals and $5,000 for families. Individual deductibles are $5,000 and family deductibles are $10,000.

PRICEY PLANS

The cost of insurance has been a problem for airline food workers for years, she said, but now workers fear the fine outlined in the Affordable Care Act that awaits the uninsured. The ACA says workers with job-based insurance plans can switch to marketplace plans if they want, but they only will be eligible for certain deductions if coverage costs less than 9.5 percent of their family's income, and the plan does not cover 60 percent of the medical costs.

“These workers don't qualify for subsidies,” Cohorst said. “So either they take the company insurance and scramble to pay for it on top of all their other bills, or they don't have insurance and deal with all the other complications that can arise from that.”

Tyler French, strategic director at Service Employees International Union Local 1, which represents 50,000 members in six states, said he has seen workers struggle with the high costs of health care.

“We've seen a concerted effort by employers across our markets, across our industries, to cut not only the hours that their employees are working but also cut their contributions to their health insurance, and they're using the Affordable Care Act as an excuse,” French said. “It's deplorable and it goes against the Affordable Care Act itself.”

'EXTREMELY POWERFUL ENTITY'

SEIU represents workers at O'Hare International Airport employed at Air Serv, a company that contracts with United. Air Serv employees work as baggage handlers, ticket agents, cabin cleaners, wheelchair escorts and more. French said that although companies such as Air Serv are the employers offering health care, the airlines have the influence to dictate change.

“The airlines are an extremely powerful entity that are the driver behind one of the largest economic engines that are the airports,” French said. “If United committed to spending more money on contracted workers' health care, it would certainly make a difference.”

Helen Harris, a 48-year-old, uninsured Gate Gourmet employee at O'Hare, was at United's headquarters today. She gets paid $8.71 an hour and has worked for Gate Gourmet for four years.

“I'm just walking on a ledge really, because I've been sick before and I wasn't prepared,” she said. “I'm hoping we'll see results, but it may take time. Right now, United is saying it's not their responsibility, but it is because the airlines control everything. They need to put the pressure on Gate Gourmet.”