TAMPA — Looking to lower the number of Americans with no health insurance, the White House has targeted Tampa as one of 20 communities to take part in a contest to sign up the most people for insurance under the Affordable Care Act, more commonly known as Obamacare.

The prize for the winning city: a visit from President Barack Obama himself.

Cities were chosen for the Healthy Communities Challenge based on the percentage and number of uninsured residents and also on levels of diversity and poverty. The White House also sought cities with leaders, like Tampa Mayor Bob Buckhorn, who support Obamacare. The contest will run through the three-month enrollment window that ends Jan. 31.

Some 17.6 million people have already signed up for insurance in the program’s first two years, said Jerry Abramson, White House Director of Intergovernmental Affairs. That includes 1.3 million Floridians.

That has seen the number of uninsured Americans decline by 45 percent since 2010, but some 10.5 million people who are eligible for coverage remain uninsured.

White House officials described the contest as part of an unprecedented regional and local effort to boost enrollment, while acknowledging that, with the program now in its third year, it is becoming tougher to get uninsured people to enroll.

“We know we need to work smarter and harder to reach people who haven’t signed up yet,” said Kristie Canegallo, White House Deputy Chief of Staff for Implementation, in a telephone conference call Monday.

More than 77,000 Hillsborough residents are now insured through the Affordable Care Act, according to Enroll America, an independent nonprofit, nonpartisan organization that works to get more people insured.

Still, roughly 15 percent of residents in Hillsborough County have no insurance. The percentage rises among minority populations, with 19 percent of black and 21 percent of Hispanic residents having no insurance.

Buckhorn, whose wife is a physician, said Obamacare has had a dramatic effect in reducing the number of people with no insurance who walk into hospital emergency rooms for treatment, which drives up costs for insured patients.

He said access to healthcare is a fundamental right for all people.

“I will tell you it makes a difference,” Buckhorn said. “Those are our friends, those are our neighbors, our constituents who now have a sense of security, of hope, a sense of better days ahead because they don’t have the ominous threat hanging over their head that, God forbid, something happened to them.”

The Affordable Health Care act is intended to reduce the number of uninsured Americans by making low-cost insurance plans available. People and families with low incomes who sign up are eligible for refundable tax credits.

But there have been challenges for the program, with several non-profit healthcare insurance providers set up for the program subsequently closing down.

The decision of state lawmakers not to expand Medicaid as provided under the act also meant Florida cannot draw down an estimated $18 billion of federal funds over 10 years to help low-income employees pay for private insurance plans. Most Republican presidential candidates have pledged to work to repeal the Affordable Care Act.

As it did last year, Tampa will in the next few weeks make community centers available for residents to meet navigators, the name given to trained workers who guide and advise residents on insurance options.

Florida Covering Kids and Families this year will receive a $5.9 million federal grant to provide roughly 150 trained navigators throughout Florida during the enrollment window.

“I think these kinds of things the city is able to do definitely gives us more access to consumers in places where they are,” said Jodi Ray, director of Florida Covering Kids and Families.

With costs for plans changing, Ray said, there is plenty of work for navigators to do giving guidance to people, including those already covered. Insurance situations for families and people change with every marriage, change of job and other life event, she said.

Residents who do not have insurance could face a fine of $695, Ray said.

New Orleans, Denver and Dallas are among the other 19 cities taking part in the enrollment challenge. Buckhorn on Monday was characteristically bullish about Tampa’s chances of winning.

“We’re confident President Obama can pre-book Air Force One and head to Tampa,” he said. “We’re going to be working to get more people than we’ve had before.”

codonnell@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7871

Twitter: codonnellTBO