Teams from New Jersey rocked the competition as fourteen of them teams placed in the top 20 in their respective challenge competitions.

The Hakuna Matatas from Bernards make their presentation for the “Making Waves” challenge. (Photo: Courtesy of Destination Imagination)

Thirty-eight teams representing New Jersey, with 17 from Hunterdon, Somerset, Union and Middlesex counties, joined with 1,400 teams from 17 countries and 30 states at Destination Imagination’s Global Finals competition in Knoxville, Tennessee.

Each year, Destination Imagination develops seven fun and engaging open-ended challenges that are designed to bridge the increasing gap between the emerging digital and human ecosystem and what students are learning in school.

Challenges foster work with STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) subject matter. Teams are comprised of up to seven students, aged from kindergarten to college level, who worked together for several hours a week since last fall to create and realize solutions to their selected Team Challenge.

Coat Check team from Bernatds with their elaborate props designed and built by the team for the “Creature Feature” challenge. (Photo: ~Courtesy of Destination Imagination)

More than 17,000 attendees participated in the “world’s largest celebration of creativity” held over four days and nights earlier this spring. Teams from New Jersey rocked the competition, with 14 of them placing in the top 20 in their respective challenge competitions.

Local competing teams included: the Technicalities and Destiny Detectives from Immaculate Conception School in the Annandale section of Clinton Township; the Diamond Girls, Polar Peeps, The Sixth Element, The Game of Lifers, Coat Check, Packed with Love, DI Devils, Dinosaurs of Oliver Street and The Hakuna Matatas from the Bernards Township School District; The Fire Breathing Ice Cubes from the Readington Township Public Schools; two teams from the Dr. Albert Einstein Academy in Elizabeth; Back to the Future from Elizabeth High School; and Swaggy Service from Califon School.

According to CEO Dr. Chuck Cadle, “Destination Imagination’s goal is to prepare each of our participants for a future world where the jobs they will perform have not been imagined yet. Here at Global Finals, we are celebrating each team’s creative solutions to our annual challenges and we are preparing our students for the individuals they will become, leaders of industry and society.”

Teams are forming now to compete in the 2015-16 Destination Imagination program year. For more information on how you can become involved please go to www.destinationimagination.org or contact Carmine Liuzzi at www.directors@njdi.org.

Reporter Jenna Intersimone: 908-801-4853; JIntersimone@GannettNJ.com

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1EpnGpg