Topics: Consumerism, Editor's Pick, Life stories, Love and Sex, Life News

I admit it: there are one or two things I’m not number one in.

More difficult for me to admit is that my lack of number one-ness in these few things is a matter of complete indifference to me, and that I have no particular desire to improve myself. Worse, that this lack of ambition, this ability to not strive for greatness, gives me real pleasure.

Worse still (here I’m closing in on ideological treason), I see this ability to rest easy as a virtue, even a talent. (Quite possibly I’m number one in not caring if I’m number one.) I believe that being good enough, in many cases, is more than good enough; that it may, in fact, be the key to the contentment box, and that properly understood and appropriately applied, it can make us a lot happier and a whole lot less annoying to others.

Let me take a second to throw some tacks under the wheels of my critics.

First, I have no quarrel with the strivers who choose to march – and I mean march – to a different drummer. If going for personal bests is your oyster, I’d be the last one to take it away. I’ve known that oyster – damn-near killed myself on the track and the squash court, for example – and there’s great satisfaction to be found in it.

Second, in praising the virtues of good enough-ness, I’m not suggesting that you apply it with a great, slovenly brush to your entire life. I’m not proselytizing for sloth. By all means, pick a thing, or a couple, if you like, in which “good enough” will never be good enough – I have – and strive for mastery. Knock yourself out.

Then find a place in the shade and consider the benefits of not striving for mastery in badminton, say, of not going for the gold in bird-watching, or barbecuing. Imagine letting the competitor-consumers, the relentless researchers, the worried trend-watchers with their fingers forever on the pulse of the moment sprint grimly ahead, while you take the day to mess around with your kids, or head off into the woods, or burn some chicken. Think of the money you’ll save and the confusion you’ll sow.

I say confusion because the world is filled with things, big things, unsuited to competition and perfect for “good enough”; things that can’t be ranked because there’s no universal yardstick by which to measure them. Because they just don’t measure. Whose #1 in decency? Or joy? Or even – despite a 150-year-old industry devoted to convincing us otherwise – contentment?

What’s interesting is the number of things similarly unsuited – parenting, for example, or leisure – that we’ve somehow been conned into believing are not profoundly individual activities in which one person’s notion of success is different from another’s, but rather activities which – like tennis – will reward our dedication with the brass ring of excellence. Never have so many been suckered so effectively. Barnum would be proud.

In many ways, of course, we Americans were ripe for the fall, culturally predisposed, like fifth-generation alcoholics, to find the rabbit hole and throw ourselves into it. For 350 years, ever since the Puritans began to fudge the Covenant of Grace by suggesting that, hey, maybe there were some things we could do – like working, striving, etc. – to punch our ticket to heaven, we’d been associating virtue with labor and labor with accumulation. On our journey through life, we’d come to understand, our task was to attach stuff to ourselves, and if the logical apotheosis of that Velcro philosophy was the figure of Donald J. Trump, bestriding the New World like a gold-plated colossus and braying ‘”I’m number one!” well, that happy sight was still a ways off in the future.

Back to history. It didn’t take long for the spirit of capitalism to capitalize on the suggestion that our labor could save us; all that had to be done – picture Don Draper of “Mad Men” making the pitch – was to bring the whole business down to earth. In the blink of a banker’s eye, work now pointed to a secular salvation and competition-for-things became the three-word answer to every question, the yellow brick road to every dream, the cure for every fear, and if by some chance you had the presumption not to feel afraid, the sellers would fix you by selling you that, then selling you the stuff to dispel it.

From there on it was one swift ride, made swifter by the breakdown of civil society, the rise of mass media, the increasing atomization of American culture. Selling stuff to David Riesman’s “lonely crowd,” it turned out, was a piece of cake. Miserable people could be made to feel inadequate – society’s losers. Isolated people could be conned into believing that striving for a bigger house or newer car would make everything right simply by showing them pictures of people with bigger houses, newer cars, who looked happy.

Not surprisingly, the sellers found a receptive audience for their Kwik-Fix solution to life’s disappointments; after all, real contentment was hard to find, hard to hold on to – it took years (and something like wisdom) to even recognize it. How much easier to just strive for the corner office, the perfect score, the award-winning kid, the trophy wife. Why climb the stairway to heaven when you could take the escalator, and lay your money down.

Enter social media, on which everyone’s life is always better than yours, on which everyone’s thrilled because they just love their new French marble countertops and Kylie just got into Princeton (or the pre-school certain to get Kylie into Princeton), and they’re leaving on that vacation (which you could never afford) with their adoring husband who just got that promotion and . . . But you’ll show them. You’ll “like” their pics to prove you don’t care, and then post that selfie in which you look so thin so they’ll see it while they’re stuffing themselves in Tuscany.

Here’s the thing: In response to this wonderfully intricate mousetrap we inhabit, I propose, laughably enough, the cultivation of “enough,” a concept as elegant in its simplicity as it is revolutionary in its implications. There’s nothing to buy – no salesman will call. It’s not available in any store.

Before proceeding, however, you should be aware that good enough-ness is potentially both infectious and hereditary and that adopting a laissez faire approach to barbequing, for example, may keep your kid out of Harvard, which currently asks its 18-year-old applicants to limit themselves to their top six state- or national-level awards.

You’ve been warned.

***

Case Study #1: Sex

Let’s start with sex. As an impressionable college freshman I was once wandering past the used bookstores on Amsterdam Avenue when I came across a book on sex. If memory serves – it’s been a while – it was called something like “How to be a Great Lover,” or “Twelve Steps to Becoming a Great Lover.” Assuming an expression of amused sophistication – How absurd! – I started reading. Though I’d have denied it under torture, when it came to sex I was as ignorant as a turnip. Maybe I’d learn something, pick up some pointers, improve my “technique.” There was a technique, right?

The book, which, disturbingly, I remember well, consisted mostly of exercises accompanied by hand-drawn illustrations designed to fast-track my lovemaking prowess. Fingertip push-ups were involved, as were tongue-extension sessions (the men’s room at the office was a good bet for getting in that mid-day workout), and high-speed blinking exercises to minimize fatigue while performing the butterfly flutter on her nipples.

Ten pages in, hope entered my heart: If this was what the competition was up to, I might be all right. If Becoming a Great Lover involved sitting on the can during lunch developing a tongue of steel and indefatigable eyelids, maybe greatness was the wrong goal. Maybe, unless you aspired to join the pro tour, having a good time without worrying about your ranking might be enough.