The all-volunteer team trained at Lake Loveland on Saturday

The ice on Lake Loveland is currently less than half an inch thick in some places, with pockets of bone-chillingly cold water among the frozen chunks.

It's what Mike Levy of the Larimer County Dive Rescue Team calls 'crappy ice,' and it happens to be the best kind for volunteers of the team to practice saving people. On Saturday, 13 people attended the ice rescue and ice diving training on Lake Loveland, including three new members of the Loveland Fire Rescue Authority and one prospective dive rescue team volunteer.

"The ice dive is really the most dangerous type of dive," said Levy, who is one of three team leaders of the Dive Rescue Team. "Once you're underneath that sheet of ice, there are a lot more restrictions."

The all-volunteer team responds to emergencies throughout Larimer County, in conjunction with many of the fire departments, and is called out-of-state at times. When they receive a call for someone who has fallen through the ice, the plan of attack depends on what they find when crews arrive.

"It's all very situational," Levy said. "The first thing is just observe and assess."

If it's an ice rescue situation where the victim is visible in the water, it might call for a surface rescue where a team member gets in a buoyant, insulated suit and makes his or her way across the ice with a board on which to place the victim.

Ice diving is usually reserved for recovery operations, cases in which witnesses have reported the victim has not resurfaced. In that case, divers in dry suits take the plunge off a boat into water where they typically cannot see more than a few feet in front of them.

"It's mostly by feel," said Bill Collins, a Poudre Valley Hospital paramedic and auxiliary member of the team.

Members of the Larimer County Dive Rescue Team practice their skills Saturday through a hole in the ice at the south end of Lake Loveland. ( Steve Stoner )

Step-by-step implementation of both types of incidents -- ice rescue and ice diving-- were practiced thoroughly on Saturday. Because the team never knows when it will get its next call, or what its members will need to be prepared for, they meet monthly for varied training sessions.

"Because there are periods of a time where we might go three months without having a call, you can't get rusty," Levy said. "These skills need to be reviewed all the time."

The dive team was founded more than 40 years ago with the primary mission of the rescue and/or recovery of people and property in water-related accidents. The team, which relies on fundraising efforts and donations, is currently seeking new members.

The only requirement for members is an interest in helping people. Even those who aren't interested in getting in the water and training on lake diving and swift water rescue can be an asset as shore support, Levy said.

The call for new members caught the eye of Loveland resident Adam Raberge, who attended his first meeting on Saturday morning and observed the training session on the lake.

"It's awesome; I wish I could be out there with them," the CSU student said while watching from the rocky shore. "These guys are all volunteer --they put themselves in dangerous situations to help other people out."

The Dive Rescue Team meets monthly in its Fort Collins headquarters, 1303 N. Shields. The team's annual academy weekend -- an overview of the team and an opportunity for new members to get involved -- will be held Feb. 8-10. To apply or for more information on the team, visit lcdrt.org.

Jessica Maher can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 516, or maherj@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @JessicaMaherRH.