Maintain Safety Net for All Californians

While the historic expansion of coverage under the Affordable Care Act is providing new insurance options for millions of Californians and dramatically reducing the number of uninsured by half or more, potentially three million Californians will remain uninsured. Increased efforts at outreach, education and enrollment can bring that number down further, but there will be some who fall through the cracks.

For the many Californians who are left uninsured, there needs to be a safety net to provide basic care and coverage, to prevent the devastating health and financial consequences to individuals and the public health and economic repercussions to our communities. While not a majority, a good percentage of the remaining uninsured are immigrants not legally present, who are explicitly and unfortunately excluded from the subsidized coverage the ACA provides.

This issue thus falls to the state and counties, and it is not going away. Even if immigration reform passes, it’s likely that those on a more-than-a-decade-long “path to citizenship” will be barred from any federal financial help for health care, regardless of their income.

Health Access and community partners recently surveyed the counties that will continue to have the responsibility for providing care for the uninsured. Our new report, “California’s Uneven Safety-Net,” found that despite exciting progress in key counties, California will continue to have a highly variable patchwork of indigent care and safety-net programs and services. Some counties — like Alameda, Los Angeles, San Francisco, San Mateo and Santa Clara — are moving ahead in providing a medical home to the remaining uninsured, in some cases reorienting the Low-Income Health Programs that served as a “bridge” for the new Medi-Cal population. But there are only 10 (albeit populous) counties that explicitly provide primary and preventative care to undocumented Californians beyond emergency services. Three others (Contra Costa, Sacramento and Yolo) cut their care to undocumented immigrants in 2009 during the budget crisis.

Other counties even were discussing cutting safety-net services, as they faced reduced federal and state funds. If California does a good job enrolling people in coverage, counties may and should decide to use new savings and revenues to continue to provide a safety-net that survives and thrives for the remaining uninsured, including the undocumented. We urge advocates and organizations to engage with counties as they make initial decisions about their safety-net funding in January, and into the new year as counties assess the impact of health reform.

Ultimately, we need a statewide solution that recognizes the dignity of every Californian, regardless of which county they live, and the need to invest in our shared health and prosperity. California took an important step by including many legal immigrants who were excluded in the federal law — including recent legal immigrants and DREAM Act students — in our Medi-Cal expansion. We should take additional steps in 2014 and beyond. Our counties and ultimately our state can fulfill the full promise of health reform, and benefit from a health system that is more humane, more efficient and effective, and stronger, when everyone is included.