Freedom Partners Chamber of Commerce, the big-money group connected to the Koch brothers network, launched its second Oregon ad hitting Democratic Sen. Jeff Merkley -- this time on health care and what it said was his overall ineffectiveness.

Merkley campaign spokeswoman Lindsay O'Brien countered that the group was "blatantly lying" about his record.

Freedom Partners, which is connected to a network of large, mostly anonymous donors put together by billionaire businessmen Charles and David Koch, is in the second week of what is a reportedly a $3.6 million ad campaign in Oregon running until the Nov. 4 election.

The group is operating independently of Merkley's Republican challenger, Portland pediatric neurosurgeon Monica Wehby. But she has welcomed the group's investment in the state, and on Thursday she launched a new ad that picks up on the theme of Freedom Partner's first commercial, which had focused on government spending and the growing federal debt.

In its new ad, Freedom Partners charges that Merkley has authored only one bill signed into law in his more than six years in the Senate. That ignores a number of times he's been one of a group of senators who crafted successful legislation or that he's played a key role in inserting major amendments into a bill.

The Merkley campaign said examples included a Merkley amendment to the Dodd-Frank financial reform bill that more strictly limited the trading activities of large banks.

The Freedom Partners ad also focuses on health care, saying that "Merkley promised to fix Obamacare, but last year our premium increases were the highest on the West Coast."

It cites an article in Forbes studying the increased cost of premiums in the individual and small business market under the new federal health care law compared to previous insurance costs.

Most Oregonians do not receive their coverage through the individual market. The new individual plans also typically carry greater benefits, and the Forbes comparisons did not include government subsidies that some policyholders can receive. Oregon, acting under authority from the Obama administration, also allowed many individuals to continue receiving their old insurance plans for another year.

Last, the Freedom Partners ad says that more health insurance increases are on the way next year. Moda, which captured the largest share of the individual and group market, is increasing rates. However, some firms say they are lowering their rates.

-- Jeff Mapes