LAKE OSWEGO, Ore. -

The Oregon Association of Hospitals and Health Systems announced a new community benefit policy package Tuesday.

"The two-part voluntary policy package demonstrates hospitals' commitment to the communities they serve at a time when the Affordable Care Act is changing the health care landscape in Oregon," the organization said in a news release.

A St. Charles Health System spokeswoman said the hospital system has pledged its support for the policies.

Here's the rest of the association's new release, in full.



The first initiative will provide free care for families who are not Medicaid eligible and whose income is below 200% of the federal poverty level.

This program will help ensure that even as Medicaid expands, those who do not qualify and are unable to attain insurance will receive the hospital care they need.

It is estimated that 87,000 Oregonians fall into this category, and providing them with free hospital care builds on the success of Medicaid expansion, which covers people below 139% of the federal poverty level.



The second initiative involves hospitals keeping overall community benefit spending at or above levels from prior years.

During a time when charity care - free care for patients who do not have the ability to pay--is dropping statewide as a result of record numbers of Oregonians obtaining insurance coverage through Affordable Care Act, hospitals have committed to maintain their 2015 community benefit spending based on an average of prior years, as reported to the Oregon Health Authority.

This commitment will allow hospitals to reinvest those dollars in other community benefit activities which support local health needs, in addition to fulfilling their charitable obligations to their communities as tax-exempt organizations.



"Oregon's hospitals are leading the way by enacting a set of initiatives voluntarily that seek to close the coverage gap for the shrinking percentage of uninsured and underinsured, while maintaining their significant investments in their communities and in the people they serve 24/7/365," said Andy Davidson, President and CEO of OAHHS.

"Hospital and health system leaders in Oregon are proud to play such a vital role at this pivotal time our state's health care transformation."



In Oregon, "community benefit" is defined in statute as health care-related services that nonprofit hospitals provide without the expectation of compensation. These services include (but are not limited to):



--Health services to vulnerable or underserved people

--Financial or in-kind support for public health programs

--Health education, health screenings, and prevention services

--Medical research and health professions education

--Community-building activities such as neighborhood revitalization projects, or workforce development programs



In 2013, as tallied by the Oregon Health Authority, Oregon hospitals provided more than $1.9 billion in community benefit contributions to their communities, while providing care for 336,153 inpatients, more than 9.9 million outpatients, and more than 1.2 million emergency room visits. More information about Oregon's community benefit reporting program can be found online at http://myoregonhospital.org/



About the Oregon Association of Hospitals and Health Systems

Founded in 1934, the Oregon Association of Hospitals and Health Systems (OAHHS) is a statewide, nonprofit trade association that works closely with local and national government leaders, business and citizen coalitions, and other professional health care organizations to enhance and promote community health and to continue improving Oregon's innovative health care community.