Joshua Rincon with his family at Matheny’s annual picnic. Clockwise from left: brother Nicolas, father Jairo, brother Adrian and mother Grecia. (Photo: Courtesy of the Matheny School) Story Highlights Joshua wanted to communicate and had been frustrated by his limited ability to do so

Positive forms of communication includes PECS (Picture Exchange Communication Systems)

When 3-year-old Joshua Rincon arrived at The Matheny School in August 2013, it was clear to his teacher, Dawn Williams, that "he wanted to communicate and had been frustrated by his limited ability to do so."

The key to unlocking Josh's communication, said Williams, has been "encouraging him to use a variety of positive forms of communication including PECS (Picture Exchange Communication Systems), real pictures and objects, voice output switches and, perhaps the most successful of all, using his pointer finger to make choices."

Joshua's father, Jairo Rincon, a Hillsborough resident, said improved communication has been one of his son's major achievements since coming to Matheny.

"His communication," Rincon said, "has improved so he can let us know his needs and preferences. He has learned how to use his utensils, and he is also able to play and entertain himself. And his behavior has improved."

Joshua Rincon with Dawn Williams during a visit to the Peapack-Gladstone Firehouse. (Photo: Courtesy of the Matheny School)

Shortly after Joshua was born, he was diagnosed with cerebral palsy, and his father recalls that "we were told he would always need extra help."

Joshua received early intervention through the Arc of Somerset County's Jerry Davis School, and his social worker recommended Matheny. The Hillsborough School District, Rincon said, was supportive.

Matheny is the correct environment for Josh, Rincon believes, because of the level of attention and interaction that is required. And, "the IEP (Individualized Education Program) is followed more aggressively." The teachers and therapists at Matheny, Rincon, said, are "excellent. Their level of expertise is very high. They are always bringing new ideas about Joshua's education and his physical progress."

Williams points out that Joshua has become more independent and adept at daily living skills such as self-feeding, which, she adds, "is great because he loves to eat! He is also very proud when he is successful using his custom toileting chair." Rincon said he and his wife, Grecia, often refer to Williams as "his second mom. She is so caring and loving. We are so glad she is our son's teacher and his caregiver."

The Matheny School is part of the Matheny Medical and Educational Center, a special hospital and educational facility for children and adults with medically complex developmental disabilities.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1GiejEH