Meeting News Coverage

DENVER — The future of dermatology, which includes changes brought on by the Affordable Care Act, was the subject of speakers at the American Academy of Dermatology annual meeting plenary session.

“Our specialty remains very ripe for disruptive innovation … we’re sometimes at risk of realizing it too late,” Jack S. Resnick Jr., MD, associate professor and vice-chair of dermatology, University of California, San Francisco, told the audience. “We really need to think about how would we design the perfect physician-led team to provide the best care. We let the market drive it instead, and we’re playing catch up.”

He mentioned teledermatology as having “huge potential to do wonderful things.”

Resnick, recipient of the Clarence S. Livingood, MD, award and lectureship, told the audience they must collect data, measure quality [and] demonstrate value.

“One of the things we have in our favor is that we are highly valued by our patients. Our patients love dermatology, and that works well for us.” he said.

“But the world is changing,” he said. “And if we don’t adapt, we are at risk of being marginalized and commoditized.”

“Never before have we faced such fundamental challenges in the way health care is delivered,” Dirk Michael Elston, MD, AAD president, said.

Elston said AAD has worked with state and sister societies. “Because much of the action is at the states, and that’s where the academy has to be partnering with state and local societies in their individual legislative societies.”

The state societies are the first line of defense against limited provider networks, which have appeared in some states, including Florida and Connecticut, Elston said.

Brett M. Coldiron

Brett M. Coldiron, MD, who will assume the AAD presidency at the end of the annual meeting, outlined challenges facing dermatologists brought on by the Affordable Care Act.

The first detail for dermatology is the limited provider networks. “It’s an unexpected consequence from the Affordable Care Act,” Coldiron reported.

The Affordable Care Act also has pressure to create larger physician groups, Coldiron said.

“Most of us are in small groups and we like it that way,” Coldiron said. “If we stay small, we risk the loss of access. If dermatologists join large multispecialty groups, they fear they will lose autonomy and control. … A better option might be to form a larger dermatology-only group where you’re at.”

Coldiron also stressed motivating action, with dermatologists becoming more involved with their specialties and future. He said the organization needs to get more involved with the American Medical Association.

“It’s time to join forces,” he said. “We can no longer thrive as a small isolated specialty outside of organized medicine and politics in general. The forces of change are hard upon us. … Our work is cut out for us.” – By Bruce Thiel

For more information:

Plenary Session. Presented at the 2014 American Academy of Dermatology annual meeting; March 21-25, 2014; Denver.