Controversial craft shop Hobby Lobby will host a grand opening in West Covina’s Eastland Center at 9 a.m. Monday.

The new 42,000 square-foot craft and home decoration store has been in the works for at least six months. It is expected to create between 35 to 50 new jobs, according to the city.

It joins a number of new businesses planned at the Eastland Center, including Pier 1 Imports and UTLA Beauty later this year.

“We’re working as hard as we can to make the atmosphere right for companies to come here and to stay here,” said City Councilman Fred Sykes, who described the new businesses as a “resurgence” at the once struggling Eastland Center.

He attributed the turnaround at Eastland to the hard work of the city’s staff, who go out and promote West Covina as a business-friendly city.

Hobby Lobby only adds to the diversity of businesses already located at the shopping center, City Manager Chris Chung said.

“We’re just trying to encourage more businesses to come within the city,” he said.

The new businesses, like Hobby Lobby, help generate much needed sales tax for West Covina, which in turn helps the city meet its goal of expanding its public safety departments, according to Mayor Steve Herfert.

“In addition to the services and products they will be offering our residents, they will be occupying former vacant spaces, generating sales tax revenues to the city and creating employment opportunities for the residents,” Herfert stated.

A representative from Hobby Lobby did not return requests for comment.

Hobby Lobby’s West Covina opening comes less than two weeks after about 50 people protested the grand opening of the franchise in Burbank. Protesters bearing signs targeted the retailer after the Supreme Court ruled that some for-profit companies with strong religious beliefs, like Hobby Lobby, could opt out of covering certain types of birth control under the Affordable Care Act.

West Covina city and police officials knew of no planned protests at Monday’s grand opening.