Deceased is Taylor Thyfault, 21

Taylor Thyfault (FACEBOOK photo)

A Colorado State Patrol cadet killed Saturday when he was allegedly struck by a convicted felon involved in a high-speed chase used his last moments to possibly save another man's life, according to investigators.

The cadet was identified as 21-year-old Taylor Thyfault. Colorado State Trooper Clinton Rushing, 37, was also critically injured after both men were hit on Colo. 66 near Weld County 1 at about 8 a.m. Saturday, following a police chase that originated in Weld County.

Troopers were trying to apprehend Christopher Lee Gebers, 27, when Gebers allegedly took off heading west out of Weld County in a 2002 Honda Civic.

Longmont police Cmdr. Jeff Satur said investigators are not sure why Gebers fled the traffic stop, but noted that the man's driver's license had been suspended.

Christopher Lee Gebers (Longmont Police Department)

Gebers plowed into the scene of a separate crash investigation being conducted by other state troopers. Satur said Rushing and Thyfault arrived on the scene to assist with the unrelated crash investigation and were deploying stop sticks in the road when they heard of the high-speed chase coming from Weld County.

The cadet and trooper were standing in between a tow truck and another vehicle when the Civic came skidding into the gap, striking the two men, Satur said. Rushing was critically injured and is being treated at a local hospital. Thyfault died at the scene.

Thyfault's last act was to shout out to a tow truck driver on the scene to get out of the way, Satur said.

"As far as law enforcement goes, we never want to lose a life and the cadet acted heroically and saved another and unfortunately lost his own life in the process," Satur said.

Gebers sustained minor injuries in the crash and was taken to Longmont United Hospital for treatment before police took him into custody and transported him to Boulder County Jail.

Colorado State Patrol, Weld County Sheriffs Deputies, Longmont Police and Mountain View Fire Rescue personnel are seen near Weld County Road 1 and Colo. 66 while working the scene of a high speed chase ending in a fatality on Saturday. ( Matthew Jonas )

Gebers faces potential charges of first-degree murder, criminal-attempt first degree murder, first-degree assault on a peace officer, vehicular assault, vehicular homicide, reckless endangerment, reckless driving, eluding a police officer, driving with a canceled/denied license and illegal use of blue lights.

Court records show that in 2014, Gebers was convicted in Larimer County of stealing between $350 and $700. In 2013 ,Gebers was convicted of distributing a controlled substance in Adams County and had a sentencing hearing in January of this year.

Also in 2013, Gebers pleaded guilty to a charge of driving under a suspended license. In 2006, Gebers was convicted of possessing a controlled substance and carrying a concealed weapon.

Thyfault's body, draped with an American flag, was taken to the coroner's office at the former site of Boulder Community Health on Broadway in Boulder under heavy police and trooper escort Saturday afternoon.

Thyfault described himself on his Facebook and Instagram pages as a Fort Collins native who studied at Red Rocks Community College and served in the U.S. Army. Facebook photos depict him as a man passionate about excercise. A Mother's Day post shows him with his mother, who called him her "greatest accomplishment" in the comments.

Cadets ride along with troopers multiple times during their training at the academy. The goal is to help the future troopers understand the job and to get them excited about it, Trooper Josh Lewis told the Denver Post.

"Ultimately, this was supposed to be on the best days," he said.

Thyfault was a squad leader in the academy class that started in March, Trooper Josh Lewis said.

"He was a popular cadet," Lewis said.

A state patrol news release said the families of both Thyfault and Rushing had requested privacy.

"The Colorado State Patrol wishes to express thanks not only to our partnering agencies for their assistance, but to the community as a whole that has given and continues to give us so much support," the department said in a prepared statement.

The Longmont Police Department is the lead investigation agency for the incident. Boulder County Sheriff Joe Pelle was also seen at the site of the crash, Saturday morning.

"From the whole Longmont public safety family, our condolences and thoughts go out to the families," Satur said. "You don't like to see your law enforcement brothers killed doing their job."

Boulder District Attorney Stan Garnett also expressed regret at Tyfault's death.

"Obviously where this loss is concerned, it's a tragedy for the whole community and the whole state," Garnett said.

Charlie Brennan: 303-473-1327, brennanc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/chasbrennan