Pinal County Sheriff Paul Babeu has formed a political-action committee that his consultant says is intended to influence congressional races around the country.

Pinal County Sheriff Paul Babeu (Photo: Arizona Republic)

Consultant Mike Noble, who has worked with the sheriff since his first campaign in 2008, said the PAC isn't necessarily a sign Babeu wants to run again for the U.S. House of Representatives or Senate. But he might.

"All options are on the table," Noble said. "We haven't talked about that yet."

The Republican's political team formed the PAC, called Babeu for America, earlier this year and launched a website soliciting donations.

But only recently did the PAC file organization paperwork after meeting the required $5,000 fundraising threshold. The Federal Election Commission records were submitted Nov. 25.

Babeu plans to back like-minded federal candidates who believe in "securing the border and supporting the rule of law," Noble said.

His state PAC, Paul Babeu for Arizona, was active for Republicans in 2014 races, contributing to Secretary of State candidate Michele Reagan as well as Republicans for state Legislature and Justice of the Peace.

Noble said Babeu wants to capitalize on his "national presence."

"With him being on the national circuit, he believes we should use that to get some funds," Noble said. "A lot of folks talk a big game… We're putting our money where our mouth is and helping other folks."

The PAC so far has not backed candidates for 2016. But Noble said it's still too early.

"We're focusing on getting the PAC where it needs to be," he said.

Babeu regularly appears on FOX News and conservative radio to talk about border security, drug cartels and illegal immigration. His fundraising e-mails often blast President Barack Obama and take on national issues, including the Affordable Care Act.

"The President and his allies in Washington continue to do everything in their power to weaken our border and immigration laws," reads one. "Illegals are flooding the country every day because of the lack of leadership in D.C. It's up to us to fight back!"

Babeu ran for House in 2012 but dropped out after a scandal erupted over allegations from a former boyfriend, who was undocumented and claimed the sheriff threatened him with deportation. Babeu was later exonerated.

He was talked about as a possible candidate for Congress in 2014 but decided against running.

Babeu recently drew attention for a sheriff's department recruiting video that portrays Pinal County as overrun with drug cartels and crime.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1CORYzK