Green Bay Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers (12) celebrates after throwing a game-winning 61-yard pass as the clock expired against the Detroit Lions at Ford Field. (Photo: Jim Matthews/P-G Media/@jmatthe79 )

Hail yeah

When it comes to that Hail Mary, we still can't get enough.

The endless replays. The funny memes. The SportsCenter chatter. That GIF of Calvin Johnson dropping to his knees on the sideline.

The thrilling — and almost unbelievable — finish to Thursday's game against the Detroit Lion energized the Packers and it energized us, too.

No matter what happens with the rest of the season, we have this memory. And what a great feeling it is. Congrats to the players for sticking it out to the very, very, very end.

Expo center advances

A belated congratulations to the organizers of the Fox Cities Exhibition Center and Appleton Mayor Tim Hanna. All 10 communities in the Fox Cities tourism zone have agreed to raise their room taxes to pay for the building slated to be built to the south of the Radisson Paper Valley Hotel.

Municipal boards across the Fox Cities voted — some of them unanimously — for the project because they see how it can benefit their residents. A vibrant downtown Appleton equals a vibrant Fox Cities.

For the most part, this project will be paid for with money from visitors. Unless you're staying in a hotel room nearby, you're not paying for the bulk of the construction.

We look forward to the day it opens.

Lawmakers' take-home pay increases

It was an empty promise.

Assembly Speaker Robin Vos told voters that a change in the way lawmakers are compensated for staying in Madison overnight when they're on state business would save the state money. It seemed like a good idea.

Then, Gannett Wisconsin Media took a look at the real numbers.

Since the change was enacted in January, it's costing us a lot more money.

The perk cost taxpayers about $738,000 through September. The bill during the same span in 2013 and 2011, when similar budget debates were happening, was about $49,000 and $63,000 lower, respectively.

We're not questioning our lawmakers' dedication to their jobs. They spend a lot of time in Madison away from their hometown and families. We are, however, questioning why we're being told a change will save money and then more lawmakers are walking away with additional cash in their bank accounts.

It's time to change it back.

Bald eagles stage a comeback

Look up in the sky. If you see a bald eagle, you have federal and state authorities to thank.

The state Department of Natural Resources counted about 1,400 nesting pairs of bald eagles this year. That's up from a low of 108 in 1973.

Regulation of the pesticide DDT and eagle protection laws have helped tremendously. But the threat of lead poisoning remains here in Wisconsin, in part because of discarded gun ammunition.

We're encouraged by the trend and can't wait for the day when we see even more of these majestic birds soaring above the Fox River.

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1XRgiWX