On one of the guys’ LinkedIn pages, his accomplishments include “Employee of the Quarter 2009” and “Caught 1 Touchdown Pass from Peyton Manning.”

Another guy was Mr. Irrelevant.

Another played for Colorado’s Coach Mac — not the current one, but Bill McCartney. And another, a defensive lineman, had never caught a touchdown pass. Ever.

This Sunday, Peyton Manning could very well throw three touchdown passes, which would give him an astounding 500 for his NFL career. Those who have caught many of the 497 are superstars, be it Marshall Faulk or Marvin Harrison or Demaryius Thomas. There are 12 men who have caught one — but only one — touchdown pass from Manning. They’re forever part of history, even if many are long forgotten by most fans.

“Believe it or not, I found a few minutes to think about some of (them),” Manning said this week. “A guy named Trevor Insley, he caught one. Of course (Broncos defensive tackle) Mitch Unrein would be in that category. There was a tight end named Mike Roberg in there. Lamont Warren. Tom Santi from Virginia. Gijon Robinson. The scary thing is I can actually remember the touchdown — Gijon Robinson caught a goal line naked against New England in New England. Fake bootleg left, roll right, wide open because nobody thought we would be throwing it to Gijon Robinson. I can’t remember a lot of things — important things — but I have a lot of useless information in my mind.”

Of the Touchdown Twelve, only two played for the Broncos (Lance Ball and Unrein), though three were born in Colorado — Aaron Moorehead (Aurora), Robinson (Denver) and Unrein (Eaton).

Meanwhile, Warren attended Colorado under McCartney from 1991-93 and caught Peyton’s 10th career touchdown pass for Indianapolis — the city where Warren happened to be born.

Kenton Keith, who caught a 4-yard touchdown pass in 2007, is a cousin of the great Roger Craig, while Dan Klecko, who hauled in a 2-yard toss on the last day of the 2006 season, is the son of former New York Jets Pro Bowler Joe Klecko.

As for the 497 touchdown throws, “Let me say this,” Luke Lawton explained. “Mine has to be his easiest one. It was just a shovel pass on the goal line. I was in the backfield, I ran in front of the line and he kind of underhand-flipped it to me, kind of like an option pitch. And I took it in, just like that.”

Lawton’s 1-yard haul gave Indianapolis a fourth-quarter cushion in a 2007 win against the Jacksonville Jaguars. Now 34, he’s a reserve in the Marines.

Moorehead (9-yard catch in 2006) is now an assistant coach at Virginia Tech.

Jim Finn (4-yard catch in 2000) was indeed Mr. Irrelevant, picked last in the 1999 draft. For three seasons (2004-06), Finn caught passes from Manning’s brother, Eli, in New York, but his only career touchdown came courtesy of Peyton.

Unrein is still on the Denver defense. But the Broncos put in the large load on offense for a 2012 game, and suddenly there he was in the huddle, Manning’s first read in a goal-line progression.

“The ball was in the air — it seemed like time just slowed down, just kind of stood still,” Unrein said. “It was so weird, I could see all the fans in the background, and I could see the laces spinning, and all I could think was — don’t drop it, don’t drop it, don’t drop it.

” I caught it, the crowd went crazy, and I stood there for a second or two, didn’t really know what to do. So I decided to spike it. And then right after it, I was like, ‘Where did the ball go?’ “

Unrein had never caught a touchdown at any level and today has the ball in his basement trophy case, alongside awards earned by his wife, bronze-medal Olympic trapshooter Corey Cogdell.

But perhaps the most obscure of the scorers is Roberg, who only caught two NFL passes, one for a touchdown, which made his LinkedIn page. Roberg turned 37 on Thursday, and when initially contacted by the media this week, he thought — “Man, this sounds like one of my buddies in Denver, trying to set me up.”

Roberg’s second and final NFL reception happened against the Tennessee Titans in 2002.

“The play was your typical third-and-1, a play-action to the tight end — nobody was covering me,” he said of the touchdown toss. “All I had to do was catch the ball. I kept the ball. It’s one of the things that people always ask — ‘If your house caught on fire, what’s one thing you’d probably grab?’ And I’d lean toward that, because it’s a priceless thing.

“What I know now, I wish I would’ve had Peyton sign it. I thought someday he’d be at this mark, to break the all-time record. It’ll be cool to say that I was part of it.”

Brandon Krisztal, host of The Post’s online show “The Press Box,” contributed to this report.

Benjamin Hochman: bhochman@denverpost.com or twitter.com/hochman