People Moves of the Week: AlpInvest, KeyBanc, Star Mountain

AlpInvest taps new managing director; KeyBanc adds to its health care group; Star Mountain brings in former Morgan Stanley CEO John Mack

AlpInvest Partners — The wholly owned subsidiary of global alternative asset manager the Carlyle Group (Nasdaq: CG) announced that Neal Costello has rejoined the firm as a managing director. Costello, now a member of AlpInvest’s secondary investments team in Amsterdam, was most recently a senior principal, based in London, at Canada Pension Plan Investment Board (CPPIB) – the recent buyer of GE Capital Sponsor Finance. Before that, he was with AlpInvest from 2003 to 2013, starting in the New York office as a founding member of the firm’s secondary investments team and later led AlpInvest’s Asian team in Hong Kong.

Bressler Amery & Ross PC — The law firm has opened another office in Florida. Bressler Amery & Ross is now based in both Miami, as well as Ft. Lauderdale. The office employs 8 legal professionals, including six attorneys, and focuses on the firm's securities, insurance and litigation practices. The attorneys in the office include principals Alex Sabo, Sara Soto and Rebecca Leon; counsel Alise Henry; and associates Hope Zelinger and Krista Elsasser. They will be joined by two paralegals.

K&L Gates LLP — The Hong Kong office of the law firm hired Carolyn Sng as a partner. She joins K&L Gates from Fried Frank Harris Shriver & Jacobson LLP. With experience in Hong Kong and throughout Asia, Sng focuses on capital markets and M&A. She also acts for underwriters, investment banks and large corporations both public and private on restructurings, corporate finance, and private equity deals.

KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc. — The investment banking arm of Cleveland-based KeyCorp (NYSE: KEY) brought in Steven Alcauskas as a managing director in the health care group. Based in New York, Alcauskas will provide strategic advisory and financing services for health care services companies.

Star Mountain Capital LLC — The New York alternative asset manager tapped former Morgan Stanley (NYSE: MS) executive John Mack (pictured) as a senior adviser. Mack served as chairman of Morgan Stanley from 2005 to 2011 and CEO from 2005 to 2010. Previous positions include chairman of Pequot Capital Management and CEO of Credit Suisse First Boston (NYSE: CS).

Westchester Capital Management — The New York investment adviser enlisted Michael Corigliano as an analyst and trader, as well as Amy Nazimiec who joins the business management and operations team as associate compliance officer. Both will be based in Valhalla, New York. Corigliano began his career at Citigroup, later working as an equity derivatives trader for Capstone Investment Advisors and Rodman & Renshaw/Hudson Securities. He was also an equity derivatives portfolio manager at Bell Curve Capital in Sea Cliff, New York. Nazimiec began her career in 2005 and has held roles at BlackRock, Old Mutual Asset Management Trust Co. and Towers Watson Investment Services Inc.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: