LOS ANGELES — “I Love L.A.”

That Randy Newman ditty blares out of the speakers at Dodger Stadium every time the home team wins.

The Rockies have been forced to listen to the song — a lot — having lost 10 of their last 11 games to the Dodgers at Chavez Ravine.

But not Saturday night.

Behind a sparkling performance by left-hander Jorge De La Rosa and home runs by Carlos Gonzalez, Daniel Descalso and Nolan Arenado, the Rockies pounded out a 7-1 victory.

“De La (Rosa) set the tone for us, and CarGo set the tone, too, with that first-inning bomb,” Arenado said. “He’s really been swinging the bat well. And that kind of wakes us up. It feels good having the lead, and we got it in the first inning. I think ‘De La’ fed off that and he just did his job. It was one of the best performance I have seen from ‘De La.’ “

Unfortunately for the Rockies, there was more bad news on the injury front. De La Rosa, who might have had a chance for a complete-game shutout, left the game with one out in the eighth after fielding a grounder by Scott Van Slyke. De La Rosa appeared to re-injure the left groin that cost him the first two weeks of the regular season.

“It’s a little concerning that he had to come out in the eighth, but we are hoping it’s not too bad and he’s able to make his next start,” said Walt Weiss, who returned to manage after missing two games after undergoing an appendectomy on Wednesday. “The groin is a concern because it’s been somewhat chronic, so we’ll see how he is tomorrow.”

De La Rosa said he tweaked his groin when his spike caught the turf.

“I felt it a little bit,” he said. “That’s why I told them about it, so they took me out.”

De La Rosa entered the game winless in four starts and with a 9.56 ERA. Last Sunday at Coors Field against the Dodgers, he lasted only four innings, giving up five runs on five hits and walking six.

But he was at his best Saturday night, allowing no runs on just two hits with no walks and three strikeouts. His ERA dropped exactly three runs to 6.56.

The Rockies not only beat L.A., they beat right-hander Zack Greinke, who entered the game 5-0 with a 1.52 ERA, second-lowest in the majors.

It was one of the most satisfying victories of a frustrating season for the Rockies, who won for just the second time in their last 14 games, and for the sixth time in their last 24.

Gonzalez, showing signs that he’s waking up from his season-long hibernation at the plate, hit a solo homer to right-center off Greinke in the first. Greinke tried to throw a 2-0 fastball past Gonzalez and CarGo hit it 425 feet — not an easy feat through the Pacific air at Dodger Stadium.

Gonzalez hit a three-run, go-ahead homer in the ninth inning of Colorado’s 5-4 win over the Dodgers on Thursday. That was his first RBI since April 25.

When asked if he’s near to regaining his form at the plate, CarGo answered: “Close. I would say it feels good. I never doubted myself. I think the biggest thing for me is that I have been in this situation before. I try not to pay attention to the scoreboard. Anybody can have a bad month.

“I see myself at the end of the season hitting over .300. I’m not saying I’m going to hit over .300, but that’s my goal.”

Greinke departed after six innings, his only mistake being the misplaced fastball to CarGo.

Descalo’s two-run homer in the seventh provided a nice cushion. His first home run in a Rockies uniform, and his first ever against the Dodgers, came on an 83 mph changeup by reliever Sergio Santos.

Arenado cranked a two-run homer to left in the Colorado’s three-run eighth. Arenados’ seventh homer of the season also came off Santos, who was roundly booed by the Dodger faithful.

The game was filled with defensive gems. Dodgers center fielder Kike Hernandez turned into the “Say Hey Kid” in the fourth, robbing Michael McKenry of extra bases. Hernandez, running with his back to the plate, made an over-the-shoulder grab and then slammed into the padded center-field wall. Legendary Dodgers broadcaster Vin Scully called it “A Willie Mays catch.”

Arenado countered in the seventh, making a bare-handed scoop of Jimmy Rollins’ roller and throwing him out by a quarter-step. And Blackmon made a highlight of his own, making a running grab of Greinke’s drive to deep left-center in the third.

Unfortunately for Colorado, left fielder Corey Dickerson came up injured after his long chase toward the ball and was removed from the game after the inning. Dickerson has been playing with a painful case of plantar fasciitis in his left foot. He has said it doesn’t affect him while he’s hitting, but it flares up when runs on the bases or in the outfield.

“When he hit the track, the soft track, (the injury) bit him,” Weiss said. “Like we have talked about, it’s something he’s going to have to deal with, to some extent, for a little while. But he’s done pretty well so far.”

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp