In the months before we opened the first SoulCycle studio, my co-founder Julie and I sat with friends, family and people we trusted to share our vision, solicit guidance and, most importantly, gauge reaction to our business concept. These meetings were rarely encouraging. Over and over we heard the same question: “Why would anyone in their right mind pay $27 for something they could get at the gym for free?”

The truth is, we didn’t know if there was a market for the experience we were creating, but we had a bunch of clues. Indoor cycling had been around since the early ’90s, and popular instructors’ classes were in high demand in New York City. We also knew that the group fitness scene in New York was a mess. Gyms were uninviting, uninspiring and operationally inefficient. Class quality was totally unpredictable, and service was an afterthought. We listened to a lot of people complain about their fitness options, and at SoulCycle, we often say “if one person is complaining, then 100 are thinking the same thing.” So we were confident there was an opportunity to improve the product.

Julie and I thought people would pay a premium price for a premium product. Why? Because WE were willing to pay that premium. We were the target audience, we knew what we liked and what we didn’t, and we designed SoulCycle precisely to our own specifications. We assumed that if it worked for us, it would work for a lot of people like us. But the more people asked, the more the $27 question kept us up at night.

We knew we had to take the guesswork out, so we focused on creating a one-of-a-kind experience and providing unparalleled customer service. Our marketing highlighted the fact that SoulCycle was more than a workout – it was fitness and fun and community and therapy rolled together. Ultimately, delivering on that brand promise is how we won the value argument with our riders.

Here are some lessons that we learned about creating a product that satisfies market demand.

Sometimes it’s better to tear the house down than to renovate. Initially, Julie and I thought we could find a space, lease some bikes, hire a couple of teachers and be off to the races. But as we explored the industry, we realized there were fundamental problems with how boutique fitness businesses operated that explained why so few were thriving or able to scale. Instructors were transient because they were paid poorly and didn’t receive benefits, there was little to no investment made in their training or development, and they were wildly inconsistent because there were no brand standards for how they taught their classes. We decided to change all of that — to treat instructors like talent, to offer them real careers and to invest in them like they were our most valuable assets. Because they are. When our instructors are happy, our riders can feel it. It’s hard to find inspiration when your guru is miserable.

Pretty soon, we realized that we could innovate on just about every aspect of our business — from our pay-per-class business model, to creating our own reservation platform, to manufacturing our own bikes. Ultimately, this is how we answered the $27 question. We built the best possible product by stripping everything down and rebuilding from the studs.

Product gets them in the door, user experience brings them back. SoulCycle is an experiential brand, so our product is our biggest marketing tool. We give away free classes by the truckload because we believe in the experience. But our marketing doesn’t stop when people walk through the door — in fact, that’s where the magic begins. Our pay-per-class model forces us to deliver a premier experience because there’s no obligation return — you come when you want and pay as you go. As a result, every touch point at our studios is carefully curated to ensure a joyful, uplifting experience, from the clean, airy design of our lobbies to the cheerful front desk staff who are trained to learn your name and shoe size. It’s easier for a product to resonate with consumers when every interaction around that product is filled with joy and wonder. User experience is everything. Invest accordingly.

Create opportunities for customers to make noise about your product. SoulCycle was built on word of mouth. Our best marketers don’t work for the company, they’re the ones riding in our studios. We create 14 limited edition retail collections each year that invite our riders to express their love for the brand outside of the studio. We curate cool, inspiring content on our social media channels, post weekly Spotify playlists featuring the music our instructors are playing in the studios, and highlight transformation stories on our blog. All of our content is designed to be shared. We expand our market by giving our riders tools to promote our business to their friends and social networks.

Listen up and be nimble. We receive more than 50,000 customer service emails annually and answer just about every question tweeted our way. Our front desk staff solicits feedback from riders and our corporate team is encouraged to ride and report back on the studio experience. We know in real time when something’s not working, and we fix it immediately. We operate our 41 studios to serve our riders, so even as we grow, we go to great lengths to listen to rider feedback, respond to the requests that bubble up regularly and adapt our business to meet the changing needs of our customers.

Ms. Cutler is the co-founder and co-CEO of SoulCycle, a brand of indoor cycling studios with 41 locations nationwide.

Follow @SoulCycle



Follow @WSJstartup