Indians struggle in the kicking game, aids Windsor scoring drives

Loveland quarterback Ayden Eberhardt (7) attempts a punt during the 4A state championship game Saturday at Sports Authority Field. The Indians struggled with the kicking game, one of several miscues that cost them in a 35-14 loss to Windsor. ( Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

DENVER — There's no room for error. Not in a game like this.

Champions execute. They thrive when the moment is the brightest. It's what separates a champion from the rest.

Loveland wanted so badly to be champions. To pen the final sentence of the final chapter of the most unlikely state championship Colorado ever saw. For a time it appeared the Indians sat in a position to fulfill their dream.

But they showed tiny fissures. Little gaps in execution and their opponent was relentless. Mistakes, painful and reoccurring, would make up the final sentence of Loveland's incredible story. The difference between being champions and one of the rest.

Windsor 35, Loveland 14.

Loveland accepts it's state runner-up trophy, which provides little consolation. Great season none the less #copreps pic.twitter.com/yoZUiPXbzU — Cris Tiller (@cristiller) December 5, 2015

"It's unbelievable. I've been working with these guys for so long, and for it to kind of just slip away like that ..." senior wideout Calvin Kelley trails off in thought. "It's unreal. Finally hanging it all up, it's the most bitter-sweet moment I've ever had. Ending it on a loss is just really difficult."

After starting the game as close to perfect as any team could, Loveland struggled to capture that same lighting throughout the afternoon. Miscues in the kicking game most notably doomed the Indians.

Windsor was supplied with excellent field position, leading to plenty of time in Loveland's half and short drives for touchdowns. All season Loveland utilized a rugby-style punt with senior quarterback Ayden Eberhardt serving as the team's punter, which created a three-prong attack for the Indians.

Ideally, Eberhardt rolls one way or the other, reading the coverage for opportunities to take off and run for a first down or nail a pass for a chunk play. If none of those options are viable, he simply boots the ball and the opposing return unit is limited in it ability to create long returns.

It's worked for the Indians all year, including a 70-yard touchdown pass that won the game against Greeley West, but the formation was a disaster Saturday. The first two attempts were blocked by Windsor's defense, each setting up short fields for the Wizards, who capitalized for touchdowns.

Loveland averaged just 15.8 yards per punt, huge chunks of hidden yardage in a game that was tight outside on a 4-minute stretch. However, the Indians didn't want to shy away from what they do. Windsor simply knew what to expect.

"It definitely created a bunch of positives for us this year, especially against Greeley West, which was a huge turning point for us on a 70-yard touchdown pass off of it, but rolling out gives you the run-pass option and you hope for the best," Eberhardt said. "Yeah, it bit us in the butt, but we were doing it all season, so you can't really say too much about that.

"They were getting through pretty quick and it was right to where we were trying to roll, so that didn't help either. It just happens."

Windsor exploded out of halftime for three touchdowns in a 4-minute period to make the final margin look far more dominant than the contest actually was, but it was another kicking-related mistake that drove a dagger into the Indians' dreams.

Following their second straight touchdown to begin the second half, leading 28-14, the Wizards chipped a pooch kick into a soft spot of Loveland's return team, sprinting down the field and snatching up the ball before and Indian could reach it. Kelley ended up as the closest LHS player to the ball, but a wicked last-second hop sideways kept it agonizingly out of his reach.

Loveland senior Dane Abila takes the emotional walk back to the Indians' locker room following his team's loss in the 4A state championship game Saturday at Sports Authority Field. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"From the very beginning it was broken because I was expecting the kid in the line in front of me to kinda scoot back and catch it, but he ended up just turning around expecting me to catch it," Kelley said. "So I had to hustle up there because I was already worried about it, but when it took that crazy bounce, I was just like 'Oh my God.' That was the worst thing that could've happened there."

Windsor cashed the gaffe into its final touchdown of the day, sealing Loveland's fate. The Indians' fairytale story always felt like it was resting on a knife's edge as they pushed through the field as heavy underdogs.

Cruel, really, that the Indians ended up tipping themselves over the precipice.

"Pretty much in most games it's the mistakes that cost you the game, and that was true for us today," LHS coach Wayne McGinn said. "We turned the ball over, we gave up long plays for touchdowns and we just didn't play our best ball in that second half. We made too many mistakes. Mistakes hurt."

Cris Tiller: 970-669-5050 ext. 511, tillerc@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/cristiller