There’s one opportunity you may not be taking advantage of – and it could help you save money and lose weight at the same time.

It’s no secret that America has an obesity problem, but the U.S. is also one of the busiest nations in the world. Health is low on the priority list for many, and feeling too busy is one of the most common reasons people give for not working out, but it doesn’t have to be. Increasingly, employers are offering workplace wellness programs focused on fitness and obesity-reducing initiatives that can save employees time and money.

So, why do employers spend money on these programs? The truth is that they spend money to save money – on health care costs. Harvard research has shown that returns on these programs can be as high as six times the investment and that the average return is $2.71 for every dollar spent. Employers look at workplace wellness programs as investments, just as many fitness devotees look at their gym memberships and vegetable budgets as investments.

Even though employers increasingly understand the benefit of such health initiatives in the workplace, employees aren’t recognizing that the benefit is mutual. In fact, only 46 percent of employees take advantage of free screenings and health assessments, and less than half of that – 21 percent – participate in fitness options when offered. This can be a huge mistake; taking part in employer-sponsored programs of any type can save a lot of money. Even if your company doesn’t offer a workplace wellness program now, it might soon. Under the Affordable Care Act, employers can get grants and rewards to start or expand a variety of wellness initiatives.

[Read: Diet Success Stories: Dieters Reveal How They Hit Their Target Body Weight.]

Gym memberships

One common feature of wellness programs is a fitness feature in the form of a discounted gym membership. Since monthly rates can run up to $90 or more and some companies offer full reimbursement for dues, the potential for savings is hundreds of dollars per year. A bonus is that the gym being offered is often close to the workplace, so time and money spent on transportation are minimized. Securing a group rate is one of the most affordable investments an employer can make, so if your company doesn’t have one now, you can appeal to your boss’s financial smarts when asking.

In addition to employer-sponsored group rates, your health insurance company may have set up a similar arrangement with a gym near you. For example, Anthem has deals set up with a number of gym facilities, not to mention nutrition programs, home gym equipment and fitness gadget makers like Bodybugg. Their members can receive discounts on any of these things, and Anthem isn’t the only insurance company offering this. Chances are that your health insurance provider does, too.

Due to the ACA, we can probably expect to see more workplace fitness facilities around the country. If you’re lucky enough to have a fitness facility at work, you stand to save a lot of money on gym membership fees if you aren’t already. Even so, the most valuable savings may come in the form of more free time. Since you won't be wasting time in transit to and from the gym, you can sleep in a little longer or start dinner a little sooner. This will be especially true if your employer offers fitness flextime, a benefit that allows you longer breaks during the workday for exercise.

Even if you really like your current gym, many are now offering special rates for members who only go during non-peak hours like midday, nights and weekends. Using this option to supplement your job site gym could be a cost-efficient compromise. You’ll still have the freedom to hit the gym on weekends, and you’ll still save money on your membership.

[Read: 7 Mind-Blowing Benefits of Exercise.]

Save money on health services

Although we’ve been focusing heavily on fitness savings, workplace wellness programs offer a ton of other ways to save on your health costs. Most offer health assessments or appraisals as a jumping-off point, as well as free screenings for early signs of disease. These can save time and money the next time you visit the doctor, since you can bring the results into your appointment for your doctor to look over and archive. Many employers can also save you money by offering flu shots and other vaccines you’d normally have to pay for.

Many corporations are now offering body fat testing (up to $100 value) and obesity or overweight interventions like nutrition counseling and diet help. Additionally, workplace wellness programs often include free smoking cessation help, mental health help and alcohol counseling. Some larger companies even offer on-site clinics at a lower rate than other local care providers, and the benefits keep expanding as new ideas and financial incentives facilitate growth. In fact, your employer may even pay you to participate in your company’s wellness program. Do yourself a favor, and check out your company’s wellness initiative today.

[Read: How to Save Money on Fitness.]