Regulations that favor home firms over foreign ones could lead to better laws.

Chinese anti-monopoly regulators have launched investigations into foreign companies, including Microsoft. (Photo: Ng Han Guan, AP)

Eight years ago, when I crisscrossed China for months to research a book, I was struck by how lavishly American and other expatriate managers praised the Chinese government. At home, execs always harped on how the U.S. government failed business. In China, however, the expats rhapsodized over how the Chinese government worked hard to make business easy. The profit margins for multinationals in China exceeded their profit margins overall. So did their growth.

Of course, all that public glee masked some buried gripes. Businesses are free to criticize Western governments. Chinese officialdom is more sensitive and, perhaps, vindictive. Even so, for multinationals seeking to cut production costs and looking for a fast-growing market, China was the darling destination.

Lately, however, sentiment among foreign firms in China has soured a bit. In its annual survey, the U.S.-China Business Council found that large American corporations in China are likely to be growing slower than in the past. There is also the growing fear that the Chinese government means to tilt domestic markets toward homegrown firms.

'Economic nationalism'

"Economic nationalism is in full swing," writes professor Minxin Pei of Clarmont McKenna College in Fortune. "Chinese leaders ... have often publicly expressed concerns that foreign economic influence and technological dominance (are) undermining Chinese security."

Perhaps the most chilling development for foreign firms is the legal blitzkrieg Chinese regulatory agencies have wrought on some of the biggest U.S., European and Japanese companies.

Microsoft and Qualcomm have come under state scrutiny for so-called anti-competitive practices that purportedly help the companies keep prices high in China.

McDonald's and Yum Brands, which runs KFC and Pizza Hut, among others, have thousands of popular restaurants in China. When state-run Chinese TV revealed that some outlets served meat that was past its use-by date, state authorities investigated allegations against the American-owned meat supplier to the chains. Yet China is a country where food safety is nearly universally suspect.

Sometimes the enforcement actions have a touch of the absurd. Antitrust actions in China often focus on the relatively high prices foreign firms can charge for their goods. The logic of Chinese regulators seems to be that foreign products shouldn't have the double advantage of being coveted and costly.

In May, China levied millions of dollars in fines against seven foreign eye care companies. Other enforcement actions centered around price have hit foreign companies selling consumer electronics, infant formula and auto parts, all crowded niches.

Chinese firms immune

The Chinese companies with the most dominant market positions, such as state-run oil monopolies, have been largely immune from antitrust actions. What will be the sum effect of China's heightened scrutiny and prosecution of American and other foreign firms?

In the short term, the reputations of the foreign brands might dip. Yet, even allowing that China's motives could be to favor the home team's companies, the long-term results might not be so terrible.

China could be inadvertently helping foreign companies gain market share against Chinese competition by forcing them to lower prices. What's more, China's regulatory push together with its recent anti-corruption drive could mean the rule of law is slowly coming into play. It is possible, remember, that the big foreign companies might have deployed dodgy strategies. Microsoft, for one, has a history of battling — and often losing — antitrust battles in the U.S. and European Union. At least official enforcement action means there will be official proceedings and procedures.

The system is far from perfect, but one can hope that this rash of enforcement actions is China's baby steps on the way to aligning with the best international norms. The U.S. and other countries can encourage this, making better laws and legal procedures a condition for China's full participation in international trade bodies and the multilateral standards settings boards that its representatives sit on.

The promise of better law gives the country a bargaining chip to ensure that its companies get treated fairly abroad. In that environment, companies and consumers everywhere get a fairer shake.

Ted C. Fishman, author of Shock of Grayand China, Inc., is a member of USA TODAY's Board of Contributors.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our

Board of Contributors

. To read more columns like this, go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter @USATopinion or Facebook.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1sfpIS8