Sioux Falls, SD

Many motorcyclists have been waiting all winter for a day like today, so it's no small gesture that they decided to put off hitting the road in favor of gathering in support of an injured biker.

We brought you the story of Tea native Rick Bissell February 27 on EYE ON KELOLAND. After terrible crash in the summer of 2014 left him seriously injured, he had to sell his business and is being forced to put his house on the market in order to pay his medical bills.

Previous Story: Rick's Recovery

It's been a long haul for Bissell, and that's why a supportive community of around five hundred of his friends, family, and volunteers filled the Sioux Falls VFW today. Today's fundraising event marked the culmination of six months of planning with an auction, raffle, a live band, and 300 pounds of smoked pork sandwiches.

It's a huge showing of support for one man, but his supporters say it's the same thing they'd hope the community would do for any one of them.

"It's a small community, but yet there's a lot of people that are involved that are willing to help, because you never know if you're going to need that help and that response yourself. If you can't help somebody else, then you can't expect help from anybody if you're in that position," a friend of Rick's, Michelle Erickson, said.

"[Rick] just needs to know that there's people that appreciate him no matter what and will support him no matter what, and I think that's what we did here today," Erickson said.

Key donations came from Sweet Baby Ray's Gourmet Sauces, Hormel Foods, Barrel o' Fun Snacks, and numerous individuals from Rick's extensive community of supporters.

News

Events Center

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.