In the court of Nisi Prius, you can object all you want. But you will not get a ruling because nobody will hear you. They're too busy laughing. Or singing. Or chewing. Or networking.

That's not to say there aren't grounds for objection at the court's annual "Grand Assize," a two-day song-and-shtick spectacle complete with a spread that has to cost an unthinkable number of billable hours.

At this show, much of the material is purposely objectionable to someone.

It also can be funny and, always, timely.

This year, the "serjeants" of the social "court" – mainly a bunch of successful corporate lawyers and judges who probably wish they'd see their names in lights, not lawsuits – aimed near and far in the packed grand ballroom of the Renaissance Cleveland Hotel.

They razzed Cleveland's sports teams, President Obama's falling popularity (the skit is titled: "Lameduck Dynasty,") the troubled Obamacare rollout, the NSA leak scandal, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie's bridgegate, Cleveland's efforts to attract the Republican National Convention, United Airline's pullout from Cleveland as a hub, Ohio's difficulties with capital punishment and basically anything else that makes it into your newspaper.

Speaking of which, in a skit about hiring Vladimir Putin to ready Cleveland for the Republican National Convention (hey, he got Sochi ready for the Olympics), Joe Roman, played by Greg Mersol, partner at Baker Hostetler, explains why no one protested:



"Well, we hired him on a Sunday afternoon. By the time The Plain Dealer came out on Wednesday, it was old news."

Objection! Objection! We print seven days a week, but only deliver it four. Objection! Can anybody hear me?



The annual tradition plays out over two days, but lawyers gather over lunches well in advance to hammer out the script and parody songs, this year under the direction of Virginia Davidson, a partner at Calfee Halter and dinner chair of the 114th Grand Assize, only the second woman-in-charge in its history.

The lawyers entertained family, friends and clients at a dress rehearsal feast on Friday, then reprised the show for clients and VIPs on Saturday, where the event's highest honor, the Grand Order of the Double Cross, was awarded to Cleveland businessman Dan T. Moore.

Many of the lawyers are talented performers and in the midst of the jocularity, they surprise. Squire Sanders partner Rick Manoloff , for example, as the new non-offensive Chief Wahoo wearing a tie with the "Block C," mastered The Black Keys' "Gold on the Ceiling" for his bit, "Gold Ring for Cleveland."

Shaker Heights Municipal Court Judge K.J. Montgomery had the show-stopper, singing as LeBron James about a return to Cleveland to the tune of "For Good" from Wicked.

"And I know this town is sore, but

I'm your favorite son

And it seems as I've grown older

I must do the thing I should

I'll come back; make your team so much better

Because I knew you

I'll join the CAVS for good."

But it wasn't just music. Subodh Chandra of the Chandra Law Firm awed the crowd, or was it ewwed, as Barack Obama cum Tom Cruise in Risky Business, dancing in tighty whiteys and a dress shirt. And who knew Porter Wright's Leo Spellacy could do a full-on split that would make a cheerleader jealous?

One skit featured a fan who suffers brain damage not by playing for the Cleveland Browns, but by watching them all these years. He sues the team, represented by three bald Misny law firm partners, and the trial is held in Cuyahoga County Common Pleas Court with "The Honorable Judge Russo-Gallagher-Corrigan-O'Donnell-McClelland-McCormick-McDonnell" presiding.

And as for the RNC convention? Cleveland's got work to do.

"One month! We have just one month to show them we can create enough hotel rooms for their convention!" cries Roman.



Positively Cleveland cheerleader -- that was the outfit -- David Gilbert (played by lawyer and development consultant Susan Jaros) replies, "We need a powerful leader who can stay on the job and get the job done!" At which point, Cuyahoga County Executive Ed FitzGerald (played by Ulmer & Berne Managing Partner Kip Reader) saunters by.

"Hello. Ed FitzGerald. County Executive. Former Mayor. Running for Governor. Just passing through."

Ouch.



If he wants to object, though, he'll have to call another press conference.