SHARE Chelsea Clinton speaks about her mother’s campaign to win the Democratic nomination for president at a forum presented by the Clemson College Democrats in the Hendrix Student Center at Clemson University. Chelsea Clinton speaks about her mother’s campaign to win the Democratic nomination for president at a forum presented by the Clemson College Democrats in the Hendrix Student Center at Clemson University. Chelsea Clinton speaks about her mother’s campaign to win the Democratic nomination for president at a forum presented by the Clemson College Democrats in the Hendrix Student Center at Clemson University.

By Kirk Brown of the Independent Mail

CLEMSON UNIVERSITY — Three weeks before South Carolina's Democratic presidential primary, Clemson University students quizzed Chelsea Clinton on Saturday about her mother's positions on numerous issues.

About 150 people turned out at the Hendrix Student Center on the Clemson campus to see the daughter of former President Bill Clinton and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. The visit, which was hosted by the Clemson College Democrats, was the last of three stops Chelsea Clinton made Saturday in the state on behalf of her mother's presidential campaign.

Before fielding questions, Clinton took a few minutes to share her views on the race for the White House.

"I think this is the most important election of my lifetime," said Clinton, who is expecting her second child this summer. "Everything I care most about, I worry is at risk."

Clinton said the next president will have an opportunity to make critical Supreme Court appointments. While saying her mother would support raising the minimum wage and equal pay for women, she warned that a Republican president might seek to reverse the progress that has been made since President Barack Obama signed the Affordable Care Act.

Clinton also expressed concern about "hate speech" permeating the GOP presidential race.

The first question she was asked involved the criticism that her mother has received for her financial ties to Wall Street. Clinton said her mother favors "stronger regulation across-the-board" for mortgage companies, insurance companies, private equity firms and hedge funds.

Responding to another question, Clinton discussed a proposal by her mother's Democratic rival, Sen. Bernie Sanders, to provide free tuition to college students. Clinton said her mother's plan to provide free tuition to students whose families earn less than $250,000 per year is a better approach.

Clemson junior Sydney Hamer was one of the students at the event Saturday. She said she plans to vote for Hillary Clinton and is most concerned about gun control and policy brutality.

Juniors Carson Glass and Gianna Alfonso said they also support Hillary Clinton. They cited her experience as first lady, a United States senator and secretary of state.

Sanders won a sizable majority among younger voters in last week's Iowa caucuses, and polls show he is receiving strong backing from that same group in New Hampshire.

"He's a dreamer," Glass said. "When you tell 20-year-olds that they can have free college tuition when they are already $50,000 in debt, that is something that will make them listen to you."

Sophomore Erin Moran, who has not decided which candidate to vote for, said she doubts Sanders will earn overwhelming support at Clemson because it is "such a Southern conservative school."

In a brief interview with the Independent Mail after the event, Chelsea Clinton said she hopes younger voters will eventually gravitate to her mother.

"My mom is a stronger candidate because of her plans but also because of her record," she said. "I think on any issue she has a stronger record of actually achieving what she said would achieve than Sen. Sanders."

Follow Kirk Brown on Twitter @KirkBrown_AIM