Mateo Quintanilla achieves highest scouting award and has his sights set on Harvard

Mateo Quintanilla on Sunday shows off the badges he has received as a Boy Scout. Quintanilla just completed his Eagle Scout project in January and is looking forward to the ceremony around April. Becoming an Eagle Scout is special to Mateo because with autism he has had to work harder for it than most. ( Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Mateo Quintanilla, now 17, came home from school in third grade and said he wanted to be a Boy Scout because it would look good on his resume.

Quintanilla also set a goal at the same time in 2006 to eventually go to Harvard and get into a career with computers and video games.

These are lofty goals for any child.

They pose an extra unique challenge for Mateo as he was diagnosed with autism at age 3.

Mateo just completed his Eagle Scout project in January.

His mother, Anne Quintanilla, said that her son has had to work harder than other children his age all his life.

Homework takes several hours a night.

Advocacy in his school classes is ongoing. Anne even went back to school for a master's degree in special education to better understand her son's needs and work with other parents who struggle with the same issues her family went through.

Each badge in the Cub Scout and Boy Scout curriculum took hours or days of study and went outside his comfort zone.

Mateo's main challenges in doing everyday tasks include balance issues, fine motor skills, eye contact, speaking clearly and selective mutism, where he might be in an uncomfortable situation and physically can't get any words out.

He said that bicycling was one of his favorite and least-favorite badges to obtain.

Advertisement

It required him to learn how to ride a bike and then do a 15-mile ride, two 25-mile rides and one 50-mile ride.

"We had to buy him a bike," his mom said. "He had never been on a bike before so we got him one with stabilizing wheels because of his balance issues."

He was pleased to accomplish that goal but when asked if he has biked since getting that badge two years ago, he said quickly, "No!"

His mom hopes to get him riding again this summer.

Mateo Quintanilla heads west on the bike trail in Windsor two years ago, working hard to get his bicycle badge. Mateo had to complete a 50-mile ride, two 25-mile rides and a 15-mile ride for the badge, which was a lot of work, especially since he'd never ridden a bicycle before. (Special to the Reporter-Herald)

He also had to complete a hiking portion of his camping badge, which meant hiking up an elevation of 1,300 feet with a 50-pound bag. It took him and a group of scouts nine hours to complete.

Anne said that a sailboat excursion for his boating badge tested the limits of his comfort zone, since he's usually keen to not venture toward any type of danger. The badge required him to tip over the boat, then right it and climb back in.

"I don't think he'll ever go sailing again," she joked.

And during a challenge course where he started just off the ground and traversed a ropes course 72 feet in the air, he realized too late that the only way down was to rappel.

"I don't think he thought that one through," Anne said.

But he did it.

He had to practice four months on eight different knots for the knot tying badge, which really tested his fine motor skills.

Anne said she and her husband weren't about to use the excuse "he has autism" to get him out of activities because they wanted him to be challenged.

"We didn't want any slack for him," she said.

For his Eagle Scout project, he and his adviser settled on making eight bat houses for the city of Loveland for places that were flooded, which ruined some of the bat ecosystem. Apparently, there were bat dwellings in places like the bike trail bridges on the south side of Loveland.

He wrote up a proposal and worked with the open lands department and parks and recreation department in Loveland.

He found a blueprint online to make a bat house and enlisted the support of around 21 volunteers to help him make the houses. Mateo even won a grant through Lowe's Home grant program, which helped him get donated supplies for the project.

"It was good. It was good leadership. It made me feel like a leader and a role model to the younger scouts," Mateo said about completing his Eagle project.

Anne added, "He was pretty proud to become an Eagle. I knew he always wanted to but I was surprised at the noticeable difference. He was pretty proud."

Mateo knows that Harvard is going to be expensive, so he is now working on a video game, which he hopes to sell on a website called "Nail Head Projections" he's designing with the help of his two sisters.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/jessicabenes.