Topics: 2016 Elections, Affordable Care Act, Barack Obama, Editor's Picks, GOP, Jeb Bush, law, Obamacare, Rand Paul, Ted Cruz, The Right, Politics News

In passing the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (also known as “Obamacare”), Congress made a minor mistake — a drafting error that threatens the entire act. Two federal courts of appeals have issued conflicting rulings about how to interpret Congress’ poorly chosen words. And while the more favorable ruling seems likely to prevail, the act is still in grave danger. That’s because even the more favorable one leaves it up to the executive to decide which interpretation of the Act is correct. That means that while Obamacare might seem safe for now, a future president could interpret the act in a way that would destroy it.

The problem revolves around the subsidies the act provides to help people buy health insurance. A poorly drafted provision, it says that subsidies are available to people who buy insurance on a healthcare exchange “established by [a] state.” Read in isolation, this language suggests that subsidies are not available to people who buy insurance on HealthCare.gov, the exchange run by the federal government in states that have not created an exchange. That’s 36 states, so the point makes a big difference to whether the act can work.

The act also, however, contains other language that leaves room for a different reading. It says that if a state does not create an exchange, the federal government will establish and operate “such exchange” within the state. This language (along with some other, rather opaque provisions) creates the possibility that the federal exchange is, for purposes of the act, deemed an exchange “established by [a] state.” The IRS adopted this reading when it promulgated regulations allowing subsidies to people who buy insurance through HealthCare.gov.

It’s not clear why Congress wrote the statute this way. Probably it’s just a mistake — the sort of thing that happens all the time when a huge statute is passed. Normally, it would be fixed by a “Technical Corrections” bill. But obviously the Republicans are not going to let an “Obamacare Corrections Bill” get through Congress. So we’re stuck with the act as drafted.

The statute therefore presents a classic clash between statutory interpretation philosophies. On the one hand, some of the statutory text could be read, narrowly and literally, to say that subsidies are available only in states that run their own exchanges. On the other hand, Congress can’t have intended that result. The subsidies are critical to the success of the whole statutory scheme. Congress can’t have intended to let individual states destroy the act by choosing not to create exchanges.

What is a court to do when statutory text conflicts with likely legislative intent? Some “textualist” judges believe that a court’s job is simply to read the statutory text and do what it says, even if what it says seems silly. That’s what the D.C. Circuit did last month. It said that “established by [a] state” means “established by [a] state,” and it prohibited the IRS from allowing subsidies to people who buy insurance on HealthCare.gov.

The 4th Circuit refused to read that one phrase in isolation. Also ruling last month, the 4th Circuit saw ambiguity in the statutory text. The 4th Circuit concluded that while the statute could be read to prohibit giving subsidies to people who buy health insurance on HealthCare.gov, it could also be read to allow them.

The 4th Circuit therefore invoked a tie-breaking principle established by the Supreme Court in the 1980s: Where statutory language is ambiguous, a court should uphold the interpretation given to the statute by the federal agency that administers it, as long as that interpretation is reasonable. Here, the 4th Circuit found the IRS’s interpretation to be reasonable in light of the vital role that subsidies play in the overall statutory scheme.