The U.S. is facing a mental health crisis. Nearly 25 percent of U.S. adults have a mental illness and 50 percent of adults will develop at least one mental illness during their lifetime. More troubling is the connection to chronic illness: increased occurrence of cardiovascular disease, diabetes, obesity, asthma, epilepsy, cancer, tobacco and alcohol abuse, and a 2-6 times higher incidence of suicide. When my daughter – a bright, independent, happy 18-year old college sophomore was diagnosed Bipolar I back in December, I began learning about her illness and how to help.

Weeks before her 19th birthday, my daughter took Lithium, Zyprexa, then Wellbutrin to manage her disorder. Barely two months into 2015 she had two psychiatric ‘hospitalizations’ and experienced psychosis. ER staff were annoyed with our daughter, characterizing her as attention-seeking without meeting her or knowing her medical history. She was placed on an involuntary psychiatric hold – hospital legalese that placed her into a psychiatric facility. The paperwork omitted the fact that this brave young woman voluntarily came to the ER seeking help.

ADVERTISEMENT

I never expected to experience questionable treatment or to challenge the quality of her care. “Crisis’ treatment can be horrifying - often without proper consent from or consultation with the patient or their caretakers - exacerbating their conditions if left unchallenged. When I visited her at the psychiatric center the next day, we barely recognized each other. She couldn’t focus on me, her voice barely audible, she couldn’t form complete sentences, she seemed restless, randomly talking, singing, dozing off mid-sentence or staring at nothing, or began wandering the corridor. A doctor prescribed anxiety medication four times a day ‘as needed’ not simply for her, but it seemed nearly every ‘patient’ on her floor. In the first three days, our daughter received this medication a whopping TEN times, nearly four times daily for behavior listed only as ‘anxiety.’

I demanded that staff suspend use of this medication without a complete description of the behavior warranting the drug or a specific request from my daughter or I would call my lawyer. They stopped administering it, and she began to emerge from the medicated ‘fog.’ Daily, I demanded her chart, reviewed meds, and checked progress notes. When her doctor called days into her hospitalization I demanded changes to her treatment plan as the only person monitoring her condition daily. One medication – an antipsychotic with sedative effects – should be administered only in the evening and all at once as she’d only slept about two hours in 2.5 days. Sedation throughout the day was convenient for staff but not helping my daughter. Her brain was misfiring and blurring reality. She entered a psychotic episode due to staff medication mismanagement and lack of sleep. The doctor agreed to the changes. The first night of the medication modification by my request, she slept six hours. Every night following, she was getting more rest, her brain healing, though she had no recollection of the first three days. How had I become a better mental health provider than the ‘professionals’? What of those patients who had no advocate?

I asked the facility’s medical director to imagine if English wasn’t my first language or if I hadn’t asked questions, demanded information, medication changes, or if I’d blindly trusted the facility: what state might my daughter still be in? She began to cry and promised to investigate. Following my daughter’s discharge, I filed grievance with my insurance, the Joint Commission, and the facility and await responses. This is our mental health system – minimal oversight, little accountability, and now with the Affordable Care Act (ACA), more subscribers.

ACA has expanded services for US citizens. It must do more to ensure that quality of care meets a minimum standard and provides Patient Protection. Adding more consumers to a system that cannot manage its current patient load is likely to produce more disparities in care and health outcomes. There must be parity between mental and physical health care.

As mental health-related diagnoses increase, so must human and fiscal services, social policies and resources for mental illness to prevent a severe strain on healthcare, adult and juvenile justice systems, housing, unemployment, social and disability resources. The ACA should better fund and partner with community and regional programs such as the National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) and the Depression and Bipolar Support Alliance (DBSA) to provide more support services for mental health consumers in post-deinstitutionalized America.

Anthony lives in Northern California. She is an education administrator who provides advising and support to community college and state university students pursuing careers as physicians. She can be reached at brnimoe@me.com (408-219-4512). For more information about mental health support in your region, please visit www.nami.org or www.dbsalliance.org.