Topics: aol_on, David Brooks, Editor's Picks, George Orwell, Media Criticism, Life News, News

When I cornered the paleoanthropologist Richard Leakey to ask him about the elephant that had once chased me but had let me go, he responded, “The elephant wasn’t interested in you.” Though clearly anxious to get away after his talk at the National Geographic Society in Washington, D.C., he had heard out my tale of how it had stopped once I fell, allowing me to disencumber myself of equipment, get up and run off without being chased. “The elephant simply wanted to examine your cameras.”

I wasn’t important to the elephant. The terror I had felt, the fear, the certainty that I was about to die and the hope that it would be quick and without too much pain meant nothing to it. I wasn’t important enough for it to have any feelings at all about me. It wasn’t demonstrating its power or considering me at all.

After it had happened, I had indeed recognized this. I felt no need to act against the elephant, to exact revenge or to advocate catching it or killing it as “rogue.” Leakey only put into words what I already knew.

In “Shooting an Elephant,” George Orwell looks at another side of this, describing the pressure he had felt in Burma when an elephant there killed a local man:

I glanced round at the crowd that had followed me. It was an immense crowd, two thousand at the least and growing every minute. It blocked the road for a long distance on either side. I looked at the sea of yellow faces above the garish clothes-faces all happy and excited over this bit of fun, all certain that the elephant was going to be shot. They were watching me as they would watch a conjurer about to perform a trick. They did not like me, but with the magical rifle in my hands I was momentarily worth watching. And suddenly I realized that I should have to shoot the elephant after all. The people expected it of me and I had got to do it; I could feel their two thousand wills pressing me forward, irresistibly.

To Orwell—and, to his credit, he understood this—the elephant had to become, simply, a thing. Or rather, he had to look at it that way (though, as he writes, that was difficult for him, if not impossible in the long run).

At the end of the essay, Orwell makes his sad point: “I had done it solely to avoid looking a fool.” Orwell’s political activism arose in part because of the understanding that grew within him during his time in the Burmese police about power and the reasons behind its actions–including not looking foolish, something that endangers power.

In The New York Times this week, David Brooks writes about “Shooting an Elephant”:

In his essay nobody feels like they have any power. The locals, the imperial victims, sure didn’t. Orwell, the guy with the gun, didn’t feel like he had any. The imperialists back in London were too far away.

Brooks misses Orwell’s point—not surprising, for Orwell was writing from a leftist stance diametrically opposed to the conservative ideology Brooks long ago rallied to and, for all of his protestations, stays true to. Orwell did have power, and he acted on it. And he knew it. Power, Orwell understood (and this is something Brooks ignores), has one overriding need—and that is to protect itself. Orwell had protected his power–and did not like it.

Running away from my own elephant, I had headed toward a group of people watching from about 100 meters away. As I neared, they did not run, so I knew the elephant was no longer after me. They welcomed me, asked if I were OK, and we all turned to watch as the now-distant elephant lifted each of my cameras, tasted them, then grabbed my bag by the handle, twirled it around, and threw it. The elephant had been heading back into the forest after attacking one of their grain storage huts; it continued on its way and we all went home. Powerless but, at least, we had survived.