PHILADELPHIA--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Revitas, Inc., the leader in enterprise-class solutions for compliance, revenue, and contract management, today unveiled the agenda and keynote speakers for the 2016 Revitas Industry Summit: Life Sciences, being held April 18-20. Cameron Tew of Best Practices LLC will deliver a keynote about how to harness the power and potential of big data, and former MLB pitcher Jim Abbott will share his inspirational story of overcoming adversity to achieve personal goals and professional success.

Hosted at the Four Seasons Baltimore, this premier pharmaceutical and life sciences event brings together more than 250 Revitas customers, partners, executives, and industry professionals. Attendees will collaborate, share best practices, and align strategies for organizational contracting, revenue management, and compliance operations. The theme for this year’s event—Chart Your Course—will address the current and future state of the life sciences industry, as well as complex issues, such as Affordable Care Act regulations, government pricing, and prescription-level validation.

The day one keynote speaker, Cameron Tew, will present “Big Data: The Powerhouse for Action,” which outlines how pharmaceutical companies can leverage the power and value of big data. Tew will provide insight on how to cohesively engage key corporate pharmaceutical functions, like commercial operations and medical affairs, and how to develop partnerships with payer and government groups.

On day two, former MLB pitcher Jim Abbott will give a personal address in “The Long Walk to the Mound.” Born without a right hand, Abbott overcame physical challenges to pitch for the Gold Medal U.S. Olympic Team in 1988, and subsequently took the mound for four MLB teams over 10 seasons. Drawing parallels between sports, corporate organizations, and his work with the U.S. Department of Labor Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP), Abbott will offer attendees inspiration and insight to defeat any obstacle.

The 2016 Revitas Industry Summit incorporates four distinct educational tracks:

New Products and Technologies. Receive a sneak peek of Revitas’s highly-anticipated life sciences technology modules, including advances in government pricing reallocations, contract management, and revenue management, scheduled for release in the second half of 2016.

Receive a sneak peek of Revitas’s highly-anticipated life sciences technology modules, including advances in government pricing reallocations, contract management, and revenue management, scheduled for release in the second half of 2016. The Agile Business. Discuss new operational and technological strategies that can streamline processes, improve revenue, and drive profitability. Includes a detailed overview of Revitas’s 7.10.1 platform for life sciences.

Discuss new operational and technological strategies that can streamline processes, improve revenue, and drive profitability. Includes a detailed overview of Revitas’s 7.10.1 platform for life sciences. Industry Landscape. Learn about big-picture market dynamics, the factors effecting change, and the strategies and tools needed to carve out new paths to success.

Learn about big-picture market dynamics, the factors effecting change, and the strategies and tools needed to carve out new paths to success. Regulatory Landscape. Explore processes and procedures for managing compliance, and learn how to implement new regulations like the recently announced AMP Final Rule.

“The annual Revitas Industry Summit is our chance to introduce customers and other life sciences professionals to new procedures, strategies, and technologies to help them chart a course through a complicated and ever-changing industry landscape,” said Hemanth Puttaswamy, Chief Technology Officer for Revitas. “We’ve worked hard over the past year to upgrade our platform for life sciences organizations, and at Summit we’ll unveil a set of advanced modules to provide a more intuitive user experience and empower customers to achieve faster task completion, and reduce the TCO of their technology investments. Combined with the insight and best practices shared, attendees will leave Summit better equipped to handle what the industry throws at them in 2016.”

The Diamond Sponsor for this year’s event is Cumberland Consulting Group, a national technology implementation and project management firm. HighPoint Solutions and PwC have signed on as Platinum Sponsors, and Alliance Life Sciences and IMS Health as Gold Sponsors. Silver Sponsors include Activus Solutions, LLC, Breakaway Technologies, Inc., and Cognizant. PharmaVoice is this year’s media sponsor.

For more information about the 2016 Revitas Industry Summit: Life Sciences visit the event website and register today.

About Revitas

Revitas is the leading provider of enterprise-class solutions for channel and contract management, on premise and in the cloud. Revitas solutions enable organizations to accelerate revenue through diverse, multi-level sales channels and attain maximum value from contracts. For over 25 years, Revitas has empowered companies in channel-intensive industries to achieve best-in-class performance and sustainable competitive advantage. For more information, please visit www.revitasinc.com.