A website has provided an unprecedented platform for women to share their abortion story experiences through video submissions in order to show other women they’re not alone. The site appropriately titled “Not Alone” was founded only a year ago to form a support system for women, and it has since taken the Internet by storm along with its tagline: “Not afraid. Not ashamed. Not alone.”

The controversial tensions on abortion are hard to ignore, especially when state jurisdictions create hurdles for women trying to schedule an abortion by either arguing health care coverage or shutting down abortion clinics. Women then turn down unsafe roads, resulting in 68,000 deaths of women worldwide from unsafe abortions. There have been thousands of stories slowly and in some cases reluctantly told of women traveling to questionable doctors placed in dangerous situations.

"We are here to let women who have had abortions know that they are part of a community," the website reads. "We are not ashamed of our experiences; we are not anonymous; and we are not alone."

Once the pinnacle Roe v. Wade Supreme Court ruled for the legalization of abortion in 1973, women were unilaterally given rights back to their bodies, though lingering stigma and shame still lingers from decades ago. "When we learn that those who terminate — one in three women in this country — are our mothers, sisters, grandmothers, partners, daughters and friends, this issue gets a human face," Website co-founder Beth Matusoff Merfish told The Huffington Post.

It’s incredible to think how far civil rights movements have gone, yet just yesterday at the Texas Tribune Festival in Austin, Republican Texas Gov. Rick Perry defended a law he signed that would close the majority of abortion facilities and leave only seven left in the state of Texas, the second-most populous state in the country. Perry, also a potential 2016 presidential candidate said the law will make his state safer, according to the NY Daily News.

In order to compete with the lime light of a presidential hopeful, such as the likes of Perry, women have been called by the website to share their story and give one another hope. Once women have full right to their bodies and the decisions they make despite legislative pushback, only then will there be fundamental progress for women equality. Currently, there are 99 females out of the 535 members in Congress and 20 females out of the 100 Senate members, making the entire female representation roughly 19 percent. That’s a small percentage of women with a voice in politics. Until the numbers shift, “Not Alone” will stand in to provide the female-to-female support system that’s so desperately in demand.