Regarding the May 6 editorial “An abortion rights win”:

Each year more than 625 women experience abortion-related complications in Virginia, and some experience serious complications requiring hospitalization. These numbers attest to a serious public health concern.

The editorial’s assertion that there is “no evidence to suggest any pattern of unsafe, unsanitary or poor treatment” at Virginia abortion clinics is false. Americans United for Life and other groups have documented that, from 2012 to 2014, at least 17 Virginia abortion clinics were cited for health and safety violations. Among the violations were poorly maintained buildings or offices, failure to ensure the competence of physicians performing abortions and failure to sanitize procedure tables between patients.

Instead of recognizing that the Virginia regulations are designed to protect against such deplorable practices, the editorial scoffed at physical-plant standards, including minimum hallway widths. Clearly, Karnamaya Mongar, who died after emergency personnel could not get a stretcher into Kermit Gosnell’s abortion clinic in Pennsylvania, has been forgotten. Thankfully, supporters of the regulations have not forgotten her or the abortion industry’s many other victims.

Denise M. Burke, Washington

The writer is vice president of legal affairs for Americans United for Life.

●

As an obstetrician-gynecologist who served on the Virginia health commissioner’s Regulatory Advisory Panel addressing building regulations for health clinics that provide abortion care, I thank Attorney General Mark R. Herring (D) for his recent legal opinion in favor of evidence-based standards to promote the health and safety of Virginians.

I support efforts to make abortion safer, but that is not what Virginia’s requirements do. Abortion is one of the safest procedures in medicine, with a complication rate of less than 1 percent. Covered entrances and a minimum number of parking spaces could not possibly make a medical procedure with a 99 percent safety rate any safer. Yet these are some of the costly standards the legislature and Virginia’s previous attorney general tried to impose on clinics in the name of improving patient safety. Instead, these medically unnecessary regulations threaten to shut down good, safe clinics that serve Virginia women.

Health-care regulations should be guided by medical evidence, not political agendas. I appreciate and applaud Mr. Herring’s recognition of this fact.

Serina Floyd, Alexandria