Bonnie DeAngelis came out of the AIDS epidemic of the 1980s and 1990s — when diagnoses were tantamount to death sentences — emboldened by a constant struggle with her own mortality as she learned to live as an HIV-positive woman.

A key part of that fight was her long relationship with her primary-care physician in San Francisco, whom she continued to see despite moving to Sacramento. That 18-year link ended when the doctor retired, leaving her feeling alone and vulnerable once more to the disease.

“If they knew your whole history, you have to start all over again. That’s such a horrible process,” DeAngelis said, adding that she believes her health never got back on track.

But that process of finding a new doctor — and that fear of losing an established bond with an old one — is now something that many of the well over 1.1 million HIV-positive Americans must face as they adjust to the changes brought about by the Affordable Care Act (ACA), often dubbed “Obamacare.”

Many of these patients now face changing long-term arrangements — something that they say is difficult and upsetting. But at the same time, many other sufferers, who had been ineligible for some forms of coverage or unable to pay exorbitantly high premiums in the past, will find themselves finally able to get coverage.

For both groups, navigating the complex new health care system is likely to be confusing and intimidating, even though it offers long-term gains for managing and treating their disease, many health policy analysts believe.

“They may have to change hospitals, pharmacies,” said Anne Donnelly, a longtime supporter of San Francisco’s HIV-positive community and the director of health policy at advocacy group Project Inform. She added that for many people living for years with HIV, their medical care system had almost become a way of life. “There’s a lot of uncertainty. It’s kind of a natural thing that people face. Anytime you have a disease like HIV, your health care is your lifeline. Anything that presents a change is going to be threatening,” she said.