Boulder works to update Comprehensive Housing Strategy

Alexander Torres works on a pathway at the Solana development at 3100 Pearl in Boulder, on Friday afternoon. ( Paul Aiken / Daily Camera )

Related Stories Changes to promote Boulder's housing diversity could be controversial

If you go What: Boulder City Council Study Session When: 6 p.m. Tuesday Where: Boulder Municipal Building, 1777 Broadway Info: To read the memo on the Comprehensive Housing Strategy and to see the rest of the agenda, go to http://bit.ly/1lJn91j

Real estate agent Brady Unruh has been working one client for nine months. A couple with two teenage children who currently rent in Broomfield, they wanted to move to Boulder, where they work. They started out looking for houses at $550,000 or less, but found only smaller, older homes and a few townhouses.

Then they expanded their search to homes $850,000 and under and didn't find much more.

"They loved the idea (of the townhouse) but if you have dogs and it's not close to trails, it's hard to commit to that when you can get more land and more value in a neighboring community," Unruh said.

That's one of the challenges Boulder planners are grappling with as they update the city's Comprehensive Housing Strategy. The city is losing middle-income households — those earning $65,000 to $150,000, who make up a shrinking share of the city's population — as single-family detached housing has become increasingly unaffordable.

In 1990, the median home price in the city was $122,700 — about $222,560 in today's dollars. By 2010, it had exceeded $500,000. Today, just 13 percent of the housing for sale is under $200,000 and nearly all of it is attached housing, according to a city analysis.

At the same time, 59 percent of Boulder workers commute into the city for their jobs.

Boulder planner Jay Sugnet said the city doesn't expect to house every worker (nor that every worker would want to live here), and it doesn't expect to undo the steep escalation in housing prices.

Carlos Delgado, left and Jeff Barrientos of APA Tile work on an interior courtyard fireplace Friday at the Solana development at 3100 Pearl. (Paul Aiken / Daily Camera)

But Boulder officials do want to find ways to allow middle-income households — nurses, teachers, police officers, city employees — to find some options within the city.

"The single-family neighborhoods are out of reach of the middle class," Sugnet said. "We're not pretending that we can make those neighborhoods affordable again. But what can we do to encourage more diversity in those neighborhoods without affecting their character?"

The Boulder City Council will discuss the Comprehensive Housing Strategy at its Tuesday study session.

Half Boulder in-commuters would accept townhouse living

As part of the update process, Boulder conducted a housing market analysis and a survey on housing needs and desires and identified possible tools to encourage the development of more affordable housing, both deed-restricted and market-rate.

The survey was not a scientific survey, but the 1,643 residents, 1,405 in-commuters and 457 students who participated were demographically representative of the city's population.

In-commuters were similar to Boulder residents, but they had slightly higher median incomes and were more likely to have children under the age of 18, the survey found.

"This suggests that for many households, housing choice is associated more with product size, type and amenities than affordability," city officials wrote in a memo to council.

However, half of in-commuters said they would be willing to live in a townhouse in order to live in Boulder and a third would be willing to live in a duplex, triplex or fourplex. They were less willing to consider living on a busy street or in a condominium in order to live in Boulder.

Those who were willing to live in higher-density, attached housing were similar demographically to other commuters but were more likely to be renting in the communities where they lived.

"The lure of homeownership and a Boulder lifestyle is likely to be very compelling to this segment of the in-commuter market, as well as living near open space and having a short commute," the memo said.

David Driskell, director of Community Planning and Sustainability for the city, said the city is looking at a variety of tools to encourage housing that would be appealing to that segment of the population, as well as tools to preserve housing for lower-income people, seniors and people with disabilities. All of those kinds of housing will have to be developed in a neighborhood context.

Good examples of that include the Holiday neighborhood in north Boulder and Boulder Junction, the mixed-use, transit-oriented development going in at 30th and Pearl streets, Driskell said.

The city owns the Pollard Motors site at 2360 30th St., and officials identified it as one of several "opportunity sites" for a mix of affordable and market-rate housing.

'The roughest year and a half of my life'

The housing survey found that people who did live in Boulder often made considerable sacrifices to do so, whether they were Nepalese and Mexican immigrant families working multiple part-time jobs to afford a mobile home in one of several parks in the city or middle-income professionals taking on outsized mortgage debt.

Garrett Smith gave up his car when he realized living far enough away to afford rent on his $13 an hour wage at his sales support job meant his transportation costs canceled out the savings. But his living situation is less than ideal. He rents a bedroom in a condo that is rented by another person, who also couldn't afford to live alone.

And while he can get to and from work and the grocery store without too much trouble, he can't get to the mountains that drew him to Colorado from Ohio, where he was earning much more money before being laid off.

"I love Colorado," he said. "Since I moved here has been the roughest year and a half of my life, but I would not give it up for anything. I'm willing to give up my car to live and work in Boulder. At the same time, the main reason I moved to Colorado was to enjoy the mountains, and now I can't, except to look at them."

Charles Becker, who has an entry-level programming job and is a part-time student at the University of Colorado, earns about $25,000 and he shares a one-bedroom apartment in South Boulder with a roommate. They hung up curtains to turn the living room into another bedroom, and their kitchen is little more than a hallway, he said.

"It really surprised me how few options there were," he said.

Becker said he is strongly considering moving out of Boulder, even though the commute daunts him. He'd like to live alone — or at least in an apartment where each roommate has their own room.

If it's built, will they come?

One idea the city is considering to create more affordable housing — making it easier to develop accessory dwelling units like converted garages for housing — appeals to Becker.

He is originally from New Orleans, where cottages and converted garages are common forms of housing.

"That would be a great thing to do here," he said, though the total dent such housing would make in the need is small.

Boulder housing planners have identified a number of less complicated steps the city could take to make a small difference now. In addition to looking at the rules around accessory dwellings, the City Council may start calling up projects for review earlier so they can give developers feedback about what they're looking for, raise the occupancy limit just for seniors so that several older people and a caregiver could share a home, and allow affordable housing to be replaced unit for unit — even if the current zoning doesn't allow that much density.

The Boulder City Council has already given initial approval to an ordinance that would allow developers to base their density calculations on the land area before right-of-way for roads and paths is removed. A second vote and public hearing is set for June.

Currently, developers have to calculate the number of units they can build after they've removed land for roads and other connections.

Planners said the change will promote two city goals — improved connectivity for transportation and more affordable market-rate housing.

But will people who say they would take a townhouse to live in Boulder actually do it, when they're on the market?

Unruh says some people will, especially if they don't have dogs or young kids. But she thinks there would be more market for a single-family detached homes spaced very closely together in a traditional urban style.

"People who want to buy in Boulder want their home and they want their own space," she said. "If you create that concept of space with very little space, people will be drawn to it. And if they could control pricing so it wasn't astronomical, people would feel like it was a good value."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Erica Meltzer at 303-473-1355 or meltzere@dailycamera.com