The Eye

‘Penny Dreadful’ Season 2 Episode 4 RECAP: The Witches Attack Vanessa, Will Hecate Kill Ethan?

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Showtime/Jonathan Hession/Penny Dreadful's Official Facebook Page) In episode four of "Penny Dreadful" Season Two, the witches attack Vanessa Ives while Sir Malcolm Murray works on translating the Verbis Diablo with Ferdinand Lyle.

In episode four of "Penny Dreadful" Season Two, Hecate Poole attempts to lure Ethan Chandler away from Vanessa Ives but to no avail. Meanwhile, Caliban bonds with Lavinia Putney at work.



"Evil Spirits In Heavenly Places" opens with Vanessa re-telling the story of her time with the Cut-Wife to Sir Malcolm and the others, who are trying to decipher the Verbis Diablo.



Despite her stress, Vanessa agrees to go shopping with Victor Frankenstein the next day, who wants to buy his cousin "Lily" new clothes so she'll fit in.



Needless to say, the entire situation is absolutely hilarious and Vanessa clearly has a blast teasing Victor about being the lone man in a shop meant for women.



Despite Victor's awkwardness, he returns with the clothes in tow for Lily, although it's clear that she can't stand the corset.



The two muse on how unfair it is for women to have to wear such constraining clothing items and Lily refuses to wear the corset, but says she'll put up with the high heels because Victor thought they were pretty.



At the wax museum, Caliban has a heart-to-heart with Lavinia Putney about the nature of life and when he admits that he's not sure if every human is born to suffer, she proudly tells her new friend that "there's hope for him still."



Meanwhile, Hecate Poole tries to lure Ethan Chandler away from Vanessa Ives by setting up a scenario where he has to save her from a runaway horse.



She pretends to be an American and her act is going pretty well, or so she thinks. Unfortunately, Ethan is a werewolf and naturally suspicious, so he calls her out on her lies, only he thinks that she's working with his father and storms off.



Needless to say, Evelyn is furious that her daughter failed and warns her that she better not make another mistake, or there will be dire consequences.



While the witches plot against Vanessa and her friends, Dorian and his new girlfriend Angelique go out.



There's a cute scene where they play table tennis and Angelique beats her boyfriend in match after match, much to his chagrin. Dorian's new girlfriend is the perfect antidote to his vanity and he needs to have his pride injured every once in a while.



Inspector Rusk is also trying to hunt down the murderer who killed all those people in the Mariner's Inn Massacre and since he's willing to accept magic as a cause for what's happening in London, he might come knocking on Ethan's door soon.



That night, Sir Malcolm and Ferdinand Lyle finally make headway with the Verbis Diablo. The story Brother Gregory wrote is actually the demon's autobiography and a prophecy for Vanessa too, although she refuses to believe that.



Claiming fatigue, Vanessa goes to bed without eating any of Sembene's dessert but she senses something's wrong just as the witches attack.



One grabs a lock of her hair, despite her use of the Verbis Diablo while the other two attack her friends and leave them shaken.



Will Evelyn use the lock of Vanessa's hair in a spell to turn her evil? Will Inspector Rusk find out that Ethan's a werewolf? Make sure that you tune in next Sunday night in order to find out!



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.