WASHINGTON -- This week on the Hill, the FDA approved a new drug to kick-start female libido. The decision drew applause from clinicians who say the drug fills an unmet need and disdain from those who believe the agency caved to political pressure from advocacy groups. The agency also took a closer look at so-called "Low-T" (testosterone) products, and mandated that their makers develop a broad clinical trial to establish the hormone's risk-benefit profile.

Also this week, two Republican presidential candidates, who have long cried for Obamacare's repeal, presented their own alternative health plans. And a new poll about consumers' views of the high cost of prescription drugs prompted one House Democrat to challenge Republicans to step up and tackle the issue.

FDA Approves 'Female Viagra' Amid Cheers and Jeers

Addyi (flibanserin), the first drug designed to boost libido in premenopausal women, won FDA approval Tuesday, following a long -- and sometimes tortuous -- road to market.

The drug, which will have a label indication for hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HDSS), was twice rejected by the agency in earlier attempts.

"Today's approval provides women distressed by their low sexual desire with an approved treatment option," said Janet Woodcock, MD, director of the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) in a press release.

"The FDA strives to protect and advance the health of women, and we are committed to supporting the development of safe and effective treatments for female sexual dysfunction."

GOP Candidates' Health Plans Draw Mixed Reviews

Healthcare reform plans announced Tuesday by Republican presidential candidates Scott Walker and Marco Rubio received mixed reviews from health policy experts.

Both candidates called for the Affordable Care Act (ACA) to be repealed in order to enact their plans.

Walker, the governor of Wisconsin, announced his plan during a speech in Brooklyn Center, Minn., and also posted it on his website. Elements of Walker's proposal included tax credits for individuals without an employer-sponsored health plan, the ability of insurers to sell plans across state lines, and an end to the ACA's essential benefits mandate.

Rubio, a Republican senator from Florida, outlined his plan in an article in Politico magazine; Rubio's plan contained fewer details than Walker's, but included establishing refundable tax credits to purchase health insurance and reforming insurance regulations to ensure those with pre-existing conditions could access affordable care.

Both candidates' plans included an overhaul of Medicaid.

FDA to 'Low-T' Drug Makers: Prove It

The FDA is requiring companies that make testosterone products to conduct a large clinical trial to determine the true risks and benefits of using the hormone, the agency said.

In a New England Journal of Medicine perspective, Christine Nguyen, MD, of the FDA, and colleagues wrote that their agency is encouraging testosterone drug makers to work together on one large randomized controlled trial.

FDA had called for such trials last March, but much of the reporting at that time focused on the immediate change, which was an updated label for all testosterone products, highlighting potential risks.

House Dem Urges Prescription Drug Reform

One in 4 Americans taking prescription drugs say that paying for them is a challenge, according to a poll from the Kaiser Family Foundation. Among low income Americans that number jumps to 1 in 3 .

Rep. Elijah Cummings (D- Md.), Ranking Member of the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, said he has been investigating price hikes in prescription drugs since last year but that Republicans have done little to support his efforts. Cummings said, according to the poll, Republicans see this issue as a higher priority than repealing Obamacare.

"I am particularly discouraged that Chairman Chaffetz and his staff have declined multiple, repeated, detailed requests from me to take action on this issue over the past year, especially since we have been able to work together on so many other issues in a bipartisan way" he said in a press release on Thursday.

"Perhaps after reading the stark results of this report, congressional Republicans will see that this issue is critical to their own constituents, they will change their minds, and they will finally listen to Democratic requests for action."

In November 2014, Cummings introduced the Medicaid Generic Drug Price Fairness Act to require that drug companies whose prices rise higher than the pace of inflation pay a fee to state Medicaid programs, but the bill has not been acted upon.

Next Week:

Congress continues its recess.