The Meals On Wheels kitchen in Wichita is shut down after a fire there Saturday morning.

Crews were called around 10:30 a.m. to the 200 block of South Walnut, after a staff member heard smoke alarms and saw black smoke billowing from the kitchen.

Crews were able to contain the fire, but the extent of the smoke and water damage has yet to be determined, said Chris Heiman, Development Director for Senior Services of Wichita.

Heiman said the fire originated from the breaker box in the Meals On Wheels kitchen. He estimates the building will be under repair for up to a month.

“The fire comes at a very bad time of year for the over 900 seniors who receive Meals On Wheels,” Heiman said in a news release. “The upcoming holiday season and the potential for inclement weather leave the homebound especially vulnerable.”

While recipients do have emergency meals to get them by on Sunday and Monday, Senior Services is working on a plan to deliver meals on Tuesday and Wednesday.

A refrigerated storage truck will temporarily house frozen meals, Heiman said. Senior Services is asking for the community’s help finding a place to house the kitchen operations for the next few weeks until the building can be restored. If a church, banquet hall or school – that has capacity to prepare 900 meals a day - can help please call the Linwood Senior Center at 263-3703.

Schedule operation for Monday–Friday (Nov. 24–28):

Sunday & Monday: No deliveries – recipients are instructed to use self-stable meals that were delivered earlier in the month.

Tuesday & Wednesday: deliveries resume – frozen meals.

Thursday & Friday: no deliveries – recipients use their frozen holiday meals.

All activities/events at the Downtown Senior Center are cancelled.

All In-Home Respite Care services will continue as scheduled.

All Roving Pantry deliveries will continue as scheduled.

All phone lines at the 200 S. Walnut location are down. Clients and volunteers who need to contact Administration, Meals On Wheels, Senior Employment, Roving Pantry, Senior Mentors and In-Home Respite Care may call the Linwood Senior Center and leave a message at 263-3703 or email info@seniorservicesofwichita.org.