How they'll do it: Democrats eye a trick-play to force Republicans' hand over government shutdown, using the same legislative sleight-of-hand that made Obamacare law



House Republicans want changes to the Obamacare law as a condition of funding the federal government in the new fiscal year



House Democrats will try to invoke a 'discharge petition' to force Speaker John Boehner to call a budget vote without putting Obamacare at risk

The idea requires collecting signatures from a majority of House members, a number that can only be reached with the help of at least 18 Republicans

Instead of waiting the required 30 days to file their petition, Democrats will side-stepping the rules by hollowing out an older bill and dropping their funding language inside

This trick was how Democrats passed Obamacare in the first place, scooping out a House tax-relief bill for veterans and replacing its text in the Senate with Obamacare's language

Democrats boast they can pull off the stunt and persuade at least 18 Republicans to defect 'all in one day'



(Really) under construction: Capitol Hill is at a standstill, with Republicans insisting on changes to Obamacare and Democrats standing their ground but considering a sneaky tactic to break the logjam

With no end to the government shutdown in sight, Democrats in the House of Representatives are working on a strategy that would force Republicans' hand and give the Obama administration what it wants dearly: an up-or-down vote on legislation re-opening the government with no strings attached.

The ploy they're exploring would mirror the unconventional – and, Republicans have claimed, sneaky – method Democrats used to pass the Affordable Care Act in 2009.



Democrats hope their silver bullet is a so-called 'discharge petition,' a congressional maneuver designed to break logjams when leaders of the party in power want to shelve a bill favored by a majority of legislators in the House.

The White House has demanded all week that Republicans pass a 'clean' funding resolution, free of Obamacare-related demands. The GOP has thumbed its nose at that idea, with House Speaker John Boehner relying on a modern tradition that suggests he shouldn't call a vote on a bill that a majority of his own caucus opposes.

So that unadorned funding bill, unencumbered by anti-Obamacare language, sits in limbo while Boehner has maintained his demands for a shifting series of proposed changes to the health insurance overhaul law using the federal budget as leverage.

He draws complaints, meanwhile, that insist – in one of the Democrats' online ads, at least – that he's behaving like an obstinate crybaby.

SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEO

President Obama wants it his way: The White House isn't listening to suggestions that it should offer Republicans more carrot and less stick, insisting that the GOP cave on the government shutdown without negotiation

Speaker of the House John Boehner (R) and Majority Leader Eric Cantor (C) are holding the line and insisting on changes to Obamacare as a condition for reopening the government. Oklahoma Rep. James Lankford (2nd-L) has become a pawn of Democrats, who will hollow out one of his bills and use it to force a vote on a funding resolution that leaves Obamacare out of the equation

Although all 200 House Democrats would vote 'aye' on a government funding bill that preserved Obamacare as-is, the 232 Republicans could easily overrule them.

The White House, however, has insisted that if that funding resolution were put to a House vote, enough Republicans would defect from their leaders' hard line to end the budget stalemate that seized the administration's checkbook at 12.01am on Tuesday.

Enter the discharge petition.

Satisfying certain conditions would force President Obama's preferred funding bill out of committee and straight to the House floor without Boehner's approval.



House Democrats need to collect the signatures of 218 House members – a plain majority of the 435 seats – even though three seats are vacant.

But the fly in the ointment is a second requirement, stating that a bill must languish in committee for at least 30 days before it can be discharged to the House floor through a petition.

Democrats plan to sidestep that rule with a sleight-of-hand exercise that recalls the Obamacare fight four years ago.

Instead of waiting for their 'clean' resolution to ripen over 30 days, they have located another much older bill that has grown dusty since March.

The Government Shutdown Prevention Act, proposed by Oklahoma Republican Rep. James Lankford, attracted only 16 co-sponsors. It proposed to keep government funding on autopilot if Congress should find itself at the end of a fiscal year without an agreement on how to move forward.

White House Press Secretary Jay Carney (R) has nearly run out of new ways to say that the president wants an up-or-down vote on a 'clean' funding resolution Origination clause: Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts ruled in 2012 that Obamacare was constitutional because it levied taxes, not penalties. But the law is still uncertain because only the House of Representatives can originate a new tax -- and Obamacare had its genesis in the Senate, in the same kind of maneuver House Democrats are working to end the shutdown stalemate

Democratic Reps. Chris Van Hollen of Maryland and George Miller of California attached a discharge petition to that bill on Friday afternoon. Miller told reporters on Friday that the two plan to scoop out its innards before it reaches the House floor, and replace it with the bill they want Boehner to put to a vote.

'We will have a complete substitute for that language,' said Miller, talking about the long-ignored Lankford bill, 'which will be a clean continuing resolution to open up the government.'

After the discharge petition sits in the House Rules Committee for 7 days, they can make a motion on the floor to present it for a vote. That vote could happen as soon as three days later, on Oct. 14.

Should the maneuver succeed, it would end the shutdown showdown, send Republicans away with their tails between their legs, and void their last, best chance to strip Obamacare of its immediacy and economic power.



Rep. Miller boasted at a press conference that it wouldn't be hard to collect 218 signatures and move the discharge petition forward.

'We expect we can get them all in one day,' he said.

But finding 18 Republicans who are willing to buck their leadership will be no easy task. Publicly defying the House speaker is usually the quickest way to backbencher status, and can sometimes cost veteran legislators their committee chairmanships.

Ah, the old discharge petition move. Zero percent of the time it works every time. — Brendan Buck (@Brendan_Buck) October 4, 2013

Speaker Boehner's spokesman, Brendan Buck, isn't impressed with the discharge-petition idea, although it did grease the skids for the McCain-Feingold campaign finance law in 2002



Rep. George Miller (L) and Rep. Chris Van Hollen (R), are leading a curious Democratic charge to force John Boehner's hand and give the White House the up-or-down vote it wants



The House Republican Caucus has spoken with near-unanimity in a strategy designed to take one controversial part of the shutdown after another off the table by funding them individually.



GOP members cast a total of 1,588 party-line votes and just 2 'nays' this week in a series of measures continuing funding for veterans programs, national parks, the National Institutes of Health, the Washington, D.C. government, salaries for National Guardsmen and military reservists, nutrition programs for women and children, and military paychecks.



Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid hollowed out a veterans tax-relief bill and dropped Obamacare inside. Now House Democrats aim to do the same thing in order to move a discharge petition in less than the standard 30 days

The president has welcomed only the last bill, signing the military salary protection measure into law two hours before the shutdown took effect. He has threatened vetos of all the others.

If, somehow, Van Hollen and Miller were able to find 18 Republicans willing to rock the boat, it would mark the second time Obama's health insurance overhaul was advanced by hiding one bill inside the shell of another.



The Affordable Care Act itself was passed by shoehorning language into a hollowed-out bill.



It originated as a House measure called the Service Members Home Ownership Tax Act of 2009, a proposal from New York Democratic Rep. Charles Rangel to give tax credits to soldiers, sailors and Marines who wanted to buy homes. The House passed it unanimously in October 2009.

By the following month, however, Democratic Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid had renamed the bill the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, gutted it completely, and amended it by filling the empty space with Obamacare's legislative language.

Conservatives have held out hope that Reid's maneuver will ultimately prove to be Obamacare's downfall.



A lawsuit from the Pacific Legal Foundation, currently pending in a federal appeals court, contends that by leaving the bill's number as the only portion of the Obamacare that originated in the House, Reid violated the U.S. Constitution.

The Constitution's 'Origination Clause' states only the House can originate bills that levy taxes on the American people.



The tax issue only entered the controversy in 2012 when Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts wrote that penalties associated with Obamacare's individual health insurance mandate were actually justifiable taxes. It was this feature, Roberts ruled, that made the law permissible in the first place.

Some Democrats, including White House Press Secretary Jay Carney, don't care how Boehner caves, as long as he does.

House Democrats including New York Rep. Steve Israel (L) have screamed at the Republican majority that they want a vote on reopening the government without clamping any restrictions on the Obamacare law. The GOP wants a delay in implementing the most crucial part of the health insurance overhaul

'What I can tell you is they ought to just act and let the majority speak and let the bill pass,' Carney said Friday, 'and the president will sign it. However that comes about is fine with us.'

But he is certain that if the president's long-awaited 'clean' funding bill comes to the House floor, it would pass despite influences from the tea-party-influenced right wing of the GOP.

'We're confident, and I think Republicans across Washington are confident, that if the Speaker put that bill on the floor, it would pass with Democratic and Republican votes,' Carney predicted..

'And by some Republican estimates, many Republican votes.'

Approximately 20 Republican House members have said publicly that they would vote to re-open the government if they had the chance, with or without changes to Obamacare.