The Health Care District of Palm Beach County is sticking with one of its own to lead the taxpayer-funded agency that provides everything from clinics to insurance for people in need.

The district board on Wednesday picked Darcy Davis, the district's current chief operating officer, to become CEO after a search that had been ongoing since a leadership shake-up in July.

After the district's lingering period of transition, Davis on Thursday said her top priorities include looking for ways to expand services and bolstering the reputation of the 1,200-employee agency.

"Everybody here is just relieved to have some definitive direction to move forward," Davis said.

The district board on Wednesday unanimously selected Davis as CEO instead of opting for another round of interviews with competing candidates.

Board members said Davis had the best plan for guiding the district, coming into interviews with a plan for her first 90 days and even a proposed organizational chart.

"Darcy had showed that she was superior to the other candidates," said Philip Ward III, Health Care District board chairman. He said board members "have great confidence in Darcy and look forward to working with her as CEO."

Davis' competitors for the post at one point included three candidates with ties to the Broward Health public hospital district, which is under investigation by state and federal authorities. A state inquiry came to light after the recent suicide of Broward Health's chief executive officer, Dr. Nabil El Sanadi.

While the concerns in Broward prompted questions from some board members in Palm Beach County, Ward said it wasn't the determining factor in choosing Davis.

"Fortunately we had a really strong internal candidate who made it a non-issue," board member Nancy Banner said.

The Health Care District of Palm Beach County has faced some hiccups of its own, triggering an ongoing review by state auditors.

And in July, Dr. Ron Wiewora stepped aside as CEO after a no-confidence vote by the board.

Some board members had complained about communication problems with Wiewora, saying he was slow to tell them about important issues.

Long before the emergence of Obamacare, Palm Beach County voters in 1988 approved creating the Health Care District and authorized new taxes that now pay for the district's $236 million annual budget.

The Health Care District runs clinics, operates the Trauma Hawk rescue helicopter, school nurse programs, a hospital in Belle Glade and a nursing home in West Palm Beach. The district also provides free or low-cost health insurance coverage.

Davis is a certified public accountant and longtime health care industry executive who went to work for the Health Care District in 2011.

Prior to joining the district, Davis was senior vice president and chief financial officer for Memorial Health University Medical Center in Savannah, Ga.

The district board still has to approve a salary and contract for Davis. Her predecessor was paid $254,633 a year. The board meets again March 9 to consider finalizing Davis' deal.

Davis said some of her goals include improving the district's public outreach efforts and expanding programs that "are filling in the gaps where Obamacare doesn't cover."

"We continue to emphasize growth," Davis said. "There are a number of people who continue to be unserved."

abreid@sunsentinel.com, 561-228-5504 or Twitter@abreidnews