Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

NEW YORK (AP) — Joan Rivers bombed in late night for the world to see, on an upstart network no one thought would last. In the process, she infuriated Johnny Carson, the titanic TV star who had long supported her and, 20 years before, made her an overnight star.

Or, put another way: In October 1986, Rivers made TV history as the first (and still only) woman to host a late-night broadcast talk show. She was the first face of the Fox network, headlining its first program, “The Late Show Starring Joan Rivers.” She was a winner.

And through getting fired after eight months on the air, then losing her husband to suicide three months after that, Rivers displayed epic fortitude. She picked herself up, recreated herself and renewed her career.

“The beauty of Joan is that, despite the tragic loss of a friendship, of a show and of a husband, she was resilient. And after all that, she became part of pop culture once again — or more so than ever before,” says Henry Bushkin, Carson’s one-time legal adviser.

In retrospect, her flier in late-night TV should occupy only one, brief chapter in a long, storied career — a trailblazing run that ended Thursday, all too soon, days after Rivers, a dynamic 81, went into cardiac arrest at a doctor’s office during a routine procedure. A private funeral is set for Sunday.

With “The Late Show,” she took her place as one in a string of Carson’s fallen challengers, who also included Joey Bishop, Merv Griffin, Dick Cavett and Alan Thicke.

“It’s nobody’s fault,” Rivers told the audience on her last “Late Show,” adding, “I’ve been in this business for 23 years. I’m going to be in it another 23 years.”

She did that and then some. But never again on “The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson.” Rivers’ debut appearance with Carson in 1965 propelled her into the national spotlight. And after dozens more appearances through the years, both as a guest and subbing for Johnny at his desk, she was named the show’s first “permanent guest host” in 1983.

Then, unbeknownst to Carson, Rivers signed with Fox for a show to compete against him.

Bushkin, who then was among Carson’s inner circle, recalls the day he learned about her deal.

“I got a call from a reporter — ‘Did you know …?'” says Bushkin, who recently published “Johnny Carson,” a book about working with the legendary host. “I didn’t know, and I immediately called Johnny to let HIM know before he found out somewhere else.”

What was Carson’s response to the news?

“I’ll edit it,” says Bushkin. “He was very upset.”

Despite Rivers’ attempts to smooth things over with her friend and mentor, Carson, who died in 2005, never spoke to her again. And his de facto blacklist seemed to last long after his retirement. Rivers returned to “The Tonight Show” only this year, when incoming host Jimmy Fallon welcomed her back to the same NBC studio where she had made her first appearance 49 years earlier.