The post-Affordable Care Act healthcare landscape makes physician engagement more important than ever for hospital leaders, and there are several concrete measures leaders can take to improve it, according to Hospitals & Health Networks.

Only 41.5 percent of physicians say they feel engaged with their organization, and it is incumbent upon hospitals to find strategies to improve these numbers. These strategies are a two-way street, writes Todd J. Kislak, chief development officer at the Austin, Texas-based physician services company Hospitalists Now Inc. Steps healthcare leaders can take to promote physician engagement include:

Keeping physicians in the loop on the hospital's financial and operational goals: Leaders should try to provide physicians with an administrative perspective on hospital objectives and leaders' plans for achieving them, Kislak writes.

Engaging the community: Healthcare leaders should promote readmission reduction by visiting area post-acute facilities and reviewing their programs, as well as making joint calls to the hospital's lines of referral, such as community primary care physicians and post-acute care providers.

Increase physicians' protected nonclinical time to improve engagement: Leaders should offer physicians more educational resources and training to increase their skills in fields such as healthcare economics, interpersonal communication and team-building.

Meanwhile, physicians can take several steps to improve the administrator-physician relationship as well, according to Kislak, including:

Familiarizing themselves with the company's goals for stakeholders: Learning their employer's broader goals, Kislak writes, will help them align their personal and professional objectives with them.

Concentrate work at one facility: Physicians who work with more than one facility's systems or staff should focus on one and minimize part-time work at others, according to Kislak.

A 2014 report found several other ways to improve physician engagement, including asking specific questions on the subject to determine engagement gaps and creating roadmaps for improvement, FierceHealthcare previously reported.

To learn more:

- here's the article

Related Articles:

Healthcare systems fall short in physician engagement, docs report

4 steps for successful hospital-physician integration

HIMSS Analytics: EHR governance efforts lack doc engagement

Physician engagement can cut waste

How hospitals can boost physician engagement

Physician satisfaction: Adapt to the system or break free?