Did House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi just make fun of John Thune and Joe Biden? Was that an Obamacare joke? "I'm having a good time," Pelosi said, speaking before Wednesday night’s Washington Press Club Foundation dinner, as she needled nearly every big name in Washington during her nine-minute comedy act. The bit left some audience members wondering if we should be reading between the lines.

As Politico recently pointed out, Pelosi’s encountered a lot of bad news in recent weeks, including the retirements of fellow California Democrats Reps. George Miller and Henry Waxman. She says she’s running again, but is she really eyeing the door? [READ: Amid 2014 Retirements, Pelosi Pledges to Run Again]





At the dinner, Pelosi gave a shout-out to ABC’s Ann Compton, who was awarded the Washington Press Club Foundation Lifetime Achievement Award. “Among the people congratulating Ann tonight is her husband Bill, a physician,” Pelosi pointed out. “Ann was very glad to hear that under Obamacare she can keep the doctor that she liked.”

She delivered a few media-inspired zingers. “As you know Gannett owns USA Today and I understand that they’re also working on a newspaper for people who are not staying at hotels,” Pelosi said.

And she worked the Republican sitting nearby – Sen. John Thune, R-S.D., she said, was an avid runner. “So much so that he’s been called the fastest man in Congress,” Pelosi said. “Although, I’m not sure that’s a compliment.” She also talked about Thune’s home state being famous for Mt. Rushmore. “But just because you look stone faced at the State of the Union address doesn’t mean you’re going up there,” she sassed. [ALSO: Rep. Donna Edwards Weirds Out Washington]

Speaking of the State of the Union, Pelosi even took aim at the president. “It was powerful, it was moving, it was inspired,” Pelosi said. “After listening to the president’s speech, though, it sounded as if he’s going to change the song that plays when he walks in the room from ‘Hail to the Chief’ to ‘With or Without You,’” the Democrat said, singing a bar.