Buy Photo Police blotter in Hunterdon, Somerset and Union counties (Photo: File photo)Buy Photo

MONTGOMERY

CARELESS DRIVING, 9:38 a.m. Dec. 29. Police responded to a motor vehicle accident on Woodview Drive near Green Avenue. Christine Li, 23, of Belle Mead was driving an Acura TSX west on Woodview Drive when she hit the rear of a parked Ford F350 owned by Top Line Construction. Li said she had been using her vehicle’s GPS screen while driving and did not see the parked truck. Both vehicles were able to be driven from the scene and Li was charged with careless driving.

CARELESS DRIVING, 11:31 a.m. December 30. Police responded to a motor vehicle accident with minor injuries at the intersection of Route 518 and Cherry Hill Road. Neil Kamin, 57, of the Skillman section was driving a Toyota Sequoia east on Route 518 when a vehicle in front of him suddenly braked. Kamin said he tried to avoid the vehicle by leaving the roadway and his vehicle hit the Cherry Hill Road street sign and post and entered Cherry Hill Road and struck the vehicle Kamin was attempting to avoid, police said. The second vehicle was driven by Karren Thornton, 64, of Lambertville. Thornton said she was turning from Route 518 to Cherry Hill Road when her vehicle was struck by Kamin’s vehicle. A passenger in Thornton’s vehicle complained of pain, but refused medical attention at the scene. Kamin was charged with careless driving and his vehicle was towed as a result of the damage sustained in the accident, police said.

CARELESS DRIVING, 5:31 p.m. Dec. 30. Police found a motor vehicle accident on Route 206 near Wall Street. Cindy Shi, 19, of Monroe was driving a Toyota Camry south on Route 206 when she hit the rear of a Ford Mustang driven by William Atoeff, 74, of Princeton. Shi said she was operating a GPS at the time of the crash. Shi’s vehicle was towed due to the damage from the accident. Shi was charged with careless driving, police said.

NORTH PLAINFIELD

VEHICLE THEFT, 11:51 a.m. Jan. 4. A 2006 Honda Odyssey, valued at $11,000, was stolen from a Grandview Avenue and Verdon Street, police said. Police put the vehicle into the NCIC system as stolen.

THEFT, 10:18 a.m. Nov. 29. A victim reported fraudulent activity and that he had been scammed out of $1,900, police said.

SHOPLIFTING, 9:50 a.m. Dec. 9. Azariah A. Lazar, 19, of Edison, was charged with shoplifting a pack of cigarettes out of the Family Dollar store on Route 22, police said.

DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED, 1:12 a.m. Dec. 14. Police charged Jose F. Olivares-Hernan, 45, of North Plainfield, with driving while intoxicated, police said.

WATCHUNG

OUTSTANDING WARRANT, 2:14 p.m. Jan. 2. Jennifer M. Greene, 47, of Fanwood was arrested on an outstanding warrant for $100 out of Linden, police said. She was released after posting bail.

SHOPLIFTING AND POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA, Dec. 31. 1:39 p.m. Michael Salsano, 25, of Somerville was charged with shoplifting $170.96 worth of extension cords from Sears. He was was also found with two hypodermic needles, 17 empty folds of wax paper commonly used for transporting controlled dangerous substances and seven pieces of miscellaneous silver jewelry, police said.

OUTSTANDING WARRANT, 6:12 p.m. Dec. 29. John Fleming was arrested on an outstanding warrant out of Watchung for $1,350, police said. He was taken to the Somerset County Jail, police said.

SHOPLIFTING, 1:20 p.m. Jan. 3. Police charged Joseph D. Cordelius, 52, of North Plainfield with shoplifting $59.98 worth of razors at Stop & Shop, police said.

WARREN

POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA, 1:11 a.m. Jan. 3. Following a motor vehicle stop on Mountain Avenue near Regional Drive, Frank. L. Calabrese, 19, of Gillette was charged with possession of marijuana, possession of drug paraphernalia, failure to turn over controlled dangerous substance, failure to keep right and operation of a motor vehicle while in possession of a narcotic, police said.

FRANKLIN (Hunterdon County)

SHOPLIFTING, 3:40 p.m. Dec. 23. Special Officer Kevin Richards responded to Walmart on a report of a shoplifter in custody. Patricia Cantagallo, 27, of Lake Hopatcong was charged with shoplifting multiple items, police said.

CLINTON TOWNSHIP

POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA, 2:55 p.m. Dec. 29. Patrolman Joseph SanGiovanni stopped a 2008 Cadillac CTS driven by Peter O’Neil, 27, of Bridgewater, on Route 22 East near Route 621 for equipment violations. SanGiovanni smelled marijuana inside the vehicle and found O’Neil to be in possession of a bag of it as well as a pipe with residue. O’Neil was charged with possession of under 50 grams of marijuana, possession of drug paraphernalia, operating a motor vehicle while in possession of a controlled dangerous substance and failure to display front license plate.

FRAUD, Dec. 31. A 78-year-old township resident said that he was contacted by his credit-card company and two banks regarding fraudulent activity involving his social security number. The victim said that the fraudulent activity began after he entered personal information into online health insurance websites while applying for health insurance, police said. The victim’s name and information was entered into NCIC, identifying him as an identity theft victim.

DISTRACTION BURGLARY, 1:55 p.m. Jan. 3. Officer Jennifer Petruzziello responded to a Harrison Street residence for a report of a burglary. Petruzziello met with an 86-year-old township woman who said that a man rang her doorbell and claimed that he struck a pipe while digging on a neighbor’s property. The man, who was let into the house by the resident, asked her to turn on the kitchen and bathroom faucets to ensure that her water was running properly. As they spoke, the man asked if the neighbor was home, saying that he also wanted to check the neighbor’s water. When the resident said that the neighbor was away, the man persuaded the resident to let him into the neighbor’s apartment, as she had a key. While the two were in the neighbor’s home, the resident saw a second man walking around the properties. The first man asked that the water remain on in both residences to ensure that there were no problems, police said. The two men then entered a white two-door pickup truck and left the area. Police said that soon after, the resident entered her bedroom and saw that a pillowcase had been removed and that her jewelry box had been stolen. The suspects were described to police as thin, approximately 5’2” tall, and approximately 30 years old. Both were wearing coats, hats, and gloves. Further, both were talking to each other in Spanish on walkie-talkies. Later, the neighbor returned home and discovered that multiple pieces of jewelry had been stolen from her residence, police said. Officers and detectives are determining the items stolen and their value. On Jan. 4, Petruzziello learned that an off-duty Somerset County officer found a purple pillowcase and an empty silver metal box on the road in Tewksbury. The officer showed the items to the victim, who confirmed they were items stolen from her residence. Anyone who may have observed the two subjects or the white pickup truck in the Center Street/Harrison Street area on Saturday between 1 p.m. and 2:15 p.m. should call Detective Thomas Hash at 908-735-7245, extension 250.

BRIDGEWATER

THEFT, between 6:20 and 6:44 p.m. Jan. 3, Three women stole a wallet from a purse and made unauthorized transactions inside Macy’s, totaling $2,600 for various items.

SHOPLIFTING AND OUTSTANDING WARRANTS, 1:30 p.m. Jan. 2. Anthony Stoddard, 28, Bound Brook was charged with shoplifting and hindering apprehension, Jennifer McLaughlin, 37, of Avenel was charged with shoplifting and Sarah O’Donnell (25) of Bound Brook was arrested on outstanding warrants. Police said the incident involving all three occurred at Marshall’s.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1BArPBY