The Founding Fathers penned the Constitution after more than a decade of investing their lives and blood to establish a free, independent country with a strong yet limited government. This blueprint has served as our country’s foundation for more than 200 years because it is the most brilliant constitution ever written and because we as a nation dedicated ourselves to fighting for it and improving it. For it to endure as the supreme law of the land, we must commit to defending it.

The Constitution, which members of Congress and the president have sworn to uphold, provides separate powers for each branch of the federal government. Article I places the power to write the law in the hands of Congress. Article II charges the president to “take care that the laws be faithfully executed.” This difference is important. The founders knew that giving one branch the power to both write and execute the law would threaten the liberties of the American people.

Unfortunately, President Barack Obama has repeatedly gone beyond his Article II powers to enforce the law and infringed upon the Article I powers of Congress to write the law. Because of these unilateral actions, our nation is facing the exact threat the Constitution is designed to avoid. Branches of government have always attempted to exert their influence on the other branches, but this president has gone too far.

Rather than faithfully executing the law as the Constitution requires, Obama has selectively enforced the law in some instances, ignored it in others and changed statutes altogether. He’s done this without going through the required lawmaking process. Specifically, he has waived work requirements for welfare recipients, unilaterally changed immigration laws and ignored the statutory requirements of the Affordable Care Act.

This has tilted the balance of power away from the legislature and toward the executive. It has also undermined the rule of law that provides the predictability necessary to govern a functioning and fair society.

We have chosen to sue the president for failing to faithfully execute the Affordable Care Act. Outside experts, including two who testified before the Rules Committee last week, believe that it is the option most likely to clear the legal hurdles necessary to succeed in restoring the balance between the branches.

When the executive branch goes beyond the constraints of the Constitution and infringes upon the powers of the legislative branch, it is important that the remaining branch of government — the judiciary — play its role in rebalancing the separation of powers. After all, the constitutional limits on government power are meaningless unless judges engage with the Constitution and enforce those limits.

That is why today the Rules Committee will be voting on a resolution that I introduced to authorize the speaker of the House to file a lawsuit against Obama for failing to faithfully execute the law. The founders refused to place too much power in the hands of one person because they knew that tyranny could follow. Unfortunately, Obama has chosen to ignore the wisdom of the founders by bypassing Congress to accumulate power in his office.

This lawsuit is not about partisan politics. Any person who believes in our system of government should be worried about the president’s executive overreach. This president, as well as future presidents, must not be allowed to ignore the Constitution and circumvent Congress. Through this lawsuit, the House will take a crucial step in reining in the president and defending our Constitution so that it endures for generations to come.

Pete Sessions, R-Dallas, serves in the U.S. House, representing Texas’ 32nd District. He can be contacted through sessions.house.gov.