Please consider disabling it for our site, or supporting our work in one of these ways

Russian nationalism, with its dangerous xenophobic overtones, is now spreading to the country's 'silent majority.'

For all the crude xenophobic placards and slogans at this week's Russian March, one stood out for its—dare I say—cleverness. “The good half of the population already hates the regime. Soon you will get to know the bad half,” read a sign carried by a marcher. Not only was it clever, but it also rang true. In a recent editorial, Gazeta.ru wrote that “for the first time, nationalist marches are taking on an oppositionist character.” After years of successfully manipulating nationalists for their own purposes and cultivating xenophobia among the population, the Kremlin is now standing face-to-face with the monster it helped create. “Those nationalists who did not join up with the authorities in time attached themselves to the protest movement—you have to avoid your own marginalization somehow,” political analyst Andrei Kolesnikov wrote in a ​recent commentary.

In addition to the predictable chants of “Russia for Russians,” “Stop Feeding the Caucasus,” and various anti-migrant diatribes at this year's Russian March, there were plenty of calls for the end of Vladimir Putin's “Chekist regime.” But to get a grip on what is really happening in Russia now, we need to look beyond the dramatic and violent manifestations of nationalism—the race riots in Moscow's Biryulevo district, the attack on a Moscow-Dushanbe train, or marchers calling for “death to Caucasians”—and look at the more latent, and widespread, variant. And widespread it is according to a recent poll by the independent Levada Center. According to the poll, nearly 73 percent of Russians—and more than 80 percent of Muscovites—favor the deportation of migrant workers. Some 66 percent of Russians agreed to some degree with the idea that “Russia is for Russians,” while only 19 percent said such a sentiment was “fascist.” Levada Center director Lev Gudkov said it showed that “between 70 and 80 percent” of Russians harbor xenophobic sentiments. Most of these people will never attend the Russian March. They won't ransack a vegetable warehouse searching for migrants. And they are unlikely to attack a train from Tajikistan. But they are deeply disturbed by what they perceive as an influx of migrants and with the criminality they associate with it. Many believe—despite evidence to the contrary—that non-Russian citizens of the Russian Federation are privileged and ethnic Russians are discriminated against. “To understand Russian nationalism, even racism, you need to realize that despite their political, cultural, and numerical dominance, many Russians see themselves a nation without a state,” Sean Guillory of the University of Pittsburgh's Center for Russian and Eastern European Studies wrote in The Nation. It is this latent nationalism of the silent majority that is driving much of the political dynamic right now. These aren't black-clad skinheads. Many are respectable urban professionals, students, and entrepreneurs. In a 2012 report, the Public Chamber warned of a “sharp rise” in xenophobia among city dwellers and the highly educated.