Photo

SARATOGA SPRINGS, N.Y. — Beer cans popped open. The pages of The Daily Racing Form rustled. A voice boomed through the loudspeakers, accompanying the replays of the previous day’s races.

And in the near distance, the whirling turnstiles at Saratoga Race Course clattered rhythmically, admitting some patrons only once, but others — those who came to spin, not to bet — over and over again.

On most days, Marty Strack is a horseplayer, but on a recent Sunday, he had joined the ranks of the spinners, a particular breed of racetrack regular whose name derives from repeated spins through the entry turnstiles on track giveaway days, amassing hats, T-shirts and the like by the armful.

Mr. Strack (“Track,” he said, “with an ‘s’ ”) handed over his $5 and collected a blue voucher entitling him to the track giveaway item: a free Saratoga 2014 hat. He entered the grounds, made a quick left, exited, and hit the turnstiles again.

There are usually four giveaway days during Saratoga’s six-week meet, which opened July 18, and the spinners are easy to spot: They’re the ones clutching multiple giveaways as they leave the track early, keeping their wagering dollars to themselves. They generally resell the items for a profit on auction sites like eBay, or save them to dispense as holiday gifts.

Photo

Depending on the desirability of the giveaway (long-sleeved T-shirts are hot items, as are horse or jockey bobbleheads), spinners have been known to wait for close to an hour before making it to the finish line to cash in their giveaway vouchers.

Several years ago, the New York Racing Association, which runs the track, diverted spinners to a separate line, allowing them to pay admission and head to a second booth inside the track to buy up to five additional vouchers. Nonetheless, the spinning culture endures, often to the disdain of racing purists.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The giveaway days have proved so popular that the paid track attendance on these days typically approached or exceeded 50,000, even if not nearly that many people were at the track.

“I noticed that there were a number of people that would go through the turnstiles as paid admission and leave by 11 a.m. with 10 or 12 hats on their head,” the president and chief executive of the racing association, Chris Kay, said this month. “If you would appear to have a crowd of paid admission of 50,000 but only 30,000 were actually in the building, it didn’t create the kind of transparency I wanted to see.

“If you told me there are going to be 50,000 on a given Sunday, I might say, ‘That’s too crowded; I don’t want to come.’ I want to make sure people understand we have 30,000 people.”

So the racing association altered the playing field this season: Admission was raised to $5 from $3; the number of giveaway vouchers available for purchase was reduced to two from five; and only three vouchers could be redeemed at once.

Photo

How would the spinners react? Would they be deterred, or simply adapt to the changes?

Eric Naigles, a veteran spinner who lives a few miles south of Saratoga, offered an ambivalent characterization on July 20, the first giveaway day.

“I’m disappointed,” he said. “I thought I’d be able to get six hats at once. While we were waiting in line, a lot of people were disappointed that they could get only three at a time.”

The upside, he said, was the efficiency.

“I used to get here, I’d be waiting in line out by the road,” said Mr. Naigles, who added that he was collecting hats for friends, not for resale. “Now, there were only a few people in front of me, and when you went to get the extra vouchers, it was a piece of cake.”

Undeterred by the extra $2 to get in and for each additional voucher, many customers scoffed at the idea that it would keep people away.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Still, the crowd seemed sparse on July 20, and the shorter lines led to a resurgence of the original spinning behavior, with spinners finding the admission lines no longer than the voucher lines.

On Sunday, the track was giving away Saratoga pilsner glasses, two to a box, and the lines — perhaps affected by early-morning storms — were nonexistent. People stuffed their glasses in shopping bags they had brought with them, or held them precariously in stacks of three or four.

Photo

Many, like Kirk Wendell of Saratoga Springs, did not have to travel very far for what had become a trip of necessity. “During spinning time,” he said, holding about a dozen boxes in a clear plastic bag and another two boxes under his arm, “you’re always having to get things for people.”

Few would admit to reselling the items on eBay. But on July 20, within hours of the gates’ opening, hats were already posted on the auction site. One vendor did not even wait to get home before listing a hat for sale.

On Sunday, an enterprising customer went one better, posting the glasses for sale before the gates had even opened.

Another seller, who asked to be identified by his eBay identity, Bobrush12866, had nearly 100 horse-racing items available, many of them giveaways from various tracks. A 2001 Saratoga T-shirt? A 2004 Belmont Park umbrella? A 2006 bobblehead doll in the likeness of the trainer Todd Pletcher? Yep. Bid away.

“I’ve been doing this a long time, and it’s a business proposition,” he said, adding that he tried to direct the proceeds toward his retirement kitty. “With a $5 admission, I have to think twice about what I get, take into account shipping, and PayPal and eBay get a cut.”

So how much money can he save in a summer?

“Not enough,” he said. “NYRA gets it all back anyway.”