In recent finance committee meetings, the TESD has been grappling with issues that affect the school community as well as taxpayers in the district. In the last meeting March 9 the school board reviewed option for funding capital projects.In the March 16 meeting at the TESD Administration Building, the finance committee discussed in detail the Affordable Care Act, the measures to handle it in the district, and how it related to both the district budget and classroom dynamics.The Affordable Care Act’s mandate to offer full-time employees health insurance affects 73 aides and paras in the district. The board decided after almost a year-long process to change the way they hire and retain flexible-hour employees, and will now hire all aides and paras through a vendor at less than 27.5 hours a week.In Monday’s meeting, the finance committee had the opportunity to introduce to the public, and discuss as a board, the three vendors who submitted proposals to be the primary vendor for the district. All 73 of the current aides and paras have an option of reducing their hours and staying with the district with a Public School Retirement System plan or moving to the primary vendor (non-exclusive) and going with the new company’s 401k or 403b plans by July 1. Proposals came from CCRES, Delta-T and Staffing Plus, vendors who all have workers in the district currently.“We are looking at the quantitative and the qualitative aspects of this decision,” said Virginia Lastner, finance committee chairwoman, about the budget as well as the classroom concerns.To address the day-to-day operations with contracted employees already working in the district, the board invited Director of Curriculum (and incoming Superintendent) Dr. Richard Gusick and Director of Individualized Student Services Dr. Andrea Chipego to discuss how the limitations of hours and contracted workers may affect students with IEP’s that require more hours of care.“Both Delta T and CCRES have been able to respond to the needs,” says Chipego.“I had the opportunity to go to the principals of the different schools who supervise these (contracted) employees,” says Gusick, “and ask them about responsiveness for placing someone in a position to meet the needs of the students.” Gusick reports that the principals have responded favorably.Members of the community have pushed back to the board and committees about the lack of transparency of this process, and the fact that the current vote will have the board effectively mandating a retirement plan for employees. Virginia Lastner addressed concerned community members by explaining that their current decision is ideally three years but that employees have the option of switching the vendor they work through after a year, and that the retirement plans for both the for-profit (Delta T) and non-for-profit (CCRES) companies are very similar. Staffing Plus was removed from the discussion early because of their high cost and lack of experience in the district.“The classroom needs are fluid,” says Lastner, responding to discussion on how each summer new employees are hired based on the IEP’s of current and incoming students, and decisions made now are based on a current model. Continued...

In recent finance committee meetings, the TESD has been grappling with issues that affect the school community as well as taxpayers in the district. In the last meeting March 9 the school board reviewed option for funding capital projects.In the March 16 meeting at the TESD Administration Building, the finance committee discussed in detail the Affordable Care Act, the measures to handle it in the district, and how it related to both the district budget and classroom dynamics.The Affordable Care Act’s mandate to offer full-time employees health insurance affects 73 aides and paras in the district. The board decided after almost a year-long process to change the way they hire and retain flexible-hour employees, and will now hire all aides and paras through a vendor at less than 27.5 hours a week.In Monday’s meeting, the finance committee had the opportunity to introduce to the public, and discuss as a board, the three vendors who submitted proposals to be the primary vendor for the district. All 73 of the current aides and paras have an option of reducing their hours and staying with the district with a Public School Retirement System plan or moving to the primary vendor (non-exclusive) and going with the new company’s 401k or 403b plans by July 1. Proposals came from CCRES, Delta-T and Staffing Plus, vendors who all have workers in the district currently.“We are looking at the quantitative and the qualitative aspects of this decision,” said Virginia Lastner, finance committee chairwoman, about the budget as well as the classroom concerns.To address the day-to-day operations with contracted employees already working in the district, the board invited Director of Curriculum (and incoming Superintendent) Dr. Richard Gusick and Director of Individualized Student Services Dr. Andrea Chipego to discuss how the limitations of hours and contracted workers may affect students with IEP’s that require more hours of care.“Both Delta T and CCRES have been able to respond to the needs,” says Chipego.“I had the opportunity to go to the principals of the different schools who supervise these (contracted) employees,” says Gusick, “and ask them about responsiveness for placing someone in a position to meet the needs of the students.” Gusick reports that the principals have responded favorably.Members of the community have pushed back to the board and committees about the lack of transparency of this process, and the fact that the current vote will have the board effectively mandating a retirement plan for employees. Virginia Lastner addressed concerned community members by explaining that their current decision is ideally three years but that employees have the option of switching the vendor they work through after a year, and that the retirement plans for both the for-profit (Delta T) and non-for-profit (CCRES) companies are very similar. Staffing Plus was removed from the discussion early because of their high cost and lack of experience in the district.“The classroom needs are fluid,” says Lastner, responding to discussion on how each summer new employees are hired based on the IEP’s of current and incoming students, and decisions made now are based on a current model.A primary budget concern and the incentive for starting this process last year, is the $2,000 per employee penalty for not complying with the Affordable Care Act. Delta T was the only vendor that did not require the district to pay the penalty if it should occur. They currently have 54 staff members in the district and stipulated that they will stay in their employment if the contract is enacted. Community member Pattye Benson questioned why the ACA penalty was even in the discussion when the entire process was initiated to avoid the penalty.The district is offering a $2,000 one-time retention bonus for those working in the district to stay with the chosen vendor for one year. The district has budgeted $1, 803,322 for the employees. CCRES’s proposal is for $1,825,714, Delta T’s proposal was for $1,709, 565, and Staffing Plus for $2,386,697.At the close of the meeting, the finance committee voted to recommend Delta T as the vendor of choice for 2015-2016 to the full school board. The meeting will be March 23, 7 p.m. at Conestoga High School.