doctor with female patient (Photo: AlexRaths, Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Franklin-based health care company Healthways has announced a new partnership with Genesis Physicians Group, a Texas physician group.

The two companies will form a joint venture called GenHealth, which is designed to help doctors transition toward a reimbursement model that rewards value-based care.

The key to this partnership is that it offers an alternative to other types of consolidation happening in the health care industry, according to James Walton, CEO of Genesis Physicians Group and GenHealth.

The health care industry has faced a tremendous amount of consolidation over the past several years, which has been accelerated by uncertainty surrounding the Affordable Care Act. Much of that consolidation has included large hospital companies purchasing smaller providers as well as physician groups.

Still, many doctors prefer the independence of a physician group, said Walton, although they could still benefit from the know-how of a company with more experience managing population health.

“Healthways offers physician organizations like mine a unique opportunity to not have to consolidate with major health care systems that have hospitals and outpatient surgery centers and all that other overhead,” he said. “That’s what makes it so unique. It’s the first of its kind in the country. It’s not going to be the last, I don’t think.”

Healthways thinks about its population health management tools in three groups — those that help manage people who are sick, those that try to mitigate risky lifestyle behaviors such as smoking, and, finally, those that encourage healthy people to stay well.

“The important thing about this is these physicians have come together with us because they want to be an instrument for transforming the way that care is delivered,” said Bob Porter, Healthways’ Health System and Physician Group Market president. “Just trying to negotiate different rates is only passing the pain around.”

Porter says Genesis can be a powerful partner because physicians can truly influence patient behavior.

Genesis and Healthways also will partner with an accountable care organization called Genesis Accountable Physician Network, which is based in Dallas and formed in 2013. “As GAPN developed plans and processes to coordinate the care of Medicare and future commercial patient populations, we came to realize that we needed a partner with the critical assets, expertise and experience in delivering proven value,” Walton said in a statement.

“We selected Healthways because of its unparalleled leadership and outcomes in the well-being improvement space and because it is one of the few companies offering a truly complete set of capabilities for effectively managing population health.”

Reach Shelley DuBois at 615-259-8241 and on Twitter @shelleydubois.

Read or Share this story: http://www.tennessean.com/story/money/industries/health-care/2014/06/18/healthways-forms-new-health-care-partnership-texas/10814535/