Photo: Getty Images A few weeks ago, a St. Louis-based investment advisory firm settled charges with the Securities and Exchange Commission over allegations that it failed to implement even threadbare cyber security policies and procedures in advance of a 2013 breach of its server, which was hosted by a third party. The attack, which investigators ultimately traced to China, resulted in the compromise of thousands of the firm’s clients’ personally identifiable information, or PII, according to the SEC. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

And while advisors to 401(k) plans and other investors will no doubt want to stay on good terms with regulators, GJ King, President of RIA in a Box, an RIA compliance consultancy, says the SEC is the least of advisors’ concerns. “Cyber security posses the greatest risk to RIA firms in the near and long-term picture,” said King, who recently hosted a webinar with the founders of Itegria, a provider of technology security solutions built specifically for RIAs.

Perhaps the most chastening reality for 401(k) advisors is that most data compromises are not disclosed, in part because many aren’t known, a reality all of the security expert sources for this story underscored. “At the end of the day you are going to be breached—everyone agrees on that,” said Peter Martini, co-founder of iboss Cybersecurity.