Senate GOP floats 2-year Obamacare fix

Senate Republicans are coalescing around a plan to extend Obamacare subsidies for up to two years if the Supreme Court strikes them this month.

The court is due to rule within days on whether the president’s health care law allows people using HealthCare.gov to get insurance subsidies. If the court rules against the White House and strikes the subsidies, Republicans say they want to be ready to protect the more than 6 million people who could lose their subsidies.

Story Continued Below

In a closed-door meeting Wednesday, Republicans crafted the outline of a plan that would extend the subsidies for a period of time — potentially through 2017 — and couple it with a delayed repeal of big-ticket pieces of Obamacare, such as the individual and employer mandates.

Democrats are unlikely to embrace any plan that derails the health law and President Barack Obama has said he would veto any bill that hurts his signature domestic policy achievement.

Republicans plan to frame the extension as a way to help people who would lose subsidies because of the law’s flawed construction, not as an extension of Obamacare. Sources said they may even call it a “grandfathering” of the existing subsidies.

“We’re going to be prepared,” said Senate Finance Chairman Orrin Hatch (R-Utah). “We wouldn’t call them subsidies. But we’d certainly keep people whole so that they wouldn’t suffer because of this interim time.”

Hatch and Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) said that restoring the subsidies through the end of 2017 is on the table, although other sources said that no timeline had been determined. That timeline would give the next president the ability to craft a replacement health plan. Insurers will also be watching the timeline closely as they set rates many months before a plan year begins.

No specific legislation has been selected as a response, senators said, although there are pieces of bills written by GOP Sens. Ron Johnson of Wisconsin and Ben Sasse of Nebraska that Republicans mulled over at the meeting.

Republicans will look to point the finger at President Barack Obama, not the Supreme Court, on behalf of the 6.4 million people who suddenly find themselves without subsidies.

“As far as I’m concerned that’s the No 1. consideration — that people aren’t hurt any more by Obamacare,” said Sen. John Cornyn (R-Texas.) “Be clear that this is because of the way this law is written if the court happens to strike down [the subsidies]. It’s not the Supreme Court’s fault. It’s not the people who voted against it. It’s the people who voted for this bill.”

The struggle for Republicans will be to protect the people who lose subsidies while not looking like they’re embracing Obamacare.

“Nobody said that it would be an easy needle to thread, but I think that we’re well on our way to doing that,” said Sen. Richard Burr (R-N.C.).

“I think it will be clear that on the one hand we want to make sure that we protect anybody currently in a plan so that they’re not hurt but at the same time that we intend to end Obamacare,” said Sen. John Hoeven (R-N.D.).

After the Wednesday meeting, several Republicans said there was broad consensus for the outline of the plan but cautioned that the details will be important — and all of it could change depending on the wording of the court’s ruling. If the court sides with the challengers, it could delay its ruling taking effect for an indefinite period of time.

The GOP goal before the ruling is to get its fractured conference in the same place — then link across chambers with House members to make sure that congressional Republicans are all on the same page. Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas), who has spoken out against a long-term extension of the subsidies, did not speak in the meeting.

“The consensus is that we need to be ready immediately. And it would be good to have a unified response, and when I mean unified I mean not just the Senate but the House as well,” said Sen. Shelley Moore Capito of West Virginia, a former House member.

One of the Republicans’ biggest fears is that the Supreme Court decision will be handed down during a congressional recess, leaving lawmakers strewn across the country and unable to mount a concerted response to the president’s bully pulpit. So much of the Senate discussion revolved around how to talk about their response in a way that makes clear the GOP is not on board with Obamacare.

Their talking points are short and sweet: Talk about aiding the more than 6 million people who rely on subsidized health insurance via Obamacare, and bash the law’s mandates and make clear that Republicans are aiding people, not the health care law, senators said.

“There is an overriding concern that we’re all together that we come up with a single strategy and a single position,” said Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.).

In the House, several top Republicans met with rank-and-file members Wednesday and outlined a similar plan that is still under development.

Under the House framework, subsidies would be kept through 2015 if the court doesn’t allow it already. In 2016, states will have the choice of opting out of all ACA rules and regulations.

If the state chooses to do so, it would get a block grant to set up a health program. If the state doesn’t want the block grant, its residents would still get subsidies to use on any plan on or off the exchange. In 2017, all of this would sunset to encourage a new president to find a new solution.

“What we do is we give the power, instead of requiring or forcing governors to enter Obamacare, we give them the power to opt out of Obamacare [and] the money to take care of those who are on some form of subsidy for a specific period of time, until we can put in place a full-system replacement,” said Rep. John Fleming (R-La.)

Manu Raju and Erin Mershon contributed to this report.