Buy Photo Downtown Pensacola was flooded in April. (Photo: Tony Giberson, Pensacola News Journal)Buy Photo

The 24-hour deluge of rain at the end of April was a strong reminder of two related local issues. We have a flooding problem in Escambia County, downtown Pensacola in particular. And, as we have long known, there is a serious degradation in the water quality of our waterways.

The first challenge is to promptly address the flooding problem. The waterways problem is long-term, but the minimization of flooding will help the waterways. A prominent local architect has advised: "We need more ways to store large volumes of water." And we need them now.

The Pensacola renaissance will stall unless the county and the city act soon. The CEO of the Institute for Human and Machine Cognition has given a strong signal. Existing businesses will delay expansions, and outside businesses and agencies will steer clear of relocating to this area. There must be visible and determined efforts to solve the flooding problem. We cannot wait. Successful downtown businesses need to see action.

The city made a start in 2002 with a stormwater fee to finance water runoff. This was a good start, but more must be done.

The recent "once in a hundred years" rain deluge had significant impact. It will set off strong remedial efforts on flooding, just as Hurricane Ivan precipitated the relocation of the Main Street sewer plant. Both events got attention in a big way. No community can afford to protect against "once in a 100 years events," but we can greatly reduce the risk of smaller floods and diminish the severity of the 100-year events.

Satisfactory holding ponds are the immediate and least expensive need, especially if we put them on vacant properties. The charm of using vacant properties is the elimination of the cost of demolishing buildings. Prime candidates are the old ECUA Main Street sewer plant property and the Blount Junior High School property on West Gregory Street, assuming they meet elevation and other holding-pond criteria. Both would provide flood protection for the west side.

Another holding pond possibility is the Tech Park near the Bay Center. It may be more valuable as a holding pond than as an office park. It would shield Aragon and Seville. It would also complement the Admiral Mason Park lake/holding pond.

Remediation of our waterways is a prolonged effort after decades of environmental neglect. A start has been made. The quality of our bays and tributaries has made a very modest improvement. Moderation of flooding will also aid in the remediation of the waterways.

Our community is in a mood to act boldly. Local leaders will have full support of the populace – although it means higher taxes and fees. Federal and state aid will supplement local funding.

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1mspzl9