ASSOCIATED PRESS

Common sense and decency seem less and less important to Republicans in the House of Representatives as they continue their shameful conduct toward President Barack Obama for trying to do his job.

Americans are facing chaos in the immigration system, a still-recovering economy, heavy-duty foreign policy issues and many other serious challenges. Yet, the Republicans, and their pitiable leader John Boehner sink to new levels of absurdity by the day. On Thursday, Boehner announced that Republicans intend to sue the President for changes to his signature health insurance law, known as "Obamacare."

Speaker Boehner has been talking about his plans to sue the President for over a month. He should proceed with caution. The American people are sick and tired of being sick and tired at this "do-nothing" Congress. House leader Eric Cantor (R-VA) lost his party's primary to a political unknown because he was out of touch with voters in his conservative leaning district in the suburbs of Richmond Virginia. This should be a warning bell for many House Republicans.

The House Rules Committee recently has fallen into line with this sue-the-President scheme by making public a copy of the draft legislation outlining Republican complaints. But where does it stop? Instead of working for the American people as they were elected to do, they are wasting time, money and energy on this kind of nonsense.

The real issue at hand is a simple one: Republicans in Congress simply are not willing to work with President Obama. The President time and time again has extended an olive branch to Speaker Boehner in efforts to build cooperation.

Republican lawmakers say it's Obamacare that bedevils Congressional cooperation. But wounds run deeper than that. Republicans have been trying to repeal the law for years, claiming it will ruin the country financially and that Americans would refuse to enroll in its coverage. The cynics and critics were wrong. Millions of Americans signed up for Obamacare and the country has moved on with business as usual.

No, this latest fiasco is not about the Affordable Care Act. It is about Midterm elections. Yes, it is about politics, and the reality that Republicans have little progress to report to their constituents. They have little that they accomplished on behalf of the Republican base. They should have thought of that last year while they put their energies blocking any idea the President had to move the country forward instead of doing the business of the people they were elected to serve.

Republican are so desperate they are even speaking of impeaching President Obama. They had better hope they keep their own jobs come November. Meanwhile the president is not sitting on his hands waiting for Speaker Boehner to come to his senses.

I have to commend President Obama for using his executive powers to move the country forward! That's exactly what he was elected to do. Bravo!