Whenever her turn came, the girl in the lucky white sweater walked quickly to the microphone. She was “No. 1” — the number hanging around her neck — to those who didn’t know her.

More than once, she started spelling a word before the announcer got to the definition. She spoke clearly, calmly — then zipped back to her chair and began incessantly tapping her foot on the stage floor.

After she spelled one final word right, 12-year-old Sylvie Lamontagne was crowned champion of the 75th annual Colorado State Spelling Bee, topping a field of 250 other fourth- through eighth-graders.

The clinching word was sympatric — which means occupying the same range or area.

Clutching her trophy at the University of Denver’s Sturm Hall, Sylvie said she prepared by studying word lists, patterns and roots.

“I just kept telling myself I had a decent chance,” said the seventh-grader from Creighton Middle School in Lakewood.

Sylvie drew some of the toughest words of the final rounds: nasturtium (a family of pungent herbs), eczematous (related to inflamed skin) and intussusception (an intestinal problem).

Only one word rattled Sylvie: guttiferous. Her father could tell by the look on her face she didn’t know the word for a gummy substance.

RELATED: How “vinyl” broke one Colorado State Spelling Bee contestant

Second place went to Edwin Wojcik, a sixth-grader at DSST Conservatory Green Middle School in Denver. He was knocked out after missing nosocomial — as in nosocomial infection, a hospital-acquired infection. Bryn Flanigan, a seventh-grader at Girls Athletic Leadership School in Denver, finished third.

Competitors used everything at their disposal to gain an edge, even stalling.

A boy in a rainbow-colored hoodie fought for several minutes with the word vinyl.

“Paaaart of speech?” he asked.

“It’s a noun.”

“Can I have the definition again, but slowly?”

“Any of a group of tough durable plastics based on resins often compounded with other substances … and used especially in the form of films and sheeting, flooring, sound records, and other molded and extruded products.”

The boy let out a big sigh.

“Is there anything I haven’t asked? Can you use it in a sentence?”

“Though Brett denied that he was a hipster, his wooden-framed glasses and vinyl record collection said differently.”

It didn’t help any.

As Colorado champ, Sylvie will compete for a chance to win $30,000 in the 2015 Scripps National Spelling Bee in Washington, D.C., in May.

Eric Gorski: 303-954-1971 or egorski@denverpost.com

Spelling test

A sampling of late-round words:



Sympatric

Vinyl

Isotope

Sinecure

Homophony

Peristaltic

Umbrageous

Nautical

Fuliginous

Guttiferous