S.A. making strides toward breast-feeding education









Photo: Helen L. Montoya / San Antonio Express-News Image 1 of / 3 Caption Close Image 1 of 3 Berenice Zamarano nurses her son, Emiliano, at the Baby Café. The site, operated by the San Antonio Metropolitan Health District, offers mothers free breast-feeding help and support from lactation consultants, dietitians, peer counselors and each other. less Berenice Zamarano nurses her son, Emiliano, at the Baby Café. The site, operated by the San Antonio Metropolitan Health District, offers mothers free breast-feeding help and support from lactation consultants, ... more Photo: Helen L. Montoya / San Antonio Express-News Image 2 of 3 Photo: San Antonio Express-News Image 3 of 3 Photo: San Antonio Express-News S.A. making strides toward breast-feeding education 1 / 3 Back to Gallery

SAN ANTONIO — As her baby son nursed contentedly, Berenice Zamarano relaxed on a comfy couch, chatting about what it's like to breast-feed in public.

“I practiced in the mirror so it looks like he's just getting a snuggle from me,” Zamarano said, smiling down at 11-month-old Emiliano.

It's the type of tip she shares with other mothers nursing their infants at the Baby Café, which the San Antonio Metropolitan Health District opened in February. The center near Loop 410 and Callaghan Road was designed as a place for nursing mothers to receive free breast-feeding help and support from lactation consultants, dietitians, peer counselors and each other in a nonclinical environment.

The Baby Café is part of a larger push to encourage breast-feeding in Texas and around the country because of its short-term and long-term effects on the health of babies and mothers.

The Baby Café model began in England in 2000, and dozens more have sprung up around the world, including more than 40 in the United States. Metro Health launched the site through the Texas Medicaid 1115 Waiver program, which funds efforts to prevent health problems. Breast-feeding has been shown to reduce the risk of a child being overweight.

Metro Health also has set up satellite Baby Café sites at five WIC clinics throughout the city.

“There is a great need for education in San Antonio,” said Christina Padilla, a dietitian and certified lactation consultant at the Baby Café.

Besides obesity, experts said, breast-feeding helps protect against diabetes, sudden infant death syndrome, asthma, childhood cancers and other chronic health conditions and diseases. Mothers who breast-feed have a decreased risk of breast and ovarian cancer, Type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Breast-feeding also helps with weight management.

“Breast-feeding is one of the most cost-effective and effective preventive health measures that are out there,” said Julie Stagg, state breast-feeding coordinator at the Texas Department of State Health Services. “Between the cost of moms not breast-feeding at optimal rates and of children not being breast-fed, it's estimated that about $13 billion in excess costs are accrued in the United States every year, and a conservative estimate of about 900 pediatric deaths that could otherwise be prevented.”

But while 81 percent of women in the United States who deliver babies attempt to breast-feed, only 25 percent are exclusively breast-feeding after six months, according to a 2012 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report.

More Information Breast-feeding resources The Baby Café, 4538 Centerview Drive, Suite 151, is open 8 a.m.- 4:30 p.m. Monday-Friday. 210-207-7138 or sanantonio.gov/Health/HealthServices/BabyCafe.aspx La Leche League holds meetings throughout South Texas. texaslll.org/group/south-texas The San Antonio Breastfeeding Coalition can direct mothers to many resources, including breast-feeding classes and a directory of lactation consultants. sabctx.org The Texas Department of State Health Services WIC Program offers a one-stop breast-feeding resource. breastmilkcounts. com or 800-514-6667 The National Breastfeeding Helpline connects women to peer counselors who can answer questions in English or Spanish. 800-994-9662 Jessica Belasco



About the San Antonio Baby Café

Find a directory of Mother-Friendly Worksites

About the Texas Ten Step Program

Find a La Leche League meeting

Breast-feeding may be a natural process that's hardwired into mothers and babies, but there's a learning curve.

Mothers may need to learn proper latching so nursing won't hurt and the baby is receiving sufficient milk; they also can learn different types of holds to make the process more comfortable. The Baby Café counsels mothers about such topics and offers literature, such as a guide to examining a baby's diaper to determine whether it's getting enough to eat.

One of the top barriers to continued breast-feeding is the difficulties in pumping when women return to work. In the 1990s, the state began a program to recognize workplaces that make it easier for women to pump as Texas Mother-Friendly Worksites. These workplaces offer flexible scheduling so mothers can pump and provide them with a lactation space, access to a clean water source and hygienic storage for the breast milk, among other requirements. More than 1,700 worksites have received the designation.

Workplaces here that received the designation include Baptist Health System, Broadway Bank, Whole Foods Market and Tesoro. The city of San Antonio was the first municipality in Texas to receive the designation, Stagg said.

Southwest General Hospital, another Texas Mother-Friendly Worksites, offers a private lactation room designed for comfort with recliners, a refrigerator and sink.

“We want that to be their last worry when they come back to work in the hospital after maternity leave,” said Christina Rivera, the hospital's director of human resources.

What happens to babies right after birth also can affect breast-feeding rates. That's why the Department of State Health Services and the Texas Hospital Association developed the Texas Ten Step Program to promote the practice.

The steps include placing the baby in skin-to-skin contact with the mother immediately after birth for at least an hour, giving the baby no other food or drink unless medically indicated, allowing mother and child to stay together 24 hours a day and not giving the infant a pacifier.

In San Antonio, 11 hospitals have been designated as Texas Ten Step facilities, including San Antonio Military Medical Center, Children's Hospital of San Antonio, Methodist Children's Hospital and University Hospital.

Hospitals also are putting more lactation consultants in post-partum units. In August, North Central Baptist Hospital opened a Mother's Milk First Lactation Center, which offers breast-feeding consultations, bra fittings and assistance with breast pump reimbursement.

Some help for nursing mothers is mandated by law. The Affordable Care Act requires health insurers to provide breast-feeding counseling and equipment for nursing mothers.

But mothers also need social support to stick to breast-feeding. That's where Baby Café and La Leche League, a mother-to-mother support group that also offers phone consultations and house calls, come in.

Holly Holmes had difficulty breast-feeding and found that La Leche League meetings were her “saving grace,” so now she leads meetings to help others in San Antonio.

“It can put them in touch with other moms who have been there,” Holmes said. “Sometimes there's not really something you can say specifically, like, 'Here, do A, B and C, and this will solve your problem.' Because sometimes when it comes to parenting, what you get from other moms is just, 'I've been there, hang in there, you'll make it through.'”

jbelasco@express-news.net