Thousands packed the Charleston Area Convention Center Saturday to find out the value of their antiques.

The famous Antique Roadshow finished its six-city summer tour with a stop in the Lowcounty.

"I think what's so special about antiques is they tell us a story and it's a very present story," said Antique Roadshow Executive Producer Marsha Bemko. "They're sitting the object right in front of you and whether you're 8 or 80, you're interested in that object's journey."

This stop marks the show's second time in Charleston. The first was in 2000.

"We're going to see about 5,000 people with two items each, so about 10,000," said Bemko. From that, we're going to make three episodes of television."

Behind the cameras and lines were the stories.

"These are Japanese police swords that my father brought back from Japan," said Frank from North Carolina. "He was in World War II."

"We came to see if Toby is a real stife," said Robin, from Florida, showing off her teddy bear. "And, he is. He's circa 1910. He was my Great Aunt Mary's."

Some items brought back fond childhood memories.

"We used them on the farm as play toys," said Frank, smiling at his swords.

To many, the sentimental value far outweighed the retail value.

"I had a conversation with him and explained he'd be staying with us anyways so it didn't really matter," said Robin, hugging her teddy bear that was appraised at $5,000.

People traveled from across the country, bringing items of all kinds.

But the number one antique seen were paintings.

Some were shocked to find the monetary worth of their items, while others expected more.

Bemko said in show's 20 years, they've seen hundreds of thousands of pieces with character, but there seems to be one common theme.

"No matter how good it is, they usually do not ever sell it," says Bemko.

Because, often times, the item tells a story that money can't buy.

The Antique Roadshow Charleston episodes will air sometime this year on ETV.

Antique Roadshow is on every Monday night at 8pm.

There will be a separate show called "Junk in the Trunk" from Charleston that will air sometime in 2016.

Copyright 2015 WCSC. All rights reserved.