“I also will not you make you promises I can’t keep,” she said. | AP Photo In Nevada, Clinton hits Sanders' campaign promises

LAS VEGAS -- Democratic presidential hopeful Hillary Clinton on Saturday defined herself as a progressive while attacking rival Bernie Sanders’ campaign platform as unrealistic.

In a 15-minute speech at a union hall in a suburb of Las Vegas, Clinton painted Sanders as a scorched-earth candidate who cannot accomplish what he’s saying.

Story Continued Below

“My opponent wants us to start all over again, throw us into a contentious national debate about a theory of [healthcare] coverage that would cost an enormous amount in taxes for every single American and would start us at zero,” Clinton said at a rally of several hundred supporters.

“I want us to make progress right now,” she said. “I happen to think a progressive is somebody who makes progress, somebody who gets things done that helps people right now.”

Part of Clinton’s speech zeroed in on Sanders’ call to break apart big banks. Sanders' campaign has tried to link Clinton to Wall Street financiers by highlighting speeches she delivered at their companies and for taking campaign contributions from them.

“Not everything is about an economic theory,” Clinton said. “If we broke up banks tomorrow – and I will if they deserve it, if they pose systemic risk, I will – would that end racism? Would that end sexism? Would that end discrimination against the LGBT community? Would that make people feel more welcoming to immigrants overnight?”

“I also will not you make you promises I can’t keep,” she said.

Antipathy toward Wall Street appeared to be not as vehement among Clinton’s supporters as it is among Sanders'.

“We don’t hate Wall Street,” said David Kolbe, political and legislative director for an iron-workers union that is affiliated with AFL-CIO and had endorsed Clinton.

“If we don’t have major industries building manufacturing plants or offices, we’re not working,” he said while waiting for Clinton to arrive.

“They [financiers] have to prosper, but it’s got to be a shared prosperity that skilled work has to be paid for,” he said.