Buy Photo Opelousas Mayor Reggie Tatum, foreground, listens to city council members during Tuesday’s budget discussion. (Photo: Freddie Herpin, Daily World)Buy Photo

During a special meeting Tuesday the Opelousas City Council passed an amended budget for the fiscal year that begins Sept. 1.

The meeting followed a dramatic session earlier in August when council members urged more time to review the proposed budget and the city's police chief pleaded for its adoption, saying that his officers lacked basic safety and operational equipment.

Tuesday's meeting was loaded with numbers, but it wasn't drama-free.

Council members Jackie Martin, Tyrone Glover and Julius Alsandor questioned independent accountant Dana Quebedeaux about elements of the $21 million budget, including line-item transfers within city departments and what, if any, flexibility the council might have to delay a final vote on the spending plan.

In response to questions about what would happen if the budget didn't pass by Aug. 31, Quebedeaux replied, "You'd be in noncompliance with state law."

Alsandor, the most outspoken member on budget matters, reminded his colleagues and Mayor Reggie Tatum, "We are the gatekeepers. We're pretty much held accountable if there's something cited by the auditors."

He expressed particular concern about what he considered missed opportunities for saving money, such as a proposed $18,000 annual rental on space for the police department's detective unit when the city owns office space it's not using.

"If we do not agree with the budget the mayor presented, we do have the right to continue with the existing budget? This council, this city, has previously done it," Alsandor said to Quebedeaux. "Is that correct?"

She responded, "Yes."

That meant that Opelousas city government could continue under its existing budget for the next six months of its fiscal year. Fiscal years do not have to line up with calendar years. Governments may choose any 12 months to set and reconcile their spending.

The council split evenly on whether to adopt the amended budget.

Tatum called its 3-3 vote "an affront...to the department heads and myself.

"We worked hard to make sure these numbers are correct and right. The numbers were the actual numbers we came up with after we added them all together," he said.

The mayor praised department heads at the meeting by name for their efforts to keep spending in line.

"This is nothing but transparency," Tatum told the council,. "All we did was take these numbers and look at what (those managers) spent and what they'll need next year. This is not rocket science. This is what it is, this is what it's going to be."

The mayor also addressed Alsandor by name and suggested that he had influenced other council members to oppose the budget.

"I'm only one vote," the councilman replied. "If the budget don't pass, I'm only one vote."

The eventual vote required Councilwoman Sherell Roberts to rescind her earlier motion for a vote on the amended budget. Four members agreed to proceed with a new vote. Alsandor and Glover voted "no."

On its second vote on the amended spending plan, all but Alsandor voted "yes." City employees in the chamber applauded, and some hugged one another.

Police Chief Donald Thompson called the result "favorable. Not just for the police department but for the whole city of Opelousas.

"It gets us to where I can promptly equip my police officers with what they need — (bulletproof) vests, gloves, Tasers," he said after the meeting. The department also needs to get some of its vehicles in good running order, Thompson added.

He referred to his emotional appeal to the council two weeks before, when he said the items he'd requested in his department's budget were necessities, not luxuries.

"From my argument, some of the council members absorbed what I told them in our last meeting," Thompson said. "Let's talk about safety first for the officers."

He added that two recent deaths of law enforcement personnel who responded to a domestic violence call in Shreveport and a traffic stop in Lake Charles lent urgency to his plea.

Alsandor, who also had questioned the police chief's budget request, said after the meeting, "I've said all I'm going to say.

"The budget passed," he continued. "I didn't agree, but I'm happy for the city of Opelousas."

Read or Share this story: http://www.dailyworld.com/story/news/local/2015/08/25/opelousas-council-passes-city-budget/32369963/