Topics: Crime, mandatory minimums, Rape, Sex, Sex abuse, Sex Offenders, Sexual assault, Life News

Registering as a sex offender automatically imposes scores of restrictions on convicts’ lives, which is essentially why most people favor them. Restrictions barring sex offenders from living within a certain distance of schools or playgrounds might make communities feel safer, and, as I’ve found in my own experience, the registry can provide some solace for abuse survivors and their families. But the strings attached to sex offender registration are — like drug laws — numerous, generally non-specific and replete with lengthy, often unfit penalties.

What I mean to say is: sex offenders frequently face mandatory minimums when they don’t comply with any one of the innumerable restrictions placed on their lives, and mandatory minimums are something of which we should be skeptical.

Here’s an example to illustrate why: Joshua Gravens, a social justice scholar from Dallas, studies the impact of placing children on sex offender registries, the ramifications of which he understands firsthand. When he was 12, Gravens — who was raped by three high school students when he was a young boy and didn’t tell anyone — touched his younger sister’s vagina two times. As Lenore Skenazy at Reason tells it, then-adolescent Gravens quickly found himself in the hands of the criminal justice system, after his sister told their mother what happened and he told the truth:

Their mom called a counseling service for advice. The counsellor said Josh’s mother was required to report his crime to the authorities and the next day, he was arrested. He spent the next four years in juvenile prison: the Texas Youth Commission, as it is officially called. The charge was “aggravated sexual assault,” because any sex offense against a person under age 14 is automatically “aggravated.” He got out at age 16 and was put on the sex offender registry, which, in Dallas, requires him to report in person to the authorities once a year, as well as anytime anything in his life changes.

Well, 27-year-old Gravens’s life did change recently — he, his wife and their children moved into a new home — which means he had to visit the registry to report the change within a week of it happening. Skenazy accompanied Gravens to the registry when he went to notify officials, but when they arrived, the unforeseen happened: