For the last few weeks, Vivienne Zhao, an investment banker, has spent each Monday on a cleanse, consuming over the course of the day five liquid-based meals delivered in single-serve plastic containers.

Among those typically included on the menu: pinto and black beans cooked with tomatoes and morsels of spinach and bok choy; garlicky carrots mixed with onions and alkaline water; and puréed pumpkin spiked with cardamom and Saigon cinnamon.

Like a growing number of people, Zhao came to the routine — known as souping, or going on a soup cleanse — after finding juice cleanses, which she tried several times, too extreme.

“The juice cleanses are difficult because you don’t chew, and you don’t feel like you’re eating anything for days at a time,” she said. “You’re just really hungry.”

Zhao orders from Splendid Spoon in Brooklyn, where sales have tripled annually since the line was introduced in 2013. In January, Soupure, a company that opened in Los Angeles in 2014, expanded from local delivery to shipping its cleanses nationally.

The appeal of souping, in part, is that it promises an easier detox than a juice cleanse.

“When you do juice cleanses, your blood sugar can spike really high,” said Despina Hyde, a registered dietitian at NYU Langone Medical Center. “Soup cleanses are inherently lower in sugar overall because they’re using more vegetables and complex carbohydrates versus fruit. They also tend to be higher in fiber, which has so many good benefits.”

Elina Fuhrman, who founded Soupelina in Los Angeles in 2013, chimed in: “The juice cleansing trend started from a good place and evolved into something that’s not so healthy, because there’s a lot of sugar and not enough nutrients that the body needs.”

For the most part, the soups that make up these cleanses tend to be quite flavorful, thanks in part to a liberal use of spices like turmeric and cumin. Packaged without preservatives and delivered chilled, they lack the higher sodium content of, say, a can of chicken noodle from a supermarket. Some are drinkable cold, although eating them warmed up, ideally out of a bowl with a spoon, arguably underlines the sense that they’re a meal.

Soup cleanses also tend to be quite low in calories, often hovering around the 1,200 mark for a day’s worth of soup.

“That’s right at the borderline,” said Hyde, the dietitian. “A lot of people I work with need between 1,400 and 1,600 calories a day. You’re going to lose weight on low-calorie diets, of course, but it can lead to muscle breakdown.” For that reason, she doesn’t advise souping for more than one full day at a time.

For those who prefer to make their soups from scratch, several books on soup cleansing have recently been published, including “The Soup Cleanse” by Blatteis and Vivienne Vella of Soupure, and “Soupelina’s Soup Cleanse” by Fuhrman. The founder of Splendid Spoon plans one, too.