College Station, TX

Dr. Alan Xenakis, MD announced today the release of his latest book entitled "DOC X MD Funny Feelings." The new book, DOC X MD Funny Feelings translates the most common Funny Feelings in a unique story telling style with humor and medical accuracy. The book is creatively illustrated, entertaining, informative, inspirational, and motivational. The reader will find answers to those age-old questions that most folks are embarrassed to ask. Why does running water make people pee? Why do mosquitoes bite some and not others? Why do folks nod in agreement when they are talking, but don't hear a word being said? Why a certain level of road rage is almost inevitable? Why do people forget what they are looking for when they travel from one room to another?

From quirky figments of the imagination to curious body talk these are just a few of hundreds of health and medical mysteries, curiosities, and concerns, called Funny Feelings, which make up nearly 50% of everyone's day. Funny Feelings are unknowingly embedded in nearly everything people see, feel, hear, taste, and smell. From business meetings, sporting events, newscasts, healthcare delivery settings, places of worship, music listening, and classroom venues, regardless of age, sex, color, or creed, all too often they have a tendency to ignore constant signals that their body is sending and receiving without really understanding what they mean.

Dr. Xenakis during his lectures, regularly emphasizes, "Throughout my medical career as a teacher, lecturer, radio & TV host, author, and now with the Affordable Care Act's compliance expectations, creating sound communications between patients and healthcare providers about health curiosities and concerns is vital in decreasing delay, or even avoidance of needed healthcare."

An Emmy Award winning communicator, Doctor Xenakis' NPR radio program DOC X MD FUNNY FEELINGS is heard weekly on KAMU-FM. His first book, "Why Doesn't My Funny Bone Make Me Laugh" was featured in more than 300 radio, TV and print outlets including, CBS-TV, CNN-TV, USA Today and ranked as one of the top ten consumer wellness books of the decade by the Wall Street Journal.

The new book is currently available on Amazon.com. Buy the book here.

Hear Doc X MD's Funny Feelings three minute audio vignettes podcast on NPR:

Listen to the Podcast

Visit FunnyFeelingsMD.com for contact details, photos, and an author bio.