Stacey Seifert

Stacey Seifert's name will be on the November election ballot, when she hopes to be elected to retain her seat as Fremont County Assessor.

Seifert is running on the republican ticket, hoping to serve another four-year term. The reason she wants to keep her position is simple.

"This is what I do," she said. "I love what I do — I think I do a pretty good job, and I want to keep doing it."

The main duty of the Assessor's office is to find, list and value property in the county for ad valorem tax purposes.

Seifert began her time with the Assessor's office in January 1990, and she worked as the Chief Appraiser until 2000. She was elected Assessor in 2006, replacing former Appraiser Jim Deatherage.

When she became Assessor, she said the office was in disarray, but she and her staff spent quite a bit of time cleaning it up.

In 2007 and 2008, the Assessor's office put more than $200 million in value on the tax role from building permits that had never been inspected over the prior six years, and revaluing property that hadn't been looked at or valued in more than six years, she said.

"About a year ago, we converted to a new software program, a Windows-based program," she said. "Anytime you do this kind of mass conversion, you have to go through a full one-year cycle to learn the new program."

Advertisement

The program is more user-friendly and includes its own website that allows users to print a property record card and view physical information, value and assessed values of a property. There is a link to the Treasurer's site as well, so people can pull tax information.

Seifert said she specifically enjoys the analysis and numbers part of the job.

"I like making things work," she said. "It's always challenging; there is always a law change or a procedure change — I really enjoy that."

The Assessor also is responsible for the department's budget.

"I have actually reduced our budget by about $87,000 (annually)since I took office," she said. "Almost half of that has been eaten up by increases in health insurance premiums, but that still leaves $45,000 which goes back into the General Fund."

The savings mostly comes from reducing the staff.

"When I took office, there were fourteen-and-a-half people here, now there is 10," she said. "It's a well-oiled machine in here."

She said the office and information are more accessible to the public, including a direct link to the GIS mapping system.

Feb. 3 is the last day to update voter registration addresses to participate in the March 4 party precinct caucuses ( http://sos.state.co.us">http://sos.state.co.us). Voters must be a resident of the precinct for 30 days, and registered to vote no later than 29 days before the precinct caucus. The primary election is slated for June 24 and the general election is Nov. 4.