A state Board of Health member asked his fellow board members Tuesday to endorse a plan that would use federal Medicaid expansion dollars for an alternative plan to increase health insurance coverage options for low-income Oklahomans.

Board member Tim Starkey, an executive director of a rural community health center, said the board should “officially endorse” the Oklahoma Hospital Association’s plan that asks state leaders to use federal money — which would have been used to expand the state’s Medicaid program — to instead increase affordable health insurance coverage options for low-income adult Oklahomans.

“That’s how strongly I believe that this is a good plan and really reflects what needs to be done in Oklahoma, and I’m afraid if we’re too weak on the issue that might be perceived that we’re really not on board,” said Starkey, who operates Great Salt Plains Health Center in Cherokee.

The board tabled Starkey’s motion, with other members saying it was too early to endorse the association’s plan, which uses Medicaid expansion dollars — a politically sensitive and heavily debated topic among state leaders.

Gov. Mary Fallin announced in November 2012 that Oklahoma would not expand its Medicaid program to cover more low-income Oklahomans, a key element of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare.

Hospital association leaders launched their plan, Transforming Health Care: A Proposal for Oklahoma’s Future, in November and have spent the past few months educating policy leaders about the plan’s goals. Oklahoma Hospital Association President Craig Jones presented the plan in December to the Oklahoma Health Care Authority board.

Jones said during his presentation to the board Tuesday that although the state’s political climate hasn’t been open to expanding Medicaid, the money is available and other states have used it for alternative plans to increase coverage.

“Obviously, there are concerns about ‘Well, what’s this going to cost the state?’” Jones said. “And we’ve run the numbers umpteenth different ways, and we are absolutely convinced — absolutely convinced — that it is a positive return for the state.”

Insure Oklahoma

Jones said Oklahoma has a health insurance program in place that it can use to cover more low-income adults. That program is called Insure Oklahoma.

Insure Oklahoma is a state-based program created to bridge the health coverage gap for low-income working Oklahomans, according to the Oklahoma Health Care Authority. The program provides a premium assistance program for employers. For individuals who don’t have access through an employer, they’re provided limited coverage options, including paying a health insurance premium based on a sliding income scale.

The program is paid for with state tobacco tax money, matched with federal money.

A waiver for Insure Oklahoma was scheduled to expire at the end of 2014, but the federal government agreed to extend the program until Dec. 31.

Insure Oklahoma’s income guidelines for its individual plan are capped at people who make 100 percent of the federal poverty level. Through the hospital association’s plan, more low-income adults would be able to sign up for coverage through Insure Oklahoma.

In 2012, about 590,000 Oklahoma adults were uninsured, according to U.S. Census Bureau data.

Many of these residents are in rural Oklahoma, placing a strain on hospitals in those regions, Jones said.

The cost of providing care for uninsured Oklahomans in 2012 was $550 million, with rural hospitals providing a lot of that care, he said.