Ron Gutman wants to bring back the village doctor.

His three-year-old startup, HealthTap, offers an online service that duplicates at least a small part of the comfort and convenience we enjoyed in the days when doctors still made house calls. It lets you instantly connect with physicians via the net and ask them the most personal of medical questions.

“You can’t bring back the village doctor himself,” says Gutman, the founder and CEO of the Palo Alto, California startup. “But you can bring back the notion of a village doctor using technology, using data, using more immediate access — easier, cheaper access.”

That may seem like a poor substitute for the good ol’ days, but it’s a step up from today’s status quo, where you’re lucky to get a doctor on the phone when you most need their advice. Gutman says that more than 7 million people visit the HealthTap site each month, trading questions and answers with a pool of about 46,000 doctors, and in some cases, these visitors are paying good money for private online consultations on the site.

— Ron Gutman ‘You can bring back the notion of a village doctor using technology, using data, using more immediate access — easier, cheaper access.’

But for Gutman, this is only a first step. He believes the service translates not only into quicker advice for patients, but also into fewer visits to the doctor’s office, since so many in-person consultations are informal and conversational. While his products initially target consumers, he envisions a system where the big insurance companies will eventually pay for their members to use the HealthTap service too. The way the country is moving, he just might get his wish.

At a time when more and more Silicon Valley startups are struggling to finally convert users into profits, those in the health sector believe they have a real advantage: Thanks to inflated medical costs, the arrival of Obamacare, and a looming influx of new patients across the country, health care startups can make their money not just from the Average Joes and Josephines, but from the health care establishment, an industry that has no choice but to change.

While more lighthearted startups tinker with new advertising schemes and new tricks to promote apps of questionable import, health startups are turning their attention to deals with insurance providers, hospitals, and doctors’ offices, as well as the large corporations that offer health benefits to their employees. That’s where the money is, but it’s also where a technological overhaul makes the most sense.

“The fundamental change has to happen on the supply side,” says Jonathan Gruber, an MIT economist, former adviser to Barack Obama and Mitt Romney, and director of the health care program at the National Bureau of Economic Research. “There’s a broad transformation within health care that can happen — not where a startup becomes Apple, but where startups work with big health care institutions and providers to transform how they deliver care.”

As Barack Obama told a joint session of Congress in 2009, the U.S. spends one-and-a-half times more per person on health care than any other country, but “we aren’t any healthier for it.” And even the right-wing critics of his efforts to overhaul the health care system have agreed that costs are out of control.

Big businesses are looking to reduce the cost of the health care benefits they offer to employees, and similar belt tightening is underway at insurers, doctors’ offices, and hospitals. Insurers have a particularly difficult task, with the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, aka Obamacare, mandating certain minimal coverage standards that make it harder for insurers to strip down their policies and easier for patients to switch providers (Much of the act goes into effect in October and at the start of 2014).

— Bob Kocher ‘Employer health savings directly translate into either higher margins for the employer or higher wages for the worker — it’s highly tangible.’

The result is that health care startups have their work cut out for them. As Health Tap sets its sights on insurance providers, another startup, the San Francisco-based Castlight Health, is going after those large corporations. Castlight runs a service that lets you comparison shop for medical procedures, but it doesn’t offer this directly to consumers. It goes through the corporations, which then bundle the Castlight service with the other tools and benefits they provide to employees.

This only makes sense, says Bob Kocher, a partner at Venrock Capital, board member at Castlight, medical doctor, and former Obama adviser, because the corporations shoulder most of our health care costs. “It’s much easier and much smarter to go direct to employer,” Kocher says. “Employer health savings directly translate into either higher margins for the employer or higher wages for the worker — it’s highly tangible.”

Castlight’s funders, which also include Morgan Stanley and the Cleveland Clinic, have put $160 million into the startup, and several big-name businesses have already signed up, including Safeway, Honeywell, and ConAgra.

For Harvard’s Gruber, this sort of startup model holds a particular promise. “Basically, it’s the employers who pay the bills at the end of the day,” he says. “It’s the employers will have to take the real action in terms of standing up and saying, ‘This will not stand, and we’re going to insist on changing the way our employees use health care. I think that can help. I think that can lower heatlh care costs 5, 10, 15 percent.”

He isn’t the only one. The two-year-old Chicago startup Retrofit — backed by $11 million in venture funding — is telling employers its weight-loss program can reduce absenteeism and health costs while boosting productivity and morale. The Minneapolis-based RedBrick is pitching companies a service that gives employees financial incentives to enter exercise, weight loss, and quit smoking programs. And Sherpaa, a startup based in Brooklyn, wants to help businesses offer online tools that can diagnose employee illnesses online — another means of curbing visits to the doctor’s office.

But at the same time, another gaggle of startups is looking to serve doctor’s offices and hospitals, offering everything from patient acquisition and scheduling tools (a la six-year-old ZocDoc) to remote patient monitoring services (Airstrip). This group also includes Glow, a startup backed by PayPal co-founder Max Levchin.

— Mike Huang ‘Health is an extremely hard industry to tackle. Many have tried and failed. But if someone gets it right, it could impact many, many lives.’

Glow has built an app that offer specific and intimate guidance to couples having trouble with conception, and although this app was originally designed for consumers, the Glow team still ended up working with fertility clinics. If couples who can’t get pregnant with the help of Glow timing and guidance from a doctor, they often end up needing in vitro fertilization, a costly procedure rarely covered by insurance. The sort of detailed record supplied by Glow can help shorten the medical work required before the procedure — and reduce costs.

Some question whether the Glows and the HealthTaps of the world will succeed in wooing old school businesses, including Mohanjit Jolly, a managing partner at the venture capital shop Draper Fisher Jurvetson, who points out that insurers and hospitals tend to be inherently conservative in their approach to technology and are difficult to sell to.

But he sees signs that this is changing. During a visit this year to the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, he says, insurers like UnitedHealthcare and Aetna had booths showing off their new technology, a “remarkable” development. “They were saying: ‘We’re going to adopt technology to deliver better healthcare to the masses,’” Jolly says.

This industry will change, though it may take awhile. “Health is an extremely hard industry to tackle. Many have tried and failed,” says Glow CEO Mike Huang. “But if someone gets it right, it could impact many, many lives.”