In this digitized era, paperwork, in many cases, is being phased out.

For example, in the health care industry it used to be common for patients' information to be kept in paper records. However, one of the phases of the Affordable Health Care Act, mandates for hospitals to switch to standardize billing and patients' information to be kept online

After about two arduous years, all medical records are now online at Hardeman County Memorial Hospital. This after a mandate from the federal government.

However, before that, Interim CEO Dave Clark said these records weren't secure.

"This is all new. So, small hospitals are the last to do it because of the expense. I mean for a million dollars in bankruptcy? Couldn't do it. So, we had to work with a company that would work with us in a payment for them," stated Interim CEO Clark.

While they know of no patient information being compromised, Clark said, for a couple of months, the hospital didn't even have firewalls in place protecting that information against potential hackers.

He said that is no longer the case.

Now, the hospital contracts with an off-site IT company.

Computer Specialist Joseph Porciuncula manages the computers and server and he only comes in once a week.

"The biggest challenge for a rural hospital, such as the Quanah hospital, is the budget. With money, you have less man power," explained Porciuncula.

His response time to threats can range anywhere from a couple of hours to 24 hours.

"The biggest security threat is there is a specific virus that's called a cryptolocker virus. Basically, when you're infected with that virus, it will encrypt or lock all your files," Porciuncula said. "If you don't have a back up, it is almost impossible to decrypt the encryption. So, you will basically lose all your information."

At United Regional Hospital in Wichita Falls, there are two different departments overseeing the records and computers and a staff of about 44.

"Over on the other side, then we have business intelligence people who work on clinical informatics and that kind of thing," said Director of Information Services and Telecommunication Services, Jerry Marshall.

IT Director Marshall said patients' medical records are constantly monitored.

"They can analyze that information and let us know within 10 or 15 minutes whether they see stuff that is suspicious that we need to be aware of," Marshall stated. "Cybersecurity is an ever-changing battle field basically.You have threats from nations, you have threats from organized crime, you have threats from people living in their mothers' basements."

All the information is kept at United Regional. However, there is also a data recovery site where more information is backed up and kept so, Heaven forbid if anything happened here, they could still access it. Of course, at all times, there are security cameras watching, making sure that everything is safe.

So far, they have not had any problem stopping potential hackers at United Regional and he thinks the hospital's proactive measures have helped keep patient information safe and secure.

"We've even gone so far to block traffic from various countries like traffic coming from Russia, China, North Korea, or Iraq," Marshall said.

In this digital era, officials at both hospitals agree keeping patients' information safe is a priority mission.

They said that is why they are constantly looking at the latest programs and ways to guard medical information.



Both hospitals are now in the process of switching over to virtual desktops. United Regional started two to three years ago and has 1,400 complete. Marshall estimates about 600 - 800 computers remain.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



A 2015 report shows criminal attacks are the new leading cause of data breach in health care. In fact, criminal attacks in health care are up 125% compared to five years ago.

Researchers said however only 40% of health care organizations are concerned about cyber attacks.

So, how does that national research compare to here at home?

We focused on two hospitals, Hardeman County Memorial Hospital and United Regional Medical Center.

While both hospitals are very concerned with protecting patients' medical records, Interim CEO, Dave Clark, at the hospital in Quanah said that was not always high on the security list.

After the Affordable Health Care Act was signed into law in 2010, there was a rollout mandate dictating how much information hospitals had to have stored online.

Before that mandate, Clark said all patients' information at the hospital was kept on hard copies.

Since the Hardeman County Memorial Hospital was bankrupt at the time, Clark said it was a very expensive for the hospital to make that transition.

So, for several months, he said the hospital did not have any firewalls in place protecting that information.

"In the past, hospitals didn't do a very good job of securing their network with patient records," said Interim CEO Clark. "So, it was pretty easy for someone to come in and sit at a desk and could get basically anything they wanted."



However, Clark said many firewalls and securities are now in place, guarding patients' records.

Read the cyber security report for yourself here.

You can also read the key features of the Affordable Health Care Act here.