Donald Trump will be the Republican nominee for president. As that soaks in and “establishment” Republican figures cycle through the various stages of grief, it is important to understand that the Trump phenomenon is rooted in a cynicism long embraced by the Republican Party. These modern roots can be traced back before the 2010 midterm elections, when Senator Mitch McConnell declared the goal of Republicans was making President Obama a one term President. The birth of the Tea Party and legitimization of the likes of Sarah Palin as participants in our political discourse only precipitated matters.

Congressional Republicans mastered the art of obstruction; they rendered government dysfunctional then won elections on the very premise that government was dysfunctional. They intentionally made Washington ineffective then lambasted Washington when talking to constituents and voters at home, stoking the flames of fear, hatred, and bigotry. Coupled with a compliant media who dutifully reinforced the “false equivalency” narrative–the notion that both parties in Washington are the problem, that both parties are guilty of obstruction–voter frustration with Washington yielded Republican victories in 2010 that cemented their Congressional control. The result? More gridlock. More dysfunction. More obstruction.

Is it no wonder, then, that voters are losing patience and faith with the democratic process? The current political climate is testing our system of government and leading to voter resentment–not unlike the resentment and loathing personified by Donald Trump. It is unfortunate that Republicans cultivated a dysfunctional government only to make it a cause for electoral success. But even worse is the fact that some self-avowed progressives are buying into this cynical meme.

While Bernie Sanders raises important points about needed changes in the campaign finance system, regulation of the financial sector, and action on climate change, his calls for an uncompromising “political revolution” and for upturning our system of government should give Democrats and like-minded individuals concerned about Republican cynicism pause. They feed into the Republican narrative that government is the problem, not the solution–that there is a fundamental flaw in our democracy that requires radical upheaval.

Such rhetoric not only threatens people’s faith and trust in government but also the very foundation upon which we can build progressive priorities. It feeds a dangerous brand of cynicism, as columnist Kevin Drum recently noted, that shifts blame and removes any sense of shared responsibility or connectedness.

This is disconcerting because it not only breeds distrust in government and discourages political engagement, but it is also counterintuitive to our goals of breaking down barriers and shaping an inclusive society. Cynicism, as a basis, is a luxury afforded to the privileged. The North Star blogger Clay Claiborne wrote in 2012, “When practiced by those in a position to do it well, cynicism allows them to criticize the oppressor and sympathize with the oppressed without ever having to move out of their comfort zone…He may not, as yet, be wanting for much personally, but he can see the growing misery all around him so he has to think or do something. The cynic solves this dilemma by thinking that nothing can be done!”

By justifying an abdication of shared responsibility, the political cynicism seeping through today’s political rhetoric is a threat to progress and progressivism itself. It provides the means with which lines of division are drawn between and among members of our society. It inspires indignation, making government the enemy and feeding the “outsider” appeal of candidates like Trump. When voters have lost so much faith in government that experience is considered a liability to holding elected office, the problem is not so much the system itself but the rhetoric that, election after election, sends representatives into this system whose political survival depends on it not working.

Yes, Washington is clunky and progress has been slow–but it’s not been absent. The Affordable Care Act, the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act, Dodd-Frank, executive action on immigration, the repairing of global relations, economic stabilization, and the creation of ten million news jobs did not occur in a vacuum. They were the result of a concerted and, at times, laborious effort to push through the gridlock and get something done. Is it revolutionary? It may not feel that way on a broad scale, but given the scope of our democracy and the structure of our government, it can be. For a child denied insurance coverage because of a pre-existing condition, being able to afford health care is probably revolutionary for her and her family. For a mother and father who live with their children in fear of deportation every day, the assurance of safety is probably revolutionary. For the unemployed, landing their dream job or a job that helps them support their family probably feels revolutionary.

Change doesn’t have to be grandiose or dramatic to make a significant impact in the lives of people all over the country–and such meaningful impact is the primary aim of progressivism. Small changes today point us to a better future tomorrow. Look no further than President Obama’s apt analogy describing the “ocean liner theory of change”: it is difficult to turn an ocean liner around, but if you change the heading by just a few degrees, you will reach an entirely new destination compared to the direction in which you were moving.

There’s nothing about progressivism that requires, dare I say, “revolutionary” change on a large scale. And, in fact, a sudden lurch to one side or the other could wreak havoc not only on our system of government but also on the ideals we seek to advance. We do not live in a society where nothing can get done. We live in a society where something can be done and that something can lead to even more, positive change. That is what progressivism requires–continual growth, improvement, and adjustments toward a future better than where we are now: a future where barriers are broken and opportunity is available and accessible to all Americans.

This is precisely the future for which Hillary Clinton is fighting. Should she be a progressive pariah because she understands the most efficient way to achieve progressive goals is by making our system of government work for all Americans? By definition, progressivism is forward-thinking. It would oxymoronic and a mistake to think these values can be advanced by turning people against government. It would be as if a sports franchise sought to gain fans by intentionally losing games. This may work for Republicans, but it undermines the message Democrats need to convey. If we want to restore faith and confidence in government–and progressivism relies on an efficient and effective government–then we need to show that government can be part of the solution and not the source of disdain.

This also means, as President Obama recently noted in a commencement address at Howard University, that we won’t get everything we want. The very nature of democracy requires a degree of compromise. Just because we were unable to achieve a single-payer health care system, for example, does not mean the Affordable Care Act was a defeat for progressives. Defeat would come by being so unyielding that it exacerbates this cynicism: “If you think that the only way forward is to be as uncompromising as possible, you will feel good about yourself…but you’re not going to get what you want. And if you don’t get what you want long enough, you will eventually think the whole system is rigged. And that will lead to more cynicism…” This describes the identity crisis happening within the Republican Party as we speak. There is far too much at stake for Democrats and progressives to become paralyzed by this as well.

The difference between Hillary Clinton’s vision of the future, then, and Donald Trump’s is stark. And the choice in the general election should be clear to anyone concerned about breaking down barriers and moving America forward. If Bernie Sanders wishes to stay in the race until the last primary, that is his prerogative. And if his supporters want to continue speaking about the issues he has raised and the causes for which he stands, by all means keep speaking. But if we focus on the values that unite us, we will find that couching these issues within the cynical terms fueling Trump’s divisive and bigoted rhetoric only threatens revolutionary–both large and small scale–progressive change. Rather than concluding the system is rigged and ineffective, we progressives should work to win elections up and down the ballot, working within the existing structures of government to advance our cause. With such political influence, we can use the positive potential of government to lift lives and empower all Americans to succeed. This will not only boost people’s confidence in government as a means of bringing about change but also establish a progressive bulwark that can endure the headwinds of political cynicism.