Just five companies own the majority of the molecular diagnostics market as of this month, according to Kalorama Information. The healthcare market research publisher estimated Roche, Hologic, Qiagen, Becton Dickinson and Abbott alone earned 60% of revenues in the 5.5 billion molecular diagnostics market in 2013. The finding was made in Kalorama’s Molecular Diagnostics Six Month Update, the latest look at this fast-growing IVD test segment.

Kalorama thinks top-tier companies will continue to dominate due to their global reach and multi-segment participation. Further, as IVD markets in N. America and Europe offer little growth opportunities for the vast number of tests, the top tier has invested in molecular and personalized medicine testing and also has reinforced international connections.

The report notes that while the names of the players dominating molecular testing have not changed extensively in recent years, their revenue growth rates have. High growth has shifted to innovators, while leaders are seeing flatter revenues.

“Roche holds the number one market position but growth is slowing,”said Shara Rosen, author of the report. “Roche Diagnostics once earned close to double digit revenue growth in its molecular test business. This has slowed in the last two years as the company is conducting a major reorganization and reported that it will phase out its 454 Life Science unit by 2016.”

The report said that IVD veterans Becton Dickinson, Gen-Probe (now part of Hologic), Abbott Diagnostics and Siemens Healthcare hold their own in a highly competitive environment, while newcomers Meridian Biosciences and GenMark have made gains with user-friendly infectious disease tests. Meanwhile Pharma specialist Novartis has bailed out of the blood screening business to concentrate on other business units.

The report says that molecular diagnostics is becoming a go-to resource in clinical practice and is the faster-growing part of the diagnostics market at the present time. Tests are being developed constantly, and changes in light of the amount of activity in test development and regulatory and reimbursement challenges in 2013, Kalorama Information presents this updated review of molecular diagnostics with an emphasis on the last six months of 2013: July – December. This report highlights trends and developments that portent the evolution of molecular tests and technologies. The ensemble of consumer demand, technological advances and market forces create a dynamic, energetic and fast-moving environment for new tests and companies.

Market analysis in the Molecular Diagnostics Six Month Update covers world markets for in vitro diagnostics, with a bias towards the developed areas of the globe -- North America and Western Europe. Segment markets in molecular diagnostics are broken out, and trends and partnerships are given extensive discussion. The Molecular Diagnostics Six Month Update is available at http://www.kaloramainformation.com/Molecular-Diagnostics-Month-7969379/.

About Kalorama Information

Kalorama Information, a division of MarketResearch.com, supplies the latest in independent medical market research in diagnostics, biotech, pharmaceuticals, medical devices and healthcare; as well as a full range of custom research services.