Buy Photo Gov. Dennis Daugaard, shown speaking with Argus Leader Media on Tuesday, is trying to push Medicaid expansion as well as a sales-tax increase for teacher pay during the 2016 Legislative session. (Photo: Jay Pickthorn / Argus Leader)

For the life of him, Gov. Dennis Daugaard couldn’t recall the miserly moniker bestowed upon him by critics who found the Republican executive too fiscally conservative to make an actual difference.

“Was it Grandpa Cheap?” Daugaard asked during a visit to the Argus Leader Media offices this week.

“I think it was Grandpa Frugal,” someone offered.

“Ah, yes,” he said. “Thank you.”

The softening of that label, from cheap to frugal, is nothing compared to the political transformation taking shape as Daugaard splashes loudly into his sixth legislative session as governor, with alliances and legacies at stake.

The 62-year-old former Sioux Falls business executive strongly supports a half-cent sales tax hike to raise teacher pay, changing course on an issue that has dogged him through much of his tenure but gained intensity since his 2014 re-election.

Why is he supporting an education funding initiative that he previously thought should be left to the devices of local school districts? It’s simple, really. He listened to the concerns of his constituency and opted to change his mind – a refreshing example of flexibility amid rigid ideological times.

“I wasn’t convinced that South Dakota teacher pay, after adjusting for taxes and cost of living, was uncompetitive, and now I am convinced,” Daugaard said when I asked about his change of heart. “I wasn’t convinced that teacher shortages were any worse than they were a decade or two decades ago, and I am convinced now. They’re worse.”

Of course, Daugaard now faces heat from both sides. Republicans uncomfortable with a tax increase are undercutting his proposal by promising Plan B enlightenment if the governor’s push fails. Democrats are riled by the reality that some school districts may have to cut teachers (or not fill openings) to get salaries to the desired average of $48,500.

But a plan that generates more than $62 million to raise salaries and has the support of the teachers union is the most promising South Dakota has seen in a while, and Daugaard’s willingness to take political heat to make it happen has the genuine feel of leadership.

If that weren't enough, the governor unveiled a Medicaid expansion plan that would help extend coverage to 55,000 additional South Dakota residents in conjunction with the federal Affordable Care Act, more commonly known as Obamacare.

Daugaard isn’t the only Republican governor to embrace a strategy to address state health care needs with greater access to federal funds, which in South Dakota’s case means broadening Indian Health Services reimbursement parameters.

But the very notion that a South Dakota GOP standard bearer would align himself even indirectly with President Obama was enough to provoke shrieks of outrage in Pierre.

This is a growing dichotomy in American politics, where the battle cry of ideology tries to shout down policies of non-partisan pragmatism, casting heroes and villains along the way.

Daugaard, who toed the line by holding back praise of the Democratic president during Obama's visit to Watertown last spring, sees the absurdity of using national party bias to determine the best course of action for matters within his own state.

“There is a stigma attached to President Obama,” said Daugaard. “He is very disliked in South Dakota. By attaching Medicaid expansion to him, the interest of people in supporting it goes down, just by the very association of the name.”

Right on cue, conservatives slammed the governor for trying to drag South Dakota further into a federal entitlement program, though he pointed out that 60 percent of those eligible under the Medicaid expansion are employed.

“They’re not lazy people who want to be on the public dole,” Daugaard said. “They’re working but not earning enough to afford health care, which is expensive.”

Those aren’t words you’ll see on many GOP campaign mailers, but they’re admirable for the chief executive of a state with a Native American health care crisis that is growing more troublesome by the day.

On teacher pay and Medicaid, the governor had a decision to make. He could cruise through his second term without ruffling conservative feathers, solidifying his reputation as a sturdy fiscal guardian without achieving much of anything. Or he could make an effort to solve problems of significant concern to many of the citizens he represents.

Daugaard was re-elected in 2014 with more than 70 percent of the vote, giving him the biggest gubernatorial landslide in state history and a piggy bank of political capital to spend during his final term. If he was going to adopt a “get things done” approach and circumvent traditional party channels, he had to choose his battles wisely.

“However pragmatic a solution may be, if it’s politically not saleable, I don’t want to propose it and waste the political capital I may need to propose a plan that could pass,” he said. “If I push and fail too many times, people are less likely to endorse or support those plans.”

That tone of cautious aggressiveness led to the formation of the Blue Ribbon Task Force on education, illustrating the governor's more nuanced view of South Dakota’s lowest-ranked teacher pay status.

Unlike occupations that could point to low cost of living and no state income tax to soften the blow of their low national ranking, education salaries weren’t tied to competitive market influences but instead were government controlled.

“They were more a matter of political decisions,” said Daugaard. So he decided to make one.

He commissioned a poll paid for with campaign funds, showing that at least 71 percent of likely voters favor using a half-cent sales tax for teacher pay, and he took it to legislators to bolster his plan. His staff beat the bushes with task force data and testimony linking South Dakota’s alarming teacher shortage to substandard salaries, a connection Daugaard had earlier dismissed.

“Last year at about this time, there was a great hue and cry to put a lot more money into education, but it was all based on anecdote and opinion,” Daugaard said. “It wasn’t founded in data that I could see; it was all just complaints. Well, that’s nothing new. I wasn’t convinced until the task force spent some time analyzing this that something needed to be done.”

He spoke with an administrator in Avon, where elementary school openings that used to draw 40 applicants are now bringing in two or three. He heard from statewide educators concerned that the quality of education could suffer greatly if qualified young teachers don’t view South Dakota as a viable place to make a living.

Most of all, though, Daugaard did something that you don’t see in politics very often. He admitted that he was wrong. He reversed course in the face of overwhelming evidence and decided to fight for something that could make his state better, no matter the political cost.

Daugaard is a 62-year lame duck executive who hasn’t strayed much into political ideology anyway. He is known for nuts-and-bolts governance and running a tight ship, which makes his positions on teacher pay and Medicaid expansion all the more remarkable.

If Daugaard is supporting these proposals as a Republican governor in a rabidly red state, it’s reasonable to infer that a need existed all along and someone just had to find some chutzpah. Who would have guessed that Grandpa Frugal would be the one?

The politics of pragmatism will be sorely tested in the weeks ahead, since Daugaard needs a two-thirds majority to pass the sales tax increase for teacher pay and is battling the specter of Obamacare with Medicaid.

When last seen, he was fighting to make the case for progress, fully aware that his political reputation among conservatives could be tarnished. This resolve to push forward despite the looming unpopularity of your actions is known as leadership, and it’s rare enough in these parts that we should tip our cap when it actually occurs.

Argus Leader Media city columnist Stu Whitney can be reached at swhitney@argusleader.com. Follow him on Twitter @stuwhitney

Read or Share this story: http://argusne.ws/1ROfN1K