File (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

In the early 19th century, workers in England began to realize the effects of laborsaving machines. These workers would often destroy the laborsaving equipment as a protest against the technological industrialization that was replacing them as workers.

The theory of the Luddites has been dismissed as the workers were relocated to different jobs as the economy continued to grow.

There has been a "re-think" going on. Larry Summers, the former U.S. Treasury secretary and a leading economic thinker states, "Until a few years ago, I didn't think this was a very complicated subject: the Luddites were wrong, and the believers in technology and technological progress were right. I'm not so completely certain now."

It is a complicated issue and it may be a double-edged sword as well. It may be why we are recovering so slowly.

Think of "Willy the Welder," who was used in a Cadillac advertisement many years ago, as a fellow doing body welds as the cars moved down the assembly line. The ad was meant to show the craftsmanship and hand assembly of Cadillac, the premier brand of General Motors.

As automation and bad trade deals with Japan, Canada, Korea and Mexico took hold, Willy became a victim of automation. Robotics and/or foreign workers replaced him.

"Willy the Welder" used to work 40 hours a week and earned $15 an hour in 1990. With a bit of overtime, Willy earned $40,000. He paid 24.9 percent in federal income tax or $9,960.

The robots have been there 25 years and robots work 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, and they do not pay taxes at all. So, the termination of "Willy the Welder" not only cost Willy $1,000,000 in 25-year income, it also cost the government $249,000 in lost taxes. It does not end there.

Strictly speaking, what the velocity of money tells us is how long people hold onto their money. In 1990, the velocity of money was 1.8. So every dollar earned, it was spent 1.8 times over the next 12 months.

Willy was fired in 1990 and moved from his $15-an-hour job and went to work at a McDonalds that was paying $3.80 an hour in 1990. The impact of this event is dramatic. Obviously, the effect on Willy was devastating, while he had his full-time job he could afford to have a modest home, a wife, two kids and a Cadillac in the driveway. Importantly, Willy's wife could stay at home and raise their children as people have raised children for millennia.

With a reduction in income of $11.20 an hour, Willy's wife had to go back to work and could not care for the children all day. She wound up with another job at minimum wage so they earned $7.60 an hour or $15,200 a year — a 62 percent reduction. The disruption in the family ultimately led to divorce and the children left home before they completed high school.

In addition, the velocity of Willy's $1,800,000 in the economy over 25 years was reduced to $684,000 as a direct cost to gross domestic product over 25 years.

The point of this story that has occurred millions of times in America over the last 40 years is that we have adopted economic policies that have devastated our republic, concentrated wealth and forfeited our children's futures.

Many would suggest this is capitalism at its best. And perhaps in the short term, it is. As these policies mature into eliminating people from production processes, these people are no longer customers and corporations ultimately suffer in demand for their products and services which seems to be happening now as wages, inflation adjusted, have only increased 7.8 percent since 1964.

The statistic that demonstrates the reduction of labor is the civilian labor force participation rate divided by real gross domestic product. Since 1970, this ratio has declined from 2.9 to .9, or a 69 percent reduction. We are at the lowest rate since it started being measured in the mid-20th century.

The labor participation rate is now at its lowest level since 1979 and stands at 62.6 percent for June. And we still have over 8 million looking for work.

The "End of Work" produced via automation will ultimately apply to all jobs in the future, even brain surgery. The question is, how do we respond to this trend? There is nothing we do as a species, including procreation, that robots of the future cannot do. So what are our choices as we move to the "end of work"?

It seems the Luddites were correct after all; they were just 300 years early.

Business leaders, elected officials and universities need to address this issue, as the transition to the "end of work" will be difficult for many.

The field of study already has been named, "Post-Workism."

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1IYORqS