Getty Images Retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson initially seemed like the most soft-spoken GOP Presidential candidate. But just a few months into the campaign cycle, he's emerged as the weirdest! Take a look at some of his biggest scandals and most head-scratching quotes so far.

Advertisement

In January 2015, Carson admitted to plagiarizing parts of his 2012 book, America The Beautiful. Ironically, he wrote in the memoir about getting caught plagiarizing in college and how he didn't know it was wrong because the term didn't exist at that time!

Getty Images Carson really doesn't like Obamacare. In fact, he hates it so much that he compared it to slavery! "I have to tell you Obamacare is, really I think, the worst thing that's happened in this nation since slavery," he said in 2013 during a speech at the Values Voters Summit.

Advertisement

Getty Images Also, during an interview with Evan Gahr of The Daily Beast, Carson said that the healthcare law was worse than the 9/11 terror attacks.

Getty Images Carson is also a self-proclaimed vegetarian and has been so for decades. But back in May he was invited to Iowa Sen. Joni Ernst's fundraiser, which included a pork roast. He admitted to eating meat on special occasions "to be nice."

Getty Images The alleged vegetarian also claimed in October to have been involved with an armed robbery at Popeyes — a fast-food fried chicken joint. Aside from wondering about what a non-meat-eater would order at Popeyes, Baltimore police were unable to find any records of the incident.

Zondervan In his autobiography Gifted Hands, Carson recalls stabbing a friend over a radio tuner dispute. Then a teen, the GOP hopeful claimed he would have killed the guy if the victim's belt buckle didn't block the blade. He also confessed to acting violently towards classmates and even trying to hit his mother with a hammer.

Getty Images Despite the shockingly specific confessions, CNN was unable to locate any of Carson's alleged victims. All those the network reached out to simply could not remember the incidents Carson had described.

Getty Images Carson's campaign admitted that he made up a story about receiving a scholarship to attend the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. The GOP hopeful had written in his book Gifted Hands that at 17 he met Gen. William Westmoreland, who offered him the position. West Point had no record of him even applying.

Getty Images In 1998, Carson shared his strange theory on the Egyptian pyramids while delivering a commencement address at Andrews College. He claims that despite what archeologists say, Biblical character Joseph built the pyramids to serve as granaries — not tombs for the pharaohs.

Getty Images Carson got into some major heat in September 2015 for telling NBC's Chuck Todd that he would not support a Muslim leader in the U.S. "I would not advocate that we put a Muslim in charge of this nation. I absolutely would not agree with that," he told Meet the Press.

Getty Images Two months before getting into the presidential race, Carson appeared on CNN's "New Day" and declared that being gay is a choice. "A lot of people who go into prison straight and when they come out, they're gay, so did something happen while they were in there? Ask yourself that question," he told host Chris Cuomo.

Getty Images Right after the mass shooting at Umpqua Community College in Roseburg, Oregon, Carson revealed that how he would handle a similar situation. He suggested that everyone should attack the gunman: "Hey guys, everybody attack him. He may shoot me, but he can't get us all," he said.

Getty Images Most recently, the retired neurosurgeon made some ill-received remarks about Americans' intelligence. "People are not as stupid as [the media] thinks they are," he said in Mother Jones's video. "Many of them are stupid, OK. But I'm talking about overall."