"Are we ready to support the 34,000 caregivers who currently live in Sarasota County?" Pamela Baron, director of senior services for the Jewish Family & Children's Service of the Suncoast, asked at a recent summit on aging in place.

If you go strictly by some of the other numbers tossed out at this forum — put together by JFCS' Advocacy Committee and featuring a roster of experts on elder community life — the grim answer would be no.

Take the $1.2 million in Older Americans Act funding that will be funneled this year to Sarasota County elders through the Area Agency on Aging for Southwest Florida. It may sound like a lot, but this is roughly the same level of federal support we were getting 15 years ago, the agency's program director Gail Holton told the audience.

The money pays for meals for 460 people, Holton said, and in-home services for only 321. Meanwhile, the waiting list for in-home services — those vital daily supports that can mean the difference between staying in your neighborhood and checking into a long-term care facility — has swelled to 904 people in Sarasota County alone.

"You have people who need services; there's no question about it," Holton said. "The problem is, there's no funding to support it."

One hitch is that federal law gives priority to those in the direst need — virtually guaranteeing that those on the waiting list will see their situations worsen. To try to counter this phenomenon, Holton said, the agency is also funding wellness and prevention programs where it can.

Similar drops in a big bucket exist on the state level, added Laura Cantwell, associate director of advocacy for AARP Florida. Last year the Legislature increased the funding for in-home Medicaid services, she said. But those services are expensive.

"As of November 2014, as a state, we still had a wait list of 55,000 seniors waiting to get services, which is huge," Cantwell said. "Last year the Medicaid program received a $12 million increase. That meant adding just 823 more people — so you can see how much money it takes."

The state's Community Care for the Elderly program, she added, got "its largest increase in a decade, $5 million." That added 751 more slots to the program statewide — 8 percent of the waiting list, Cantwell said.

But if you think this means elders constitute a drain on national and state economies, Cantwell said, think again. She cited an AARP study last year, "The Longevity Economy," which found that people over 50 contribute more to the GDP than they require in assistance.

Per capita, Floridians over 50, she said, "contribute $2,850 more to the state and local economy than they consume in public services. We really need to be focusing on attracting older adults; they bring a lot to our economy. We also need to make sure we are taking care of our seniors."

CUSTODY CONFLICTS

The Bradenton-Sarasota Chapter of Alienated Grandparents Anonymous will sponsor a talk via Skype on Jan. 27 by J. Michael Bone, a therapist who specializes in high-conflict custody disputes.

The program starts at 7 p.m. at the Living Lord Lutheran Church, 11107 Palmbrush Trail, off State Road 70 in Lakewood Ranch. The session is open to the public, and a question-and-answer period will follow his remarks.

Alienated Grandparents Anonymous provides information and support to grandparents who feel alienated or estranged from access to their grandchildren. For more information, visit the website or email the group at aga2_lwr@yahoo.com.