ENLARGE Police in Brazil haven't faced any serious trouble. Associated Press

Rio de Janeiro

After nearly a week of World Cup soccer, Brazil can breathe easy. Despite long lines, the occasional mugging, and some missed flights, the tournament is proving what many people suspected: That soccer and Brazil mix quite nicely.

From the hedonistic beaches of Rio to the steamy jungle near Manaus, Brazil is so far hosting the world's biggest sports tournament with only minor glitches, unmarred by widespread crime or the kind of protests that hit last year's Confederation's Cup contest, when a million Brazilians took to the streets to rail against the country's bad public services and government spending on the World Cup.

"Brazil has gotten a lot of bad press ahead of the Cup, but let me tell you, it is delivering everything I could hope for," said Deybi Mazuera, a 33-year-old Colombian who lives in Canada. "To be in the country of soccer, surrounded by natural beauty and just great, warm people, has been a dream."

Mazuera's only gripe was something that irks Brazilians: High prices thanks to a strong currency and an economy largely protected from imports.

Helping lift spirits is the action on the field, where teams are scoring goals at a relatively high clip. Only three games out of the first sixteen have produced fewer than three goals a game.

The protests so far have been small, limited to so-called Black Bloc activists. Some fear that could change if Brazil crash out of the tournament early, but others say that even then, the show will go on.

Not that there weren't headaches for visitors, from street crime to long lines. Many tourists are discovering what Brazilians already know: That this country—despite its aspirations to join the economic big leagues—is often a basket case when it comes to organization and advance planning.

The stadium in Natal, where the U.S. defeated Ghana late Monday, is still surrounded by the detritus of construction. Inside, there aren't enough concession stands—a complaint heard in many of the stadiums. Even after FIFA, soccer's international governing body, pushed Brazil to change its laws to allow stadiums to sell beer, the lack of concessions meant long lines.

"The beer line had a few hiccups," said Andy Veasey of Raleigh, N.C., who attended the Germany-Portugal match in Salvador's Fonte Nova stadium on Monday. Swiss fan Martina Tuchshmid waited an hour to get in to Brasilia's Mané Garrincha stadium on Sunday to watch Switzerland pull off a dramatic last-minute comeback against Ecuador. "Perhaps if it were better organized?" she suggested.

Security at the venues is as laid-back as Brazil's beach culture, say some visitors. Steven Black, a 30-year-old Scottish native, says he walked right into the VIP section of the stadium in Salvador and wasn't asked for identification.

For Europeans and Americans, the adjustment to Brazil's slower pace takes a few days. Toni Gruner, a 25-year-old business student from Greiz, Germany, summed it up: "The service level is very low. We must relax and get into the flow of the country."

Getting into the flow has proved easy for tens of thousands of fans who have hit the beaches daily in Rio, providing a party-like atmosphere around the clock. "Bevvin' it and watching bootie," was how 25-year-old England fan Nathan Bond described a recent day. spent a recent day.

Across the beach, thousands of fans from Argentina were drinking, singing, and joking with fans from Colombia and elsewhere, snarling traffic on the main drag on Copacabana's fabled beachfront. "It's not Argentina, of course, but Brazil's pretty nice," joked Simon Capella, a 24-year-old software programmer from Buenos Aires.

England fans who had traveled to Manaus with some trepidation on account of the remote location, the suffocating heat and the risk of malaria in the Amazon city said they were surprised to discover a comfortable and efficient World Cup host.

"It's all very different from what we expected," said David Leigh, from Burnley, who attended England's opener in Manaus with his wife on their 25th wedding anniversary.

Many fans took advantage of local tours of the rain forest or cruises along the Rio Negro.

"It was fabulous, we went on an Amazon river tour, had a brilliant time," said Mike Ruttledge, from Leeds.

Eric Campbell, a 47-year-old executive administrator originally from California sums up his view of the World Cup this way: "The organization is questionable. The people are fantastic/ If you can speak a few words (of Portuguese) they'll talk to you for an hour."

—Loretta Chao, Jonathan Clegg, Leslie Josephs and Patricia Kowsmann contributed to this article.