Stethoscope wrapped around hundred dollar bills (Photo: Getty Images/Creatas RF)

The rise in health care costs is beginning to slow for some southeast Michigan businesses. But not because health care is getting less expensive.

A new employer survey shows that businesses and government employers are dealing with the growing expense of employee health care by passing more of the costs on to workers and introducing high-deductible insurance plans.

If the trend continues, more employees could find themselves paying deductibles of $1,500 or more before health benefits fully kick in.

The survey, conducted and released last week by the Marsh & McLennan Agency in Troy, found that midsize employers in southeast Michigan would have faced an average 7% increase this year in their health care costs if they simply renewed their plan policies and did not pass the extra costs on to consumers.

Related: Marchers protest DPS reform plan, health care changes

But after making changes to their insurance offerings — including higher co-pays and greater deductibles — the employers narrowed that rate of increase to just 3%. The survey sampled 404 midsize area businesses and 51 municipalities and school districts with 100 to 5,000 workers.

"The 3% increase, while an increase, is the lowest we've seen in the last 10 years," said Rebecca McLaughlan, a vice president at Marsh & McLennan Agency.

The median deductible on a high-deductible plan is $1,500 for singles and $3,000 for families, according to Marsh & McLennan.

Jackson-based Dawn Foods, which is self-insured, has four health insurance options, two with high deductibles and lower premiums, that employees can choose. The company has 3,500 U.S. workers, including 600 in Michigan.

The survey identifies Dawn Foods as one of its "Trend Benders, which means it's part of a group that averaged a 5% decrease in its health care costs for its plans this year, and a 1.5% increase over the past two years.

Related: $130 a month: Retirees, Wayne Co. strike health care deal

The company introduced its first high-deductible plan in 2006 and only about 2% of employees chose it. Today, nearly 60% of employees are enrolled.

Dawn Foods also offers gym membership discounts, free wellness checkups and telemedicine options, among other initiatives aimed at promoting long-term health among employees and avoiding big medical bills in the future.

"Since we've adopted the education teams and walked them through the mathematics for each of the situations, we're down to like 20% in the traditional PPO (insurance plan)" said Brian Coleman, the company's director of benefits, compensation, payroll and human resource management.

"Fifty-eight percent of them are staying on that high deductible (plan) and love it," he said.

The survey found that more companies are mimicking Dawn Foods' approach in offering "consumer-driven health plans," which combine high deductibles and employee savings accounts to encourage employees to make more cost-conscious decisions about health care.

This year, 43% of the surveyed employers offer this plan option. Only 8% of employers in the annual survey did so in 2006.

The national rate for consumer-driven health plan offerings is 48%, according to Marsh & McLennan.

Workers who pick one of these consumer-driven plans get lower premiums in exchange for having "more skin in the game" by shouldering a large share of their medical costs before the insurance kicks in.

A 2011 Rand Corp. study found that families who switched to a consumer-driven plan spent an average of 21% less on health care during their first year under the plan than similar families who stayed in traditional plans.

About 60% of Michigan residents receive health care through an employer.

For the more traditional employer-provided insurance plans, average deductibles for PPO plans rose $87 this year among the businesses surveyed to $909 for singles and $194 for family coverage.

For HMO plans, 68% of employers surveyed now include a deductible, up from 59% in 2014, the survey found.

The overall 3% increase in costs for employers was higher than the U.S. 0.8% inflation rate for 2014, but still smaller than the typical year-over-year increase in health care spending levels that has been happening nationwide.

Health care spending overall rose 5% in 2014, a bit faster than it did during the years immediately following the recession but slower than the 6% to 9% annual increases that prevailed before the recession and the Affordable Care Act, according to data from Altarum Institute's Center for Sustainable Health Spending.

The midsize businesses in the Marsh & McLennan survey appear to be faring better under the new health care law than smaller Michigan businesses in the small group insurance market.

Mike Embry, president of Southfield-based agency Comprehensive Benefits, said area businesses that have fewer than 50 employees have been experiencing 15% to 25% rate increases once they move from their older health insurance plan to a more comprehensive plan that complies with the Affordable Care Act.

And once they make that transition to an ACA-compliant plan, the businesses then typically see renewal rates rise 4% to 8% each year, Embry said.

"In some cases the only groups that are avoiding sizable increases are the groups that are still staying with non-ACA plans," he said.

Embry anticipates seeing more businesses switch to a self-insured plan model because those plans do not need to comply with many of the new health law requirements, and therefore are cheaper.

Businesses that self-insure pay out money for their employees' health care claims, but still contract with an insurance company to process claims.

Rate of health plan cost increases (after plan changes) to midsize southeast Michigan businesses

2015 - 3%

2014 - 7%

2013 - 4%

2012 - 6%

2011 - 8%

2010 - 7%

2009 - 5%

2008 - 7%

2007 - 6%

2006 - 6%

2005 - 9%

Source: Marsh & McLennan annual surveys

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1MH1F3W