Click to email this to a friend (Opens in new window)

By Andrew Beaujon • November 19, 2013

President Obama attended the University of Maryland-Oregon State University basketball game Sunday, and KATU-TV anchor Anna Canzano asked viewers on Facebook: "Hi, it's Anna Canzano KATU. Does it bug you to see President Obama taking in college hoops with his family today (even if he was watching the OSU) ?"

Oregon State coach Craig Robinson is the president's brother-in-law.

"No. what does bug me is a news station baiting for angry comments," said one commenter. "As the Chair of the Multnomah County Republican Party, this doesn't bug me at all," wrote another.

Canzano also posted the question on Twitter:

Does it bug you to see President Obama taking in college hoops with his family today? #gobeavs #terps http://t.co/ITyEk4t28x — Anna Canzano (@AnnaCanzanoKATU) November 18, 2013

On Facebook, Canzano replied to some of the comments: "I ask the question because in light of a week in which our president did a mea culpa on the Obamacare roll-out and his approval rating is at an all time low, I wondered how these images would play and if public reaction to them would be positive or negative. That's all. No agenda. I personally think it's cool whenever he supports OSU."

In an email to Poynter, Canzano said, "I was trying to gauge public sentiment about the president -- much like I have countless times on Facebook with a variety of topics."

I wondered in light of the ACA problems he'd just apologized for if there would be blowback seeing him enjoy downtime -- the way other presidents have been scrutinized during challenging times for their administrations. It doesn't mean his presence at the OSU Beavers game bugged me -- it actually didn't. Anyone who knows me understands I don't personally have any political agendas against Obama or anyone else. As a journalist, I am an equal opportunity skeptic and critic.

Indeed, Canzano frequently uses her social media accounts to pose questions (here's another on Facebook), though they're not always as provocative.

Does the world's 1st 3D-printed METAL gun excite you / concern you / neither? PHOTO #LiveonK2 at 11 http://t.co/M3UAxdYNvp — Anna Canzano (@AnnaCanzanoKATU) November 18, 2013

Gov. Chris Christie's acceptance speech was more like an announcement speech. Could you see him as president? http://t.co/eWoN2AuHOS — Anna Canzano (@AnnaCanzanoKATU) November 6, 2013