BALTIMORE — Denver’s latest trip to the lacrosse Final Four ended much the same way its first two did.

The potent Pioneers encountered one of the few offenses as loaded as they are, absorbing a 15-12 loss to top-seeded Duke in the NCAA Tournament semifinals at M&T Bank Stadium.

Attackman Wesley Berg scored five goals for fifth-seeded Denver (16-3), which fell in the semifinals for the third time in the last four seasons.

“We have so many weapons on their offense as well, so I kind of look at them as us,” said DU midfielder Jeremy Noble, whose team’s 13-game winning streak was halted. “They have so many weapons, and anyone on any given day can have a great day, and they all had a great day offensively.”

Kyle Keenan scored four goals and Jordan Wolf added three goals and two assists for Duke (16-3).

Keenan stepped in for injured attackman Josh Dionne to make his first start since 2012, and his effectiveness only reinforced how capable the entire Duke offense is.

“We knew they were going to get their goals,” DU coach Bill Tierney said. “I thought the ones that hurt us were in the middle of the field. In a short week, we probably didn’t do as good a job as we should have to prepare for that full-field action.”

Nonetheless, fifth-seeded Denver nearly climbed out of a five-goal hole against the defending national champions. The Pioneers cut a 10-5 deficit to 11-10, in the process chasing Duke goalie Luke Aaron. The teams then swapped goals, with Zach Miller pulling Denver within 12-11 with 11:09 to play.

The Pioneers almost tied it with 10:08 to go when Berg tried to one-time a deftly placed pass at the goalmouth. However, he never controlled the pass, and the ball trickled into the crease, and Keenan scored less than two minutes later to re-establish a multigoal lead for Duke.

“They had a phenomenal game plan and executed it well, but I thought we had our chances,” Noble said. “I thought offensively we had a chance to win the game. We hit a few pipes, dropped a couple passes. That was the difference in the game.”

Denver didn’t enjoy nearly the same success against Duke backup goalie Kyle Turri, who made four stops in less than a quarter of work. The Blue Devils’ defense also stiffened, especially after Duke rattled off three consecutive goals to establish a four-goal edge.

Tyler Pace chipped into that deficit with his score with 6:29 to go, but the Pioneers couldn’t generate many quality chances after expending so much effort to make it a close game again.

“We never felt out of it,” Tierney said. “We felt we made that run. You get to one, you’re either going to win if you score the next goal, or it might be too much having done that. That’s what happened today.”

The Blue Devils will face sixth-seeded Notre Dame (12-5), an 11-6 winner over No. 7 Maryland, in Monday’s final.