Gail Donovan (Photo: Provided)

Welcome to Cincinnati Health Briefs, a quick dose of news from around Cincinnati coming to you on Mondays. Got a story tip or a smart remark? Twitter @apsaker, asaker@enquirer.com or 513/768-8489.

TriHealth has a new executive vice president and chief operating officer. Gail Donovan of New York City starts her new job Dec. 1.

Mark Clement, TriHealth's president and interim chief executive officer, made the announcement last week. Donovan replaces Jerry Oliphant, who left TriHealth last month. Donovan will have responsibility over all health system operations.

Clement said Donovan "has continually demonstrated the ability to successfully lead complex organizations in challenging markets by fostering teamwork, integration and patient centered operations in a rapidly changing healthcare environment."

Donovan has more than 30 years of experience as a healthcare executive, most of that time at Continuum Health Partners in New York. Most recently, she was chief hospital operations officer for Mount Sinai Health System in New York City, a system created in 2013 when the Mount Sinai Medical Center merged with Continuum Health Partners.

Before the merger, she served for 13 years as executive vice president and chief operating officer for Continuum, a New York City system including Beth Israel Medical Center, St. Luke's, Roosevelt Hospital Center and New York Eye and Ear Infirmary.

She earned a bachelor's of science degree from Villanova University in business administration and her master's in health services administration from George Washington University. She is married and has two grown children. She has earned the Healthcare Leaders of New York Award of Distinction, named by Modern Healthcare as one of the Top 25 Women in Healthcare, and ranked among Crain's New York 50 Most Powerful Women in the State.

Obamacare open enrollment opens again

Time has arrived again for enrollment in health insurance. Sunday, the gates opened for the third year of the Affordable Care Act. Faith leaders in Cincinnati have launched the "Souls to Enroll" push across the city to connect the uninsured with free enrollment assistance at their place of worship. Working with the city's clergy is Enroll America, the nonprofit that has worked to help Ohioans use healthcare.gov to obtain health insurance.

"Sunday is the first day that the uninsured can enroll in private coverage through the health insurance marketplace and those who purchased coverage last year can renew their coverage for 2016," said Trey Daly, Ohio state director for Enroll America. "That's why we're teaming up with faith leaders across the state the make sure that this Sunday, Ohioans can learn about their coverage options in a setting of comfort – their place of worship."

Assisters will be on hand during the "Souls to Enroll" event in churches around Cincinnati to talk about the tools and services available to get enrolled. For more information on in-person assistance in navigating the insurance marketplace, visit getcoveredamerica.org/connector.

Open enrollment runs through Jan. 31.

OHC partners on research with The Jewish Hospital

OHC, a major local provider of treatment for adult cancer and blood disorders, is now partnering on research with the Blood Cancer Center at The Jewish Hospital ‑ Mercy Health. OHC's blood and bone marrow specialists already provide the center's medical directorship and oversight. The research partnership opens study participation opportunities for patients.

"Our program is the only accredited center for autologous (from a relative) and allogeneic (from an unrelated donor) transplantation for adults in Cincinnati and the Tri-State region," said Dr. James H. Essell, OHC medical oncologist/hematologist and medical director of The Blood Cancer Center. "This partnership with OHC and the Sarah Cannon Research Institute strengthens our research program and interdisciplinary model of care from the time of diagnosis, during treatment, and follow-up."

Last year, The Jewish Hospital Blood Cancer Center performed 118 transplants, and it has completed more than 1,900 since opening in 1993. Each year, the team treats an average of 120 new patients with acute leukemia and high-grade lymphoma with procedures including autologous, allogeneic, syngeneic (from an identical twin) and haplo-identical (half matched donor) transplants.

Last year, The Jewish Hospital Blood Cancer Center enrolled more than 45 patients in clinical trials.

Health fairs around the city

Opportunities abound on Nov. 7 for health screenings.

* Cincinnati Sports Club, 3950 Red Bank Road, is hosting the annual Get Healthy! Health Fair, Family Fun Fest and Open House from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Presented with The Christ Hospital, the fair is free and open to the public.

Interactive events and engaging activities designed to help attendees become engaged in an active lifestyle include wellness demonstrations including yoga, Zumba, stretching and dance; experts discussing health and wellness topics; cooking demonstrations and healthy food samples; health screenings for skin cancer and blood pressure; analysis of body fat percentage and BMI; flu shots; fitness competitions, and activities for children.

* The Arlington Memorial Gardens, 2145 Compton Road, is hosting a free veteran's health and wellness fair from 10 a.m.to noon in the Community Room. Dan Applegate, president of the gardens, said the event is being held in honor of Veteran's Day. Free activities include flu shots; blood sugar and blood pressure tests; spinal, ear and memory screenings; massage; fitness and nutrition specialists; the Mercy Mobile Mammography Unit (call 513-686-3300 to schedule a screening), and benefits information for veterans, spouses and widows (bring your DD214.)

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1MrX83R