The outbreak of Zika virus is worse than originally expected, Obama administration officials that are leading the repose to the outbreak told reporters Monday.

“Most of what we’re learning is not reassuring,” Anne Schuchat, principal deputy director of the Centers for Disease Control, said Monday at the White House press briefing.

“Everything we look at with this virus seems to be a little bit scarier than we initially thought,” she added.

Schuchat estimated hundreds of thousands of Zika cases could occur in Puerto Rico, but said she couldn’t estimate how many people in the continental U.S. may become infected.

Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases at the National Institutes of Health, said he doesn’t currently have the resources needed to prepare for the outbreak, which is expected to worsen as much of the continental U.S. approaches mosquito season.

“When the president asked for $1.9 billion, we needed $1.9 billion,” Fauci said.

Last week, the administration announced it would transfer more than $500 million that had been allocated for Ebola to prepare for Zika, but maintained that money needed to be replaced, and that more was still needed for Zika. Fauci said he does not currently have the resources needed to fight Zika.

“What I’ve done is take money from other areas of non-Zika research to start,” Fauci said. “We couldn’t just stop and wait for the money.”

Funding that the agency is currently planning to go toward areas such as malaria and tuberculosis next year are, for now, going towards Zika, he said.

Not having funding could also make it harder for the government to work with pharmaceutical companies to develop a vaccine or diagnostic, Fauci added.

“If they don’t perceive us as a reliable partner, they tend to back off a bit,” he said. “We won’t be able to develop these counter measures on our own.”

White House Press Secretary echoed Fauci’s call for Congress to fund the administration’s request, and said he hoped Fauci’s and Schuchat’s appearance at the briefing would help motivate Congress to act on the request.

“We have not seen the kind of response from Congress that we would expect, and frankly we haven’t been the kind of response from Congress that is clearly in the interest of the safety and wellbeing of the American people,” he said.