Joseph (Joe) D. Meckle, DC

Age: 55

Occupation: Doctor of Chiropractic (chiropractor )

How many years have you been in the St. Vrain Valley? 30-plus. I opened my practice, Lyons Chiropractic Clinic during Thanksgiving week of 1984. I've been practicing continuously here since .

What brought you here? What has kept you here? Beautiful Colorado is where we wanted to raise our family. I realized very soon that I was drawn to a small town setting. We were just a young couple at that time. We opened the doors in Lyons and have been here ever since. Lyons is the coolest town with great people. It has outdoor activities, and it is just home.

What's your office's particular approach? At our office, we practice traditional hands-on chiropractic care. We treat the spine and extremities. If it's a moveable joint I am glad to evaluate the area . Also we see the issues spinal problems have on the nervous system — radiating symptoms in arms and legs, headaches. If we find your problem isn't one we can help with we will refer you out immediately. I say we because the assistants I work with are just great professionals. They take really good care of people. I make it a point to new patients that if we can help you and your in the right place you will know in one to three visits. Most patients seek out a doctor because they have a problem — something hurts, isn't functioning well.

You were one of many impacted by the flood of 2013. How's the recovery coming? Certainly this past year and a half has been a test. My home/office was on Park Street in the river confluence neighborhood. It took a big hit. In the midst of a total rebuild. Coming along thanks to the awesome people of Lyons and along the whole Front Range who are such dedicated volunteers out there every week helping anyone who is still trying to get back in their homes. One realizes how super lucky they are to be part of such a community when tough times hit. So I think I got a cool job in a great community. Or is it a great job in a cool community? Works either way. Just lucky.