Two years have passed since Congress enacted the American Taxpayer Relief Act (ATRA), which increased the federal estate and gift tax exemption to $5 million (indexed annually for inflation) and the maximum estate, gift, and generation-skipping transfer (GST) tax rates from 35 percent to 40 percent.

For 2015, taking into account the inflation adjustment, the federal estate and gift tax exemption is $5.43 million for each individual, or $10.86 million for a married couple. The ATRA also made permanent the portability feature introduced in 2010. The portability provisions allow a surviving spouse to combine the deceased spouse’s unused exemption with the surviving spouse’s exemption, thereby effectively assuring that married couples utilize their full exemptions.

With respect to the federal income tax, the ATRA increased the top individual income tax rate from 35 percent to 39.6 percent and the top capital gains rate from 15 percent to 20 percent. In addition, the Affordable Health Care and Patient Protection Act (commonly referred to as “Obamacare”) added the 3.8 percent income tax on net investment income (NII). Therefore, taking into account the 3.8 percent tax, the top federal individual income tax rate can reach 43.4 percent for ordinary income, and the top rate on dividends and long-term capital gains can reach 23.8 percent.

The 3.8 percent tax only applies to individual taxpayers whose modified adjusted gross income exceeds $200,000, or $250,000 for married taxpayers filing jointly. The 3.8 percent tax also applies to trusts when the adjusted gross income of the trust exceeds $12,150.

Because of the ATRA, the increase in the federal estate and gift tax exemptions, coupled with the increase in the top individual income tax rates, has now shifted the focus of estate planning to include income tax planning.

Two Income Tax-Planning Strategies to Consider

Traditionally, estate tax rates exceeded income tax rates, but the ATRA has closed that gap significantly. Now, individuals are well-advised to consider income tax-planning strategies where they had not done so previously. Here are two approaches:

Trending {{item['sft-title']}}

1. Assign income from a taxpayer in a high-income tax bracket to a taxpayer in a lower bracket: For example, gifting income-producing assets to a complex trust allows the trust to shift taxable income to beneficiaries in lower tax brackets. Given that complex trusts reach the top 39.6 percent income tax bracket and are subject to the 3.8 percent tax on NII on only $12,150 of taxable income, trustees of complex trusts should consider distributing taxable income to trust beneficiaries who are in a lower tax bracket and are not subject to the additional 3.8 percent tax on NII.

When a complex trust distributes its income, the trust is permitted a deduction for that distribution, and such income is shifted to the beneficiary. The income shifted would also generally retain its character. Even if a beneficiary is in the top marginal income tax bracket, the beneficiary may not be exposed to the 3.8 percent tax on NII.

2. Avoid the phase-out of itemized deductions and personal exemptions: By reducing one’s income, taxpayers may be able to decrease the phase-outs of itemized deductions and personal exemptions. In general, itemized deductions are based on a percentage of the individual’s adjusted gross income. For example, the overall limit on itemized deductions is reduced by the 3 percent phase-out, and miscellaneous itemized deductions are allowed only to the extent they exceed 2 percent of adjusted gross income.

If a taxpayer could reduce his or her gross income, the taxpayer may be able to reduce or eliminate the phase-out of certain deductions, including charitable deductions. For instance, taxpayers who make recurring and predictable annual charitable donations should consider creating a non-grantor charitable lead annuity trust (CLAT) to ensure that the charitable deduction is fully utilized. Because a non-grantor CLAT is a taxpayer separate from its settlor, the income generated by the asset that was contributed to the CLAT would be shifted to the CLAT, thereby reducing the settlor’s adjusted gross income. The CLAT would receive a corresponding deduction for its yearly charitable donations without being subject to any phase-outs or percentage limitations.

The Shift in Planning with Respect to Tax Basis

Historically, estate-planning professionals had a simple goal when it came to estate tax planning: to shift as much out of their clients’ gross estate in order to reduce or limit the exposure to estate tax. However, in light of the higher federal income tax rates, estate planners must now focus on the type of assets owned by their clients (i.e., cash, marketable securities, real estate, closely held businesses) and inquire regarding the tax basis of each asset.

In general, when an individual gifts an asset during life, the basis in the asset in the hands of the donee remains the same as it was in the hands of the donor at the time of the gift. Alternatively, when an individual dies, the tax basis of the assets owned by the decedent receive a “step-up” in basis at death to the asset’s then-fair market value. Therefore, upon the death of an individual, the legatee receives the asset with a “stepped-up basis.” As a result, after reviewing each asset and its tax basis, the estate planner and the client may well determine that certain assets should remain in the client’s gross estate in order to receive the step-up in basis at death. When formulating an estate plan, it is now common for the income tax analysis to trump the estate tax concerns of the client.

The enactment of the ATRA and the permanency of the federal estate, gift, and GST tax rates and exemptions have magnified the importance of personal income tax planning in the estate-planning arena. As the inflation adjustments to the exemption amounts continue to reduce the number of taxpayers subject to federal estate tax, an increasing number of individuals will seek income tax-planning advice.

About the authors:

Seth R. Kaplan is a partner and Joshua N. Goldglantz is an associate in the Wealth Preservation and Tax Planning Group of Florida business law firm Berger Singerman LLP.