ANDERSON – A group of Central Indiana women delivered donations Friday to a grieving pregnant mother who recently lost her husband in a car accident. The couple had ten children.

Oscar Cardenas, 37, Anderson was one of two men who died on the way to work Wednesday.

He was riding in the passenger seat in a GMC Jimmy with three others. Authorities said 29-year-old Lukas Green was driving a 2000 Chevrolet Cavalier south on State Road 9 when he crossed the centerline south of County Road 1300 N and struck the GMC Jimmy head-on.

Green was flown to IU Health Methodist Hospital in critical condition. Antonio Perez, who was driving the GMC Jimmy, and Cardenas were pronounced dead at the scene.

“I heard one of the two in front breathing for their last breath,” recalled 17-year-old Kyle Kress who was riding in the back of the GMC Jimmy.

Kress was also flown to an area hospital in critical condition. He could barely stand as he told Fox 59 what happened.

“Scariest moments I’ve ever seen or heard,” he recalled.

In the midst of her grief, Cardenas’ wife Amalia spoke to Fox 59 about the moment she found out her husband had passed.

“I didn’t want to believe it,” she said. “I was waiting for somebody to come and tell me ‘No, you know, we made a mistake.’ But when they showed me his ID, then I knew it was him.”

Now she is the sole parent of ten children and she’s pregnant with twins, due any day.

She is getting help from family, friends and strangers. A group of local women who help struggling families in the Anderson area collected food, clothes and items for the Cardenas family.

“I couldn’t imagine. I just couldn’t imagine,” said Kelli Cave. She is a member of One Families Junk is Another’s Treasure! and Hidden Treasures-Free Group on Facebook.

Fox 59 was there when she and others delivered the collected goods to the Cardenas family.

“It won’t make the grief go away, but maybe a little bit of stress taken away? That’s what we want to do,” Cave said.

Even in her most helpless moment, this act of kindness gave Cardenas some hope that things would work out for her children.

“They will be okay,” she said. “That’s one thing that I’m gonna promise my husband… that they will be okay.”

Both groups continue to collect donations for the Cardenas family and funeral costs. If you would like to help, please contact the group administrators via Facebook.