For President Barack Obama's last State of the Union address, he chose to sell optimism, instead of policies. The president touted his accomplishments during his two-term presidencies, including progress on the economy, climate change, social issues and, of course, his signature health care law.

But not all Americans are optimistic about the state of the country. In fact, most aren't, according to a recent poll. Only 28 percent of registered voters said the country was strong and confident right now, while 71 percent said it wasn't. Even among Obama's greatest supporters, there wasn't a strong majority saying the country was strong and confident.



Thursday night's Republican debate will be the first chance for the 2016 GOP presidential candidates to respond in a coordinated way to Obama's address. The Republican debate participants – front-runner Donald Trump, Sens. Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio, retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson, Govs. Chris Christie, Jeb Bush and John Kasich – will need to convince Americans the president was wrong, and that they can make it right again to win the debate.

Here are the areas the Republicans should focus on:

The Economy





Obama said in his speech: "Let me start with the economy, and a basic fact: the United States of America, right now, has the strongest, most durable economy in the world...Anyone claiming that America’s economy is in decline is peddling fiction."



The economy is a safe issue for both Democrats and Republicans because there are no black-and-white conclusions. Analysts can't say without qualifiers if the economy is good or bad; up or down. The unemployment rate is down, but there are less people in the workforce. Jobs in the private sector are growing, but wages aren't.

The polls also reflect this uncertainty — Americans are largely split on the economy. In the Fox News poll, 49 percent say they are somewhat or strongly optimistic about the economy, while the same say they are somewhat or strongly pessimistic. While 85 percent of Republicans say the Obama Administration failed at stimulating the economy, 72 percent of Democrats say it succeeded, reflecting a strong party divide.

Confidence in the economy has waned in the last year, according to Gallup.



Gallup

Republicans onstage tonight will concentrate on the negative aspects of the economy in order to draw a divide between themselves and the Democrats — President Obama, as well as Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton.

National Security





"I told you earlier all the talk of America’s economic decline is political hot air. Well, so is all the rhetoric you hear about our enemies getting stronger and America getting weaker. The United States of America is the most powerful nation on Earth. Period. It’s not even close."



This is the safest issue for Republicans, and one that will likely play heavily into the debate. Squelching the threat of terrorism is first on Americans' priority lists for the new president, according to Gallup surveys. It's also an area where Americans turn to the Republican Party. According to a Jan. 4-7 poll, 43 percent of Republican primary and caucus voters say that "national security, such as ensuring a strong military and America's position in the world" is the most important factor in deciding their vote for a Republican nominee.

According to the poll, 60 percent of registered voters say the Obama Administration failed at improving the country's image around the world, 65 percent said the administration failed at handling the Islamic State Group and 58 percent said it failed at making the country safer. A whopping 91 percent of Republicans said the administration failed at handling the Islamic State Group.



Lindsey Cook for USN&WR; Fox News Poll of Registered Voters, Jan. 4-7, 2016

Americans unhappy with the policies of the administration toward Islamic terrorism in the Middle East will look toward the Republicans on the debate stage for leadership, especially to Trump and Cruz, who currently lead the polls.

Health Care





"That’s what the Affordable Care Act is all about. It’s about filling the gaps in employer-based care so that when we lose a job, or go back to school, or start that new business, we’ll still have coverage. Nearly 18 million have gained coverage so far. Health care inflation has slowed. And our businesses have created jobs every single month since it became law."



Obama's signature health law has lead to millions of Americans gaining health insurance. But that doesn't mean it's popular, especially among Republicans.

Only 41 percent of Americans say the Obama Administration succeeded at improving health care, compared with 53 percent who said it didn't, according to the Fox News poll. Among Republicans, 85 percent said the administration failed at improving health care.

In a New York Times/CBS poll, a plurality of Americans said they strongly disapproved of the health care law.