Other bills would block the Food and Drug Administration from reviewing e-cigarette marketing and keep the Federal Communications Commission from carrying out “net neutrality” regulation of the Internet. A “conscience” rider would let employers in the District of Columbia refuse health insurance coverage for any service on moral grounds, and hire and fire based on women’s use of health services.

The White House has vowed to veto each of the dozen spending bills in the works, and Senate Democrats have pledged to filibuster before they can even reach the president.

“Frankly, the fall is shaping up to be the most predictable — and, really, avoidable — budget crisis in memory,” said Representative Nita M. Lowey of New York, the ranking Democrat on the House Appropriations Committee.

Two changes have combined to make this budget season particularly contentious. The first is Republican control of Congress. Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, said the appropriations process was a way for Republicans to block new White House efforts and roll back old ones.

The other change is budgetary. After a protracted fight over raising the government’s statutory borrowing limit, Congress and Mr. Obama agreed in 2011 to strict spending limits for domestic and defense programs that would last a decade, absent a larger budget deal that overhauled the federal tax code and entitlement programs like Medicare. In the face of those limits, Representative Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin, and Senator Patty Murray, Democrat of Washington, negotiated a two-year budget deal to lift the caps.

With the reprieve ending Oct. 1 and Democrats no longer in control of the Senate, Republicans approved a budget this spring demanding adherence to the 2011 restrictions.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“The Appropriations Committee in the Senate is reporting out bills consistent with the budget that the Senate passed, and we’re going to move forward,” Mr. McConnell said last month.

With Democrats promising to vote against any bill that sticks to those limits, Republican appropriators have had to shift spending bills to the right to win the support of Congress’s most conservative members. Mr. Cole called the 10 bills that have passed the Appropriations Committee “the opening position in a negotiation” that has yet to begin.

But that position has only strengthened the president’s resolve.

Compounding the problem is the fact that the government will be nearing its statutory borrowing limit in late September, when Pope Francis is to be in Washington, heightening tensions around cuts to social welfare programs.

Senior House Appropriations Committee members, including the panel’s chairman, Representative Harold Rogers of Kentucky, have already told Republican leaders that the time to negotiate a way out of the impasse is now, not in the shadow of the papal visit or a government shutdown Oct. 1, said Representative Charlie Dent, Republican of Pennsylvania and a subcommittee chairman.

Short of that, appropriators will press for quick passage in September of a “continuing resolution” to keep the government funded at current levels through December and begin budget talks.

“We all know there’s going to have to be a short-term C.R. to take us from September to December,” Mr. Dent said. “And I would hope sometime between now and then, we’ll have a negotiated budget agreement.”

But so far, Republican leaders have said little.

“We’ve got a plan that gives him what he wants for defense and keeps the caps in place,” Speaker John A. Boehner said, referring to Mr. Obama’s military spending request, which Congress plans to meet by increasing emergency war funding not subject to the 2011 limits. “And if he wants to have a budget negotiation, all he has to do is ask. I’m a pretty reasonable guy.”

What the president sees as unreasonable are the bills being drafted to adhere to the caps.

House Republican legislation would either reduce full-day, full-year service for 570,000 young children in Head Start or cut 140,000 children from the program altogether, the White House budget office said. That bill would also cut $6.4 billion from the president’s education spending request, and $370 million from the Pell Grant higher education program.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Funding for job training would be almost $500 million less than the White House requested. The National Labor Relations Board’s budget would be cut by nearly a third.

Family planning would be all but eliminated. National service programs would be cut 42 percent. The Environmental Protection Agency’s operation budget would fall $474 million, or 13 percent. The federal Land and Water Conservation Fund would lose $152 million, or 38 percent. Cuts to the National Park Service as it prepares to celebrate its centennial would delay about 70 percent of its construction projects and more than a third of its repair and rehabilitation efforts.

To the Republicans drafting those bills, the cuts are about priorities. The same health and labor bill would increase spending on the National Institutes of Health by more than $1 billion and protect the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Higher education aid would be focused on historically black colleges, predominantly Hispanic universities and tribal education.

“The reality is we still live in a divided government,” Mr. Cole said. “It’s not as if the Democrats can be shut out, but they can’t dictate to us any more than we can dictate to them. It’s time to sit down and see if we can make a deal.”