Buy Photo Amanda Moore, who telecommutes from Murfreesboro, works as director of online content and communication for the Clearinghouse Review, the nation’s leading journal for poverty law. (Photo: John A. Gillis/DNJ)Buy Photo

Amanda Moore was born a coal miner's granddaughter.

"Well more like a coal truck driver's granddaughter," she said with a laugh.

Now the Yale Law School graduate is the director of online content and communication for the Clearinghouse Review, the nation's leading journal for poverty law. Moore telecommutes from her home in Murfreesboro.

Published by the Sargent Shriver National Center on Poverty Law, the legal journal provides a resource for legal-aid attorneys across the Unied States, connecting professionals who see similar issues affecting the poor from coast to coast. The center has offices in Boston and Chicago.

"Ideally what we are doing is building an online community between legal-aid lawyers," Moore, 39, said, noticeably brightening.

Moore's passion for the downtrodden grew from her eastern Kentucky coal-mining roots. They drew her to environmental law as an undergraduate at Western Kentucky University and led her to Yale Law School and back to coal country as an environmental and poverty lawyer.

Originally from Benton, Kentucky, near Paducah, Moore started her legal career on the other side of the Bluegrass State at the Appalachian Citizens Law Center in Whitesburg, Kentucky.

The nonprofit legal center focuses on the environmental and personal issues surrounding coal mining.

Moore helped miners with black lung disease benefit, mine safety and also environmental issues, Moore said, explaining there were many issues with the water supply from runoff from coal mining.

"I loved that job. You had to get out and see the hollers and coal mining towns," she said.

But then she had two children—Henry, 9, and Ada, 7—with her husband Jason Vance, information literacy librarian at MTSU.

"I was on the road all the time. I just couldn't do it after Henry was born," Moore said.

So she got a job teaching in Kentucky. Then Vance was offered a job at MTSU.

"We decided to move closer to family and ended up here," she said, pointing out that she's only a two- hour drive from her hometown but in Whitesburg, near the Virginia border, she was more than six hours away.

At first Moore taught legal writing and research at MTSU and landed a job telecommuting from Murfreesboro as a part-time senior attorney-legal editor for the Shriver Center.

Named in honor of the activist Sargent Shriver, the center advocates for policy changes in a range of issues affecting the poor, Moore explained, including health care, housing, economic opportunity and justice, and domestic and sexual violence.

Shriver was a married to Eunice Kennedy, the sister of John, Robert and Ted Kennedy. He served in both the Kennedy and Johnson administration and was a driving force behind the creation of the Peace Corps and War of Poverty.

As part of its mission, the center publishes "Clearinghouse Review: Journal of Poverty Law and Policy," which connects legal-aid advocates from across the nation, like the attorneys from the Murfreesboro office of the Legal Aid Society of Middle Tennessee and the Cumberlands.

"I must admit that I do not use it a lot. However, when I do, I find it to have insightful, practical, well-researched articles," Andrae Crismon, managing attorney for Legal Aid Society's Murfreesboro office.

In particular, Crismon found recent articles on the Affordable Care Act to be useful in his work in Middle Tennessee. He also said he reached out to Moore when he needed research resources.

"In the brief time that I have known Amanda, I have come to know her as a very bright lawyer who very diligently stays abreast and informed of the leading practice areas impacting the less fortunate," he said. "She has also provided me tips on a research topic that I was looking into."

Providing tips and resources to legal-aid attorneys on the front lines is Moore's main goal at the "Clearinghouse Review."

"I keep up on issues that legal-aid attorneys are seeing," she said.

Then she finds someone to write about it for the journal, so other lawyers and advocates across the nation can find the resources they need.

Moore said the issues tend to transcend state lines.

It doesn't matter if it's Tennessee, Kentucky or Oregon, people living in poverty have legal issues with housing, disability benefits, public assistance and debt collections.

"We're looking at more than a case-by-case basis. We're looking for bigger solutions, policy solutions to these issues," Moore said, and she's working on those finding solutions to those issues from the comfort of her home office in Murfreesboro.

Read or Share this story: http://on.dnj.com/1BbnsgL