On September 04, 2014, healthcare technology and media startup, HEALTHPURE, Inc. partnered with South Florida based private equity group, Linden Growth Partners LP, to fuel the company’s growth in the consumer health information and data market.

HEALTHPURE vows to make sense of healthcare in the consumer market by offering consumers access to information and tools that allow them to make sense of, and control, their own health and wellness by:

1. providing access to relevant health related information,

2. creating health related social communities with like-minded members,

3. aggregating and simplifying complex personal health information, including personal medical records and

4. selling health and wellness related products and services via an e-commerce platform.

“In the wake the Affordable Care Act rollout, we are creating a culture of health empowerment within our platform that will allow the average person to improve their understanding of their own healthcare and health related issues through the use of simple, private and engaging web, tablet or smartphone applications," says HEALTHPURE President, Erik Lohmeier.

While billions are spent each year on health information, very little of it is targeted to the general consumer. Peter Voghel, HEALTHPURE’s Chairman states, “With the advent of competitive shopping for health coverage and the tremendous amount of upheaval in the market brought on by the launch of the Affordable Care Act this year, we knew the time was right to launch a consumer targeted tool and sought an investment partner that saw the same opportunity.”

HEALTHPURE is now partnered with Linden Growth Partners, a targeted venture capital and private equity firm with deep experience investing in Biotechnology, Healthcare and Wellness companies. “To date, the bulk of our portfolio investments have been in companies that target other businesses.

HEALTPURE’s approach really addresses a void in the marketplace and we knew the timing was right to invest in a consumer-oriented company offering solutions to very real market-driven problems” says Paul Coviello, Managing Director for Linden Growth Partners. The company plans to launch its full suite of tools to the market later this year.