Budget hit: Ending Holger Osieck's term as Socceroos coach has been costly. Photo: Getty Images

There are three considerations regarding the Socceroos' coaching position. Quality, suitability and affordability. To that shortly, but first, a comment about the discussion to date. It has been embarrassing. As with recent political contests, it has raced to the lowest common denominator at a frightening speed.

Comments that local coaches are preferable because they ''care more'', ''bleed for the shirt'' and have to live in this country, meaning they are supposedly more committed to the role, are cringeworthy.

Emotions are running high after recent losses, which hurt all those who love the team and game, that we have descended into a ridiculous discussion instead of debating the merits of the different scenarios. By the same reasoning, our own coaches are landlocked as, by going abroad and becoming mercenaries - passionless foreigners - they would be the very worst of things, hypocrites.

By extension, every imported chief executive of a multinational should leave as we repatriate our own countrymen, all themselves frauds. I hope few are reading our coverage abroad. If so, please understand I am not the only person here who is embarrassed by such views.

Advertisement

This is where - although it is wonderful to see vigorous coverage around the national team - too many journalists from other sports - rugby league and AFL in particular - are waving the flag with no understanding of the global nature of our game.

The Socceroos don't compete against a handful of countries in which we are a traditional stronghold, nor in a domestic market where there are 20 coaches in the entire world. The team operates in a highly competitive, international market and this is the standard to which we have spent the past decade trying to aspire. It has not always gone well, for many different reasons, mostly political or due to poor implementation.

After obvious team problems were revealed against Brazil and France, the knee-jerk reaction is a call for pride and passion. Remember, when knees jerk, they usually hit someone in the face. English fans must be rolling in the aisles. They have been caught in this spin cycle for years, going round and round, from foreign quality to local passion, to foreign quality, instead of simply educating their players and coaches to the very highest standards until they can compete on the same level, which is what we have committed to do.

Secondly, the Socceroos' recent results have suddenly become about a lack of passion and commitment amid vociferous attacks on players, including the captain. Have we just morphed into the English press? The problems with the Socceroos have been selection (including regeneration), team organisation and the desired approach - so be careful, for if an Australian coach suffers a heavy defeat, do we also make the same vacuous accusations against the players, that they lack passion and commitment?

Besides, did the players lack ''pride'' against Iraq when they scored in the dying moments? Perhaps they lacked ''commitment'' against Japan when gaining a point away from home and setting up ultimate qualification?

I distinctly remember everyone lauding the legendary Socceroos spirit in the group at that time, just months ago. I did. How short, the memory. We used to have bucket loads of commitment when we were above 50 in the world, then we started to get organised.

So perhaps running and fighting more is not the answer but only the basic starting point. We really should be beyond this already.

I have spent considerable column inches and air time reminding how much all of our coaches have progressed, and will continue to do so with overwhelming pleasure, and I will continue to advocate higher and higher standards. The A-League is at its highest level and is growing beautifully, and having our players admired and respected is magnificent for the game, precisely what we had dreamed of and championed.

Now the discussion has turned in the wrong direction.

A new education structure has been put in place to ensure Australian coaches will be ready, at which time an important strategic goal will have been accomplished, and views will always differ on when that time has arrived. I think we have more learning to do. This may be a moot point at any rate because of the affordability issue after the not inconsiderable cost of terminating Holger Osieck's contract, but they are more qualified and skilled than at any time in the past and this is something to celebrate. This provides great motivation for further progress.

So, not to spoil the party but, if I can perhaps add one request to the mix with as much ''pride'' and ''commitment'' as I can muster, let us reposition the discussion to its proper focal points.

Twitter - @Craig_Foster