As 2015 draws closer, the Jan. 1 deadline for Obamacare's employer mandate looms larger over many small businesses. With the clock ticking, a major New York-based foundation has decided to invest a substantial sum in one Silicon Alley health tech startup.

Manhattan-based BeneStream will announce Monday that it has received a $1.5 million program-related investment from the Ford Foundation. The deal is structured as a low-interest loan aimed at helping BeneStream capitalize on the Affordable Care Act mandate that requires businesses with more than 50 full-time equivalent employees to provide health insurance, or pay a monthly penalty. BeneStream helps companies expedite and simplify the process of enrolling eligible low-wage workers in Medicaid.

"It's a very interesting time, and an exciting one," said BeneStream's CEO, Benjamin Geyerhahn.

BeneStream will use the new funding to expand its operations to additional states. Mr. Geyerhahn estimates that his company might help identify and enroll 2 million people—a mission that dovetails perfectly with the Ford Foundation's message of improving social welfare.

"This is a great opportunity for low-income workers to receive the health security they deserve," Helen Neuborne, the Ford Foundation's director of quality employment, said in a statement. "This investment is to ensure that as broad a range of Medicaid-eligible individuals as possible are able to receive the appropriate health care coverage."

Mr. Geyerhahn believes a large portion of employees in certain industries—like hospitality and home health care—will qualify for Medicaid. His company charges subscribers a one-time $40 registration fee and a $200 annual maintenance fee for each employee. By identifying low-income staffers eligible for Medicaid, BeneStream argues that it is charging relative pennies on the dollar to help companies avoid thousands of dollars in possible ACA penalties.

The relationship between BeneStream and the Ford Foundation goes back to 2011, when Mr. Geyerhahn actually put the company together, using a $200,000 grant from the organization. When he raised a $1.58 million seed round in July, he reached out to the foundation, but the timing wasn't right.

This time around, "they wanted to be part of our expansion," he said.

Sign Up for Health Pulse Brought to you by Crain's New York Business, Health Pulse is a subscription-only website focused on the business of health care. The site is updated every day with breaking news, research and unique information. Subscribe today and receive access to the site and the daily emails. Plus, twice a week we release a special report called Extra, featuring data and statistics. Subscribe Today

Comments