Last month, Alicia*, a 23-year-old who recently moved to Idaho, found out she was pregnant. The guy she was dating lived in another state, and at first she didn't tell him. Then when he came to visit to her, he got so drunk and violent, the secret came out when she was pleading with him not to hit her. He accused her of lying, called her a series of derisive names, told her he didn't care what she did, and drove off. They haven't spoken since.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Broke from using all her savings to pay for her move and sure she didn't want to have a child with that man, Alicia went to Planned Parenthood and told them she needed an abortion but couldn't afford it. A Planned Parenthood counselor talked her through her options and made sure she felt confident in her choice to end the pregnancy, and then gave her the number for the Pacific Northwest Community Abortion Information and Resource (CAIR) Project. Alicia called, told the volunteer her predicament, and within a few days CAIR contributed $100 to her abortion; another abortion fund kicked in $150, and Alicia was able to come up with the rest. The CAIR volunteer called Alicia again after the procedure to make sure she was doing all right.

Most Popular

"Getting that help and having them there and knowing, not that this is a common thing, but that other people are in similar situations and that it wasn't the end of the world helped a lot," Alicia said. "It made me feel a lot more confident in my choice."

The CAIR Project is based in Washington, a blue state that sits in stark contrast to conservative Idaho, its neighbor to the east. CAIR helps women in Washington, Oregon, Alaska, and Idaho pay for abortions. Its volunteers live in Washington, and 80 percent of its funding comes from Washington too. But it's Idaho women like Alicia who mostly receive CAIR dollars. That dynamic isn't just a Pacific Northwest one: The women desperate enough that they're willing to call a complete stranger to help fund their abortions increasingly live in conservative pockets of the country, where clinics are scarce and restrictive abortion laws mean the procedure is more expensive and tougher to access. And the people funding them tend to reside in bluer, more liberal enclaves.

As the red state-blue state divide calcifies and income inequality deepens even within states, there are few areas where the gap between the haves and the have-nots is as stark as in abortion access. Grassroots groups stepped up years ago to help low-income women pay for procedures, but they say the past five years have brought abortion restrictions so extreme they've magnified a long-standing problem: already-vulnerable women in places hostile to their rights are more vulnerable than ever and increasingly dependent on private charity, especially in abortion care.

"There has been a significant change in the landscape of who we're funding and where they're located," said Patricia Atwater, a CAIR Project board member. "Liberal states like Washington, Oregon, progressive states, states that have less restrictive abortion laws, have a wealth of resources relative to other states. And states like Idaho, which is very conservative, practically criminalizes abortion, and has a host of restrictions in place."

That shift is borne out in the numbers. Oregon, a state of about 4 million, accounts for just 17 percent of CAIR's cases. Oregon has 2.5 times the population of Idaho, but 55 percent of the cases CAIR volunteers heard last year came from Idaho callers.

That wasn't true just a few years ago. In 2010, about half of CAIR's funding went to Oregon, and 39 percent went to Idaho. Funding for women in Washington was low in 2010 and remains fairly low, since the state has long had Medicaid policies that cover abortion for poor women. But since the 2010 midterm elections ushered in a string of anti-abortion politicians across the country and as more states blocked insurance coverage for abortion as part of a backlash to the Affordable Care Act, the access gap has widened considerably.

Every three months, Carol Pencke, a 67-year-old mother of four and grandmother of two, is one of the women on the receiving end of the CAIR funding requests. She spends a week carrying around a loaner cellphone, fielding calls from as many as 20 women a day. They all say the same thing: I'm pregnant. I don't want to be. Please help. Pencke's task is to help them pay for an abortion.

"I had a call from a gal in Boise, Idaho, probably five years ago," said Pencke, who lives in Seattle. "She was living in a one-room apartment with her 18-month-old son. I could hardly get her to talk at first. She just answered monosyllabically. She was pregnant? Yes. She wanted to be? No. She was married? Yes."

The woman's husband had more or less abandoned her, taking a job as a long-haul trucker in Alaska and periodically sending small amounts of money; he had gotten her pregnant when he came home for a weekend. She only had a little bit of food in her home. She was afraid to tell her husband she was pregnant because he might get upset and hit her.