Offensive line coach Joe Rudolph has questions he needs answered in camp. Credit: Joe Koshollek

By of the

Madison — Paul Chryst makes his debut as Wisconsin's head coach in less than a month against No. 3 Alabama, a team that is expected to feature one of the better defensive front sevens in all of college football.

And as UW's coaches and players met with reporters Sunday during the team's media day, it became clear Chryst isn't sure which five players will make up the Badgers' No. 1 offensive line.

"Right now, today, I couldn't tell you who the starting five are," Chryst said. "I think that (in) spring ball, we were able to identify the pool of who the offensive linemen could be.

"But we didn't solidify who the starting five were, and that's going to be one of the things that we've got to solidify in fall camp."

Joe Rudolph, in his first season as offensive coordinator/offensive line coach, put the kibosh on any thoughts Chryst was engaging in coach-speak.

"It is going to be a fun camp," Rudolph said. "I think competition is real and alive."

The only locks, barring injury, are redshirt senior Tyler Marz at left tackle and redshirt junior Dan Voltz at center.

"I think you have a pool there that we'll find the right guys to fill in around them," Rudolph said. "But those two are huge."

Gone is a trio of multiyear starters. Right tackle Rob Havenstein left with 42 starts. Left guard Kyle Costigan left with 35. Guard/center Dallas Lewallen left with 21. All were fifth-year seniors.

The No. 1 line for much of the spring featured Marz (27 starts) at left tackle, redshirt senior Ray Ball (no starts) at left guard, Voltz (20 starts) at center, redshirt freshman Michael Deiter (no starts) at right guard and redshirt sophomore Hayden Biegel (no starts) at right tackle.

Biegel is being pushed by redshirt freshman Beau Benzschawel (no starts) at right tackle, and the staff loves the talent and temperament of guard Jon Dietzen, a freshman who enrolled in January and impressed throughout the spring.

The loss of three recruits to health issues over the last several seasons has hurt the depth. The fact UW is on its fifth offensive line coach since the start of the 2011 season hasn't helped in recruiting.

Because of the lack of experienced reserves, it is more likely that first-year players can crack the starting lineup or two-deep.

"No question," Rudolph said. "Usually, just experience would create the separation you would need. Usually, the door gets closed because guys are so developed in the system and their technique is so sound."

Deiter and Dietzen both stood out in the spring.

"We've been impressed with who he is, how he works," Chryst said of Deiter, who is 6 feet 6 inches and 316 pounds and could play guard or center. "He is really talented. We're expecting a lot out of him....

"He is big. He is tough. He is athletic. He likes to work. Guys like being with him. He's got a chance to be a really good football player."

Dietzen, 6-6 and 330, worked with the No. 2 line in the spring and showed he was mature enough to compete with his elders.

"I would just say what Jon has done to this point and what he has done in the weight room, I'm excited to see where he is at," said Rudolph, who said Dietzen is good enough to earn a starting spot. "I wouldn't put a cap on where his abilities are. We're going to coach him and give him opportunities....

"He has a strength level and an agility level, and he has a want-to to get out there. Now, it wasn't always perfect by any means. But I think that gives him an opportunity because he does have some levels that are higher than you'd expect from a freshman."

One freshman who won't be able to help is David Moorman, who is expected to miss camp because of a foot injury. According to Chryst, Moorman likely will redshirt this season.

Rudolph hopes at least to develop a solid first unit and identify reserves who can play one or both tackle spots and any of the three inside positions.

No matter how quickly the new starters mesh with Marz and Voltz and how quickly the reserves come along, they won't be as seasoned as their predecessors from last season.

"I think this is the least amount of (experienced) depth we've ever had that I can remember," Marz said. "It puts a little more pressure on us, especially the young guys.

"I think they all know it, but we play Alabama the first game...these next four weeks are going to be very important."