Photo

AUSTIN, Tex. — The architect David Heymann, 55, is known for designing the Western White House, former President George W. and Laura Bush’s glass and limestone dwelling at Prairie Chapel Ranch near Crawford. And just as the 43rd president made a late-in-life change, from politics to painting, so has Mr. Heymann, to a point.

The University of Texas at Austin professor of architecture has channeled some of his energy into fiction. His first book, “My Beautiful City Austin,” published last month, is a bildungsroman about a young architect in Austin.

Over coffee at a table overlooking Barton Springs, Mr. Heymann, still a practicing architect, discussed the stories in his collection, each of which is organized around a different commission and the disparate motivations driving it.

QUESTION: Why did you decide to write a book?

ANSWER: It started as an academic essay about how my generation of architects, who got out of school in the early ’80s, screwed things up. We were desperate for work, so just did what clients wanted. But trying to prove that would be so tedious, so I decided to write it as fiction instead.

Q. Your protagonist bristles against pretentious design — a Shaker-style bedroom, for instance, because Shakers did not have sex. Do you share his views?

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

A. There are places where architectures of pretenses make sense. But early on, potential clients would describe houses in terms of style. It just struck me that in Austin you could make an architecture that wasn’t that way, that was about how you wanted to live your life, or how you could live your life, and you didn’t have to bind it to any set idea of propriety.

Q. What is it like to practice architecture here?

A. I love Austin, but it’s the most provincial town on the planet. I’ve had far more interesting clients in Houston who are more experimental with their lives. Maybe in response to living in Houston. I designed a house for a lady there who wanted to live in the middle of the city, absolutely in touch with nature. Her house is floor-to-ceiling windows, entirely hidden by this garden. It’s like a treehouse. Houston’s a great place to practice because its residents actually want their city to be a city. Dallas is the same way. Far more ambitious.

Expanded coverage of Texas is produced by The Texas Tribune, a nonprofit news organization. To join the conversation about this article, go to texastribune.org. Cultural coverage for the Texas Report is provided by Texas Monthly. For stories, reviews, news and more, go to texasmonthly.com.

Q. Does your facility with words help you get commissions?

A. We always teach students that there are different mediums — pencil, ink, models — but describing things in words is as important. Buildings are really expensive. Did your family ever build a building? We ask the architecture students, and almost none of them have ever been involved in building. Architects build something like 30 percent of the buildings in the United States, either the ones required to be built by architects by law or the ones where the model doesn’t yet exist. So, especially with houses, you have to articulate what people want and why. In the book, I talk about this elderly couple building this giant house...

Q: A pleasure palace for their grandchildren.

A. It makes all the sense in the world. There was an M.I.T. study about how when you’re in a room with your own grandchildren your body is flooded with all the chemistry of happiness, hormonally. Far more than any other thing. More than sex or money or success. So that’s worth spending money on.

With the Bushes we had a very short period of design, so we had an intense discussion about what they wanted, and it was clear that they wanted a place where their experience was concrete. They live in a world where everyone who approaches you wants something and you’ll never be able to know what. The only people you can trust are your very old friends — or this is key at that house — nature. So that house works from that study point.

Q. How so?

A. It’s pushed into the ground. It’s one room wide — very, very long — and to go from one room to the next, you have to go outside. If you’re in the dining room and you want to go to your bedroom, you have to go outside. You go through a breezeway space where you walk along a porch. It’s kind of goofy, but it’s a very simple idea: Outside is cold or warm, you’re in the sun or the shade or the wind, or you’re not, but that’s something you trust. The sensation is real. And direct. They loved that idea. It became the grounding idea of the house, and it creates all sorts of odd details. If there’s a sink, there’s not a mirror above the sink, there’s a window so that you don’t have to look at yourself. Every window is also a door you can walk out of.

Q. You write that “everyone wants to connect to the built heritage of the landscape.” How are we to interpret that?

A. Is it possible to build something “old”? There’s a line later in the book about how that’s like being married to someone with breast implants. I think, who are these people? But the impulse is really powerful: wanting to belong somewhere at a time when anywhereness is the norm.

One of the most interesting things about agrarian landscapes like this one is that most of the old buildings were just built directly to answer some sort of a need. They didn’t assume the structure answering the need would devolve into something like an icon or a style.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Q. Do you plan to write more fiction?

A. Definitely. My wife Sandy is convinced that, after this book, I will never get hired to do another house again.