S&R Insurance Services has been in business since 1993, and its agents take pride in helping customers get the best insurance coverage for the best prices.

The company, which celebrates its 20th anniversary this year, is an advocate for the insured, President Cyndi Jeffers said.

“That’s our job,” she said. “All we do is insurance.”

Located on Talmeda Road in Oak Ridge, S&R Insurance is a full-service independent agency representing several top-rated insurance companies and offering all types of coverages, including auto, home, business, personal, bonds, life, health, accident, disability, IRAs, and long-term care.

The company has four agents, two for personal insurance such as home, auto, health and life, and two for commercial insurance, including employee benefits. The agency has two certified agents to assist with Qualified Health Plans through the Affordable Care Act.

S&R serves people and businesses in Tennessee, Alabama, Georgia, and North Carolina. Agents specialize in custom-tailoring coverages to fit client needs.

“We start by getting to know you and your needs, and review your current coverages to find any gaps,” Jeffers said. “Then, we quote your coverages with our many top-rated companies, and provide a no-obligation proposal of coverages for your review.”

Agents also provide prompt, professional service after the sale, including 24-hour personal service in emergencies.

“We’re going to be here when you need us,” Jeffers said.

Agents automatically rewrite coverages if they can lower premiums, and they are required to complete insurance education updates each year, helping them respond to regular insurance industry changes. S&R also educates consumers on insurance products.

“Being an independent agency and representing many stable companies allows us to be competitive in today’s marketplace, while meeting all the insurance needs of our customers,” Jeffers said. “Building and nurturing a good working relationship with customers and providing superior service are top-priority. We provide numerous services to our customers, each determined by individual need. Each agent handles all phases of customer service for each of their customers.”

S&R has a website at www.sandrinsurance.com, where users can meet the staff, request a quote, read the agency’s newsletters, send an e-mail, ask questions, or visit insurance-related links.

More information and a free, no-obligation quote can be obtained by calling (865) 483-3200, visiting the website at www.sandrinsurance.com, or stopping by the office at 146 Talmeda Road from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday through Friday or by appointment.

Meet the S&R Insurance Services Inc. staff:

Cyndi Jeffers, President—Jeffers is a certified insurance counselor with 33 years’ experience. She is a licensed property, casualty, bonds, life, and health agent who primarily works with commercial lines customers. Jeffers is an active member of the community, participating in the Rotary Club of Oak Ridge, Music Arts, Oak Ridge Community Orchestra, Oak Ridge Wind Ensemble/Community Band, and Secret City Winds, in addition to several professional insurance organizations.

Linda Taras, Vice President and Agent—Taras is licensed in property, casualty, bonds, life, and health coverages. She primarily works with personal lines customers.

Phyllis Booth, Agent—Booth is licensed in property, casualty, and bonds. Booth also works primarily with personal lines customers.

Glenna Engle—Engle is an administrative assistant. She is licensed in property, casualty and bonds, and works with commercial lines customers.

Rae Beasley—Beasley is the agency’s receptionist, training to become a personal lines customer service representative. Beasley handles billing and marketing questions.

Ali Swofford—Swofford handles investments and financial planning for the agency. She is a certified life underwriter and certified financial counselor with more than 20 years’ experience.

Gabi—The agency’s mascot is a Petit Basset Griffon Vendeen (PBGV). She comes to work every day to greet customers.