SALEM – A bitter dispute has broken out between organizers of the Dorchester Conference, the annual Republican retreat to discuss issues of the day, and the conservative wing of the party.

In a letter to the Dorchester Board, leaders of three prominent conservative groups said they won't attend. Instead, they plan to hold their own alternative "freedom rally."

"The evidence suggests that this year's Dorchester Conference has turned into a publicity stunt for liberal social causes rather than a forum for Republican dialogue," the letter states. It is signed by Gayle Atteberry, executive director of Oregon Right to Life, Jack Louman, of the Oregon Family Council, and Kevin Mannix, of Common Sense for Oregon.

The rift appears to be over a scheduled debate and vote on same-sex marriage, and over a video that conference organizers sent out in a newsletter advertising the event. In the video, former U.S. Sen. Bob Packwood – the founder of the conference – reminisces about his "favorite moment" when attendees voted to oppose a ban on abortion.

"We've pretty much been punched in the nose and poked in the eye," Atteberry told The Oregonian. "So we thought we'd celebrate our true Republican core values."

Atteberry said she is inviting Republicans – or anyone who wants to come – to a free lunch at the Monarch Hotel in Clackamas. It's being billed as a conservative forum and will be held March 8.

Dorchester, which is celebrating its 50th year, gets under way late on March 7 and runs through the weekend. It's held each year in Seaside.

Atteberry said she's not calling the action a "boycott," and the three groups aren't actively trying to stop people from attending Dorchester.



The Dorchester Conference typically features a debate on an issue or combination of issues that divide Republicans, said Dorchester President Jonathan Thompson. The idea is to air the best arguments, pro and con.

Thompson said he knew gay marriage would be an edgy topic, but the conference has never shied away from controversy.

"We think controversy and debate should be a positive, not a negative," he said. The conservative alternative meeting doesn't appear to be siphoning away Dorchester participants, he said. He expects between 500 and 600 attendees -- about average.



Other issues up for discussion include the Affordable Care Act, NSA surveillance and withdrawal of troops from Afghanistan. Also, GOP contenders for U.S. Senate Monica Wehby and Rep. Jason Conger have been invited to debate.

Atteberry and the other conservative group leaders say the conference, which they have helped sponsor in the past, has gone off track.

Again, from the letter:

2014 Oregon Legislature To keep up on the news

See our daily "Take 3 For Politics" video

Join our "Oregon Politics Live Chat" open forum Fridays at noon

Follow bills at our interactive Join us at oregonlive.com/politics: Follow billsat our interactive Your Government database Follow us on Twitter at @OregonianPol



"In light of the unveiled agenda to promote and celebrate liberal causes like abortion-on-demand, pet campaign projects like 'republicanizing' same-sex marriage and the attack on people of faith and their religious liberties many of us do not feel that our participation in this year's Dorchester Conference is welcomed. Considering our past relationships we actually find ourselves blindsided by the total disregard to our core issues."

Those are some harsh words, particularly among members of the same party. Thompson said he worries about the message it sends regarding Republican politics in Oregon.

"We seem to be taking a lot of time shooting at each other rather than debating issues and moving forward as a group," Thompson said. "I worry about the broader implications of what a fractured conservative movement means to the state as a whole."

Atteberry said she saw the agenda as deliberately provoking conservative Republicans.

"If Republicans want a big tent, you don't go punching the other people in the tent in the nose."

-- Harry Esteve