Pharmacy benefit manager Express Scripts (ESRX) on Tuesday issued 2016 earnings-per-share guidance of $6.08 to $6.28, solidly above views for $6.04, but analysts expressed concerns about the company’s contract with health insurer Anthem (ANTM).

Express Scripts shares settled 0.6% lower in the stock market today, after rising as much as 2% earlier. Anthem closed up 0.5%.

In a conference call discussing the outlook, Express Scripts said it was reviewing the pricing of its contract with Anthem, its largest client, and expected the companies to reach a “mutually beneficial” agreement, according to Reuters. But it was unclear when an agreement would be struck and what it would look like.

Given the absence of an agreement, the guidance issued Tuesday did not reflect any potential changes to Express’ contract with Anthem. The terms of 10-year agreement, which began in 2009, allow the companies to re-evaluate pricing occasionally, Reuters said.

“Questions regarding its long-term relationship with Anthem will continue to be a concern for investors,” FBR said in a note.

Evercore ISI analyst Ross Muken said the review presented “a number of variables that prevent clarity on timing or financial ramifications.”

And contracts aside, BMO analyst Jennifer Lynch said in a note Tuesday that she did “not view the newly issued guidance as a game-changer to the story.”

Express held to its EPS guidance this year of $5.51 to $5.55. Analysts expect $5.53. The company sees 2016 adjusted claims of 1.255 billion to 1.295 billion, roughly in line with guidance this year.

Still, management during the call said it was happy with initial results from the selling season, Muken said.

“Our focused model of alignment has positioned us uniquely in the health care services landscape to improve health outcomes and lower costs for our clients and patients,” CEO George Paz said in a statement.

Most recently, Express Scripts this month said it would partner with Imprimis Pharmaceuticals (IMMY) to promote what it called a cheaper alternative to Daraprim, the toxoplasmosis drug that became some 5,000% more expensive this year after it was acquired by Martin Shkreli’s Turing Pharmaceuticals.

CVS Health (CVS), which bought pharmacy benefits manager Caremark in 2007, finished up 2.4%.

Follow Bill Peters on Twitter @IBD_BPeters.