Left- Right, Dr. David Berg MD, his wife, Dr. Janice Johnston MD, and former Phoenix mayor Paul Johnson, who jointly founded Redirect Health, shown in Glendale on Sept. 21, 2015. (Photo: : John Samora, The Republic|azcentral.com)

When health insurance costs swelled to totals that gave even a physician headaches, Dr. Dave Berg , co-founder of Arrowhead Health Centers , collaborated with friend, businessman and former Phoenix Mayor Paul Johnson to try to find a cure.

Redirect Health , a model designed to provide businesses affordable health-care plans that enhance their employees’ health-care experiences while reducing the burdensome administrative costs attached to most traditional insurance plans, is their remedy.

After putting the strategy in practice at Arrowhead, Berg, Johnson and Dr. Janice Johnston , Berg’s wife and co-founder of Arrowhead Health Centers, launched Redirect Health in 2013 at Arrowhead’s Glendale headquarters.

In 2008, the first year Berg implemented the new approach, Arrowhead saved about $265,000. This year, Berg, who stepped away from the CEO position this year to focus on Redirect, projects a $1 million savings.

Currently, Redirect Health serves as many as 15,000 people annually and has experienced 300 percent growth from 2013 to 2014, according to company data. This year, that growth has already exceeded that number.

Johnson credited this success to word of mouth among satisfied clients.

“The savings can be millions of dollars to employers. And their employees get better service done quicker at a cheaper rate, which reduces their overall cost of health care,” Johnson said.

An analysis of a client’s employee base and their needs determines what kind of plan is best for individual businesses. Services can be done through any Arrowhead Health Center location across the Valley.

Cutting bureaucratic hoops and administrative red tape – and the costs associated with them – is part of the formula.

Johnson talked about one client that could have faced possible bankruptcy if it went with the plan offered by a major insurance carrier for its 1,000 employees. By going with Redirect, instead of paying $4 million a year, Johnson said his client spends about $200,000 a year.

Another client’s employee needed an operation that would have cost her $9,000 out of pocket, but Redirect was able to help her find an option that cost her $1,000. She also spoke directly with a doctor, not administrative personnel. The physician called her, answered her questions, talked her through the options and helped arrange the procedure.

“Just the fact that we called her… I can’t tell you how much she was appreciative of that,” Johnson said.

Affordable health care that comes with commensurate customer service is Redirect's goal. About half of those who call to request an appointment get redirected to a physician who speaks with them on the phone, often alleviating the need for an in-person visit, another cost-saving measure, Johnson said.

Many services, like a MRI, do not need to be done in a hospital, yet that’s where some of them are performed. Johnson said almost every service that can be done at a health-care center costs far less than it would in a hospital. This savings also cuts expenses.

Patients are given options with regard to treatment and prescriptions rather than being told what they need to do or take, Johnson said.

“We implemented a series of standards around the customer. That dropped costs,” he said. “We give customers the information and tools so they can help save costs and get done what they need to get done. There’s also a trust factor between doctor and patient.”

Ten months ago, a broker connected Trident Security senior vice president Lisa Kantarowski with Redirect Health when the security company’s previous insurance carrier didn’t meet her employees’ needs or Affordable Care Act standards. It also wasn’t popular among employees, the vast majority of whom are hourly and experienced high out-of-pocket costs and limited care. It was getting expensive for the company as well. Kantarowski said there was not a lot of value.

With Redirect, more than 300 of Trident’s 560 employees are on the plan and Kantarowski has received nothing but positive feedback, she said. Trident is able to cover 90 percent of costs while employees get unlimited doctor visits and appointments within 24 hours.

“They have far, far exceeded our expectations. They knew exactly what we were looking for even if we didn’t know it,” Kantarowski said. “They are a pleasure to deal with. We appreciate being partners with someone that has the same high customer service that we pride ourselves in having.”

Kantarowski recalled an employee who put his wife and their twin babies and toddler on his plan. His wife had painful hip problems after giving birth to the twins and for the first time was able to see a chiropractor – a luxury she assumed she could never afford.

“She came in almost in tears. She said, ‘I love this health plan you gave us.’ She never thought it would be possible,” Kantarowski said. “It’s life-changing for some.”

Redirect serves clients in Arizona, Alaska, California, Nevada, Washington and Oregon. It will take its model nationwide in 2016, Johnson said.

Often, when Johnson meets with non-compliant employers, they are angry, upset and don’t want to do anything because of what they’ve been told – typically by insurance brokers – what the Affordable Care Act requires and the expense that comes with it. However, their tone shifts when Johnson explains what the requirements are and that they are doable.

“Then, they become angry at another group. They realize they’ve been duped by the status quo,” Johnson said. “But once they get over the fear and anger, they see this as a solvable problem. They are grateful and want to participate.”

Redirect Health

Where: 16222 N. 59th Ave., Glendale

Employees: 25

Interesting stat: Fifty-seven percent of workers at companies with 100 employees or less have access to employer-sponsored health care, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Details: (888) 995-4945, redirecthealth.com.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1L8KjiD