When Google’s Larry Page and Sergey Brin took the ice bucket challenge, they leaned heavily toward the ice side of the spectrum. YouTube / Google

As the ALS Ice Bucket Challenge swept through the ranks of American CEOs this week, the nation’s c-suites faced a serious management question.

Just how much ice are you going to put in that bucket?

The answers varied, as did the respective style with which business leaders allowed themselves to be dunked on camera.

Some, like Google founders Sergey Brin and Larry Page, were dumped with solid ice cubes, as shown above. Others, like American Airlines’ Doug Parker, were splashed with what seemed to be purely liquid water, albeit in immense quantities:

“I’m happy to accept the challenge,” Mr. Parker said. “I’m not that happy, but I’m here with a lot of new hire flight attendants who seem really happy to dump this water over my head.”

A Wall Street Journal analysis of CEO ice bucket challenge videos left some questions not fully answered, among them the critical “How much ice is in your bucket?” and its corollary: “How cold are you getting?”

A case in point: General Electric Co. Chief Executive Jeff Immelt was surrounded by young marketing and program staffers, who doused him with what looked like purely liquid water from atop a wall on the company’s Fairfield, Conn. campus.

Mr. Immelt had time to call out the man who put him up to the challenge: The CEO of Quirky, the design incubator that has partnered with GE to launch a smart air conditioner, among other things. “Ben Kaufman I really owe you one now,” he said. “I’m going to get back at you some way or another.”

But no firm assessment of temperature could be made from the video, and a spokeswoman involved in preparing the recycling bins of water used to dunk the chief executive confirmed that there had been “tons of ice” in them — though some had likely melted.

Martha Stewart took the cube-heavy route, emerging almost dry from the experience. “I’m at John Barrett and I’m about to get my hair done,” she said in preparation. So what the heck, it doesn’t matter, does it, that I’m about to get a bucket of ice poured over my head.”

Other executives helped themselves, including WWE Chairman Vince McMahon, who delivered something like an ice-bucket challenge soliloquy in what appeared to be a wrestling gym.

“I’ve accepted the challenge from my son-in-law Triple H: Anything he can do, I can definitely do better,” he said. Then he jammed his head inside a plastic jug filled with a chilly-looking water-ice mix.

HSN CEO Mindy Grossman, with help from hair stylist Martino Cartier, appeared at first to be taking the easy way out. She stands at the ready as a video begins, beside a fairly small vase of an ice water-y mixture. But then Ms. Grossman withstands a long, slow drenching. After which, Mr. Cartier, appearing somewhat horrified, helps knock ice cubes off her head:

Costume was a consideration, too. Mr. Immelt wore a plain gray shirt, but was surrounded by staffers in company t-shirts.

Disney CEO Robert Iger wore a Mickey Mouse t-shirt, and like his contemporaries, struggled in the immediate aftermath of the event to sum up the events.

“Ah, that’s cold,” he said.

But all’s well that ends well: As of Friday, August 22, The ALS Association has received $53.3. million in donations compared to $2.2 million during the same time period last year (July 29 to August 21). These donations have come from existing donors and 1.1 million new donors.