Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban welcomes his Visegrad Group counterparts Jiri Rusnok of Czech Republic, Donald Tusk of Poland and Robert Fico of Slovakia during their summit meeting in Budapest Reuters

All eyes are on the euro zone’s economic travails. But there’s another more optimistic European story.

Eastern European economies are doing remarkably well. And as the economies within the single currency region recover, those outside should do better still.

Third-quarter euro-zone GDP numbers showed that the region is barely treading water. The French economy contracted, Germany slowed substantially, Italy was still in recession and while a few others did marginally better, there was hardly anything to shout about.

Contrast this with what was happening outside of the region. Romania and Hungary expanded strongly, up 1.6% and 0.8% on the quarter. Poland was up 0.6%. Bulgaria did well and the Slovak economy is another solid performer.

Some of that strength is no doubt down to special or seasonal factors, like stronger agricultural production. But it’s also because the euro zone has stopped being a big headwind for Europe’s other economies.

The one exception to the otherwise bullish Eastern European story is the Czech Republic. Its quarterly numbers were ugly to say the least. GDP contacted 0.5% on the quarter and was down 1.6% on the year in the most recent three months. The economy had only just pulled out of recession in the second quarter.

These data show clearly that the Czech central bank was right to launch policy stimulus in the form of currency market intervention last week after it had run out of significant interest rate firepower.

The Czech response also reinforces the advantages of independent monetary policy and a separate currency. Not having the euro as a straight jacket.

Of course, nationally-focused policy can potentially go too far. The European Central Bank has recently criticized the Hungarian government for stacking its central bank’s policy-setting board with supporters of the ruling party. The risk is that the central bank becomes so closely aligned to the government’s interests it starts to run bad central bank policy like outright debt monetization as a first step to currency debasement.

The bigger risk to Eastern Europe more generally remains a relapse in the euro zone. With growth in that region stuttering and deflation a looming threat it would be a daring call to say the single currency’s problems are over. But if the euro zone does pick up, Eastern European exporters will undoubtedly cheer. And so too will their economies.