More rain is falling in flood-devastated Colorado.

Heavy rain pounded Parker on Saturday afternoon then moved north into Aurora. By 8:15 p.m., the heavy weather had moved into flood-weary north Colorado. A flash flood warning was issued for the Fort Morgan area at 7:45 p.m., with up to 2 inches of new rain expected in the next hour.

Later, a flash flood warning was extended until 9:13 a.m. Sunday for Weld County.

Saturday afternoon, cars were stranded in water in the area of Broncos Parkway and Parker Road, according to the National Weather Service, and Cherry Creek was overflowing its banks, affecting trails in the area. Street flooding was reported in Aurora.

By 6 p.m., things had calmed down in Aurora, Cassidee Carlson, spokeswoman for Aurora police, said.

“It’s pretty much lightened up.”

But some intersections and portions of streets are closed including sections of Potomac Street and Alameda Avenue. There’s standing water on I-225 but it’s open to traffic.

No injuries were reported, she said, but “we have had to do some rescues with people who tried to drive through the water.”

“We’ve actually got blue sky here in Boulder, but it should be moving through sometime this afternoon,” Byron Lewis, meteorologist for the National Weather Service in Boulder, said at noon.

The chance of rain increases to 60 percent Sunday and falls to 20 percent Monday along the Front Range, Lewis said. It will dry out from Tuesday through the remainder of next week. The weather service has the northern Front Range under flash flood watch.

After the Waldo Canyon burn scar was hit with as much as 10 inches of rain Wednesday and Thursday, the weather service expects the Colorado Springs area to receive another inch of rain Sunday.

The southern range is dry Saturday, said Larry Walrod, lead forecaster at the National Weather Service in Pueblo, but rain will begin around 6 a.m. Sunday and continue through the evening. If the rain accumulates too quickly, more flooding problems will arise at the city’s burn scars, he said.

“The ground is still very saturated, so any additional rainfall will have a tendency to run off much quicker,” Walrod said.

Northeast Colorado received heavy rain overnight, with New Raymer getting 1.84 inches of rain, Lewis said. There’s a 40 percent of rain in the north Sunday. Rain is expected to clear out of the northeast Sunday night.

Morgan, Washington and Logan counties are under a flash flood warning Saturday.

The primary concern in those areas are water levels in the Cache la Poudre and South Platte rivers. Areas within a half-mile of the South Platte River were evacuated Saturday morning in Orchard, Goodrich and Wiggins.

The South Platte River landlocked communities in Weld County on Friday but began to level off Saturday, Lewis said. A gauge on the river in Kersey, a town just east of Greeley, showed water levels were slightly decreasing.

“I think it’s going to hold steady and you won’t see significant increases unless we get significant precipitation over the area,” Lewis said.

Kirk Mitchell: 303-954-1206, kmitchell@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kmitchelldp