Post submitted by Breanna Diaz, McCleary Law Fellow

Last week, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) celebrated the 50th Anniversary for Medicare and Medicaid.

HHS Secretary Sylvia Burwell praised the programs, stating, “No other program has changed the lives of so many of our families, friends and neighbors. No other program has given so many hope.”

Since their creation in July 1965, Medicare and Medicaid have made access to quality, lifesaving healthcare a reality for millions of Americans. Provisions within the Social Security Amendments, which were signed into law under President Lyndon B. Johnson, first created Medicare and Medicaid.

Originally designed to bridge the healthcare gap for senior citizens and low-income people, Medicare and Medicaid continue to provide quality and affordable health care for the most vulnerable Americans, including those who are LGBT.

Access to healthcare is an urgent issue for LGBT people, especially those who are low-income or uninsured. LGBT people are less likely to get preventative care, attend regular check-ups, or have access to quality mental health services because of anti-LGBT bias in the healthcare system. Equal access to care is especially problematic for LGBT seniors. There are an estimated 1.5 million LGBT seniors in America today. By 2030, this number is expected to double. After living a lifetime experiencing discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity, LGBT seniors are increasingly vulnerable and dependent upon federal benefits like Medicare.

States that have accepted Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act have already begun to see the positive change it brings, particularly for lower-income LGBT individuals. From 2013 to 2014, the uninsured rate among LGBT individuals whose self-reported income was between 18,000 and $22,000 fell 18 percent. Thanks to the Medicaid expansion, the overall rate of uninsured LGBT individuals dropped from 27 percent to 17 percent. Medicaid expansion under ACA has also given LGBT individuals increased peace of mind when accessing medical care. For example, nondiscrimination protections prohibit both public and private insurers from discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation, gender identity, and HIV status. For LGBT seniors, the expansion would not only provide LGBT seniors with better accessibility to federal benefits, but also ensure equal access and care.