Health IT

How VA is driving telemedicine

The Department of Veterans Affairs uses videoconferencing to connect medical professionals across its network and enhance patient care.

There's a quiet revolution going on in health care that has big implications for the future of medicine.

Telemedicine, or the broader term telehealth, allows patients to receive medical examinations from primary care physicians, consult with specialists, participate in one-on-one psychotherapy or counseling, and share diagnostic information using videoconferencing and other electronic communications tools. It has mainly been used to reach those who live in rural areas, but its influence is spreading.

Although most of the technology underlying telemedicine is not particularly advanced, a confluence of circumstances is conspiring to take telemedicine out of the realm of specialized and rural care and into everyday programs. For instance, consumer devices such as the networked pedometer Fitbit are showing the public how monitoring and data-collection tools can be used to enhance health and fitness.

At a deeper level, changes in the law, pressure from insurance carriers to reduce hospitalizations, and a new emphasis on preventive care and disease management are combining to take telemedicine into the mainstream.

VA spurred by aging veteran population

When the history of telemedicine is written, significant credit will go to the Department of Veterans Affairs for leading the way in deploying telemedicine on a large scale. In fiscal 2013, more than 600,000 veterans accessed VA care using telemedicine programs -- for a total of more than 1.7 million episodes of care.

And the reach of VA's telehealth services is growing by about 22 percent a year. The agency is currently in the midst of a pilot program that allows veterans to enter vital information into an online tool that is accessible via mobile phones, tablets or desktop PCs to help their caregivers manage chronic conditions. VA is launching another service that allows larger, better-resourced hospitals to connect with smaller facilities to provide remote support for intensive care.

VA did not get into telemedicine out of an inherent interest in technology, said Dr. Adam Darkins, who leads national telehealth programs at the agency. Rather, VA officials wanted to help aging veterans with chronic disease live independently, for clinical and financial reasons. Although VA has a network of 152 hospitals and more than 1,100 other caregiving facilities, it still faced the problem of having to cover a lot of territory in terms of reaching veterans. Additionally, officials found that 45 percent of those requiring treatment resided in counties classified as rural by the U.S. Census Bureau.

So beginning in 2003, VA began a deliberate policy of building a national telemedicine program to expand its reach, reduce travel costs and increase the levels of care available to veterans.

VA runs three basic types of telemedicine programs: Clinical video is designed to replicate face-to-face interactions between caregivers and patients using videoconferencing; home monitoring allows doctors to keep tabs on patients with chronic conditions such as diabetes; and the teleradiology service on VA's My HealtheVet website allows clinicians to share imaging information on individual cases for help in diagnostics and care.

Increasingly, veterans of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan are accessing telemedicine for mental health services, including treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder. Last year, VA tested a program that allows veterans to access those services from their homes via a secure video connection. It reached 2,284 veterans in the pilot phase, and Darkins anticipates reaching 7,000 this year as the program is expanded.

It poses some challenges from a network management perspective, said Peter Whitson, deputy executive director for enterprise systems engineering at VA's Office of Information and Technology. "Because it's video, it can be bandwidth-intensive," he said. "It also requires that we have in place sufficient management and monitoring tools and employing things like quality of service to make sure that other traffic doesn't diminish the quality of those video sessions. And that's a pretty big challenge on the scale that we have at VA."

Although such pilot projects are not predominantly about technology, Darkins stressed the importance of getting the clinical and IT people working together for a variety of reasons.

"It's not just a question of saying: Have we got the telecommunications and have we got the clinical model?" he said. "We then have to think about how we have to train the clinicians to be able to do it. We have to think about how we have to put help-desk support for both patients and clinicians in place. The volume of care we're providing is such that we're providing care that's mission critical, and we roll it out with that in mind."

The interoperability hurdle

The growing telemedicine industry is still working toward standardization and interoperability. VA, for instance, has the ability to videoconference at facilities linked across its wide-area network, but outside organizations sometimes have different standards and security requirements, which can make it difficult to operate on the same platform.

Darkins said remote monitoring devices have some standards for data elements related to vital signs, but there's still more work to be done. "My belief is…the device in the home needs to be standardized," he added.

Increased standardization and interoperability would pave the way toward the integration of telemedicine with electronic health records (EHRs), said Stewart Ferguson, CIO of the Alaska Native Tribal Health Consortium, a nonprofit organization based in Anchorage that provides health services to about 130,000 Alaska Natives and American Indians. He is a pioneer in developing telemedicine programs and related IT services.