Incumbent congressional candidates prefer to leave D.C. out of ads

U.S. Rep. Mike Kelly Age: 66 Party: Republican Hometown: Butler Represents: Elected 2010, 3rd Congressional District (Armstrong, Butler, Clarion, Crawford, Erie, Lawrence, Mercer counties) Occupation: Owns Kelly Automotive in Butler Education: University of Notre Dame Family: Wife, Victoria; sons, George, Brendan and Colin; daughter, Charlotte Committees: Ways and Means; Education and the Workforce U.S. Rep. Keith Rothfus Age: 52 Party: Republican Hometown: Sewickley Represents: Elected 2012, 12th Congressional District (Beaver, Allegheny, Westmoreland, Lawrence, Cambria and Somerset counties) Occupation: Attorney; former director of Center of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives, Department of Homeland Security Education: State University of New York College at Buffalo; University of Notre Dame Law School Family: Wife, Elsie; six children Committees: Financial Services U.S. Rep. Mike Doyle Age: 61 Party: Democrat Hometown: Forest Hills Represents: Elected 1994, 14th Congressional District (Pittsburgh, Allegheny and Westmoreland counties) Occupation: Former co-owner, Eastgate Insurance Agency Education: Penn State University Family: Wife, Susan; sons, Michael, David and Kevin; daughter, Alexandra Committees: Energy and Commerce; Energy and Power sub­committee; Telecommunications and Internet subcommittee Off Road Politics connects Washington with Main Street hosted by Salena Zito and Lara Brown PhD. Exclusive radio show on @TribLIVE Podcasts Loading... Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Keith Rothfus talks to the camera about his struggle with a rare cancer, crediting American innovations for saving his life.

Mike Kelly walks his Butler neighborhood, holding his wife's hand, talking about living in their home for 40 years and running a family business that employs 100 people.

Though they've booked television ad buys totaling hundreds of thousands of dollars, neither Republican U.S. representative mentions Washington — or notes that he is an incumbent running for Congress — in the campaign ads airing in Western Pennsylvania.

The omission is deliberate and not unusual, said John Lapp, a Washington-based Democratic media consultant.

“More and more elected officials want to show how they connect with voters, and no one wants to be from Washington — that is the bane of everyone's existence,” Lapp said.

Voters gave Congress its lowest marks — only a 14 percent approval rating — in the fall of a midterm election since 1974 in Gallup's latest survey, a rating lower than President Obama's.

“We live in the greatest country in the world, but all things associated with government turn people off. They respond much better to a photo of the Statue of Liberty, rather than a photo of the U.S. Capitol,” said Kelly, who is seeking his third term.

Kelly's campaign spent $125,000 on TV advertising from Sept. 16 through Wednesday. His ad shows him in the district stretching from Butler to Erie and tells his story, he said, because “I represent the district, not Washington.”

Rothfus of Sewickley said he used his first campaign ad to remind voters of who he is, and talked about his cancer of the appendix, diagnosed a month before the birth of his sixth child, “to highlight both that you can overcome adversities and the ingenuity of American doctors.” In office since 2013, Rothfus said he also wants to “remind voters of the possible impact Obamacare could have on our health care system.”

His campaign made a “six-figure buy across the district” for TV ads but would not specify the dollar amount of the time span.

Avoiding association with Washington while running for office began after Richard Nixon's presidency, Lapp said.

“It used to be there was a gravitas of noting you worked in Washington and in Congress,” he said. “Post-Watergate, there has been a growing cynicism against Washington that never really stopped.”

Democrats, he said, “are not running with the president.”

Most of this year, more people disapproved than approved of Obama's performance; his recent disapproval rating in Gallup's daily tracking was 52 percent.

Kelly's Democratic opponent, political newcomer Dan LaVallee, a Carnegie Mellon University graduate whose family owned and operated Kunst Bakery in Pittsburgh for more than 50 years, has a Facebook ad that talks about his Western Pennsylvania roots.

LaVallee could not be reached for comment. His website knocks Washington and notes that he's running because most areas in the district “are falling behind” in the economy's recovery.

“We have opportunities for growth, but we're not taking advantage of them because Washington would rather shut down the government than find solutions,” his message says. “... We need new leadership to get our economy moving again.”

Rothfus' opponent, Democrat Erin McClelland, the founder of a substance abuse rehabilitation center in Blawnox, has a web-based attack ad that criticizes Rothfus for his stance on climate change. McClelland doesn't speak in the ad, which shows Rothfus during a debate and acknowledging he does not think climate change is man-made and is not convinced it's a fact.

“I'm very dubious,” he says in the video clip.

Marios Kritiotis, McClelland's campaign manager, said she is considering whether to invest in advertising.

“We're open to anything, but at this juncture we're getting a great response in the field and have been actively engaging voters on the ground level and hearing their stories,” he said.

Forest Hills Democrat Mike Doyle, whose congressional district includes Pittsburgh and the Mon Valley, said he won't advertise this fall since he's running unopposed.

“It would not be a wise use of money. But even if I did run an ad, it would never show me in Washington. ... Bragging about working in Washington has never been something I've done,” said Doyle, first elected in 1994.

His campaign website is filled with photos of him with community leaders, college students in the city's Oakland neighborhood and in the North Side against the backdrop of Heinz Field.

In many political ads, Democrats and Republicans alike replace suits and ties and loosen the top buttons of their shirts to talk about their work to benefit communities, said Christopher Borick, a political science professor at Muhlenberg College in Allentown.

Support for the president's signature health care act would be hard to find this year, Borick said.

“The president, Obamacare and anything Washington-associated is just toxic,” he said.

Lapp produced an ad, “For Us,” for former Army Ranger and ex-CIA employee Kevin Strouse, a Democrat who is challenging Republican U.S. Rep. Mike Fitzpatrick for his 8th District seat in Bucks County. The ad shows Strouse with his family, talking about a broken government and troubled middle class.

The goal is to come across to voters as genuine, Lapp said — not to make promises or talk about legislation.

“People want to feel a connection and know that who you are sending to Washington shares your values,” he said.

Salena Zito is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. She can be reached at szito@tribweb.com.