Temporary storage space is safe, but inconvenient

Longmont Museum and Cultural Center director Wes Jessup stands in front of an early 1900s buggy in the museum's 10,000 sq. ft. storage space on Thursday. The museum is still searching for a permanent storage space to house the artifacts it had stored in the building that Cheese Importers now occupies. ( LEWIS GEYER )

EDITOR'S NOTE: The Times-Call's series Take Two revisits people we have written about in the past year. Take Two stories will run on Mondays.

LONGMONT -- Somewhere in Longmont, 40,000 artifacts wait for a new home.

They'll need to get comfortable for a bit.

According to Longmont Museum director Wes Jessup, it'll be at least 2014 before a permanent site is found for what's basically the community attic. The buttons, hayrakes, air traffic consoles and more moved to a undisclosed location last year so that Cheese Importers could occupy the former museum storage at 103 Main St.

The temporary site -- kept quiet to keep the objects safe while they await their final move -- is a good one. It's got the temperature control, climate control and other features that a museum collection needs.

Historical artifacts awaiting a permanent home are boxed and wrapped for protection in the Longmont Museum s temporary storage space. ( LEWIS GEYER )

But it's also a little smaller, at 10,000 square feet. It's leased space, and the museum would rather own its own. And everything is still packed up tight, which makes it a little inconvenient when something's needed for a display.

"We've been able to get things in and out, but it is more of a hassle," Jessup acknowledged. "We need to find a place where the collection can be accessible."

The old Main Street site began life as the original city power building in 1931. The museum started to use it as a storage space in 1999 for all the pieces not on display, including objects as unusual as a prison-made horsehair bridle, or as huge as a 5,000-pound incubator.

In February 2012, another piece of Longmont history announced it would move in. Cheese Importers, founded in 1976, wanted a space downtown and picked the building out of a dozen choices; the new "street of cheese" reopened that August.

"I'm happy to see that wonderful building occupied by such a great business," Jessup said. "They've done a great job of remodeling."

And despite the sometime hassles, the museum hasn't pulled back on putting out locally based exhibits to mix with visiting ones. (Though the popularity of some of the visitors -- hi, Lego exhibit -- hasn't hurt.)

Another big local display is set to open Nov. 22, dipping into the museum's collection of more than 1,000 international dolls to create "Around the World in 80 Dolls."

"We want to make sure we always bring our collection out and show it off to the community," Jessup said.

Scott Rochat can be reached at 303-684-5220 or srochat@times-call.com.