I keep asking myself: why Syria? Why now?

No war in America history has ever been opposed by 71% of the citizens, or 75% of the military.

That’s how absurd and unnecessary this potential war is.

Then, when you realize Obama has had so many scandals and failures to hide, war is the perfect cover story to mask the most disastrous record in modern presidential history.

Obama is a desperate man. He has to cover-up the truth.

We have a CON MAN in the White House.

The sad thing is…it’s working.

The media headlines should be about the massive IRS scandal ordered by the Obama administration and aimed at Tea Parties, Obama critics, and GOP donors. Because it’s no longer in the headlines…because of Syria hogging the media spotlight…no one is mentioning that the IRS attacks on conservative leaders and groups changed the outcome of the 2012 presidential election.

In other words,I believe that Obama used the IRS to fix the election.

Without IRS attacks, intimidation, and interference, Tea Party groups would have had the same influence as 2010 -- when their raging energy and passionate “fire and brimstone” led directly to the biggest Republican Congressional landslide in modern history.

Does anyone doubt that?

Heck we now have emails from IRS officials stating exactly that -- that Tea Parties had to be stopped if Democrats wanted to win the election.

Suddenly, mysteriously, in 2012 all the energy and momentum went out of the Tea Party movement.

Now we know why.

Obama used the IRS to fix the presidential election. Instead of massive Tea Party rallies and record-setting fundraising for conservative candidates, Tea Parties were busy being distracted, hounded, harassed, and intimidated by the IRS.

They were busy being asked about the names of their members, names of their speakers, content of their Facebook posts, and the content of their prayers.

They were fending off audits.

Their tax deductible status was purposely stalled so they could not raise money for the 2012 election.

Their lives were turned upside down by these IRS attacks.

Fraud was committed to re-elect Barack Obama. Our country was hijacked due to the efforts of government employees trying to protect their own cushy lifetime jobs, bloated salaries, obscene pensions, and their biggest defender and protector Barack Obama.

Think I’m wrong? Evidently the IRS officials don’t.

Several of them have been busy hiring the most famous and expensive law firms in Washington, D.C. to defend themselves. The kind of lawyers hired by multi-millionaire businessmen and high-profile politicians and lobbyists accused of serious crimes.

Where are they getting the money?

Is Obama or the Democratic National Committee arranging for big Democratic donors to pay for their legal fees?

Why would Obama do that?

It doesn’t take a brain surgeon to figure out that Obama is frightened to death about what these IRS officials will say under oath. Their testimony could end his presidency and destroy his legacy. But Obama has conjured up a war to keep this massive IRS scandal out of the headlines.

We have a CON MAN in the White House.

The media headlines should be about the NSA scandal aimed at violating the civil rights and invading the privacy of every American citizen. But with Syria hogging the media spotlight, we have all forgotten that Obama listens to every phone call, watches every email.

Big Brother rules our lives. Obama has turned out to be worse than Bush when it comes to civil liberties, but with Syria in the headlines, we don’t hear a word about the NSA scandal anymore.

We have a CON MAN in the White House.

The media headlines should be about Benghazi, too. Not only should everyone be asking why four American heroes died (including the first U.S. Ambassador in over 30 years), but why?

Were they killed with weapons supplied by the Obama administration to Al Qaeda rebels?

Why haven’t Obama and Hillary Clinton been forced to resign in disgrace for the worst (and most obvious) cover-up in modern presidential history?

Like the IRS scandal, the Benghazi scandal could have changed the outcome of the 2012 presidential election.

Would Obama have been re-elected if the public knew there was no “spontaneous demonstration” outside our embassy that day; that no one in the Middle East had ever seen the cheap unprofessional video that Obama and Hillary blamed on the attack; and the weapons used to attack our embassy were supplied by our own CIA, upon orders of Obama?

Would Obama have been re-elected if Americans knew that there was time to save those brave heroes defending our embassy, but Obama and Hillary refused to send a rescue team-multiple times.

Fraud was committed to re-elect Barack Obama. But with Syria in the headlines, no one is mentioning Benghazi anymore.

We have a CON MAN in the White House.

The media headlines should be about ObamaCare -- a fast moving train wreck about to destroy the entire U.S. economy. It’s so bad that Congress exempted themselves a month ago.

It’s so bad that union leaders met with Obama at the White House to demand they all be exempted, or ObamaCare be repealed. Yes, unions are asking for the repeal of ObamaCare, the signature achievement of the man they elected President. Shouldn’t this story be in the headlines?

It’s so bad that the head of the IRS testified in front of Congress that he didn’t want ObamaCare -- and he’s in charge of enforcing it.

It’s so bad that the telemarketing company Obama hired to promote ObamaCare employs part-time workers, so they don’t have to offer health insurance to employees.

It’s so bad that fast food chains are “sharing” employees, so no one works more than 29 hours- thereby avoiding ObamaCare requirements.

Where are the headlines? Oh right, Syria is in the headlines.

We have a CONMAN in the White House.

The media headlines should be about this part-time economy created by ObamaCare. The numbers are sickening. The whole country is being reduced to nothing but crummy, crappy, part-time jobs. Since January 77% of all jobs created in America under Obama have been part-time jobs.

Not surprisingly in a nation with only crummy part-time jobs, the income picture is degenerating into a nightmare. Real household income has dropped in every year of Obama's Presidency. A new Census Bureau report reveals that the typical American family under Obama now earns less today than it did in 1989.

How about the numbers of Americans living in poverty under Obama? An unimaginable 46.5 million Americans now live in poverty under Obama- twice as many as the population of Syria. Maybe it's America that needs saving, not Syria?

There are more Americans on food stamps (23.1 million) than the population of the entire Northeastern United States (20 million) including New York, Boston and Philadelphia.

But with a possible war in Syria in the headlines, no one is noticing all these scandals, all this bad news, a crumbling economy, and a collapsing middle class. Obama has clearly wrecked America for generations to come.

We either have a con man in the White House, or a madman.