Optical Department manager Valentine Zavala makes lenses for a pair of glasses at the Eye Care Center of Northern Colorado on Thursday. ( Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call )

Back when the Beatles were still a band, Vietnam was a staple of every evening newscast and gas was going for 35 cents a gallon, the Eye Care Center of Northern Colorado was established at 1446 Hover St. in Longmont. It was a simple, small building with an eye doctor. The year was 1969.

What a difference a few decades can make.

This month the center is celebrating 10 years at its state-of-the-art location on Dry Creek Drive. The Eye Care Center of Northern Colorado is now one of Colorado's most advanced facilities for eye health, surgery and vision correction. It's also one of the largest in the state.

The center has grown to have eight specialists to include cataract surgeons, three retina specialists, a glaucoma specialist, a Lasik surgeon, an oculoplastic facial surgeon, a general ophthalmologist, and an optometrist.

The Eye Care Center of Northern Colorado is celebrating its 10-year anniversary at its Dry Creek Drive location. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

"We couldn't grow in the old building," recalled Dr. William Benedict, a retina specialist and co-owner of the facility.

"It's been a great location for these 10 years. We serve all of Northern Colorado now, and Boulder, and Greeley."

When Dr. Benedict and his crew moved into their new space, Lasik was the big thing in eye care.

"Years ago it was crazy," Benedict said. "Now it's more steady. It's still big, but it is steady."

Overall the eye care industry has been changing. That's because the need for eye health products is growing, rapidly.

"Our population is aging," explained Dr. Benedict. "We have Baby Boomers aging, and so we have more cases of glaucoma and other issues."

In addition to the aging world, rising types of allergies, more exposure to digital screens, pollution, lifestyle diseases and side effects of common medications are leading to more diagnosed cases of dry eye, allergy eyes and aged-related macular degeneration, according to Euromonitor International, which monitors health trends in the U.S. and the world. .

Cataracts, glaucoma, aged-related macular degeneration and diabetic retinopathy are all on the increase as the population ages in Colorado and beyond.

"We're busting at the seams," Benedict said. "But we designed this building 10 years ago so we could expand it if we want."

With a growing number of older patients streaming through the door each day, the center may start drawing up plans for another expansion later this year, Benedict said.

For more information regarding the Eye Care Center of Northern Colorado you can visit their web site at www.eyecaresite.com.

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel