TAMPA — After a 25-year career in banking, Richard Schroff thought he was ready to retire.

But after volunteering with special-needs children, he is considering joining the workforce again in an entirely different capacity — as a special-education teacher with the Hillsborough County school district.

“I fell in love with giving back to the kids,” he said. “I want to continue giving back.”

The Hillsborough County school district, which struggles to find enough qualified exceptional student education teachers, is looking for professionals like Schroff with bachelor’s degrees in areas other than teaching to help fill the vacancies.

At the beginning of this school year — with about 80 special-education teacher vacancies — the district launched a new effort to recruit and train these professionals to teach the district’s most vulnerable population, which totals more than 29,000 students.

“We have kids who are profoundly mentally handicapped,” said Scott Richman, Hillsborough’s professional development supervisor. “We have kids on the other end of the spectrum who are borderline gifted, but have a reading disability. We need good, qualified teachers for exceptional student education.”

❖ ❖ ❖

The Program to Attract and Train Highly Qualified Exceptional Teachers for Students with Disabilities — or PATH — began three years ago through a U.S. Department of Education grant that paid for paraprofessionals already working in Hillsborough schools to earn their bachelor’s degrees and become teachers.

But the program wasn’t attracting enough people.

“Due to a lack of qualified and interested candidates, we received permission to expand our target audience for two years,” Richman said.

The program puts teachers on a fast track to get certified for free to teach ESE. Those who enter PATH this spring will start teaching in August and will be fully certified by summer 2016. Nine future teachers are going through PATH now.

PATH is similar to the school district’s Science and Math Accelerated Readiness for Teaching program, which for the past three years has placed college graduates with degrees in science and math fields in classrooms.

The grant for that program runs out after this school year. It has placed about 130 science and math teachers in district classrooms.

PATH offers a $2,250 scholarship and reimburses recipients for the costs of certification tests.

To become certified, special education teachers must take four exams — a general knowledge test, a professional education test, a subject area test and an ESE exam. Applicants attend five training classes that last six hours each. Those classes will be held on weeknights and Saturdays starting Wednesday.

They are then interviewed by a screening committee, which includes ESE supervisors, and will shadow a teacher for three days.

Once they’ve been accepted into the program, participants must agree to teach at a high-needs school for three years.

For the first two years, each new ESE teacher will be paired up with a coach and a mentor. The teachers will continue to take classes throughout their first year and will be on tap to become fully certified in June 2016.

“The goal is to not just say, ‘Here’s your keys, go teach,’” Richman said.

❖ ❖ ❖

About 45 prospective new math, science and special education teachers attended an information session Thursday night, where they got a rundown of the PATH and SMART programs and learned how to apply. The vast majority of the group was made up of ESE hopefuls.

Some are already substitute teachers in district schools. Others have children of their own who have disabilities.

Some do not have experience working with children with disabilities. Some, like Schroff, do.

He plans to apply for the program this spring and hopes to teach middle or high school social studies or science.

Richman said after the nine current PATH participants went through training, his department decided to beef up the six-hour session on disability awareness to give applicants a deeper look at how to specifically teach students with special needs.

PATH participants also take a 20-hour course in teaching students with disabilities once they’ve been placed in a classroom, Richman said.

Attending an information session, like the one held Thursday, is the first step participants must take to become teachers through the programs.

So far, 29 teachers have been employed through the PATH program. The goal is to hire 60 teachers in the next two years, Richman said.

Teaching students with disabilities isn’t for everyone, he said. It comes with significant challenges and the salary isn’t any higher than the salary of a general education teacher.

“Make sure you know what you’re getting yourself into,” Richman told those in attendance. “It’s about your ability to build relationships with children. That’s what it comes down to. These kids have to trust that you have their best interest at heart.

“You’ve got to get them to want to learn from you.”

ekourkounis@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7999

Twitter: @ErinKTBO

Becoming a special education teacher in Hillsborough County

For more information on the school district’s Program to Attract and Train Highly Qualified Exceptional Teachers for Students with Disabilities, visit path.mysdhc.org/ , call 840-7032 or attend one of three information sessions coming up. The sessions — to be held Jan. 27, Feb. 9 and Feb. 25 — begin at 6 p.m. at CareerSource Tampa Bay, 9215 N. Florida Ave., Suite 101.