AIR FORCE ACADEMY — “Get loose!”

Those were the words of Air Force assistant football coach Jake Campbell, calling on freshman quarterback Nate Romine late in the first quarter here Thursday night.

Romine’s collegiate debut against San Diego State was a surprise for himself, and everyone else at Falcon Stadium. Expect to see a lot more of Romine the rest of the season, however. He rallied the Falcons to 20 consecutive points in a 27-20 loss.

“I’ll take whatever role they give me and prepare harder than ever,” said Romine, who took over for an injured Karson Roberts. Romine is the fourth quarterback coach Troy Calhoun has used this season.

“Hopefully Karson recovers and will be ready to play, but if not, I’ll get ready to play Notre Dame,” Romine said.

Air Force plays Notre Dame on Oct. 26 after a bye this week.

Romine showed no signs of nerves, operating the option-oriented offense like a veteran. He spent most of the first quarter just trying to stay warm in the 39-degree chill. He had no expectations of seeing action. San Diego State took a 6-0 lead late in the first quarter.

Suddenly, Romine heard his name called out by Campbell.

“He meant get loose now,” Romine said. “I had no idea what had happened to Karson.”

Roberts had suffered a head injury on the previous drive, leading Calhoun to call on the 5-foot-11, 195-pound Romine from Upland, Calif.

Romine passed for 111 yards and a touchdown and ran for another TD to help the Falcons build a 20-6 lead entering the fourth quarter. But San Diego State rallied for the victory with 21 points in the final quarter.

“It would have been great to win,” Romine said. “I went to war with my teammates all week in practice. This was just like practice, only faster.”

Calhoun was impressed with Romine’s poise. “Even the last ball he threw down the field was a pretty good throw,” Calhoun said.

Romine connected on a 32-yard pass to receiver Garrett Griffin on Air Force’s last possession, but the drive ended at San Diego State’s 37-yard line.

Whoever plays quarterback for Air Force will be asked to help turn around a disastrous season.

Air Force’s 1-6 start is the school’s worst since a similar start in 1993.

It’s uncertain when Roberts will be able to return.

“He got dinged,” Calhoun said. “Any time a player takes a shot in the head, we’re not taking any chances.”

Irv Moss: 303-954-1296, imoss@denverpost.com or twitter.com/irv moss