Topics: Ammon Bundy, black lives matter, Editor's Picks, Malheur National Wildlife Refuge, Occupy Wall Street, Oregon standoff, News

On Saturday, Jan. 2, citizens of Burns, Oregon, held a rally protesting the sentencing of Oregon ranchers Dwight and Steven Hammond. The local demonstration was co-opted by a militia, led by Nevada native Ammon Bundy, now calling itself Citizens for Constitutional Freedom. Following its participation in the planned protest, the militia seized and continues to illegally occupy the nearby Malheur National Wildlife Refuge—vowing to remain there unless and until the Hammonds are granted clemency.

Many have been eager to brand Bundy and his militia as terrorists, referring to them as “Yee-haw-dists” or “Vanilla ISIS.” And to be sure, there are similarities with Islamic militant groups. For instance, while Bundy’s “resistance movement” is essentially driven by socio-political issues, chiefly land rights and perceived overreach by the federal government, their campaign is also religiously framed and motivated. This same dynamic holds true for ISIS, al-Qaida and related groups. Moreover, Bundy and his associates hold views that most would consider extreme. In fact, they share ISIS’ admiration for slavery—with Cliven Bundy (Ammon’s father, and the head of the Bundy clan) having suggested that blacks may be better off today if they were still in chains; others from the militia are known members of designated hate groups and extremist organizations. Finally, as with al-Qaida, militants who drew inspiration from the Bundys have carried out atrocities that the family itself had to disavow.

However, any similarities between the Citizens for Constitutional Freedom and Islamic terrorists are vastly outweighed by the differences between them.

For instance, the militia is not threatening violence, nor even to deface or destroy federal property, if their demands are not met; the only consequence is continued occupation. In the interim, they are being careful not to damage the refuge or its facilities, they have allowed the public to come and go largely unrestricted, and have even claimed that they will vacate the premises if it seems clear that the local population wants them to go. And so, while it is illegal for the militia to be occupying the Malheur Refuge, their actions would be better understood as an act of civil disobedience than an act of terror.

Granted, Bundy and his supporters are heavily armed. However, there is no evidence that their weapons were illegally obtained, are unlicensed, or are otherwise unlawful—and in the United States there is a constitutional right to bear arms. Clearly, the purpose of the guns is to deter the authorities from raiding them, and consistent with previous standoffs, Bundy has threatened violence if there is any attempt to forcibly dismantle or dislodge their demonstration. However, there is no evidence that they are seeking out this kind of escalation.

And so the authorities have decided to wait them out. Although they are contemplating cutting off power to the site to render the occupation less comfortable, they are otherwise content with monitoring the situation and keeping the lines of communication as open as possible in order to bring the demonstration to a peaceful end. This is exactly what they should be doing.

Black Guns Matter?

Of course, critics are quick to point out that the authorities would not have the same kind of respect for the protesters’ rights, nor exercised the same level of restraint, were federal buildings being occupied by armed minorities—for instance, blacks or Muslims. Recent history suggests they are absolutely correct.

As a matter of fact, the open-carry movement was not started by white conservatives, but by the Black Panthers. Much like the Citizens for Constitutional Freedom, the Panthers legally purchased and licensed their guns, and carried them to public demonstrations in order to deter the authorities from impugning on their freedom of speech, their right to assemble, or denying them due process if accused of wrongdoing. These were very real concerns: At the time, civil rights activists were routinely harassed, intimidated, brutalized or killed by police officers or white mobs. Like Bundy, the Panthers emphasized that their weapons were strictly for defensive purposes—they were not seeking out confrontation, but if the others initiated violence, they would respond in kind.

Did conservative lawmakers celebrate black people affirming these constitutional rights? Far from it: Strict gun control laws were drafted, explicitly to disarm the Panthers, receiving wide bipartisan support—to include from Ronald Reagan and the NRA.