Officials with storied Noshville delicatessen announced today the Midtown institution will close Sunday, Dec. 27.

The Broadway building from which Noshville operates sits within the footprint of a site on which locally based Land Development.Com Inc. is eyeing a mixed-use project. (Read more here).

Noshville owner Tom Loventhal cited rising insurance costs among other challenges. Per Loventhal in a release:

When we opened on Broadway 19 years ago, Nashville was a small town and many of the pressures that we feel today on the restaurant industry simply didn't exist.

One thing that has stayed the same is the fact that our staff and employees have been like family to us, loyal and dedicated to the experience of an authentic taste of New York City in the heart of Nashville. That's why it's so difficult for me to announce that Noshville on Broadway will be closing at the end of business on Sunday, December 27, 2015.

As you know, the property has been sold, and our plan was to continue operating into 2016. However, the rising cost of insurance premiums and government requirements related to the Affordable Care Act have made it no longer possible to run the business without taking an unacceptable risk.

The administrative time and costs of managing mandated health insurance in the restaurant industry create an untenable burden, and that's before the cost of premiums. We knew this was coming and I've been studying it since it was first announced, but I have not been able to find a viable path that makes business sense to continue into 2016 under these new provisions when we know the restaurant will be closing in a matter of months.

I've been in the restaurant and insurance businesses a long time, active in industry associations, and even been to Washington more than once to meet with our delegation on key issues. I've spent many hours, including some sleepless nights trying to find a solution, but I can't find one.

I am forever grateful to the employees and customers who have made Noshville what it has been for 19 years, and we will be working with staff members to help however we can in this transition.

Noshville in Green Hills and at the Nashville Airport will remain open, and you will likely see some familiar Broadway faces in Green Hills in the future.

Thank you, Nashville, for supporting our dream for all these years on Broadway.