EDINBURG – Hidalgo County commissioners held a public hearing this past week to review and approve the annual local hospital payments that total $1.2 billion to help pay for local healthcare programs. The debate about curbing tax increases to create a possible ‘healthcare district’ is heated – but all the local hospitals have been quietly paying millions each year since 2013 to help the county leverage matching federal funding for uncompensated care.

“I think it’s been a tremendously beneficial program for not just Hidalgo County but the entire border region,” Carlos Zaffirini Jr. president of Adelanto HealthCare Ventures, an Austin-based consulting company for the healthcare industry, told commissioners during the meeting.

The program is called the Local Provider Participation Fund and it was created in 2013, when legislation carried by State Sen. Juan “Chuy” Hinojosa was signed by the governor.

Hidalgo County collects $20,000 each year of the payments for administrative fees, as permitted by law.

For example, Doctors Hospital at Renaissance is set to pay $419 million in 2016 – or 6 percent of its net patient revenue that was calculated in 2010. Likewise, Edinburg Regional Medical Center is set to pay $361 million; Mission Regional Medical Center, $115 million; and Rio Grande Regional $181 million. Knapp Medical Center is mandated to pay $128 million.

Its CEO, Bill Adams – who announced his resignation lasr week – was the treasurer of a political action committee dedicated to the passage of the hospital district.

When contacted directly, local hospitals deferred comments to Zaffrini.

“As Hidalgo County¹s safety-net hospitals, our mission is to improve access, affordability, delivery and funding for quality healthcare services,” according to a statement.

About five years ago, Hidalgo County was eligible for about $820 million worth of what is called 1115 Medicaid waiver funding, but the program requires a local match and the county didn’t have enough in its tax base to cover it.

“Unfortunately, because of our county¹s lack of financial resources, our safety-net could access only approximately 13 percent of the funds made available,” the statement continued.

Instead, the new law allowed some leverage from hospitals through this fund. The Medicaid waiver currently supports $602 million worth of healthcare access between 78 different programs including local clinics like the Hope Clinic.

But healthcare programs are not the equivalent of health insurance, and while hospitals may write off millions each year in charity care, patients are still expected to pay the bill for medical care whether they are underinsured or lack any coverage.

INDIGENT CARE

Separately, Hidalgo County is required to set aside up to 8 percent of its general fund to help pay its indigent care program. For the FY 2016 budget, commissioners are considering to set aside about $5.5 million for the 1115 waiver program. After it’s multiplied by federal funds, the program has about $12.8 million to operate.

There are about 10,000 applicants each year for the indigent care program that covers about $30,000 worth of medical services for eligible individuals, but only about 5,000 are enrolled.

“Theoretically those other 5,000 that did not qualify show up at the hospital and say, ‘I don’t have insurance,” and those people become part of the ‘uncompensated care’ costs,” said Eddie Olivarez, chief administrative officer for the Hidalgo County health department.

The county’s share has shifted over the years, from its peak of $9 million in 2014 to only $6 million in 2015. In 2014, that $9 million contribution, including matching dollars, meant the county had $21 million to spend on local healthcare programs, but it only spent $10 million.

When the ‘healthcare district’ was presented on the November 2014 ballot, most residents reacted to concerns about the potential for a significant tax increase – voted it down – and many continue to battle against the idea.

“I don’t think that poor people are going to get helped at all, but I do think that the hospitals are going to get helped a lot.” said Virginia Townsend, president of the Objective Watchers of the Legal System, a local watchdog group. “I don’t want it coming out of our pockets. I really think we’re taxed enough.”

Critics of the healthcare district have been calling for the county to lower its tax rate this year after collecting more property taxes due to higher valuations. Commissioners approved a 59 cent tax rate for $100 valuation for the upcoming year.

“We do not have any bridges that we collect revenue from. We don’t get any sales taxes as a county, and there is a tremendous amount of growth and, with that, comes need,” said Hidalgo County Judge Ramon Garcia.

SHIFTING PLANS

Last August, some local cities and Hidalgo County pledged $47.5 million to the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley Medical School over the next ten years, provided that a county healthcare district isn’t established first.

McAllen is set to pay $2 million each year. Hidalgo County promised $1 million along with Edinburg; Pharr will chip in $500,000; and Mission $250,000. Mission Mayor Beto Salinas staunchly opposed the ‘healthcare district’ and offered more funding for the medical school’s residency program if the district wasn’t pushed.

Any newly formed district would pay for the cities’ share if created.

But the whole equation keeps shifting, especially since the 1115 Medicaid waiver is slated to expire in 2016 statewide.

The waiver was approved in 2011, while states were supposed to gear up for the Affordable Care Act and expand its Medicaid program with the help of federal funds, but Texas decided against expansion.

Instead, the 1115 Medicaid waiver has been used to largely fund community health programs and an uncompensated care pool makes payments to hospitals across the state to help cover uninsured patients that accrue large medical bills they can’t pay.

In the meantime, the Texas Department of Health and Human Services applied for an extension from the federal government. The last day for public comment on the waiver is Sept. 30 and there’s an online survey as part of the federal requirements for the renewal. Some advocates argued that Texas should coordinate with the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services to expand Medicaid instead of paying for billions of dollars worth of unpaid medical bills so patients can use insurance instead.

But it’s also the same waiver that would be leveraged for more federal funding if voters approve a new healthcare district – something that may be on the ballot in November 2016 – the same day as the presidential election.