'Interfering with traffic,' rule violations like smoking on municipal campus would become crimes

Nathaniel, who declined to give his last name, sits at the corner of Broadway and Canyon Boulevard in Boulder, panhandling on Friday. ( MARK LEFFINGWELL / Daily Camera )

If You Go What: Boulder City Council When: 6 p.m. Wednesday Where: Boulder Municipal Building, 1777 Broadway Info: To read the pedestrian obedience ordinance and see the complete agenda, go to http://bit.ly/1i1Zs8y. No public hearing is scheduled on the ordinance because it is on first reading. Note that the meeting is on Wednesday this week, not Tuesday.

Ordinance changes before the Boulder City Council this Wednesday will restore the possibility of jail time for a host of municipal offenses, from camping to littering, make it a crime under the city code to violate a rule, like the one banning smoking on the municipal campus, and make it a crime carrying possible jail time rather than a traffic offense for panhandlers to interfere with traffic.

The proposed changes are part of a larger effort by city government to clean up the municipal campus, including the area around the Boulder Main Public Library and Central Park, and address what officials are calling "social misbehavior" that makes the area unappealing to families.

However, officials said the ordinance dubbed the "pedestrian obedience ordinance" on the agenda is not the panhandling ordinance that some City Council members said they would like to see during a study session on the problem in February.

"This is not actually representative of the next steps the city is likely to take with regard to panhandling, though it affects the same population," city spokeswoman Sarah Huntley said.

Boulder cannot actually ban panhandling, as courts have found repeatedly that asking other people for money is an activity covered under the First Amendment, City Attorney Tom Carr told the council at that meeting. Cities can restrict panhandling in certain locations, but different courts have taken different approaches to the same restrictions, Carr said. That makes it difficult to know which restrictions would withstand a challenge.

City Council members asked Carr to bring back an ordinance with a number of options, including restrictions on panhandling near intersections or restrictions on stepping into the street to get money from drivers.

Carr said the provision before the council on Wednesday is not that "next step" but merely moves an existing ordinance that bans pedestrians from interfering with traffic from the traffic code to the criminal code.

The change is being made, Carr said, at the request of the municipal court judges, who found that that offense and "staying on a median" were the traffic offenses for which defendants were most likely not to appear in court.

Carr said the judges do not like issuing warrants for failure to appear, which can result in defendants going to jail, for offenses that don't otherwise carry a jail sentence, so they asked that those two offense be moved to the criminal code, where they would carry the possibility of jail time, so that when they do issue warrants, those warrants are in compliance with the court's general practice.

Municipal Court Chief Judge Linda Cooke could not be reached Friday afternoon to discuss the issue.

A desire to take 'one step at a time'

Carr said his recommendation to the City Council would be to adopt these smaller changes now and see what impact they have on the municipal campus area before tackling a panhandling ordinance that likely would be controversial.

"These are mostly not controversial," Carr said. "I think we want to see how these go and take it one step at a time."

Prosecutors with the City Attorney's Office already are asking for enhanced sentences for misdemeanors that occur in "high impact areas" like the municipal campus and the Pearl Street Mall, and the Boulder Police Department installed three surveillance cameras on the municipal campus to record activity there. Officials have said they would request "exclusion orders" to keep certain repeat offenders out of the municipal campus.

Allowing for the possibility of jail time for municipal offenses reverses a decision the City Council made in 2012 in response to homeless camping defendants insisting on jury trials. Officials hoped that by removing the possibility of jail on a first or second offense, those defendants would not be entitled to a more costly and time-consuming jury trial. However, a municipal court judge found that camping defendants still had the right to a jury trial.

In a memo to City Council, Carr described the "unexpected consequences" of that decision.

"It limited the court's ability to impose more serious sanctions in appropriate cases," he wrote. "The court is occasionally faced with a defendant who has a significant criminal history, but is a first offender with respect to the particular offense charged. In such a case, a small fine is not likely to meet any of the goals of a criminal justice intervention."

Carr said the vast majority of people convicted of municipal offenses still won't receive jail sentences, just those whose criminal history makes it appropriate.

The council will also vote on an ordinance creating a new municipal offense of "unlawful conduct." This ordinance mirrors a state statute that makes it a criminal violation to disobey an administrative rule on public property, such as the one banning smoking on the municipal campus or the nighttime parks closure.

The city currently has the option of pursuing those charges in district court, but the ordinance would allow prosecutors to bring charges in municipal court. As with other municipal offenses, that charge would now carry the possibility of jail time.

The new pedestrian obedience ordinance states, "Every pedestrian crossing or otherwise within a roadway shall yield the right of way to and avoid any interference with all vehicles upon or approaching the roadway." It does not apply in crosswalks.

Assistant City Attorney Mike Whitney, who works in the prosecution division, said the version of the ordinance in the traffic code is usually applied to intoxicated people walking in the street (most of those defendants are cited on University Hill) or to panhandlers who don't get out of traffic when the light turns green.

Whitney said he believes that is how it will continue to be applied and that the language of the ordinance would not support citations against people who get money from cars stopped at red lights.

Dave Harrison, a Boulder attorney who has represented many homeless camping defendants, said he also doesn't believe the ordinance could be applied more broadly as its currently written, though he does have concerns about the judicial branch (the municipal court) asking the legislative branch (the City Council) to move an offense into the criminal code via the executive branch (the City Attorney's Office).

"That's all a bit too cozy for my liking," he said.

'People give you a nice attitude back'

On a blustery Friday morning, Priscilla Villalba held a worn cardboard sign reading, "Help Wanted. Anything Helps. God Bless You," at the corner of Broadway and Canyon Boulevard.

"That means any kind of help," she said. "If you offer me a job, if you have a garage you need cleaned out, some yardwork, I'll do it. That makes me feel

better, honestly."

She doesn't think panhandling at intersections is dangerous or should be restricted.

"If they're drunk or causing a problem, get them out of here," she said. "But if you give a nice attitude, people give you a nice attitude back."

Asked what she'll do if the city moves to further restrict such panhandling, Villalba said she hopes she won't need help by then.

Mindi Vanzee, of Lafayette, was in downtown Boulder with a friend Friday morning. She said panhandlers don't seem to create a safety problem.

"I don't even notice it that much," she said. "They're usually just standing there, and it's up to you if you want to give them money. They're not knocking on your window."

Lars Parkins, of Boulder, said the idea of safety concerns around panhandling seems like a "cover" to him, but he supports the broader goal of cleaning up the municipal campus.

"This is my hometown, and I can't take my kids to Central Park," he said. "I don't want to be discriminatory, but I feel like it is discriminatory already in a sense because the rest of the community can't use certain areas."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Erica Meltzer at 303-473-1355 or meltzere@dailycamera.com