Federal officials have said they want to work with Tennessee to curb the opioid epidemic. (Photo: Getty Images / iStockphoto) Story Highlights The Tennessee Pain, Opioids, Problems and Solutions Forum is on April 5 at Music City Center.

This epidemic is more difficult to understand than a physical attack by an enemy sworn to kill.

Those suffering are your neighbors, your coworkers, your friends at church who struggle with family members.

On April 10 The Tennessean is publishing a 12-page guide for those who are confronted by addiction.

We rightly mourn victims of terrorism, and we worry of future attacks. Meanwhile the number of Tennesseans killed by prescription drug and heroin overdoses annually has blown past 1,000 and no one sees an end to catastrophically rising numbers.

Drug-related deaths — 78 a day throughout the country, according to one estimate — hardly make news anymore, such has our society become hardened to this reality. Tennessee is ground zero of the opioid epidemic, which is costing hundreds of millions of dollars and immeasurably more in human suffering.

This epidemic is more difficult to understand in most ways than a physical attack by an enemy sworn to kill, but no less deadly, costly, scary or scarring.

Those suffering are your neighbors, your coworkers, your friends at church who struggle with family members who have been ensnared by this insidious brain disease. The stigma associated with drug addiction is still strong, viewed as a moral failing, so most grapple with it privately and often in shame.

We as a society tend to think of addicts as sketchy people who have made poor choices, and there is no denying many have. But increasingly victims are who we’d probably call regular people — a 50-year-old father who had some back pain, a 17-year-old girl who hurt a knee playing sports, a 32-year-old mother who is recovering from a cesarean section. What addicts look like in Tennessee challenge many of our preconceived notions.

The Tennessean, like many news outlets, has tackled the issue before, including a powerful series in 2013 on babies in this state born addicted, and continues to follow the issue with ongoing work. The USA TODAY NETWORK also has a rich trove of reporting from throughout the country.

Yet the issue has not abated, and so we commit again.

On April 5, a unique conference is taking place here in Nashville. The event is bringing together a first-of-its-kind confluence of leaders who deal with the opioid crisis from multiple vantage points — law enforcement, legislators, research scientists, treating physicians, leading insurers.

They want you there.

The daylong conference, open to the public, has an ambitious agenda. And it needs your voice to engage the experts, who are focused on solutions and takeaway action. The experts need to hear the opinions of everyday people who live with or know victims. I will be there too, moderating one session but also wanting to connect. We need to understand how we can help.

On Sunday, April 10, The Tennessean is publishing a 12-page discussion guide meant to provide practical advice for those who are confronted by addiction. We see this as part of our fundamental mission to empower communities to connect, act and thrive. And we will double-down over the next year on our reporting on the many fronts in which addiction is impacting our state.

There is no easy answer here, everyone knows that. But we do need to recognize that this is a scourge that has infected all of Tennessee. It’s not “their” problem, it’s your problem and mine.

Michael A. Anastasi is executive editor of The Tennessean and vice president of news for TNMedia.

IF YOU GO

What: The Tennessee Pain, Opioids, Problems and Solutions Forum

When: Tuesday, April 5, 8:30 to 4:30 p.m.

Where: Music City Center, 201 5th Ave. S., downtown Nashville

Free registration required: http://bit.ly/1UQIDyl

Lunch included

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1RtWE0v