Buy Photo U.S. Sen. Cory Booker has over 1.5 million followers on Twitter. (Photo: File)Buy Photo Story Highlights Booker has 1.5 million followers.

Booker said that 95 percent of his tweets are his.

"When you are authentic and corny and cheesy like I am, and you tell people your struggles, you will gain a following."

When U.S. Sen. Cory Booker said he was trying a vegan lifestyle, he didn't issue a press release, call the media for a teleconference or post a statement on his official website.

Instead, the former mayor of Newark turned to his favorite method of communication: Twitter.

Booker has 1.5 million followers, nearly 1 million more than Gov. Chris Christie. A look at Booker's tweets, (he has tweeted 45,000 times since joining Twitter in 2008) and you can see why he is more popular than the governor.

He has Twitter conversations with actor William Shatner, asks comedian Sarah Silverman if she needs a hug and finishes the lyrics to Bruce Springsteen's "Thunder Road" with a follower in the middle of the night.

Having one of those Im gonna die alone and no one's gonna find me for days kind of mornings — Sarah Silverman (@SarahKSilverman) December 28, 2014

Let me know if u need a hug dear friend MT @SarahKSilverman Having 1 of those Im gonna die alone %26 no 1's gonna find me 4 days kind of morns — Cory Booker (@CoryBooker) December 28, 2014

Booker once asked on Twitter for a recommendation for a good pizza place. He received 60 responses.

On Nov. 23, he shared a petition to get Ben & Jerry's to make vegan ice cream.

While most of us were opening presents and enjoying the company of friends and family on Christmas, Booker found time to send out 20 tweets.

The amount of followers and the creativity of his tweets makes Sen. Booker one of the most influential people in New Jersey on Twitter.

"The reality is, it doesn't take as much time as people may think it does," he said. "So from what people imagine 30 to 40 tweets a day taking time, it really is just seconds. For me, it's a very powerful tool to connect with hundreds of thousands of New Jerseyans.

"It's created a great level of accountability for me as a public servant. When I was mayor in Newark, we found that residents would get action from their government through Twitter.

"People would drive by a pothole and tweet, 'Somebody should fix this.' They became empowered with social media and began taking pictures of things and tweeting me."

Booker said he started finding out about problems in the city before his staff did because the residents had a direct line of communication to him.

"It was a delight," he said. "It helped run the city so much better and efficiently."

Now that you tweeted at me sir, I'm pretty awesome! #HUGEFan RT @WilliamShatner Senator Booker how are you? — Cory Booker (@CoryBooker) December 28, 2014

A means of engagement

Booker said that 95 percent of his tweets are his. The other five percent are done on his behalf by members of his staff. He has never deleted a tweet and often has back-and-forth dialogue with his "haters."

"It's so enriching to me," he said. "I'm learning about the small details and challenges people are facing. I hear about high school plays, sporting events and businesses that are opening up.

"People from all walks of life are sharing what's important to them."

In the midst of the recovery from superstorm Sandy, a man tweeted: "Yo, Cory Booker, I ran out of Hot Pockets. Booker tweeted back, "I believe in you. This is something you can handle."

A few days later, according to Booker, someone sent the guy a bunch of Hot Pockets.

Before Booker met Jennifer Herrick of Sayreville at a meeting to announce an extension of the Mortgage Forgiveness Debt Relief Act as a result of superstorm Sandy, he was tweeting back and forth with her on the issue.

"We had established a connection," Booker said. "I'm on the Senate floor and a constituent is communicating with me on a Sandy-related tax issue.

"Before I even met her, we already knew each other."

Booker says that encounter is common among his followers.

"The best way to use a platform like Twitter is to be authentic," Booker said. "People don't want to see me as just a politician. They want to know who I am ... upset that the Giants lost or finishing the lyrics to a Bruce (Springsteen) song.

"When you are authentic and corny and cheesy like I am, and you tell people your struggles, you will gain a following."

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1IbUldr