Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton speaks during the Alabama Semi-Annual Democratic Conference on Saturday, Oct. 17, 2015, at the Hyatt Regency Wynfrey Hotel in Hoover, Ala (Photo: Albert Cesare / Advertiser)

MONTGOMERY, Ala. — In Hillary Clinton’s first visit to Alabama as a 2016 presidential candidate, she said exactly what Alabama Democrats wanted to hear.

Clinton addressed the Alabama Democratic Conference convention and spoke at length about the problems plaguing the state.

In particular, Clinton spoke against Gov. Robert Bentley and the state Legislature for not expanding Medicaid and infringing upon the voting rights of African Americans by closing 31 driver’s license offices.

“I’m very disappointed your state government did not expand Medicaid,” Clinton said in a packed ballroom of the Wynfrey Hotel in Hoover. “A lot of folks in this state would have been better off if the governor had, at no cost to the state additionally, but he put ideology ahead of the well-being of the folks he represents.”

As for the closing of driver’s license offices in predominantly African-American counties, Clinton called it a “blast from the Jim Crow past.”

“Here in Alabama, without the right kind of ID, it’s nearly impossible to vote,” Clinton said. “I followed when Governor Bentley and his administration closed 31 driver’s license offices across the state. They include every county where African Americans make up 75% of the voters. The closings will make getting license and personal identification cards much harder for many African Americans, particularly the elderly, erecting a big barrier to voting.”

Clinton pointed out that Alabama is one of 17 states not offering early voting. If elected, the former U.S. secretary of state said she would work to restore the Voting Rights Act in its entirety, enact a 20-day period of early in-person voting for all states, and have voters register automatically once they turn 18 years old.

“If a law is working, we should let it keep working,” Clinton said of the changes made to the Voting Rights Act by the U.S. Supreme Court. “We have to defend the most fundamental right in our democracy: the right to vote. No one in this state should ever forget the history that enabled generations of people left out and left behind to be able to vote.”

Regarding education, Clinton said she has a plan to get students to college without borrowing money. She also said she had a plan to increase funding for historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs).

Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton speaks during the Alabama Semi-Annual Democratic Conference on Saturday, Oct. 17, 2015, at the Hyatt Regency Wynfrey Hotel in Hoover, Ala (Photo: Albert Cesare / Advertiser)

“HBCUs have done an amazing job of educating generations of African-American students, but they are scrambling for resources,” Clinton said. “My new college compact has a special fund set aside to help HBCUs.”

Of course, Clinton is not running for office in Alabama and addressed some national platforms as well.

She reaffirmed her support of the Affordable Care Act and outlined plans to raise income, raise minimum wage, lower the cost of prescription drugs, help small businesses get started, and keep communities safe from gun violence.

She also wants to rebuild the country’s infrastructure and focus on the renewable energy industry.

“I don’t understand what Republicans have against building roads, bridges and airports, and fixing our railroad system, and expanding broadband so we can be more competitive economically,” Clinton said. “We can create millions of new job by transitioning to clean renewable energy.”

Clinton even went so far as to say that the economy is best when “a Democrat is in the White House.”

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1ROLeWs