The only people who wallow in temperature talk are TV meteorologists in Denver, senior citizens in Florida and sportswriters en masse. As Oscar Wilde opined: “Conversation about the weather is the last refuge of the unimaginative.”

Those dullards should contemplate this statistic: In 118 career regular-season home game starts, Peyton Manning never has lost when water freezes (32 degrees) or boils (212 degrees).

And all the people have failed to notice that when the Broncos freeze out, pardon the expression, the Tennessee Titans, Peyton the Potentate will become the first quarterback in NFL history to reach the postseason in 13 seasons.

Brett Favre qualified 12 times, Joe Montana 11 and John Elway 10. This will be Tom Brady’s 11th playoffs.

Manning now has won at least 10 games in 13 seasons, also a league record. He has won 164 regular-season games in fair weather, foul weather, rainy weather, indoors and outdoors.

The theme for Dr. Orangeglove and the Broncos must be: “Four More.”

Four more victories in the regular season and the Broncos, for certain, secure the AFC’s No. 1 seed. “Then Three.” Three additional victories in the postseason, and the Broncos win the Super Bowl.

The Broncos play them one at a time, but I can think about seven at a time.

I’m thinking the Broncos could play at home in January against the Indianapolis Colts and, yes, the New England Patriots. They also could play in the Super Bowl against the Seattle Seahawks. What do those teams have in common? They’ve beaten the Broncos this year in Indianapolis, New England and, in an exhibition, Seattle.

Two other postseason possibilities are, get ready, those rascal Baltimore Ravens and the scalawag Pittsburgh Steelers — teams the Broncos played in the past two playoffs and the last two regular-season openers.

The Broncos could meet the Kansas City Chiefs or the San Diego Chargers for a third time. (The Broncos have played three games against an opponent in one season four times. Two were against the Raiders — win in 1977 AFC championship and loss in the 1993 playoffs. The Broncos lost to Seattle in the 1983 playoffs and won at Kansas City in 1997 en route to their first Super Bowl title.) The Miami Dolphins and New York Jets also remain in the running for a wild-card spot.

And Tennessee is barely alive.

It’s conceivable that four, or even more, AFC teams could finish tied at 8-8. Look at the schedules. Only team to nine likely will survive.

Who would have thought the Steelers, who lost their first four and six of eight, could still be eligible? But they could win their last four to go 9-7. If the Dolphins win at Pittsburgh and defeat New England, Buffalo and the Jets, they probably will be in. Baltimore’s task is tougher with games at Detroit and Cincinnati and a home game against the Patriots. The Jets seem to be done with games at Carolina and Miami. The Chargers have a chance with three in San Diego and the upcoming Thursday night affair in Denver. The Titans close against the Arizona Cardinals, Jacksonville Jaguars and Houston Texans.

If the Broncos falter twice in the final four against teams with a combined 16-33 record, they perhaps end up as a wild-card and will be forced to play in Indianapolis, New England and/or Kansas City again. But the Broncos, with double-digit victories for the 19th time in franchise history, will streak to a 14-2 record for the second time.

With the final quarter of the season starting Sunday, my forecast for the AFC and NFC is partly cloudy (for the playoffs, not the weather):

Division winners: AFC, Broncos (14-2), Patriots (12-4), Bengals (11-5), Colts (10-6); wild cards: Chiefs (11-5), Ravens (9-7). NFC, Seahawks (14-2), Saints (12-4, tiebreaker), Cowboys (11-5), Lions (10-6); wild cards: Panthers (12-4), 49ers (11-5).

Wild-card weekend, Jan. 4-5: Ravens at Bengals, Chiefs at Colts; Panthers at Lions; 49ers at Cowboys.

Divisional playoffs, Jan. 11-12: Colts at Broncos; Bengals at Patriots; Cowboys at Seahawks, Panthers at Saints.

Conference championship, Jan. 19: Patriots at Broncos; Saints at Seahawks.

Super Bowl, Feb. 2: Broncos vs. Seahawks.

Former Rockies minor-league player Russell Wilson, current Broncos quarterback Peyton Manning and the late physicist Daniel Fahrenheit would love it.

Woody Paige: wpaige@denverpost.com or twitter.com/@woodypaige