Topics: deflation, Economics, Europe, European economy, GlobalPost, Business News, News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on GlobalPost

LISBON, Portugal — From Putin’s hordes massing over the eastern borders of Ukraine to the army of home-grown Islamic State fanatics threatening a murderous return from the Middle East, Europe has a lot be frightened of right now.

Yet there’s another nightmare haunting Europe’s economic policy makers: a monster called deflation that’s already clawing at the continent’s financial fundaments.

“We are meeting here at the time when Europe is facing a great threat,” Polish Finance Minister Mateusz Szczurek warned in a recent speech.

“We are on the verge of deflation,” he told a Sept. 4 conference in Brussels. “As Europeans we should never forget that it was depression and deflation … that brought to power the totalitarian regime that devastated our continent through the world war and unspeakable atrocities 75 years ago.”

At first glance deflation doesn’t sound so bad.

“Anybody who doubts how bad it could get should look back to the last time the US caught a serious dose of deflation. They called that the Great Depression.”

Prices go down, what’s not to like?

Yet the cold economic reality means that when prices fall people stop spending, hoping things will get even cheaper. In response, businesses cut production and lay off workers. That means even less demand, and prices drop further.

By then, your economy’s in a vicious downward spiral.

Making things worse, those falling prices bring declining wages and worsening debt burdens.

Anybody who doubts how bad it could get should look back to the last time the United States caught a serious dose of deflation, from 1929-33. They called that the Great Depression.

Japan has languished in a deflationary cycle pretty much since the late 1990s, its once-booming economy reduced to “lost decades” of stagnation. The country now lays claim to the world’s highest debt — over 1 quadrillion yen ($9 trillion) — more than twice the size of its total economic output.

Europe is now teetering on the edge.

Seventy-four percent of global investors expressed fears the euro zone was slipping into deflation, according to a recent Bloomberg poll.

In August, Italy registered negative inflation for the first time in over 50 years. It joined fellow euro zone strugglers Spain, Portugal, Greece, Cyprus and Slovakia in the deflation club. France’s inflation stands at 0.4 percen and Germany’s at 0.8 percent, all well below the European Central Bank’s 2 percent inflation target.

If the trend continues, some economists are predicting a lurch into a long-term stagnation, making the near-catastrophic euro zone debt crisis just the start. Growth has ground to a halt in France. Italy is mired in recession. Even Germany saw its economy contract in the second quarter.

“The European economy is in an exceptional situation,” French Prime Minister Manuel Valls told the National Assembly in Paris on Tuesday. “It’s marked by weak growth and a disturbing threat from deflation that’s calling into question all our most reasonable forecasts.”

Nobel Prize -winning economist Paul Krugman says Europe’s economy is performing worse now than in the 1930s.

It’s not just the economics that are starting to resemble those dark times, he warned, looking to the rise of a new nationalism that threatens to undermine the post-WWII order — when Europe’s former enemies came together in what became the European Union.

“The European project — peace guaranteed by democracy and prosperity — is in deep trouble,” Krugman wrote in a New York Times column. “The Continent still has peace, but it’s falling short on prosperity and, in a subtler way, democracy. And, if Europe stumbles, it will be a very bad thing not just for Europe itself but for the world as a whole.”