Photo

WASHINGTON — Hillary Rodham Clinton has spent the past several months discussing her foreign policy record as secretary of state, but on Thursday she officially dived back in to kitchen table issues during a panel discussion about equal pay for women, affordable child care and paid sick leave.

“The difference women and men face in getting the kinds of jobs that will provide the kind of income they need for themselves and their families is roiling beneath the surface of the political debates,” Mrs. Clinton said.

The pivot to domestic issues comes as Mrs. Clinton contemplates another run for president and as she campaigns for candidates ahead of the midterm elections, in which women’s issues have become a central focus.

Democrats in several key Senate races have attempted to shift the debate from President Obama and the Affordable Care Act to issues affecting the key constituency of women, whose votes could sway close races.

Mrs. Clinton said women’s issues have become “imperative in the political environment” and urged voters to make them part of their determination in the midterm elections. “When we can turn an issue into a political movement that demands people be responsive during an election cycle, it carries over,” she said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Democrats have said the ability to mobilize women, particularly those who are single and struggling with minimum wage jobs while paying for child care, could determine whether the party maintains a Senate majority and wins governors races in states like Florida and Pennsylvania.

Republicans, meanwhile, have accused Democrats of trying to cast some of their candidates as anti-women in order to win votes. Emily’s List, a “super PAC” that supports pro-abortion-rights women candidates, has seized on comments made by Republicans, including an operative’s likening Alison Lundergan Grimes, a Senate candidate from Kentucky, to an “empty dress.”

Some of the top Democratic women — including Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, Senator Kirsten E. Gillibrand of New York, Representative Rosa DeLauro of Connecticut and Senator Patty Murray of Washington — joined Mrs. Clinton on the panel, titled “Why Women’s Economic Security Matters.” The event was hosted by the progressive think tank Center for American Progress.

Ms. Gillibrand, who has promoted legislation in the Senate to address the sexual assault of women in the military, has lately homed in on other women’s issues, including her personal challenges with weight loss and child rearing, as she promotes her new book “Off the Sidelines: Raise Your Voice, Change the World.” On Thursday, she delivered an impassioned case for paid sick leave for working women.

“We’re the only industrialized country in the world that doesn’t have paid leave,” Ms. Gillibrand said. “Pakistan and Afghanistan that don’t even educate their girls have more paid leave. That is outrageous.”

Ms. Pelosi tried to put the issue into a broader context. “It’s about women, it’s about their families, it’s about their retirement, but it’s also about our economy,” she said.

Women’s issues have emerged as a consistent theme in Mrs. Clinton’s post-State Department speeches, especially in recent weeks as she has shifted gears from promoting her memoir, “Hard Choices,” to campaigning and fund-raising for midterm candidates.

On Friday, Mrs. Clinton is expected to deliver a speech on similar topics at the Democratic National Committee’s Women’s Leadership Forum here, where President Obama and Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. will also speak.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

At the Clinton Global Initiative, a gathering related to the Bill, Hillary & Chelsea Clinton Foundation in New York next week, Mrs. Clinton will participate in several speeches and panels related to advancing women’s rights, as part of the foundation’s “No Ceilings” initiative.

The events allow Mrs. Clinton to focus on issues affecting women and girls that she has worked on throughout her career, and they also allow the potential 2016 candidate to lay the groundwork for what could be a campaign message focused on elevating women in order to advance the economy.

Neera Tanden, president of the Center for American Progress and the policy director for Mrs. Clinton’s 2008 presidential campaign, moderated the event, and told the story of Mrs. Clinton’s supportiveness when Ms. Tanden was trying to balance a demanding campaign job with raising small children.

The panel also included working mothers. Rhiannon Broschat talked about losing her job at Whole Foods after she had to take a day off work to care for her young son because his school had closed for a snow day, as the politicians on the panel nodded understandingly. “It’s our lowest income workers who are the most vulnerable,” Ms. Tanden said.

Mrs. Clinton tried to tie her work abroad to her domestic efforts. “Where women are not given the opportunity to pursue their economic well being, their children suffer, their community suffers, indeed,” she said, and “their countries suffer.”