A FORMER police officer has been jailed for sexually assaulting two women in bizarre separate incidents that shook their trust in Queensland police and left them psychologically traumatised.

David Edward McFarlane, 38, pleaded guilty in the Brisbane District Court today to sexually assaulting two female neighbours in their homes while he was off-duty in March 2012 and May 2013.

Judge Hugh Botting jailed the former Logan Traffic Branch constable for 12 months but ordered the sentence be suspended after 10 weeks.

He took into account McFarlane’s early plea and the knowledge any jail time would likely be served in solitary for his own protection.

“People in our community are entitled to go about their day-to-day affairs and are entitled to be in their own homes and to feel free of any threat of unwanted sexual advances,” he said.

David Edward McFarlane outside court today.

Crown prosecutor Jodie Wooldridge said that in March 2012 McFarlane had called around to the home of a 26-year-old woman he knew where they chatted, shared a drink, told police stories and discussed what it would be like to be handcuffed.

She said McFarlane used tape to handcuff the woman with her consent, binding her hands behind her back as they laughed and she tried to free herself.

But Ms Wooldridge said the woman asked McFarlane to remove the binds when he instead reached into her clothing and touched her.

She said the woman told McFarlane numerous times to “f--- off” but he persisted until she could wrangle herself free.

The woman made a complaint to police on April 12, but after being advised the matter would be subject to an internal investigation, decided she no longer wished to make a criminal complaint.

The woman was contacted by police from Ethical Standards Command on June 13, 2013, and asked whether she would reconsider her position after a second woman came forward with a complaint about McFarlane.

The second victim, a 48-year-old, lived across the road from property McFarlane owned when he called in to visit unexpectedly on May 13, 2013.

Ms Wooldridge said McFarlane had coffee with the woman when he forced himself on to her on the couch in her lounge room.

The woman became pinned on to the couch by McFarlane as he touched and kissed her inappropriately despite her objections.

The court was told when the woman slapped McFarlane’s hand away to try and free herself he had a look of “excitement” on his face that made her feel extremely frightened.

Ms Wooldridge said the sexual assault lasted for around 15 minutes and only stopped when it was interrupted by a ringing phone.

She said McFarlane kissed his victim goodbye and left.

McFarlane resigned from the police service on June 19 last year and was arrested on July 1. He had been a police officer since 2007.

Barrister Andrew Hoare said his client had a difficult childhood marred by violence, family separation and the foster care system.

He said despite that, McFarlane built a career in the police service and was an otherwise upstanding member of the community.

Mr Hoare said McFarlane’s relationship had broken down since his arrest and his career was in tatters.

He said his client was deliberately put in a suicide smock in the city watchhouse to intimidate him, and was subjected to taunts by other police, but the claims were refuted by Ms Wooldridge.

Mr Hoare said McFarlane’s original bail conditions, which included a curfew, were overly onerous.

Judge Botting was critical that police opted to arrest McFarlane rather than issue him with a Notice to Appear date for his first court appearance.

“I have expressed some disquiet in the course of submissions as to why that should have been done instead of him being given a Notice to Appear. I still express that disquiet,” he said in sentencing.

He said a psychological report revealed McFarlane had depression, anxiety and was a low risk of reoffending.

Judge Botting said denunciation and deterrence was crucial.