LINCOLN, Neb. — Iowa certainly didn’t change the minds of critics who say the Hawkeyes don’t look the part of a national championship contender.

They didn’t do a whole lot on offense against Nebraska, their defense gave up a lot of yards again and they muffed a punt.

But when Friday’s game at frigid Memorial Stadium ended, the Hawkeyes were celebrating a 28-20 victory that finished their first perfect regular season in 93 years.

“We’re not trying to be pretty, we’re trying to be productive,” said Iowa coach Kirk Ferentz. “Football’s not gymnastics. There are style points in gymnastics. Here it’s having one point more than your opponent. We’re 12-0. You can’t do better than that.”

The Hawkeyes (8-0 Big Ten, No. 4 CFP) locked arms and ran to the south end zone to pick up the Heroes Trophy that goes to the winner of this game. Then it was off to the corner to salute their fans before heading to the warmth of their locker room.

There’s still work to be done to make this season even better. Next stop: the Big Ten championship game in Indianapolis, where the Hawkeyes will play for their first conference title since 2004. Win there, and a berth in the College Football Playoff is a real possibility. Maybe even a certainty.

“The goal is three more (wins),” said Hawkeyes offensive lineman Austin Blythe. “Right now we’re going to enjoy this one and find out our (Big Ten championship game) opponent on Sunday.”

Iowa’s Jordan Canzeri ran for 140 yards on 17 carries Friday and broke long touchdown runs on back-to-back series in the third quarter on a raw afternoon when a gusty north wind created wind chill of 12 degrees.

The Hawkeyes generated only 250 total yards and were limited to just 44 plays from scrimmage because they went 0-for-9 on third downs. But Nebraska’s Tommy Armstrong Jr. threw four interceptions, with Parker Hesse returning one 4 yards for a touchdown. The Cornhuskers (5-7, 3-5) committed eight penalties, including four personal fouls.

“Really shot ourselves in the foot,” said first-year NU coach Mike Riley. “The production was crazy different, time of possession, they were 0-for-9 on third down. There was a lot of good stuff in the game. It was those other parts we couldn’t overcome.”

The Huskers finished with 433 total yards, but Armstrong’s four interceptions were killers.