School support staff gets 4 percent raise

The Jamestown Public School Board on Monday approved a 4 percent pay raise for about 150 support staff workers.

The 9-0 unanimous vote followed the recommendation for approval from Superintendent Robert Lech. Support staff workers are not part of collective bargaining, and the wage increase is based on the recommendation that was approved by the full board, he said.

“Last year the support staff received a flat raise,” Lech said. “This year it is a percentage increase.”

Support staff wages totaled more than $2.38 million for 2015-16. The 4 percent increase, or more than $178,300 increase, on each current employee’s hourly wage for the 2016-17 school term totals more than $2.56 million of the budget.

The Jamestown Public School District has six categories of support staff that range from paraeducators, custodians and food service staff to kitchen, front desk, librarians, custodians and groundskeepers. The positions also include clerks and secretaries, coordinators, technology workers, homeschool coordinators, test examiners, therapists and department managers.

Ken Aune, the music teacher at Jamestown Middle School, presented the Health Insurance Committee report, noting the teachers health insurance fund has a four-month cushion over expenses.

“The fund is being used well,” Aune said.

The Health Insurance Committee is working with a consultant to navigate changes with health care laws in the coming year to help avoid unnecessary taxes and costs, he said. Teachers should expect an increase in payments that will be “responsible and reasonable,” he said.

An ongoing 18-month study of the Affordable Care Act has resulted in a push to develop its own clinic site that would provide urgent care and general practitioner services for membership, Aune said. This would require partnering with one other area employer to reach the preferred 500 members to make it efficient and cost effective, he said.

The School Board also unanimously approved a $305,880 bid with bonding from Steve Hutcherson to replace the PoolPak, a heating and dehumidifier unit at the Jamestown High School swimming pool. The School Board also approved an additional $48,930 for air conditioning that will be installed during the construction.

Both items will come from the school district’s building fund, Lech said.

The School Board received a written report from Jodi Bayer, president of the Roosevelt Elementary School Parent Teacher Organization. Bayer reported that after seven years of working on a very active board there is little to no parent involvement for the current year, which resulted in the organization disbanding in March.

“We are trying hard to re-engage families to take on the mantle of leadership but we have not been successful,” Lech said.

An April 22 letter from the North Dakota Department of Public Instruction said Jamestown Public School District is in substantial compliance with 17 compliance and performance indicators of the Individuals with Disabilities Act.

“The Jamestown School District and the James Valley Special Education Unit received the highest designation of meets requirements,” Lech said. “I believe it shows the district and unit’s commitment to our students with special needs.”

In other business, the School Board:

• unanimously approved $176,028 in textbook purchases for JMS and JHS.

• recognized Jamestown High School students Mikayla Patel, Kassi Manley, Julia Breidenbach and Emily Lauinger for placing among the finalists at the state speech competition.

• recognized Lauinger and Patel for being named to the North Dakota All State Speech Team.

• recognized Fran Silbernagel for his commitment to recycling for the school district.

• unanimously approved a boys soccer co-op agreement with Pingree-Buchanan Public Schools.

• unanimously approved the release of contracts for teachers Jodi Zimmerman and Ashley Vinje, and approved hiring Lisa Anderson as an elementary counselor.

• unanimously approved no-cost tuition agreements for a Barnes County North senior to attend Jamestown Public School and for a JHS sophomore and junior to attend Barnes County North Public School.

tlaventure@jamestownsun.com

(701) 952-8455