Sunday's planned launch follows four previous delays

Doug Biesecker, shown last month, is the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's chief project scientist on the Deep Space Climate Observatory, scheduled to launch Sunday. ( Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera )

After several delays, NASA's Deep Space Climate Observatory mission is set to launch Sunday from Cape Canaveral Air Force Base, ensuring the continued forecasting capabilities of Boulder's Space Weather Prediction Center.

The launch, most recently rescheduled from Jan. 29, is set for 4:10 p.m. MST Sunday and can be watched on NASA TV starting at 1:30 MST.

The Space Weather Prediction Center is housed within the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration complex at the David Skaggs Research Center. It serves as the nation's early-warning provider for solar storms that carry the potential to knock out power grids, interfere with space operations or commercial airline traffic and more.

"This is a huge event for the Space Weather Prediction Center," said Doug Biesecker, chief project scientist on DSCOVR at NOAA.

"We've relied on a variety of research satellites off and on for the past 25 years. With DSCOVR being the first operational satellite at L1, NOAA has now committed to ensuring these measurements are always available."

L1 is shorthand for Lagrange point 1, a gravity-neutral orbit nearly 1 million miles from Earth. The sun is another 92 million miles beyond L1.

The launch of DSCOVR, keenly anticipated by the space weather prediction team, has experienced several delays, watching planned launch dates of Jan. 13, 23, 29 and 31 all slip past, with the SpaceX Falcon 9 v1.1 rocket that will carry it still sitting on the launch pad.

Advertisement

"The first delay, from Jan. 13 to 23rd, was programmatic," Biesecker said in an email. "The launch window closed on Jan. 14, so there could have been, at most, one attempt before a forced seven-day delay due to the moon being in the way.

"The next delays were due to the delay of the previous SpaceX launch to the ISS (International Space Station). The final one was another programmatic one."

SpaceX conducted a successful static fire test on DSCOVR's rocket Jan. 31.

Sunday's launch will also mark the second attempt by SpaceX to land a rocket's first stage on a platform in the ocean, known as the Autonomous Spaceport Drone Ship. That feat was first tried Jan. 10, for the launch of a mission that included state-of-the-art hardware from the University of Colorado destined for the International Space Station.

The Jan. 10 attempt was not entirely successful, with the rocket's core stage coming into the deck hard at an angle, then sliding off the side of the platform into the sea.

If the launch has to be scrubbed Sunday, an alternate launch time has been scheduled for 4:07 p.m. MST Monday.

Charlie Brennan: 303-473-1327, brennanc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/chasbrennan