(Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images)

“Their tax plan would give the average millionaire and billionaire a $50,000 tax cut. That’s about what the average middle-class worker makes in an entire year.”

— President Obama, Remarks at Working Mothers Town Hall, Charlotte, N.C., April 15, 2015

These comments by the president during a “town hall” event jumped out at The Fact Checker. It is a standard line among Democrats that Republican tax policies favor the rich. But this seemed to be a very specific claim — that the congressional Republicans as part of their tax plan want to give a $50,000 tax cut to the “average millionaire and billionaire.”

How factually accurate is this claim?

The Facts

The House Republican budget plan — which is nonbinding — has grand ambitions but few details. It proposes a comprehensive tax reform that would include lower rates for individuals and families as well as large corporations and small businesses who often file their tax returns through the individual side of the tax code. Moreover, the plan proposes to broaden the tax base by closing special interest loopholes that Republicans say distort economic activity.

The net result of all of these changes on revenue is supposed to be zero. That’s right, year after year, zero change from the existing revenue baseline. (See page 37.)

Is that realistic? Probably not, but that is certainly the stated ambition. In effect, that means that even if tax rates are reduced (which theoretically result in a windfall for the wealthy, who pay the lion’s share of taxes), that means enough loopholes would need to be identified in order make up the lost revenue. So there is one obvious place to go for that money — the wealthy. That because they pay most of the taxes.

There is one specific detail in the budget — repeal of the alternative minimum tax. This provision of the tax code was introduced as part of Ronald Reagan’s 1986 tax reform, which simplified rates, as an effort to make sure the wealthy always paid at least some taxes. Until recently, it was not indexed for inflation, which meant it increasingly hit the middle class. Now Republicans propose to get rid of it entirely. (President Obama at one point also proposed to replace the AMT with a minimum tax just on the super-rich.)

However, even with repeal of the AMT, the budget plan presumes the lost revenue will be captured somehow. “We meet the revenue baseline as defined by Congressional Budget Office through an entirely revamped tax code,” said William Allison, press secretary of the House Budget Committee. The heavy lifting of producing a plan that met this objective is left to the tax-writing committees of the Congress.

So how does the White House come up with its $50,000 statistic?

First, it zeros in on that one detail in the tax plan — repeal of the AMT. The nonpartisan Tax Policy Center calculated that the repeal alone would result in an average $9,437 tax change for taxpayers with income above $1 million.

Now it is worth noting that for people in this tax range, the tax change would result in just 0.3 percentage points reduction of their tax rate; they still would have an average tax rate of 35 percent. It is just that because Americans making more than $1 million already pay so much in taxes that their tax change appears so large. The largest proportion of the tax cut would go to a much larger group of taxpayers — people making between $200,000 and $500,000. The AMT has always had a bigger impact on the near-wealthy as opposed to the super-rich.

In any case, this is just one aspect of the Republican tax plan. The rest of Obama’s $50,000 statistic comes from the Republicans’ proposed repeal of the Affordable Care Act, again via an estimate by the Tax Policy Center. That law included an additional investment tax and increased Medicare taxes on the wealthy as part of its funding mechanism. Since the Republicans would junk the law, they would also get rid of the funding mechanism, which TPC says would give a $44,439 tax cut to those making more than $1 million.

Add the numbers for the ATM repeal and the ACA repeal, and you end up with an average tax cut of $53,876. (And, yes, the Census Bureau says median household income in 2013 was $51,939.) But more than 80 percent of the figure comes from the ACA repeal.

Administration officials argue that it is fair game to include as part of a “tax plan” because it is a specific tax revenue issue highlighted in the GOP budget. But, alternatively, one might ask why Republicans would keep a funding mechanism if they propose to get rid of the policies supported by those funds. Moreover, if Republicans actually propose an alternative to the ACA, as they promise, they will need to raise the needed revenue somehow.

If this debate seems familiar, it is because it is a replay of the tax battles between President Obama and Republican challenger Mitt Romney in the 2012 campaign. Romney offered vague details for tax reform similar to the House GOP plan, and the Obama campaign kept trying to fill in the details, emphasizing what it claimed was a tilt to millionaires and billionaires.

The Tax Policy Center examined what was known about Romney’s plan at the time and concluded it was not possible to do everything he proposed — that not enough loopholes for the rich could be closed in order to make up for Romney’s proposed rate cuts. (The current GOP plan, perhaps acknowledging that, does not even proposed specific rates.) So the only way to make the numbers add up was increasing taxes on the middle class, the report said.

But Donald Marron, at the time the TPC’s director, warned against jumping to conclusions without more specifics. “I don’t interpret this as evidence that Governor Romney wants to increase taxes on the middle class in order to cut taxes for the rich, as an Obama campaign ad claimed,” he wrote in a blog post. “Instead, I view it as showing that his plan can’t accomplish all his stated objectives. One can charitably view his plan as a combination of political signaling and the opening offer in what would, if he gets elected, become a negotiation.”

Administration officials say they are merely highlighting the practical impact of the few tax-related policies that can be identified in the Republican budget. Moreover, they say the president was not claiming this was the full impact of the House tax plan.

Allison says the statistic is unbalanced: “The president’s tired political attacks are conveniently ignoring the fact that we have called for fundamental reform of the entire tax code to make the code simpler and fairer for all Americans.”

The Pinocchio Test

Regular readers know that we are often wary of statistics that lack significant context. By emphasizing such a hard number — $50,000 — without acknowledging the Republicans say their tax plan is revenue-neutral, the president is only giving half of the picture, if that. He would certainly be on more solid ground if, even in a caustic aside, he mentioned that Republicans claim they will make up the difference.

As with the Romney campaign, Republicans leave themselves open to such an attack because they have provided only a handful of specific tax policies, most of which appear to favor the wealthy. Republicans would have stronger grounds to complain if they actually began to identify the loopholes that would be closed to pay for the rates. (Some Republicans, such as Sens. Mike Lee of Utah and Marco Rubio of Florida, have done so.)

In any case, the president’s statistic is worthy of Two Pinocchios.

Two Pinocchios





(About our rating scale)

Send us facts to check by filling out this form

Follow The Fact Checker on Twitter and friend us on Facebook