'I want to pet the big one'

A soggy morning blossomed into a warm and sunny day Saturday as hundreds of people lined up to enjoy a uniquely Boulder event.

A baby goat shower was hosted by Mountain Flower Goat Dairy, and the goat pen seemed to the first stop for all the kids.

Many children eagerly entered the goat pen and buzzed with excitement at a chance to play with seven goats that were about a month and a half old, and two more that were only two weeks old.

Although there were plenty of activities, the goats were the main attraction, especially for the younger kids.

Jenna Murray, 7, was among many of the kids excited to play with the baby goats.

"I came to see the baby goats," Jenna said.

Lilli Jendrass, 4, appears to love the attention from the baby goats. Mountain Flower Goat Dairy in Boulder held a "baby goat shower' on Saturday. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

Other than the baby goats, there were over a dozen adult goats as well as two llamas.

"I like the big one," Oliver Parry, who is 3, said. "I want to pet the big one."

There were many goat-themed activities that families were able to partake in like goat races, farm tours, bottle-feeding goat babies, taking pictures with baby goats and goat milking demonstrations.

It was 4-year-old Lilli Jendrass' first time attending the baby goat shower.

"I like the goats," Lilli said. "I like the black goat," she said as she pointed to a two-month old pregnant goat.

Taber Ward is the executive director and founder of Mountain Flower Goat Dairy and helped organize Saturday's festivities.

Advertisement

"I wanted to get people out here and have them get to know the animals," Ward said.

The event also included local music, food and wine from numerous sponsors around the Boulder community.

Admission into the event was $5 per party, which all went toward Mountain Flower, a nonprofit farm at 3980 N. Broadway that practices humane treatment of animals through agriculture and education.

"All the money goes to keep the farm afloat," farm director Michael Montgomery said. "First and foremost, it goes to animal care, then educational programs and then infrastructural updates."

Mountain Flower Goat Dairy is one of two nonprofit businesses at Long's Garden. Catherine Long, who owns 25 acres of land, said her family has been in business in Boulder for 110 years and owned this particular property for 99 years.

"We try to have things that benefit the community," Long said. "Goats are beneficial for their manure, they eat the weeds and turn it into fertilizer, so it is less input for us in making our soil healthier."

Mountain Flower has been in business for three years. This marks the second spring it has thrown a baby goat shower.

"We have a lot of partners, so we want to give them exposure," Ward said. "We want to build a community around food."

Mountain Flower seeks to not only educate people about being consumers, but also teach them that they are essential to the animals' health and wellness.

"I want to provide an alternative to the industrial food industry," Ward said. "Especially when it comes to animals and show people how to treat them in a humane way."