By Alice Salles | Watchdog Arena

If there’s one line item President Obama’s budget actually trims, it is the special deal between Washington and major pharmaceutical companies.

Back in 2009, several drug makers agreed to support the Affordable Care Act in exchange for political privilege. In return for protection against the Health and Human Services Department’s drug price dealings, Big Pharma agreed to back Obamacare by offering an $80 billion expansion in Medicaid discounts.

At the time, Big Pharma and other leading pharmaceutical giants were given concessions that now appear to have expired. That is, unless congressional budget committees decide to scrape off the changes proposed by the president.

According the The Wall Street Journal, Obama’s pharmaceutical partners may not have been entirely aware of the pact’s short shelf life:

The news is that Mr. Obama’s new budget proposal for 2016 reneges on the quid pro quo that some of the dumber drug makers cut in return for supporting ObamaCare in 2009. That transaction was supposed to buy political protection against the left-wing wish list of price controls, weakened patents and other extortion that Mr. Obama now endorses in his budget.

As reports on the hike in prices of a series of cancer drugs hit the news, the pharmaceutical industry is faced with two other major losses: cuts to extended patent terms and hospital-administered medicine payment rates.

Obama’s newly-proposed patent terms would cut the 12-year long intellectual property protection to seven years. It would also require companies to accept a slash in payment rates for hospital-administered medicines. Both measures harm Big Pharma’s current gains.

According to WSJ, Obama’s new proposal would even expand government discounts currently available to Medicaid and transfer them to the Medicare prescription benefit. However you slice it, Obama’s new budget proposal leaves Big Pharma with little to no control over their drugs’ prices.

Unfortunately for Americans, the president’s solution to the issue might prove worse than the poison. Why? Because competition is the first to suffer the consequences of price control.

Once government acts to keep prices immune from circumstantial changes, prices no longer provide accurate market signals to producers and consumers. Without accurate market signals, producers are unable to dedicate resources to the development of new products. As a result, innovation stagnates. Once direct price controls are put in place, pharmaceutical innovation will be the first to feel the crippling effects.

The more the president promises to intervene to remedy the consequences of his own health care law, the harder it may become for patients, especially those who cannot afford expensive health care coverage.

This mess shows the consequences of allowing bureaucrats to dictate how you do business by cutting special deals with government. If we are willing to allow the market to heal so that patients benefit, government must allow industries to compete. But for that to happen, the dissolving special deals between government and industry leaders shouldn’t be replaced by more centralization.

The American consumer can only be put first when the debate is focused on ending monopolies created by government and industry leaders.

This article was written by a contributor of Watchdog Arena, Franklin Center’s network of writers, bloggers, and citizen journalists.