Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

NEW ORLEANS (AP) — Golden State coach Steve Kerr dead-panned that he’d be relaxing on the beaches of Cabo San Lucas while waiting to find out who would be the Warriors’ second-round playoff opponent.

“I’ll be in Cabo all week. I told the guys just to get some work in if they want,” Kerr said, unable to stop himself from smiling before he got to the end of the sentence.

Among those who won’t be laughing is the Warriors’ next opponent, which will have to figure out how to stop Stephen Curry and Co. from scoring in bunches, as they did in their convincing four-game sweep of burgeoning young All-Star Anthony Davis and the upstart New Orleans Pelicans.

Now Golden State awaits the winner of the Memphis-Portland matchup. Memphis leads the series 3-0.

On Saturday night, the Warriors came through with their most complete performance of the first-round, building a 13-point lead at halftime, widening it to 24 late in the third quarter and squelching the Pelicans’ desperate, last-gasp bid in the fourth quarter, 109-98.

Curry scored against anyone the Pelicans sent out to guard him, including 6-foot-10 Anthony Davis, in the clinching game. He also hit 6 of 8 3s he put up to finish with 39 points.

When he wasn’t scoring, he had plenty of help from Klay Thompson and Draymond Green.

Curry averaged 33.8 points during the series, while Thompson averaged 25 points and Green, 15.8.

“You play great defense and all of a sudden it looks like they’re throwing up a shot, but it goes in,” Davis said. “It’s tough. Hats off to them. They made incredible shots through the course of the series. We tried our best to stay attached to them, but they did a great job. Some of it was us and some of it was them hitting tough shots.”

Meanwhile, Andrew Bogut made it hard on any Pelican player trying to score inside, blocking eight shots in the series and altering many more.

“They’re built to win a championship. They’re probably the most complete team that we faced, them and San Antonio,” Pelicans coach Monty Williams said. “I had to watch games that they lost just to see what teams did against them because you just don’t see it when they’re winning games. You’re like, ‘Where’s the weakness?’ So to me, they just don’t have many weaknesses, if any. Obviously they’re well coached and they have great players.”