Wrestling: Z-M punches six tickets to state

Zumbrota-Mazeppa's Joey Majerus searches for a hold against Jared Goldsmith of Chatfield during the 120-pound, Section 1A finals Saturday at Mayo Civic Center in Rochster. Majerus won the match, 6-4, to earn a berth in the state tournament. (Republican Eagle photo by Kyle Stevens)

ROCHESTER - Joey Majerus had to go the distance twice, and the last time was worth every minute as the Zumbrota-Mazeppa 120-pounder beat top-seeded Jared Goldsmith of Chatfield, 6-4, to win a Section 1A championship Saturday at the Mayo Civic Center in Rochester, and earn a spot in the Class 1A state tournament next weekend.

Hayden Stensland (113) will also head to St. Paul as individual after taking second place. Stensland lost 9-0 to Pine Island’s Noah Bauer in the title match after upsetting top-seeded Kaleb Olson of Wabasha-Kellogg in the semifinals.

Maverick Jackson (132) did everything the hard way on Saturday, winning his first match before falling 12-5 to Corbin Powrie of Dover-Eyota in the quarterfinals. Jackson then pinned Hunter Jennings, and Jacy Ball before getting his revenge on Powrie in the third-place match to set up a true second place match with Isaac Haman of Pine Island. Jackson wouldn’t let the opportunity slip by, beating Haman 9-4 to clinch a spot at state.

Z-M continued its march to state with Freedom Hunt’s true-second-place victory over Goodhue’s Kaleb O’Reilly. Hunt earned his state berth with a 5-0 win over O’Reilly, which followed an easy quarterfinal victory, an overtime pin in the semifinals, and a loss by fall in the finals to Chatfield’s Hank Friederichs.

Devin Manzy cruised into the 160-pound finals, but fell 14-3 to Kenyon-Wanamingo’s Ted Androli. Manzy beat third-place winner Keaton Schaefer of Dover-Eyota, 9-4 in the semifinals, and did not need a true second-place match to head to state.

Dillon Downes handled Dover-Eyota’s Michael Otomo, 10-5, in the 170-pound semifinals, so Otomo’s third-place victory, and Downes’ 3-2 loss to Kenyon-Wanamingo’s Drew Sathrum in the finals was enough for a trip to the Class 1A state tournament.

Caden Steffen (152) lost a true second-place match to Goodhue’s Bailee O’Reilly, 3-2.

In addition to sending six wrestlers to the individual tournament, as well as the whole team after winning the Section 1A team title last weekend, the Cougars also left Rochester with some hardware for a couple of instructors as Link Steffen was named Section 1A Head Coach of the Year, and Mark Krier was named the Section 1A Assistant Coach of the Year.