New “Crowd-Control” Drones Will Shoot Protesters With Pepper Spray

India is the first place where drones will be used for this purpose, but it will likely expand to many other countries within a short amount of time. These types of ideas tend to spread quickly among tyrants.

(By John Vibes for The ANTIMEDIA) New drones are being developed to shoot protesters with pepper spray, as well as taking photos and videos of the crowd. India is the first place where drones will be used for this purpose, but it will likely expand to many other countries within a short amount of time. These types of ideas tend to spread quickly among tyrants.

“We have purchased five drone cameras with capacity of lifting two kilogram weight. They can be used to shower pepper powder on an unruly mob in case of any trouble,” Yashasvi Yadav, of the Lucknow Police said.

The drones will cost roughly $1,000 per unit and will be ready for action sometime this month. A prototype of these drones were used by the Indian government earlier in the year, for Muharram and Republic day, and the government was so pleased with the technology that they decided to develop a full-time arsenal of these drones.



official MintPress sponsor official MintPress sponsor

“We had used drone cameras and they were so effective that we have decided to purchase them instead of hiring them,” Yadav said.

Moves like this make it obvious that governments are preparing for war with their citizens. Why else would you want to indiscriminately spray entire crowds of people with pepper spray? Technology like this is obviously meant to scare large groups of people into submission, not specifically target people who are guilty of crimes.

This article (New “Crowd-Control” Drones Will Shoot Protesters With Pepper Spray) is free and open source. You have permission to republish this article under a Creative Commons license with attribution to the author andTheAntiMedia.org. Tune in to the Anti-Media radio show Monday through Friday @ 11pm Eastern/8pm Pacific. Help us fix our typos: edits@theantimedia.org.



John Vibes is an author, researcher and investigative journalist who takes a special interest in the counter culture and the drug war. In addition to his writing and activist work he organizes a number of large events including the Free Your Mind Conference, which features top caliber speakers and whistle-blowers from all over the world. You can contact him and stay connected to his work at his Facebook page. You can find his 65 chapter Book entitled “Alchemy of the Timeless Renaissance” at bookpatch.com.