The Buffalo Sabres have been awful while closing in on having the best shot of winning the NHL’s draft lottery, which translates to landing prized prospect Connor McDavid of the Ontario Hockey League’s Erie Otters.

Too bad there isn’t a pithy catchphrase for it, as when the Broncos — and others, most notably the Indianapolis Colts — had their eye on Stanford quarterback Andrew Luck.

The Avalanche took advantage of the Sabres’ ineptitude Saturday night at the Pepsi Center, taking a 4-0 lead after two periods and going on to a sloppy 5-3 victory to get within eight points of the Winnipeg Jets and the second wild-card playoff slot in the Western Conference.

Avs Mailbag: Pose a question for Terry Frei, Mike Chambers

Matt Duchene had his 19th goal of the season and two assists in perhaps his best game in a month. His linemate, veteran winger Jarome Iginla, had three assists — with the first one giving him 1,220 career points and pulling him out of a tie with Jean Beliveau for 40th place on the NHL all-time list.

“I played no different than I have been,” Duchene said. “It was one of those nights where things finally went in the net. Iggy and I haven’t been on for many against, and I don’t think we were on for a goal against on the (three-game Canada) road trip and we weren’t tonight. We’re getting tons of chances. It was real frustrating on the road trip not to be able to contribute, especially in those first two games where we could have been the difference. I know I took it real hard and I was disappointed, but hopefully it’s not too late now.”

Workhorse Semyon Varlamov was back in the Colorado net and wasn’t particularly sharp as the Sabres showed some spunk in the third period, but he had 35 saves in claiming his 26th win of the season in front of a sellout crowd.

“First of all, I liked the buzz in the building,” said Colorado coach Patrick Roy. “The fans were there and they were behind us, and I thought that’s what we needed. When you are playing your fourth game in six days, you need that energy and they gave us that energy that you need to play for the first 40 minutes.

“I thought we were solid for the first 40 and at the end we were a little tired. Obviously, it’s not the kind of third period we like to see, but at the same time, you look at the schedule we’ve been through. … I’d have to say I’m not surprised to see that happen.”

With seven games left, the postseason remains a longshot for Colorado, but the win was the Avalanche’s second in a row after the potentially demoralizing losses at Calgary and Edmonton.

Marc-Andre Cliche and John Mitchell scored 32 seconds apart midway through the first to give the Avalanche a 2-0 lead. Cody McLeod’s nifty backhanded pass from behind the net set up Cliche. Duchene made the play that led to the second goal, carrying the puck in and getting off the shot that Mitchell, in front, deflected past Buffalo goalie Anders Lidback, destined to be pulled after the first period.

In the second, Tyson Barrie’s 12th goal of the season and Duchene’s goal — from straight out off the rush — made it 4-0.

Buffalo’s Andre Meszaros scored twice in the third to ruin Varlamov’s shutout, and the goals were sandwiched around a goal by Colorado defenseman Brad Stuart. Then Rasmus Ristolainen got the Sabres to within 5-3 at 8:43 of the third.

Avalanche winger Dennis Everberg didn’t play in the third period, but Roy declined to be specific about the injury, saying, “We’ll know more tomorrow.”

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei