Are you working part time, but want more hours? How about someone you know? Tell us about it below in comments.

CLEVELAND, Ohio – Many Americans work part time out of choice; but substantial numbers of them are holding part-time jobs when they really want full-time work.

The issue of people working only part time when they want more hours became prevalent during The Great Recession, which officially ran from December 2007 to June 2009.

In a time of high unemployment, such as a recession, job seekers often settled for fewer hours rather than face joblessness. The Labor Department officially refers to these workers as working part time for economic reasons. In 2014, more than 7.2 million workers fell into this category. They are also known as involuntary part-time workers.

That number was lower than during the early part of the recovery, but still higher than pre-recession levels, according to Paul LaPorte, an economist at the Labor Department's Bureau of Labor Statistics in Chicago.

"The peak was in 2009, when the number of persons working part time for economic reasons was about 8.9 million," he said. "Since 2009, that number has been on the decline as we have been adding jobs in the economy."

In this article, data regarding people involuntarily working part time is being compared on an annual basis. That means the latest data available is for 2014. However, a glance at more recent Labor Department data confirms that the number of people working part time, though they wanted a full-time job, has declined. For example, the monthly federal jobs report placed the number of people working part-time for economic reasons at about 6.4 million in June, down by about 1.4 million from June 2014.

But such numbers are not impressive when contrasted with those from about a decade earlier. For example, in 2006, about 4.1 million people were involuntarily working part time, LaPorte said. He said that number, though considerably lower than the one for 2014, had steadily increased since the early 2000s.

The Labor Department considers anyone working less than 35 hours a week to be a part-time worker. Workers most often selected the category of "slack work or business conditions" as the major reason for not having full-time hours. In 2014, About 4.3 million workers cited this reason. "Could only find part-time work," came in second, with nearly 2.6 million giving it as a reason for involuntarily working part time.

Most part-time workers are not involuntary part-time workers. In 2014, about 27.7 million chose to work part time for a variety of reasons. The reasons most often given for choosing to work part time were being enrolled in school or a training program (5.8 million), fulfilling family or personal obligations (about 4.7 million) and another 2.4 million said they worked part time because they were retired or needed to limit hours in order to receive Social Security benefits.

Nicholas Buffie of the Center for Economic and Policy Research in Washington, D.C. said voluntary part-time employment increased by 7.4 percent since the fourth quarter of 2014. He attributed this increase to people who had previously only been working full-time hours to qualify for medical coverage. They now chose part-time work because they could take advantage of the Affordable Care Act, also referred to as Obamacare.

Despite this, millions of Americans involuntarily continue working part time. This recovery after The Great Recession has been uncharacteristic of other more recent recoveries because trends, such as high numbers of involuntary part-time workers and long-term unemployed workers, have persisted so deep into the recovery.

Perhaps, a recent national survey, in which more than 2,300 hiring and human resource managers were polled, offers a glimmer of hope to those looking for full-time employment.

Nearly half of employers said they planned to hire slightly more full-time, permanent employees during the second half of 2015, according to a Harris Poll done for CareerBuilder, the global human resource and recruiting company based in Chicago. However, employers said they would also hire slightly more part-time and temporary workers. 28 percent said they planned to more part-time workers and 34 percent said they intended to hire more temporary and contract workers.

We would like to hear your story about working a part-me job or jobs, though your goal is full-time employment. Please feel free to email me at operkins@plaind.com.

Vote in our poll on the subject: Why aren't employers hiring more full-time workers? The Beat (poll)

Three things to know about part-time workers who want full-time jobs

1. They tended to be clustered in certain industries and occupations. "Service occupations had the largest number, followed by sales and office occupations," LaPorte said.

Here were some common occupations involuntary part-time workers held: food preparation positions, retail clerks, protective service (including security guards) jobs, groundskeeping positions, building maintenance and cleaning jobs, child care workers, personal care and home health aides.

"Among those groups, they are generally your lower-paying jobs," he said.

Some of these job titles,including home health aides, have been among the fast-growing occupations during the recovery.

LaPorte said the sectors in which involuntary part-time workers were most likely to be employed included: wholesale and retail, leisure and hospitality and education and health service.

The Labor Department often groups more than one industry in a sector. LaPorte said home health aides and other lower-paying health care workers most likely accounted for a large number of the involuntary part-time workers in the education and health services sector.

2. The percentage of involuntary part-time workers varied by race. Asian workers were the least likely to involuntarily work part time in 2014, La Porte said. Hispanic workers were the most likely.

Here is the breakdown:

About 4.2 percent of Asian workers involuntarily worked part time.

About 4.8 percent of white workers involuntarily working part time.

About 6.9 percent of black workers were involuntarily working part time.

About 7.9 percent of Hispanic workers were involuntarily working part time.

3. Women were more likely than men to be involuntary workers. About 4.7 percent of male workers were working part-time hours in 2014, though they wanted full-time employment. About 5.6 percent of female workers were working part time, though they wanted full-time hours.