University of Portland School of Nursing professor Lorretta Krautscheid, left, works with UP nursing student Mark Lundquist as he cares for young patient Zach Harrington.

A racing heartbeat, shaking hands, faltering speech: A seasoned nurse may notice these symptoms when evaluating a patient. But they might not be symptoms of a patient but rather of a nursing student coming face to face with his or her first patient in a hospital room or ICU.



The leap from textbooks, classrooms and simulations to working with sick patients in rooms that may be crowded with medical equipment and doctors has been known to strike fear in the heart of a young nursing student.

"When we have people’s lives in our hands and are interacting with real patients, it’s intimidating," University of Portland senior nursing student Jaclyn Bieber says. "The first couple of days you’re really struggling and feeling overwhelmed."

That anxiety-producing clinical experience is a vital part of nursing education. It converts "knowing" into "doing." It helps students get past their fears, developing calmness and confidence. It’s a formative experience that may help a student make life-changing decisions about his or her career.

But when University of Portland School of Nursing administrators evaluated the way their clinical program was administered in 2001, they identified shortcomings that detracted from the student experience and limited the school’s potential to meet an increasing enrollment demand.

[RANKINGS: Top Graduate Schools in Nursing]

"There was a vigorous discussion about a pending nurse shortage," says UP School of Nursing Dean Joanne Warner. "Oregon nursing leaders set a goal of doubling the School of Nursing enrollment by 2004."

"The University of Portland nursing faculty said, 'We can’t do it under the same model. In order to accomplish this we can’t just do more with what we had.' That was the impetus," says Warner, who came to UP in 2005.

And in 2003, the school took a cue from a program pioneered at Flinders University in Australia and created a Dedicated Education Unit clinical education model. The essence of this model was to tap into the vast and expert knowledge of veteran nurses at health care facilities in Portland and turn them into teachers.



Nursing student Jamie Sharp, center, works with staff at Providence St. Vincent Medical Center.



And by connecting with highly qualified nurses who have a strong desire to teach, they are getting first-rate, clinical instructors without hiring more faculty.

"The traditional clinical experience has been for one nurse faculty and six to 10 students to descend on a unit and do their work. It was very siloed," Warner said. "The faculty had responsibility for every clinical activity and evaluating the students. Meanwhile, agency nurses went about their work of providing care and, hopefully, not being interrupted."

Janet Banks, a nursing instructor at UP, explained her experience in the traditional system:

"My role would be to be at the side of the student at every procedure: administering medicine, catheterization, changing bandages. If I have eight students, sometimes I would need to be at eight different places at the same time." Staff nurses were on hand, but it was hit and miss whether they had the time, interest or ability to help students. "Some were really good at working with students, and some were not," Banks said. A staff nurse may get different students each day with varying levels of training.

The DEU model takes people out of their silos and gets them working toward the same goals: quality patient care, hands-on training for students and professional development for nurses.

Nurses with a track record for excellence who express a desire to teach are invited to be “clinical instructors.” They go through an orientation with UP staff to help them learn teaching skills, student evaluation methods and what abilities to expect in the students they will be mentoring. A member of the UP faculty, termed a “clinical faculty coordinator,” still plays a role in the on-site student training, but is more focused on coaching the instructors rather than the students, Banks said. For this reason, a faculty member can manage up to about 20 students per rotation, more than twice as many as before, she said.

"It’s the creation of [an] optimal learning environment in the very place that care is being given," Warner says. "Everybody cooperates with the idea that we’re all here to learn. The nurse educator understands the model and is an expert and is teaching from that wisdom."

[READ: 4 Ways Medical Industry Changes Shape School Curricula]

UP’s success in developing and promoting DEUs as a national model has attracted grant support from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, which has made a commitment to addressing an acute shortage of nursing faculty through its program, Evaluating Innovations in Nursing Education.

Dr. Michael Yedidia of Rutgers University, who directs the program for the foundation, says it is "focused on funding evaluations of innovations that can increase teaching productivity, improve faculty work life and faculty recruiting while maintaining or improving the quality of education."

He says the clinical training portion of nursing education is of particular importance. Traditional approaches are unlikely to meet the growing demand for trained nurses, accelerated by the broadening role nurses will play treating those newly insured under the Affordable Care Act and meeting the needs of an aging population.

"There is a great need for more nurses who are prepared to take on new roles in health care delivery systems," Yedidia says.

The delegation of teaching responsibility to clinical staff, such as in a DEU, is very promising, he says. "I have a lot of faith in the ability of staff nurses to take this on, if they are given teaching skills and are supported in that role."

[READ: Hospital of Yesterday: The Biggest Changes in Health Care]

The Portland VA Medical Center has been a DEU partner with University of Portland for 10 years, and offers an example of how the arrangement works. Nurse manager Cindy Fahy said the hospital has 24 trained, clinical instructors, a few of whom participate in a rotation at any one time. The student rotations are five weeks long and consist of nine 12-hour shifts. Each clinical instructor is responsible for four patients and two students, with each student being assigned to two of those patients, Fahy says.

The students work side by side with their clinical instructors, who explain and demonstrate procedures. Gradually, as the clinical instructor gains more confidence in students’ abilities, the students take on greater responsibility in the care of patients.

Why would a nurse or facility willingly take on the responsibilities and burdens of mentoring students, for little or no additional compensation? Part of it is an ethic recognizing that training the next generation of nurses is part of being a nurse. Another reason is that managers gain the benefit of being able to recruit employees from among the top students who rotate through their facility. But there are other reasons.

"Teaching is a lot of work, but it’s a satisfier. It raises the bar for the nurses to continue to engage in best practice. And I have students coming in requesting positions, saying they love working with veterans," Fahy says.

[RANKINGS: Online Graduate Nursing Degrees]

Karina Schneiders, a staff nurse and clinical instructor in a DEU at University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, put it this way: "For me, it’s a way to get promoted. … I see the big picture. I’m a better team player and the learning doesn’t stop." Other clinical instructors say having students reduces boredom, ups the energy level of the facility and reminds them of why they became nurses.

Schneiders attended a mid-July conference in Portland hosted by the UP School of Nursing to discuss and share successful experiences with DEUs and ideas about the future. Susan Moscato, Tyson Distinguished Emerita Professor at UP, spoke at the conference and called DEUs "learning in the midst of excellence."

"It’s situational coaching ... it’s interactive," Moscato says. "The nurse says, 'This is what I’m thinking. This is why I’m doing this.' Students are valued as learners. There is open and safe communication. They get into the culture and work flow of the unit. At the end, students are taking care of the patients."

"The traditional model still works," Moscato said, "but the partnership comes alive with the DEU."

[READ: Hospitals Make Progress on the Path to Safety]

Research by Moscato and others shows that DEUs are effective at increasing the number of students getting clinical experience. In 2002, before DEUs were implemented, an average of 16.2 students were placed in clinical units during the academic year. But in DEUs established since 2006, placements ranged between 50 and 60 placements per year.

The nervousness that UP senior Jaclyn Bieber experienced in her first clinical encounters has given way to strong sense of confidence. "I don’t feel intimidated anymore. I can go into a room, do an assessment, check medications. I just tell a patient, 'I’m going to list to your heart now. I’m going to listen to your lungs.'"

"For me, the biggest reward is having a challenging patient and winning them over. I leave somebody at the end of the day and they appreciate the care I gave them and I appreciate the opportunity to have cared for them."

And Bieber follows the advice of her first teacher – her mother – who was a nurse: "Never judge a patient by their chart. Treat everybody as an individual and take each interaction as something unique."