The Talmage and Lilly Stage near the Boulder Sanitarium, background, on Mapleton at Fourth Street. The Sanitarium smokestack can be seen on the right in the distance ( T.B. Sturtevant / M. R. Parsons collection )

The future of the Boulder Sanatorium site, located at Fourth and Mapleton, could go two ways: It could be scraped off for redevelopment and huge profits but destroying its historic values, or it could be preserved and rebuilt, maintaining its relevance as a Boulder historic landmark.

It is sandwiched between the Mapleton Historic district and the historic Sanitas Valley. This site is of significant interest to the public and should be reviewed by the City Council, the Planning Board and the citizens of Boulder before plans for it destruction are approved by the Planning Department.

The Sanitas Valley is historically significant. The sandstone quarries are the first obvious view of past activities. There is the foundation of the Churchill homestead about half way up the valley. On the hogs-back ridge, there are the remains of activities of the residents of the Sanatorium — a stone shelter and a picturesque bridge over the irrigation ditch. The Sanatorium site is of historic significance as can be seen in the Sturtevant photo of the Sanitorium with the historic chimney on the right side.

The buildings have been progressively modernized so the remaining structures should be assessed for historic significance. Of importance is the chimney.

Advertisement

This chimney is of great educational and historic value. It represents state-of-the-art smokestack development. It is made of concrete with a brick liner and should have the lifetime of "Roman" concrete. It could easily be used for an astronomical transit telescope for students. Note that there are even architectural artistic features near the top.

There is a precedent in Colorado for designating a Salida smokestack as historic in the National Register of Historic Places (visit http://cozine.com/2012-october/standing-tall-a-monument-to-environmental-protection/).

The historic Sanitarium site, notably the smokestack, is visible from many of Boulders mountain park trails. Mount Sanitas is in the background. (Alan Delamere / Courtesy Photo)

On April 28, the developers of the Mapleton site made a presentation to selected members of the Mapleton Hill community. They addressed all hot buttons that have been under serious review over the past year. Senior housing, warm pool, affordable housing for employees, health care facilities were included. Access to the Sanitas Valley trails and some diagonal parking on Mapleton Avenue were in their plan.

The problems I see with the investors plan are:

1. Activity in the Sanitas Valley has increased a lot over the past few years, and much more parking is needed. There are currently 420 parking slots on the Sanatorium site, and they plan to reduce it to 160 for use by residents. Currently, people are using these parking lots for access to the Sanitas Valley.

2. The plan calls for a complete scrap off of the site, with the creation of a series of plateaus/cliffs.

3. The pseudo-Victorian new designs are incompatible with long-term goals of sustainable systems. The roofs are incompatible with adding solar panels, as can be seen at the Trailhead development next door.

The choices are either to go along with the investors plan to make as much money as possible from the site, or to think about making it a sustainable development for the benefit of future Boulder citizens.

It should be an extension of our historic district and be subject to the same rules with which we homeowners must comply. For example, we are not allowed to scrap off our energy inefficient homes and replace them with highly efficient designs.

The top of the Sanatorium smokestack features architectural artistic features. (Alan Delamere / Courtesy Photo)

The investors showed a concept of keeping the existing buildings, but rapidly dismissed them as being energy inefficient and costing thousands of dollars to adapt. The best return was the "scrap off" approach with the potential of millions of dollars return. Selling/renting 150 expensive senior housing units could return millions of dollars. They chose as their meeting location "The Academy" building. At the Academy, seniors pay a membership fee of $330,000 to $675,000 followed by $5,045 to $13,000 per month for accommodation and/or services (for more, see http://www.theacademyboulder.com/residences/pricing/).

My recommendation to the city and the investors is to make the site an outstanding example of Boulder's commitment to sustainability.

• Use the existing parking lots for installation of a solar garden, geothermal wells and public parking for our open space.

• Keep the existing warm pool.

• Install solar panels on all the nicely available flat roofs

• Use the existing building for low-cost senior housing and office space.

• Incorporate the site into the historic district and install historic makers.

Now is the time for us to take action before plans are cast in concrete and the bulldozers have moved in. I am requesting that the City Council and the Planning Board put this site on their agenda for detailed public review.

Alan Delamere lives in Boulder.