A juvenile who made a threat made via social media against students at Hamilton High School is in custody.

According to tweets from the Chandler Police Department, detectives working the case identified the suspect early Monday morning.

A juvenile suspect has been arrested in the Hamilton High threat case. There is no real threat. Police will be at Hamilton High tomorrow. — Chandler Police (@ChandlerPolice) January 25, 2016

Police said the juvenile who posted the threat did it as a joke and the suspect posed no real threat.

To ease concerns, extra security will be on hand at the school Monday morning.

The threat was made via Snapchat, a popular social media app.

The post reads," If you go to Hamilton. Just dont [sic] come 2morrow [sic]," and has a clip art picture of a handgun.

No other details were immediately available.

Detectives have identified the suspect in this case. The juvenile suspect has been taken into custody. The threat... https://t.co/t0GvGbEJ4S — Chandler Police (@ChandlerPolice) January 25, 2016

Although the Chandler Police Department posted on its Facebook and Twitter pages, there was nothing on the Hamilton High School or Chandler Unified School District social media accounts or websites as of 10 p.m.

Supposed threat of gun violence tomorrow at Hamilton High in Chandler. Attendance expected to be light according to some Tweeps — barrett marson (@barrettmarson) January 25, 2016

Not the first Snapchat threat

This is not the first time Snapchat has been used to make a threat against a Valley school.

In September, a 16-year-old student at Sierra Linda High School was arrested and suspended for a Snapchat post that showed students in a school hallway with the text "Planning the school shooting" and smiling emojis.

[RELATED: School shooting threat on Snapchat prompts arrest, suspension]

A teenager in Colorado spotted the post and reported it.

According to the Phoenix Police Department, the teen who was arrested and suspended admitted he was behind the post, but claimed it was a prank.

Snapchat is a mobile messaging app that is particularly popular with teens and young adults. It allows users to send photos and videos that are deleted within seconds. In addition to Snaps, which last up to 10 seconds, users also can send Stories, which are Snaps that last for up to 24 hours.

Although Snaps vanish from Snapchats servers, there is nothing to stop users from capturing screenshots of Snaps on their phones or tablets.

Fourth threat at a Chandler school in less than a week

Last week, students at Willis Junior High School were evacuated for a time because of a bomb threat. The threat came a day after a series of school threats, not just across the Valley, but throughout the country.

Chandler's San Tan Junior High and Hancock Elementary were among the dozens of U.S. schools placed on lockdown or evacuated last Tuesday. The students were released as usual at the end of the day. Nothing of concern was found at any of the schools that received threats.

The Chandler Police Department does not believe Wednesday's incident at Willis was connected to Tuesday's threats.

The Chandler Police Department and Chandler Unified School District are offering a $3,000 reward for information about the person or people responsible for the bomb threat and subsequent evacuation.

[RELATED: Reward offered for information about bomb threat at Chandler school]

Reporter Amanda Goodman contributed to this story.

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.