A phlebotomist administers a flu shot to Kelly McKinley in Louisville. Reader Troy May writes to say Gov.-elect Matt Bevin’s plan to dismantle Kynect will hike the cost of insurance and swell the ranks of the uninsured. (Photo: Louisville Courier-Journal/Alton Strupp)

Covington resident Troy May is a graduate student at Cincinnati Christian University.

If Kentucky Governor-elect Matt Bevin dismantles the health care exchange, known as Kynect, he will be going against the state’s business community and hurt average Kentuckians like myself. As a resident of Covington, a full-time graduate student and part-time worker, I purchase a federally subsidized health plan from Anthem via Kynect.

Bevin claims that once Kynect is shut down, I can obtain the same health plan on the federal exchange, but that’s not true. Anyone who claims that Kynect is just a duplicate service of the federal exchange doesn’t understand the system or the benefits Kynect provides.

Kynect.com provides access to affordable health insurance by offering federal subsidies to help people afford monthly premiums. I pay $132 a month for a comprehensive health plan with Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield. My monthly premium amount is based on my income and expenses. There are plans for under $50 a month. The working poor can also obtain Medicaid insurance through Kynect depending on their economic status.

Troy May (Photo: Provided)

Most people in the state don’t even realize the benefits of Kynect, not even those who have obtain Medicaid coverage through the program. Some of the counties with the highest rate of Medicaid, voted for Bevin, not knowing they were casting a vote to have their health insurance card snatched right out of their hands. Bevin claims all the new people on Medicaid will be a financial drain on the state budget. We all know that the Medicaid program needs reform, but Bevin doesn’t have to shut down Kynect and my access to high-quality health plans to reform Medicaid.

The Kentucky Chamber of Commerce and Kentucky Hospital Association worked with the state to develop the best market exchange in the country. The business community has endorsed Kynect because it provides access to affordable health plans for the uninsured workers of small businesses at no cost to the state. Kynect is such a great technology platform that other states may purchase the system for their state, generating revenue for Kentucky.

Kynect officials work directly with health insurers to develop top-quality health plans for the people of Kentucky. Kynect offers a long list of benefits for Kentuckians that aren’t offered on the federal exchange.

If Bevin shuts down Kynect it will cause me to pay more every month for health insurance and get less coverage. Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield already told me my health plan is not available on the federal exchange. And shutting down Kynect would create financial barriers for me to obtain expensive medicine I need because of a childhood illness.

Since Kynect was launched over a year ago, the uninsured rate in Kentucky has dropped by half. Dismantling Kynect would cause the uninsured rate to escalate once again. It would be cruel of Bevin to take away people’s health insurance and access to high-quality health plans by dismantling Kynect.

There is no logical reason to shut down Kynect other than pure politics motivated by Republicans who don’t like Obamacare. Plus, it’s estimated that shutting down the program could cost the state upward of $23 million to pay for the huge task of transitioning hundreds of thousands of people off their health insurance.

I’m confident that the majority of good people in Kentucky don’t want me or anyone else in the state to suffer because of a political dispute between Republicans and Democrats over Obamacare. I beg Bevin to put Kentuckians ahead of politics and leave Kynect alone.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1QoTq0A