Amy Dondale (Photo: Courtesy photo)

Recent stories about sexual assault in the news are bringing issues of victims' experiences to the forefront of a national conversation. When victims’ stories appear to change, or details do not line up, it is tempting to doubt the veracity of their statements. Making sense of these complex issues starts with awareness of the trauma that victims of sexual assault suffer, and its effect on the reporting process. Sexual assault is not an act that someone can simply shake off, especially when they experience violence at the hands of a person they trusted to respect their boundaries.

Trauma affects the brain’s ability to process memory, and victims may not process or recall memories of the traumatic event as a linear and coherent story. Variations in the timeline or details of a sexual assault, as well as the surfacing of repressed memories, are an anticipated result of trauma and not a conscious choice of the victim to tell their story differently. It does not mean a victim is lying. According to the National Violence Against Women Prevention Research Center, 31% of all rape victims develop Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) sometime during their lifetime. The National Institute of Mental Health lists changes to or loss of memory as a symptom of PTSD.

Not reporting to authorities does not indicate a victim is being evasive or is making a false accusation. Disjointed memories, embarrassment, fear of not being believed, and the stress of multiple recounts of a sexual assault often keep victims from reporting. Responding to victims with doubt or dismissing victim’s stories because of variations over time only serves to perpetuate victim blaming attitudes. It also discourages individuals from seeking help and impedes the ability of the legal system to identify and punish dangerous perpetrators.

Hearing about a sexual assault is always a difficult and emotional experience; we all would prefer to think it doesn't happen in our community. We can direct change and support victims through the reporting process with a better understanding of what victims experience. Understanding will also end destructive myths and stereotypes about sexual violence.

Amy Dondale is a Sexual Assault Victim Advocate (SAVA) Center Board member who lives in Fort Collins.

Read or Share this story: http://noconow.co/1AWoVr5