The engaged gay couple that appears in the launch video for Hillary Clinton Hillary Rodham ClintonDNC chair: I'm 'focused on doing my job' Auto workers union endorses Clinton Libertarian Party sees spike in registration, fundraising MORE’s 2016 campaign is inviting the former secretary of State to attend their wedding.

Jared Milrad, who appeared in the video along with fiance Nathan Johnson, tweeted out the invitation for Clinton to celebrate their marriage in person.

Thanks for inviting us to your big day @HillaryClinton. We're returning the favor & inviting you to ours. #wedding pic.twitter.com/paMtBFLLUW — Jared Milrad (@JaredMilrad) April 12, 2015

ADVERTISEMENT

“Yes, we'd be genuinely delighted to have Secretary Clinton at our wedding,” Milrad said in an email confirming that the tweet had not just been an homage to his favored presidential candidate. “We've long admired her both as a person and a leader, and to have her share in our special moment would make it extra special for us.”

On Sunday, Clinton launched her campaign with a short video that features Americans saying what they are planning to do in 2015 — including Milrad and Johsnon. Clinton appears about a minute-and-a-half into the video.

“I’m getting ready to do something too,” she said. “I’m running for president.”

Johnson said in an interview with the Washington Blade that he and Milrad had been contacted by a friend about participating in a video.

“When we were first contacted, they basically told us a little bit about what they would be doing and said they were interviewing people going through big changes in life and also said that it was something affiliated with Hillary, but didn’t exactly say what it would be,” Johnson told the newspaper, which covers the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community.

“So they just mainly wanted to hear our story about that and our life and decision to get married and how we’re dealing with that and how excited we are about that.”

According to the Blade, Johnson and Milrad will be married on July 19 at a park by Lake Michigan in Chicago.