KENDALLVILLE, Ind. (WANE) – Candidates for Indiana’s 3rd District held a forum in the Kendallville Public Library Saturday morning.

Congressional candidates who participated in the event include Republicans Liz Brown, Pam Galloway, Jim Banks, and Kip Tom; and Democrat Todd Nighten-helser.

For the candidates it was an opportunity to talk to voters about issues important to them. As for third district constituents, it was their chance to see exactly where the candidates stand.

Michele Kilogore was one of dozens of people showed up to hear from the candidates. The state of Indiana’s economy was at the top of her mind.

“I would like to see our economy grow,” she said. “I feel that a lot of our manufacturing companies are moving out of the country and I’m concerned that a lot of people are needing jobs.”

Candidates discussed how to move the economy forward and create job growth.

“I’ve worked with Governor Daniels in the Indiana economic development corporation bringing jobs back to the Hoosier state,” said candidate Kip Tom. “I’ve got a lazer focus on how to build the economy and bring those better paying jobs for all the Hoosiers and the people in the 3rd district here.”

They also discussed other hot-button issues like the Affordable Care Act, illegal immigration, and education.

Liz Brown said if she is elected into office her number one priority would be getting rid of the Affordable Care Act.

“We need to figure out how we can get people affordable healthcare,” she said. “The government shouldn’t be doing that. It should be a free market system. Businesses are telling me it’s killing jobs and healthcare is not getting to the people who need it.”

She and Kip Tom are also concerned with the state of the education system.

“We just went through a round of I-STEP testing,” she said. “We need to get the federal government out of our local schools and give more local control.”

“I have a real focus on our economy and to grow that economy we have to have a good education system,” sad Tom. “We need to bring more of that control back to the state.”

Jim Banks said his priority would be on national security.

“The issue of keeping america safe is the greatest issue of our time today and of this election,” he said. “I’m the only candidate in the entire country who’s running for congress who recently was deployed to a combat zone and served with our troops. I know what they face on a daily basis.I want to be apart of rebuilding the military.”

After listening to the candidates Michele Kilgore still is not certain who she would vote for.

“I’m not sure there’s one of them I would vote for just yet,” she said. “I haven’t made up my mind.”

Voters head to the polls May third for the Indiana Primary.