Buy Photo City code inspector Dale Wood issues citations for over-occupancy at a home in this file photo. (Photo: Coloradoan library)Buy Photo

Fort Collins has a bit of an identity problem at the moment: It’s beloved by many for its small-town feel. But as more people want to live here, we are finding ourselves with more citified issues.

We have an affordable housing problem. And some of the ways to address affordable housing may change our small-city feel.

We are faced with the prospect of growing “up,” as in taller buildings. Or increasing the population intensity of housing by allowing more people to live together in one house.

Student government leaders at CSU started a petition drive to obtain a ballot measure asking residents to allow four unrelated people to live in one home, known as Me+3. But last month they said they didn’t expect to have enough valid signatures and the effort would likely fail.

But we question whether relaxing Fort Collins’ U+2 ordinance a real solution for a lack of affordable housing.

MORE: Me+3 is now part of affordable housing discussion

There are no guarantees a change from U+2 to Me+3 would make housing more affordable for the people now living in a home with two roommates (who might be simply charged more by their landlords). Although, if more people opt to live in four-roommate situations, presumably in four-bedroom houses, it might open up more affordable opportunities for others in two-bedroom houses.

The potential benefit would be an increase in real estate inventory, but we don’t know how big an impact it would have.

Relaxing the rule comes with potential for more problems related to parking cars on the street, increased noise, and more people living in neighborhoods that were never designed for so many adults to live in one house.

So far, the pitch for Me+3 does not include acknowledgement of those problems or solutions for dealing with them. For any changes to the U+2 ordinance to be taken seriously, proponents must address these concerns.

The Fort Collins Board of Realtors told the Coloradoan Editorial Board on Tuesday that they want City Council to act on the occupancy ordinance and that if they won’t, they’ll consider seeking a Me+3 ballot measure themselves. It doesn’t seem likely that enough council members are in favor of changing U+2. Perhaps waiting for a potential new council makeup in 2017 reduces the immediate impact to housing availability that they’d like to see Me+3 make.

CLINT SKUTCHAN: Time for city council to consider Me+3

They also shared results of a telephone survey that showed 47 percent of respondents support the current U+2 law, with 42 percent opposed. The survey showed 60 percent of respondents are in favor of allowing four people to live together, compared with 35 percent who are opposed.

The occupancy ordinance isn’t the only solution FCBR is seeking. They also hope to quickly make headway on forming a regional task force, NoCo Housing Now. This effort will pull together municipalities ranging from Fort Collins to Firestone to address the affordable housing issue. The end product is purposefully undefined in order to let the group explore new ideas without hindrances.

That’s an intriguing idea, but with many questions still to be answered.

In March, Mayor Pro Tem Gerry Horak endorsed more nuanced or custom solutions during a visit with the editorial board, such as enforcing U+2 only in certain parts of the city or lifting it along busy corridors. He was also a proponent of higher-density housing projects to help clear the pipeline.

The solutions to the high cost of housing may come in the form of a host of small wins, such as Horak’s solutions, the land bank, creating incentives to build affordable housing, even buy-in for the regional task force and best practices that will make a difference for someone seeking more affordable options.

But let’s not solve one problem while perhaps creating three more, or at least straining existing rules that help preserve neighborhood quality, such as noise, weed and trash ordinances.

Even though the city has made enforcing the U+2 rule easier, it hasn’t stopped people from violating it. Often these violators are responsible, considerate people who take care of their yards and don’t cause problems. In a city where these violations are already occurring, how much of an impact can Me+3 make?

Making housing more affordable for people of all income levels will require a layered approach because just one solution isn’t going to make enough of an impact. But the social costs of a blanket Me+3 policy are greater than the economic return.

POLL: Do you support Me+3?

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Fort Collins occupancy laws Pat Ferrier/The Coloradoan

Read or Share this story: http://noconow.co/2746dNW