David Benjamin, owner of Uber Beauty, an on demand beauty service that makes house calls, styles the hair of Joanlee Montefusco at her home in East Hampton on July 24. Gordon M. Grant for The Wall Street Journal

Halfway through a Bridgehampton dinner party of striped bass and grilled leeks, James Slattery and 14 of his friends ran out of their favorite wine, a local Wolffer Rose.

Mr. Slattery pulled out his phone, and, using a new app called Minibar, solved the quandary without anyone leaving the house.

“Within 20 minutes, a happy driver was knocking on the door with more wine,” Mr. Slattery, a 31-year old consultant, said about the beverage that he affectionately refers to as “Hamptons Gatorade.”

Minibar, which lets local liquor stores sell online and deliver quickly to their customers, is just one of many services tailored to making the easy lives of beachgoers on the eastern end of Long Island even easier.

From getting their hair done to shopping for groceries, visitors may never have to leave the comfort of their vacation homes.

“Our customers are busy and especially in the Hamptons they don’t want to spend their time on errands. We help make their summer more convenient,” said Lindsey Andrews, who co-founded Minibar, which now makes deliveries between Westhampton and East Hampton.

Ms. Andrews said Minibar’s average Hamptons order is four times the size of the average New York City order. The top seller out on the island is rosé— by far.

“We definitely see a customer in the Hamptons that values service and convenience,” Ms. Andrews said.

That is also the goal for the newly launched Uber Beauty, an on-demand salon service that has no connection with the transportation service.

Stylist David Benjamin saw a business opportunity at the vacation spot, where he vistis every year, too.

“What if we could bring the salon to them?” he wondered.

So this season, Mr. Benjamin bought a fleet of Torino 150 Scooters for a gang of high-end stylists who are on call 24 hours around the clock. Their home base is a rental house in East Hampton.

Mr. Benjamin acts as mission control, dispatching the stylists to appointments. They look appropriately chic on their Italian motorbikes, wearing white pants, white V-neck T-shirts, Converse sneakers and trench coats. Their services range in price from $90 to $550.

“It’s like a fire drill. We get a call and people hop on the scooter,” Mr. Benjamin said. “They are zipping around the Hamptons at every hour of the day. We have early mornings and 10 p.m. slots before the late-night partyers go out.”

Uber Beauty stylists are all experienced, doing everything from highlights to keratin treatments, he said.

“I put them through an intense interview and audition process,” Mr. Benjamin said. Their slogan is: ‘Book from the beach and we’ll have you ready by dinner.’ ”

Traffic is always a concern in the Hamptons, which was one reason why Mr. Benjamin bought scooters instead of cars.

Mr. Benjamin prepares to ride a scooter to a client’s house in East Hampton on July 24. Gordon M. Grant for The Wall Street Journal

“We also use the WAZE app which takes us through all the back roads,” he said of the mapping app that gives drivers the best route.

“Stylists can usually get in between appointments in about 15 minutes,” which allows them to pack as many as eight appointments in a day.

“They operate every single day of the week,” he said.

Lexi Stolz’s busiest days are Thursday and Friday. That is when she and her staff at South Fork & Spoon are busily shuttling between farm stands, wine shops and grocery stores to stock the refrigerators of their Hamptons clients before they arrive for the weekend.

South Fork & Spoon calls itself a food concierge service, and its goal is to assist clients with everything from menu planning to wine selection and then perform all the shopping.

“All items are then delivered and unpacked, washed and stored away ready to be eaten, cooked or heated by the time the client arrives,” Ms. Stolz said.

Ms. Stolz is something of an expert at finding organic anything and locally produced everything, but the trickiest request she received so far this season was for two cases of Bud Light.

“Not very Hamptons,“ Ms. Stolz said.