Health care is moving from the hospital, to the clinic, to the community.

CLEVELAND, Ohio — The house call is an old-fashioned idea, but home care for some patients is proving to be a cutting-edge way to improve health and cut healthcare spending. That's according to the results of a Medicare program tested at the Cleveland Clinic and 14 other sites nationwide.

The program, Independence at Home, saved about $25 million in healthcare spending for the 8,400 patients enrolled during its first year-- that's about $3,000 per patient--according to data released from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) this week. The CMS Innovation Center, created by the Affordable Care Act, is testing different payment and delivery models to figure out how to get the most value out of healthcare spending.

In the effort to push value over volume, house calls are making a comeback. Hospitals and insurers across the country are making use of the visits to drive down costs and keep patients from falling ill after going home from the hospital. University Hospitals offers house calls for bedbound adults, and Summa Health System also offers the service to some of its Medicare recipients at no charge.

CMS is rewarding practices that succeeded in significantly driving down their spending per patient by doling out incentive payments based on performance. The Clinic did not qualify for these payments in the first year of the program, only lowering spending by $344 per patient per month, or about 7 percent.

The practices with the best results were several branches of Visiting Physicians Association, which specializes in in-home care for older adults in 10 states, including Ohio. One of these sites, in Flint, Michigan, cut spending by 19 percent and received nearly $3 million in incentive payments in return.

Dr. Eiran Gorodeski, director of the Clinic's post-acute care operations, said the the 7 percent reduction is "a fantastic accomplishment" considering the failure of most prior Medicare demonstration projects.

"If we can maintain this and scale it up to a larger population at Cleveland Clinic, it would be very beneficial for our Medicare [accountable care organization] ... and other risk contracts," he said.

He added that the Clinic's results did improve over the three years of the project, and will be reflected when the second and third-year results are released.

To qualify for the house calls, Medicare patients had to have been recently released from the hospital, recently used rehab services, have two chronic illnesses and need assistance with two basic life functions.

"These are a very high-risk population of people," Gorodeski said. "They want to be at home. The satisfaction they get out of [care in the home] is way higher than anything we could provide in the hospital or the clinic."

Primary care house calls were very similar to regular doctor visits, said Dr. William Zafirau, the clinical leader in homecare medicine at the Clinic. Doctors and nurse practitioners who perform the house calls use WiFi to stay connected to the health system, use laptops and electronic medical records, and are able to take blood for tests and perform ultrasounds if needed.

Patients and caregivers love the program, both doctors said. For many patients, it helps them avoid a nursing home.

The program's success nationally may mean that house calls for this population will become a covered Medicare benefit. Keeping these patients out of the hospital with good preventive care makes sense: They stay healthy and Medicare keeps costs down.

Patients who return to the hospital within a month of being released tend to fare worse than those who stay at home. They have higher hospital mortality rates and stay longer in the hospital than others.

"For frail elders, hospitals are dangerous places," said Gorodeski. There, they have a higher risk of falls, developing delirium and picking up an antibiotic-resistant infection. They also tend not to sleep or eat well, increasing their vulnerability to other illness, he said.

The Clinic plans to expand the in-home care model.

"Health care is moving from the hospital, to the clinic, to the community," Gorodeski said. "House calls is the community. It's health care where people want to receive it."