A home in Tennessee Town that was the cultural hub of black Topeka for more than 50 years is re-emerging, supporters say.

"We will have tours through it, have programs, and have a gallery upstairs," Jackie Bugg said. "It will tie in with the Brown v. Board of Education site and the Ritchie Site."

Bugg is the chairwoman and a founder of Living the Dream Inc.

The former Topeka Council of Colored Women's Clubs Building is at 1149 S.W. Lincoln. It is a two-story house just north of a neighborhood playground.

The Brown site, 1515 S.E. Monroe, marks the 1954 U.S. Supreme Court decision abolishing segregation in public schools, and the Ritchie Site has the 19th-century homes of abolitionist and town builder John Ritchie, 1116 S.E. Madison, and his son, Hale Ritchie, 1118 S.E. Madison.

When finished, the two-story white frame building will be the Living the Dream Inc. Robert Bugg Educational Center. Jackie and Robert Bugg are wife and husband.

Living the Dream is a not-for-profit community organization serving as a multicultural citizen’s group to help preserve the legacy and example of Martin Luther King Jr. Its goals are to enhance King’s philosophy of nonviolence, to recognize and teach human understanding, and to promote academic excellence.

Jackie Bugg remembers the structure back in the 1980s.

"I was a member of Oakleaf Arts and Culture," she said. Organized in 1898, Oakleaf was the oldest of the roughly seven women's clubs.

"*It was sort of the hub," Jackie Bugg said of the building. "All the clubs came together on a Saturday. We used to have pancake feeds and garage sales."

Harriet Johnson, vice chairwoman of Living the Dream Inc., also recalled earlier times in the building.

"I came to teas and some of their affairs," Johnson said. "They were really nice. Those women were mentors to young women in Topeka."

John Williams, a retired architectural designer, is the project manager on the restoration. Williams also is a member of the Topeka Unified School District 501 school board.

"It's in pretty good shape," Williams said. But vandals have damaged the building on occasion.

"We just need to convince this neighborhood it is theirs, as well as ours," Williams said. "It belongs to the neighborhood."

Johnson said the upstairs would be a gallery to explain Tennessee Town, the neighborhood where the structure stands.

Tennessee came into being in about 1880 when Exodusters, blacks fleeing the South and its repressive Jim Crow laws, arrived in Topeka at a rate of 300 a month, according to documents supporting adding the house to the National Register of Historic Places.

Black women began organizing "Colored Women's Clubs" in the 1880s and 1890s when discrimination and segregation was increasing, according to the National Register documents. The clubs were interested in self expression and morality, but members also fought for civil rights, drawing attention to lynching and segregation.

Future work on 1149 S.W. Lincoln will include submitting a plan to the Kansas State Historic Preservation Office, then rebuilding an interior stairwell like the house earlier had. A set of exterior stairs already have been removed. Groups are seeking to adopt rooms to fund their restoration.

"We're very excited about the accomplishment we have made to reach our goals," Jackie Bugg said.