Related • Use our interactive map to create your holiday lights tour. • Vote for your favorite display in the region through Dec. 26, and the creators will receive a $10 Starbucks gift card. • Ex-Lyons resident rebounds after losing holiday lights in 2013 flooding. • Check out an interactive graphic of a Loveland display.

It looks like Christmas exploded on Jeri Foraker's Longmont home. Mission accomplished.

For the past 10 years, Foraker has been decorating her home, at 2461 Mapleton Circle, for the holidays, and she admits she can get a little carried away.

This year's display includes more than 10,000 lights and dozens of yard ornaments, including a Noel sign that adds a sentimental touch.

The incandescent sign is the oldest decoration in the display and was given to Foraker by her dad more than 10 years ago.

"It's the first decoration he ever bought me," she said. "Especially since he's passed away, it is so special to me."

Foraker brought the sign out of retirement this year while attempting to fill a void in the display.

"There was just something missing, and then I remembered the sign," she said. "It was perfect and really completes the whole display this year. It's like there's been something missing all these years, and I didn't realize it until I put the sign out."

Snowmen and penguins are the most common characters in the yard. A bobble-head pig near the back is one of the most unique parts of the display, and an inflatable Olaf, from Disney's "Frozen," is the newest addition.

The Noel sign that anchors the central yard display was the first Christmas decoration that Jeri Foraker's father ever gave her. Foraker retired the 10-year-old yard ornament a few years ago because it wasn't as sturdy and bright as it once was. But she brought it back out this year to fill a space in the display and has no plans to retire the sign again. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

It takes about 10 to 12 hours to put up the display, which is run off of one extension chord now that Foraker has converted about 80 percent of the pieces to LED lights. The energy-efficient lights have also saved the family about $50 on their electric bill since the conversion, Foraker said.

"We don't really notice the extra cost anymore," she said. "It's maybe 15 percent more at the most, and it's something that we prepare for, so it's no big deal."

Foraker puts the display up during the week of Thanksgiving and won't take it down until after Christmas, she said. This year, one of her daughters helped with the display, but Foraker does most of the work herself.

"My husband puts up with it," she said. "He typically stays out of it and lets me do what I want for one month out of the year."

Foraker said she doesn't mind the work, which she describes as a labor of love. It's worth the cold days and heavy lifting to add a little extra cheer to the holidays as she watches the cars line up outside of her home to get a peek at one of the city's best holiday displays.

"It makes me so happy so I figured it had to have the same effect on other people," Foraker said. "I can't tell you how much joy it brings me to make other people happy."

Whitney Bryen: 303-684-5274, wbryen@times-call.com or twitter.com/soonerreporter