Texans suffer when the poor don't have health insurance New studies show benefits of expanding health care to the working poor

Photo: Eric Gay, STF Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 In This July 30, 2013, file photo, the dome of the Texas State Capital is seen. In This July 30, 2013, file photo, the dome of the Texas State Capital is seen. Photo: Eric Gay, STF Texans suffer when the poor don't have health insurance 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

States that expanded publicly funded health insurance to the working poor are racking up the benefits, while similar workers in Texas continue to cost taxpayers millions of dollars a year, according to new research.

The benefits of the Affordable Care Act for state health care budgets are becoming clearer for the 30 states that opted-in to the Medicaid expansion program. Texas has seen only more suffering after Republicans rejected any government plan to reduce the state's uninsured rate through Obamacare.

Professors at Harvard Medical School studied Kentucky, which expanded Medicaid; Arkansas, which pays private companies to insure to the poor; and Texas, where only children, their mothers and the disabled qualify for Medicaid.

The uninsured rates in Arkansas and Kentucky have dropped 14 percent between 2013 and 2014, when the Affordable Care Act began paying states to insure everyone who earns less than 138 percent of the federal poverty level. The public program in Kentucky and the private program in Arkansas were equally effective, researchers found.

Texas, meanwhile, still has the highest uninsured rate in the country.

The drop in the uninsured rates in Arkansas and Kentucky came with financial benefits for the states, just as Obamacare supporters predicted.

"Skipping medications because of cost and trouble paying medical bills declined significantly, and the share of individuals with chronic conditions who obtained regular care increased," the study found.

That means fewer taxpayer dollars reimbursing hospital emergency rooms for treating indigent people whose preventable and manageable conditions can be managed more cost-effectively through routine access to affordable health care.

I know opposing Obamacare and denying affordable health care to the poor are articles of faith among most Republican primary voters, which is why lawmakers rejected even a conservative solution to this problem.

But I hope that the brewing state budget crisis created by the collapse in oil and gas revenues, and a likely court-ordered revamp of the public school finance system, will allow fiscally conservative heads to prevail and leverage federal funding.

After all, Texans are paying twice to provide health care to the working poor, once through their federal taxes and then again through property taxes to county health systems. Drawing down the federal funds Texans deserve only makes sense.

Elections are when we tell our politicians what we expect from them when they go to Austin. Now is the time to let them know we need to solve the uninsured problem in Texas.