Photo

OTTAWA — Three men who made a dramatic escape by helicopter from a Quebec detention center two weeks ago were captured in a tourist section of Montreal by a police tactical squad early Sunday morning.

The breakout from a detention center in suburban Quebec City on June 7 was the province’s second helicopter escape in 15 months. The Sûreté du Québec, the provincial police force, said Sunday that a heavily armed tactical unit broke down the door of a luxurious, one-bedroom apartment in Old Montreal about 1:30 a.m. on Sunday. The men, who were asleep, did not resist arrest, the police said.

All three of the men — Yves Denis, Denis Lefebvre and Serge Pomerleau — were associated with the Hells Angels in northern Quebec and were awaiting trial on charges of murder, drug trafficking and gang-related offenses. After their escape, it emerged that a judge had loosened severe restrictions on the men. Among other things, the changes allowed the men to be together in the open yard where the helicopter touched down before whisking them away.

It was unclear how the police learned that the men were hiding in the apartment. Police forces in the United States and elsewhere in the world had been asked to look for the men after their escape.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Quebec police said that they were still searching for the helicopter pilot and that further arrests were likely. The French-language service of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation has reported that Mr. Lefebvre, one of the escapees, owned a helicopter and is a licensed pilot.

Police officers were seen removing material from the apartment throughout the day on Sunday. A car was also towed away by the police, apparently as part of their investigation.

Quebec’s government has begun an inquiry to determine why the province seems particularly vulnerable to airborne prison breaks, and all flights have been banned over three detention centers in the province.

The two inmates involved in the 2013 aerial breakout, which included the use of a rope ladder, were captured a few hours after their escape. The helicopter in that case was hijacked at gunpoint after it was booked for a sightseeing flight.