CRAWFORD-Retired Army Sgt. Daniel Casara was golfing at the George W. Bush Institute’s Warrior Open golf tournament in Irving last fall when the former president himself walked up to him.

George W. Bush asked Casara if he would apply to ride mountain bikes with him in the spring at the Warrior 100K, a bike ride to honor service members injured in Afghanistan and Iraq.

Casara, recovering from 24 surgeries for numerous leg injuries he suffered when his vehicle rolled over an anti-tank mine in 2005 in Iraq, gave his word he would.

He said Saturday at the conclusion of the three-day event he was glad he went.

“It was phenomenal,” he said. “I’m going to apply again next year and now that I have a bike to work with I’m going to work a little harder and do what I have to do to get back here.”

The fifth annual Warrior 100K mountain bike ride, which is part of the George W. Bush Institute’s military service initiative, was a year of both firsts and nostalgia.

Casara, who is the first person to compete in both events, just finished his first semester at the Golf Academy of America in San Diego.

This was also the first year that 14 veterans from previous years’ rides rode alongside the president and 17 wounded veterans and their families.

Retired Army Sgt. Bryce Cole, who was medically retired in 2009, was one of the alumni who volunteered this weekend and rode on Saturday.

He participated as a warrior rider in 2011 and 2012 and has volunteered every year since.

“It’s amazing to grow that team and that fraternity bond,” Cole said. “This is a really, really amazing opportunity for a lot of other people and I just remember how awesome it was when I did it. Anything I could do to help and give back to that, has just been my main goal.”

After the 20-mile ride, Bush took photos, signed rider numbers and had lunch with the veterans, their families and volunteers.

He called the vets and their families “inspiring” and said he always looks forward to this event.

“It’s neat to see the ones I rode with in the past, but I think it is very important for the riders to realize that they are part of a team of people,” Bush said.

He noted it was important for the ride to have a lasting effect for the veterans, which is why the alumni are key.

Retired Army Staff Sgt. Spencer Milo, who rode last year, said what made this year special was that his wife Sarah was able to attend.

“We as veterans look for that camaraderie and we get that at events like this, but so many times the spouses are kind of on the outskirts,” he said. “It’s so nice to have the other spouses here because they kind of form their own camaraderie.”

But Spencer said he was looking forward to getting back to Colorado to see his 2-year-old daughter Zoey.

Spencer Milo was injured in 2008 and again in January 2011 when a suicide bomber detonated mere feet away from him. He had shrapnel in the left side of his face, three fractured disks in his back, lost full hearing in his right ear and partial hearing in his left ear.

Sarah Milo said their daughter has given him “reason to live again.”

“Ever since she has been born, he has been a completely different person,” she said. “She has helped him tremendously, and she has no idea that she is doing it.”

“She is the reason I am still here,” Spencer said. “I can’t wait to hug her.”