Transitional care is essential for seniors who move between their homes, hospitals and senior care facilities. Whether they're moving out of one and into the other, or they're temporarily transitioning due to a health condition, older adults require emotional, physical and social support throughout the process.

Optimal transitional care encompasses various efforts, from coordinating schedules with health care providers to ensuring proper medical recommendations are followed. Moving from professional care to home care, or from at-home care to a senior care home, can be daunting for both seniors and their care providers, but there are a few things to keep in mind to ensure the assistance remains consistent - and excellent - throughout the transition.

Managing medical needs

A recent study conducted by researchers at Johns Hopkins University found that coordinating efforts between care is the most difficult part of transitioning, at least as far as professionals in the industry are concerned. Eighteen senior health care providers were polled about what they viewed as the greatest obstacles to senior care, then they developed a comprehensive framework for future professionals to follow when caring for older adults moving between care providers.

"Caregivers must emphasize coordinating efforts as they pertain to medical needs for optimal transitional care."

Among the efforts that require greater coordination are tracking and adhering to medical needs. This may include distributing medicine, monitoring health patterns and preventing accidental drug errors. Professionals or loved ones assisting an older adult's transition between two facilities may look into developing a spreadsheet, whether physical or digital, to better track records. Using an online sheet can allow people from different areas to update the same document, but care providers must be adamant about diligently keeping information.

Coordinating communication between care

Taking active strides to improve communication efforts between senior care providers is essential for boosting older adults' overall health, so it's important for individuals at both homes to undertake efforts to make this possible. Researchers noted that many homes have attempted to build better communication structures between facilities, some of which were motivated by a pay-for-performance strategy put in place by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010. By this legislation, those who provide excellent care are eligible for financial incentives to further promote communication.

However, study author Alicia Arbaje, M.D., explained that this tactic is not effective if people in the homes do not undertake more comprehensive institutional efforts to improve communication between homes.

"For a pay-for-performance strategy to be successful and improve patient care, health care providers must have a voice in the design process," Arbaje said. "Currently, health care providers have concerns about pay for performance that need to be considered."

When switching between care providers, communication is critical.

Emphasizing caregiver health during the process

Transitioning can be difficult for the older adult, but it can have an equal emotional strain on the caregiver as well. Research published in The American Journal of Nursing emphasized that caregivers experience a great deal of stress during this time as they try to coordinate efforts and provide optimal care for their loved ones. It's imperative that these adults seek avenues to release their stress, as attending to their own emotional care have have a significant impact on senior health as well.