The rumor began circulating last month.

David S. Lopez, the head of Harris County’s public hospital system, was in Dallas talking to the Parkland hospital board about the CEO’s job here, said an anonymous tipster to the Houston Chronicle. Lopez could not be reached for comment at the time.

Today, I called his office in Houston and was told that any announcement would be left up to Parkland.

“Does that mean he’s a candidate or that he came to Dallas to see about the job?” I asked John Martinez, his spokesman.

Martinez wouldn’t answer directly about Lopez’s possible interest in the Dallas job. “He’s deferring everything to Parkland and their processes,” Martinez said, while promising to check with Lopez to see if he wanted to talk.

About an hour later, Martinez called me back. This time, he said: “We called his office. We’re referring any calls related to that back to Parkland.”

It didn’t sound like an outright denial to me.

Parkland spokesman Mike Malaise would not comment today on the CEO selection process or Lopez specifically. “Nothing has changed since the last time we talked about this,” he said by e-mail. “So everything we discussed at that time still stands now.”

In December, Malaise reiterated that the county hospital’s board of managers invited six anonymous hospital leaders to meet with them last month about their possible interest in the long-vacant CEO job. Board chairwoman Debbie Branson had said even she did not know their race or ethnicity at the time they were invited to come here.

The group of six was promised complete anonymity, according to the hospital, because they would not become actual candidates unless any of them decided to apply for the job. So far, there has been nothing official on this selection process, other than Branson saying she hoped the board would offer the job to someone in January.

Picking a new Parkland CEO has become very hush-hush since the hospital board invited four previous candidates to meet with Dallas community groups more than a year ago. That foursome was identified and backgrounded. They shook everybody’s hands and answered questions from anyone who got a chance to meet them. It was refreshingly open.

However, their job prospects ended without explanation, leaving Parkland without a top administrator for a second straight year. If you recall, Dr. Ron Anderson stepped down in December 2011, after the board refused to renew his contract. Dallas County’s lone public hospital was embroiled in regulatory problems at the time, which threatened its federal funding. Things have eased since then.

But everything has been mum about this second group, until the surfacing of Lopez’s name before Christmas.

Here’s a little background on Lopez:

– He became permanent president and CEO of the Harris County Hospital District in April 2004 after nearly a year as interim president and CEO.

– The Harris County Hospital District serves more than a million patient visits annually through its network of three hospitals, 12 neighborhood health centers, 13 homeless shelter clinics, six school-based clinics and four mobile health units.

– Lopez describes himself as an optimist, even when he’s feeling heat about changes to his health care system. Most recently, he oversaw a regional effort to divide up future Medicaid funds for hospitals providing charity care in the Houston area, according to the Houston Chronicle.

– Lopez read the 2,000-page Affordable Care Act, which took him four months, according to a story on CultureMap Houston, an online publication.

– While he works out daily, Lopez also enjoys a daily Dr Pepper, usually accompanied by nachos.

– Following his graduation from Trinity University in San Antonio in 1975, Lopez amassed an extensive resume in Texas health care. Here’s a rundown of what he’s done, taken from the Harris County Hospital District Foundation’s website:

July 2000 – April 2004: Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer for the Harris County Hospital District

September 1998 – June 2000: Senior Executive Director of the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Texas

October 1996 – September 1998: Consultant with Healthcare Services in Corpus Christi, Texas

September 1989 – June 1991: CEO of Medical Center Hospital in Odessa, Texas

November 1984 – August 1989: Associate Administrator of Santa Rosa Medical Center in San Antonio, Texas

September 1978 – May 1980: Executive Director of Atascosa Health Clinic in Pleasanton, Texas

November 1977 – 1978: Health Planner in West Texas Health Systems Agency in El Paso, Texas