What’s the biggest mistake people make when it comes to starting a second career?

MARC FREEDMAN: I see two common mistakes.

The first is when people think they need to remake themselves afresh. Rather than succumb to the myth of reinvention, we would do well to explore the myriad ways our accumulated skills and lessons—the failures along with the more uplifting moments—can come together to contribute to a new purpose, a second act that provides both means and meaning.

A related mistake is to blithely assume that transitions are quick.

Fresh starts invariably involve false starts and detours. Lots of them. They can also involve fallow periods – long stretches where not much happens and life gets in the way. You have a few meetings with a coach and commit to taking a few steps every week. Maybe you read a book and underline a few passages that resonate. Then you stall. You get called into an eldercare emergency or take a little break from your “next act” project. You recover, set up a few informational interviews and sign up for a conference. You’re back on a roll, and sign up to a pro bono consulting project. Maybe you enjoy the work and being part of a team, but realize you’re less interested in working on the organization’s issues than you thought. But someone you met in that project recommends you for a board and before you know it, you’re now jumping into that role. And on it goes, in sinuous and fitful fashion….

I’ve seen this go on for months, even years, before a person settles into the work that ends up nourishing them for a long stretch. I’ve also seen those explorations become the work itself, a time of life that involves immersing deeply for six months to a year in one undertaking, and then moving on to a new project. The encore career that emerges is comprised of many chapters, but contains an underlying coherence as well.

Marc Freedman is CEO and founder of Encore.org, a nonprofit organization working to promote encore careers—second acts for the greater good.

Read the latest Encore Report.