WESTLAKE, Ohio -- It's mid July and that means we're smack dab in the middle of festival season.

Whether your passion is antiques, Irish music or hot rods, there's an event going on this week that's perfect for you.

Historical Society Antique, Vintage & Craft Show

It's time for the Westlake Historical Society's 44th annual Antique, Vintage & Craft Show.

Last year, more than 1500 people attended this popular event.

The show takes place from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., on Sunday, July 20, at the Clague House Museum on Clague Road.

This year's show includes antique, vintage and craft vendors, plus a plant sale, silent auction, food and drinks.

Members will also be offering free tours of the historic Clague House Museum starting at noon.

Admission is $3 per person; children under 12 are admitted free. Pets on leashes are welcome.

Rain date is July 27.

To learn more visit the Historical Society website.

Celebrate your Irish heritage at the Irish Cultural Festival

Westlake has strong ties to Ireland since it is a sister city to Tralee, Ireland.

And a great way to celebrate your Irish heritage is to attend the 32nd annual Cleveland Irish Cultural Festival.

It takes place July 18-20 at the Cuyahoga County Fairgrounds in Berea.

This year more than 100 singers, dancers and performers from across the U.S., Canada, and Ireland are slated to perform.

The festival is a true celebration of Irish music... from traditional to rock.

Headliners this year include Ronan Tynan of the Irish Tenors, Black 47, and All-Ireland fiddle champ Eileen Ivers.

There will also be Irish dancing, pipe bands, and food.

Something new this year is the Temple Bar & Museum.

I've had the pleasure to work a bit on this.

It's modeled after the entertainment district in Dublin—kind of like Cleveland's Flats back in the day.

It'll have a bar serving Guinness, live music, and cultural demonstrations. A big bonus? It's air-conditioned!

Bring the kids, too, because the Irish Cultural Festival has a children's area with loads of activities, performances, and inflatables.

Fest hours are 5-11 p.m. Friday, 1-11 p.m. Saturday, and 1-10 p.m. Sunday.

General admission is $12. Children under 10 are free.

For more information visit www.clevelandirish.org.

St. Paul Car Show

St. Paul Westlake is holding its 8th annual car show from 4-8 p.m. on Saturday, July 19.

It'll take place in the church parking lot, 27993 Detroit Road, in Westlake.

You are invited to bring your hot rod or other cool car. Or just cruise by in your mini van and drool over something cooler than your current ride.

There will be also be music and munchies.

It's free and open to all.

For more info visit www.StPaulwestlake.org

West Shore Chamber of Commerce Business After Hours

Join members of the West Shore Chamber of Commerce for complimentary food and cash bar at its Business After Hours, from 5:30- 7 p.m., on Tuesday, July 22, at Aces Grille, 32650 Lorain Road in North Ridgeville.

There's no cost to attend and you don't have to RSVP, just show up!

Westlake firm wins health award

The Chelko Consulting Group was recently named one of America's Healthiest Companies by the Wellness Council of America.

For more than six years, the Chelko Group has encouraged and supported employees' strives to live healthy lives.

It offers nutritious food, physical activities, and rewards for participation.

And it even has a discretionary fund to support employee's personal interests – like biking, tennis, golf, etc.

"We are a people business. We consult, we don't manufacture widgets," said Rick Chelko, owner and president of The Chelko Consulting Group.

"In the years that our formal program has been in place, we have seen some tremendous improvements in the health of our team members."

The Chelko Consulting Group helps clients with market cost trends, improve employee health and productivity, and comply with legal and regulatory requirements such as the Affordable Care Act.

Heritage Home Program

If your home was built in 1964 or earlier it's now considered "newly historic".

That means it qualifies for the Heritage Home Program designed to help owners of homes that are at least 50 years old.

You're entitled to free technical assistance on making improvements to your home.

You may also be eligible for low interest loans (as low as 1.4%) to make improvements like insulation and energy efficiency upgrades, roofs, kitchen and bath remodels, painting and more.

Most home improvement projects, excluding vinyl windows or vinyl siding, can be funded with these loans.

Pick up an informational brochure in the reception area at Westlake city hall or visit the program web site at www.heritagehomeprogram.org.

Questions regarding technical advice and loans can be answered at (216) 426-3116.

Porter Public Library happenings

Teenage girls in grades 6 through 12 can learn how to make a difference at Westlake Porter Public Library's "Become a Change-Maker".

The workshop will be held at the library from 10 a.m.-noon, on Monday, July 21.

Alison Tanker, founder of Tigress, an organization that teaches young women how to become change-makers through entrepreneurship and art, will teach the class.

Young ladies will learn how to become confident, passionate, creative leaders.

To register, call 440-250-5471 or visit http://signup.westlakelibrary.org:8080.

Now it's your turn!

I'm always looking for fresh good news gossip in Westlake.

Are you celebrating your 50th wedding anniversary? Is your neighbor growing the largest rutabaga you've ever seen? Or maybe your community group is holding a fundraiser?

Just send me the details in an email to KatherineBoyd216@gmail.com and I may include it in a future column.

Great gossiping with you Westlake!