Lobbying at White House to delay meaningful use stage 3

With help from David Pittman (@David_Pittman) and Darius Tahir (@dariustahir)

SCOOP: OMB, HEALTH GROUPS HUDDLE AT WHITE HOUSE: A group of health care lobbyists are meeting with Office Management and Budget officials today to urge the government to hit the pause button on Stage 3 meaningful use rules, a source tells eHealth's David Pittman. The meeting was organized by Senate Finance Committee Chair Orrin Hatch at the urging of officials from Intermountain Healthcare, the mammoth hospital system residing in Hatch’s home state, Utah. Doctors and hospitals have been pleading with HHS to hold off on finalizing Stage 3 rules, fearing their publication will ossify the program at a time when 90% of eligible providers haven’t attested to Stage 2. The Stage 3 rule went to OMB for clearance a few weeks ago, so queries now must be addressed to the White House.

Story Continued Below

Congress is in on the act too: At least 30 members have signed a letter imploring HHS and OMB to freeze the Stage 3 rule, and an insider says another 30 are expected to add their names by today, when the letter, which is being circulated by Reps. Renee Ellmers, Tom Price and David Scott, goes to the administration.

Tweet of the Day, from Pro’s own Paul Demko @pauldemko Pope was silent on ICD-10?

WELCOME TO FRIDAY. The pontiff has moved north, Washington traffic is back to normal (i.e., pretty bad), D.C. weather is bellisima and we’re on the final 100 pages of Elena Ferrante’s breath-taking Neapolitan quartet. Send suggestions for fall reading, as well as tips and news to aallen@politico.com, or tweet at me (@arthurallen202) or other members (@david_pittman, @dariustahir) of our merry band.

Days to ICD-10: six

ARKANSAS POISED FOR ‘ABOUT FACE’ ON TELEMEDICINE: Arkansas, considered one of the least friendly states for virtual doctor visits, is moving to change that. At present the state requires an in-person exam before a telemedicine consult, but a bill the state legislature passed in March allowed the Arkansas State Medical Board to expand the practice. And now a state medical board task force that met this week is expected to suggest the full board allow telemedicine as a first-time visit. “Based on what we heard, we’re very optimistic,” said Claudia Tucker, Teladoc’s vice president of government affairs. A public hearing is scheduled for Nov. 4. Tucker attributes the “about face” to the heavy push from the business community, including the likes of Teladoc, Wal-Mart and ERIC, a coalition of large employers.

MORE CRITICISM OF SURGEON SCORECARD: A new analysis to be published this morning at 9 by the RAND Corp. "has identified substantial opportunities for improvement" in the methodology the public service journalism group uses in its Surgeon Scorecard. "Until these opportunities are addressed," say the authors of the report, "we would advise users of the Scorecard — most notably, patients who might be choosing their surgeons — not to consider the Scorecard a valid or reliable predictor of the health outcomes any individual surgeon is likely to provide."

PROPublica responds that it and its scientific advisers previously addressed the issues raised by the RAND critique here, here and here. "Reasonable scholars can and do differ on the best methods for measuring surgical complications," the group responds. "We are hard at work on Surgeon Scorecard 2.0 and appreciate the input from the RAND team.”

OBAMACARE CUSTOMERS VULNERABLE TO HACKING: A database holding sensitive information from millions of Obamacare customers was inadequately secured against hackers, federal auditors say in a GAO report Thursday. The $120.4 million Multidimensional Insurance Data Analytics System, a central repository for health insurance coverage data, is owned by CMS and includes Social Security Numbers and other data used to identify individuals who have created accounts on health insurance exchange websites, including healthcare.gov and state-based marketplaces. CMS Acting Administrator Andy Slavitt told auditors that his agency had resolved all the vulnerabilities as of February and he defended the security of the system. An HHS spokeswoman said Thursday that no data has been stolen from HealthCare.gov or its supporting systems.

EHRS, OTHER TECHNOLOGY DRAIN THE COFFERS: Last year, multi-specialty practices owned by physicians spent an average of nearly $21,000 more than the previous year for technology, according to a survey released Thursday by the Medical Group Management Association. Money spent on health IT and other technology increased by 11.9 percent, and since 2010, practices' spending on technology has risen by 34 percent, while overall spending rose 12 percent, according to the survey.

SOME CMS HELP IF YOUR EHR WENT SOUTH: The agency has added two new FAQs providing information on how providers can continue participation in meaningful use or apply for a hardship exception after switching vendors or discovering that their EHR has been decertified. But don't trust us, go here for the full CMS explanation. And good luck.

SWEDES OFFER A HELPING HAND: At an event at the Swedish embassy, researchers and representatives from Uppsala University on Thursday revealed an interesting fact: they're way ahead of us in the precision medicine game. "Sweden’s already doing it," said consultant Kathie Olsen. Why is that? First, the government offers support for translating research into commercial products, explains Uppsala researcher Tobias Sjoblom. Another part comes down to culture: "People are not very mobile — they stay where they are, for the most part," which makes them easier to find for research. The final piece of the puzzle is Sweden's excellent registries, which track most of what goes down, medically, in the whole population. That explains why Sweden was one of the first countries able to debunk the theory that certain vaccines cause autism. The researchers told our Darius Tahir they'd like partner with U.S. scientists on precision medicine.

WHAT WE'RE CLICKING:

An interview with Validic's leader on the future of digital health http://bit.ly/1FkLhHZ

Illinois' statewide health information exchange throws in the towel http://bit.ly/1VeEVLW

ONC to Be More Inclusive of Behavioral Health Providers http://bit.ly/1OxVJ1D

Seven 21st-Century Skills Doctors Wished They’d Learned in Medical School (IT and data are on the list) http://bit.ly/1NQqsW2

Accenture, which just partnered with Cerner to win DHMSM, buys a consulting firm that specializes in Epic http://bit.ly/1Lahp3o

Niam Yaraghi explains why physician adoption of EHRs will continue to increase

http://bit.ly/1gTgTsr

Tips, comments, suggestions? Send them along via email to our team: Arthur Allen (aallen@politico.com, @ArthurAllen202), David Pittman (dpittman@politico.com, @David_Pittman) and Darius Tahir (dtahir@politico.com, @DariusTahir).