FARGO, N.D.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--The Healthcare Trends Institute announced today the results of a Healthcare Benefits Technology Trends Survey, now available for download.

The 2015 Healthcare Benefits Technology Trends Study report provides insights into how benefits decision makers are gauging current and future technology investments at organizations across the United States. The research was sponsored by the Healthcare Trends Institute, an educational platform for employers, consumers, and other healthcare benefits stakeholders.

The short, 11-question survey polled human resources (HR) executives, benefit specialists, and other benefit decision makers to explore how employers are utilizing technology in their benefits program management while ensuring compliance and employee satisfaction as the benefits environment continues to shift, due not only to rules instituted by the Affordable Care Act (ACA), but also due to continued innovation from both startups and established companies.

“With such a rapidly shifting healthcare benefits environment, decision makers are utilizing technology in their benefits programs and this report not only shows that, but also employers’ plans to continue that trend,” said Tiffany Wirth, Executive Director of the Healthcare Trends Institute.

The complete 2015 Healthcare Benefits Technology Trends Study can be downloaded here.

About the Healthcare Trends Institute

The Healthcare Trends Institute is an educational platform to help employers, third-party administrators, health plans, brokers, banks, payroll providers, consumers, and other stakeholders keep up with the rapidly changing healthcare benefits industry. It covers a range of topics related to the administration and management of healthcare benefits, including defined contribution, health exchanges, insurance, legislation, and more.

Healthcare Trends Institute programs include an educational web series, an annual awards program, newsletters, training programs, a resource library, a real-time health exchange infographic, and more. To ensure all content and programs achieve the highest level of quality and relevancy, the Institute is guided by an Editorial Advisory Board comprising of subject-matter experts that represent diverse aspects and perspectives within the healthcare benefits industry. The Institute is sponsored by Evolution1, the nation’s largest electronic payment, on-premise, and cloud computing consumer-driven healthcare solution. More information is available at www.HealthcareTrendsInstitute.org.

Follow Healthcare Trends Institute on Twitter, LinkedIn, Facebook, and Google+ to get the latest information on benefits trends in the workplace.