'Honorable man' remembered for dedication, professionalism

STERLING — — There were uniforms, of course. Not just of the men and women of the Sterling Police Department, whom he had led for the last eight years — although they were there, sitting together as part of the family he left behind.

But there were also uniforms of people SPD Chief Roy Breivik had worked with in other capacities. Uniformed representatives from the Sterling Fire Department, Logan County Sheriff's Office, Colorado State Patrol. And even further afield — Castle Rock and Wyoming were among the badges displayed on the shoulders of those who had come to pay their respects. And the military uniforms of those who presented military honors in recognition of his seven years in the U.S. Army.

And there were many others not in uniform. There were other colleagues, both within and outside of the law enforcement community. Fellow city employees and local officials. Not to mention those who considered him a friend.

They gathered in the ballroom of the Hays Student Center on the Northeastern Junior College campus to celebrate Breivik's life, remembering him as an "honorable man" with a "commanding presence" who had contributed much to the community.

Pastor Jared Sonnenberg officiated the service, sharing a version of the police officer's prayer that he said was most appropriate for the late chief, as it talked about courage, honor, loyalty, integrity and strength.

Advertisement

"Thank you chief for being to us what we want to be for others," he said. "For a model of what's good and right, in a world that is so often filled with doubts."

Military honors, including the playing of "Taps" on bagpipe by Roger Hosea, were presented to officially start the ceremony.

Some "non-traditional" music was also shared — Led Zeppelin's "Immigrant Song" — giving a more personal glimpse of a man who liked to turn on heavy metal while working out.

Sonnenberg shared a quote from Arthur Ashe that he felt reflected the chief's service: "True heroism is remarkably sober, very undramatic. It is not the urge to surpass all others at whatever cost, but the urge to serve others at whatever cost."

Mayor Heather Brungardt spoke on behalf of the city of Sterling about Breivik's 35 years with the department. She spoke of his admirable work ethic, saying any city would be envious of Sterling for having someone so dedicated to his job. "We were fortunate, we were honored, we were blessed" to have him as police chief, she said. "And we will sorely miss him."

Also reflecting on the chief's service was Lila Koch, an administrative assistant with the SPD who worked with Breivik for 18 years. She shared some lighter moments, recalling Breivik's fondness for sharing stories — again and again — and his love of his daughter, Kristine. She also spoke about his fight against cancer, noting the courage he found in his family as he faced the disease that ultimately claimed his life.

Major Tyson Kerr, who spent 15 years working with Breivik, including the last five and a half when they worked side by side, gave the eulogy. He noted Breivik's military service included a canine unit, fostering the chief's love of dogs. He echoed Koch's thoughts on the chief's stories, saying, "He didn't just like to talk about them. He really like to talk about them."

But, he said, the things Breivik talked about most were the things that he was most proud of, especially his daughter. Family was very important to the chief, Kerr said — his own, and that of his officers.

"He was a stand-up, simple, honest, fair guy," Kerr said, who lived by the police department's code of ethics and expected the other officers to do the same.

Kerr noted Breivik's accomplishments, including the recent development of a new mission statement for the department that reflected the input of all of the officers. During one of their last conversations, Kerr said Breivik told him, "Stay the course, keep the guys strong, and the mission remains the same."

"Our pursuit of excellence will not waiver," Kerr said on behalf of the department, which he will lead as interim chief. "We will not let down the chief."

The closing of the ceremony included a 21-bell salute by the SPD officers, and a "last call" from dispatch:

"Command One, Sterling. Command One, Sterling. Command One, Sterling... Command One, Chief Roy Breivik, be advised this is your last call. We thank you for your service, dedication, loyalty and friendship. May you continue to watch over and protect us. Command One, 10:42, 11:56."

Contact Journal-Advocate managing editor Sara Waite at 970-526-9310 or swaite@journal-advocate.com