Frozen food maker Amy’s Kitchen Inc. is recalling almost 74,000 cases of its organic products after discovering they could be contaminated with listeria — the latest of several recalls to hit the food industry.

The company said it’s recalling the products finding out its supplier may have sent organic spinach containing Listeria monocytogenes. The possibly contaminated products include vegetable lasagna, spinach pizza, enchilada verde, brown rice and vegetable bowls, and gluten free tofu scramble breakfast wraps, according to the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA) website — a full list of the affected products can be found there. In all, the company is recalling 73,897 cases of its products.

While no illnesses have been reported, the company, which has expanded its product line to include canned foods and sauces, said it’s recalling the products out of an abundance of caution. Consumers in both the United States and Canada who find they have these products should either throw them out or return them to the store they bought them from to get a full refund. Amy’s can also be reached directly by phone at (707) 781-7535 Monday to Friday from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. PT.

The L. monocytogenes bacterium causes fever, muscle aches, diarrhea, and other gastrointestinal problems. But young children and older adults, as well as anyone with a compromised immune system, is at risk of more serious infection, which can sometimes become deadly. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that 1,600 people become sickened from listeria-contaminated food each year.

Amy’s recall is the third in the United States this month. Just last week, Kraft Foods Group announced it was recalling some 6.5 million boxes of its original flavor macaroni and cheese product after eight consumers reported finding pieces of metal inside. Ice cream-maker Blue Bell Creameries recently expanded its own recall, which already encompasses 10 other frozen snacks, to include 3-ounce chocolate, vanilla, and strawberry ice cream products sold in institutions such as hospitals. Earlier this month, the ice cream products were linked to three patient deaths and two illnesses in a Kansas hospital. L. Monocytogenes was also implicated in this case.