SPRINGFIELD — Hampden County Physician Associates, one of the oldest and largest specialty groups of doctors, physicians' assistants and nurse practitioners in the Pioneer Valley, is getting ready to file for bankruptcy, according to a source with knowledge of the situation.

Many of the physicians in the group will join Mercy Medical Center, the source, who spoke with The Republican only on condition of anonymity, said on Monday.

A person answering the phone at the Springfield-based administrative offices of Hampden County Physician Associates said officials had no comment when asked about changes to the corporation.

No one at the Sisters of Providence Health System, the parent of Mercy Medical Center, nor Mercy has yet to respond to calls seeking comment.

Hampden County Physician Associates employs more than two dozen practitioners.

There has been a recent trend of hospitals acquiring such practices, sometimes agreeing to clear any debt, and hiring staff as the delivery of health care services is changing, as are reimbursement rates to doctors from insurance companies amid increased administrative and equipment costs.

More than 50 percent of physician practices in the United States are hospital owned, according to data from the Physician Compensation and Production Survey by the Medical Group Management Association (2003–2009) cited by the New England Journal of Medicine. Rates from Medicare for certain services have decreased anywhere from 10 to 40 percent to doctors, but not to hospitals. Doctors within a hospital system would be eligible to receive the hospital rate.

Hampden County Physician Associates, a corporation whose facilities include an urgent care and sleep center in East Longmeadow, recently consolidated some of its offices into the Sisters of Providence Health System's new $20 million, 75,000-square-foot medical office building at the corner of Carew and Chestnut streets on the campus of Mercy Medical Center.

The corporation has long had on-site doctors, called hospitalists, at Mercy, and it formed the Accountable Care Organization of New England, with Mercy, in 2010, that now includes other area providers. ACOs, which serve Medicare patients, are sanctioned by the government to meet quality measures established by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services and benefit from savings accrued as a result of better delivery of preventative health services. This approach to health care is based less on fee-for-service and more on a team approach to patient care aimed at efficiency and cost reduction.

A 2010 report from the Physicians Foundation [pdf] predicted that more hospitals would acquire physician groups. In that report, 258 hospitals surveyed said they had seen a 70 percent increase in requests from physician groups for employment, and some 61 percent said they planned on acquiring such groups over the next 36 months.

Doctors' compensation and reimbursement rates from insurance companies are a growing issue in health care. It is estimated that physicians have a patient load of around 2,250 patients. Rates of reimbursement to doctors have changed as insurance companies work to keep premiums low under the Affordable Care Act.

Nationwide, there is a shortage of primary care physicians, even as the number of insured has increased dramatically under the Affordable Care Act. Primary care physicians ares said to earn about $200,000 annually, according to a 2011 Medical Group Management Association survey, with specialists earning twice that amount.