St. Elizabeth Healthcare is working with St. Elizabeth Physicians and Commonwealth Orthopaedic Centers to develop a new institute focusing on sports medicine, inpatient and outpatient orthopedic surgery, total joint replacement, rehabilitation and physical therapy, and clinical research. Pictured is St. Elizabeth Edgewood. (Photo: Provided/St. Elizabeth Healthcare )

A new orthopedic institute has been created involving St. Elizabeth Healthcare, its physicians group and Commonwealth Orthopaedic Centers.

Doctors at the institute will focus on sports medicine, inpatient and outpatient orthopedic surgery, total joint replacement, rehabilitation and physical therapy, and clinical research. Physicians and leaders from Commonwealth, St. Elizabeth Physicians, and St. Elizabeth Healthcare will lead the institute.

Under the partnership, Commonwealth will remain its own independent practice.

The goal of the institute is to increase relationships and collaboration among the entities to improve patient care. St. Elizabeth and Commonwealth have worked together for more than 20 years.

The change mirrors a trend unfolding nationwide as more health systems acquire physicians and specialty practices or create new relationships with speciality groups. Making a move to a hospital relieves physicians of administrative headaches and the costs of implementing electronic record keeping, a requirement of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

Orthopedic care locally has been a focus of these changes. In August 2013, Wellington Orthopaedics merged with Mercy Health and TriHealth. In March, the Christ Hospital Health Network announced a partnership with Beacon Orthopaedics & Sports Medicine to create an expanded sports medicine program for local high schools and college teams; the partnership was not a merger or an acquisition.

Wellington has no locations in Northern Kentucky, while Beacon has one. Commonwealth has five locations with a sixth being built in Florence.

Under the new St. Elizabeth-Commonwealth relationship, services will continue to be provided at existing locations.

"The collaboration between primary care providers and us is one of the most exciting things from our standpoint," said Dr. Nicholas Gates, one of Commonwealth’s 19 surgeons.

The institute is expected to be in full operation this fall. Officials said the new partnership does not involve a reduction of staff.

A priority of the institute will be its relationship with 16 Northern Kentucky schools by providing athletic trainers, team physicians and sports medicine services. St. Elizabeth and Commonwealth are also developing athletic training curriculum at the university level and will provide opportunities to educate both college and high school students in musculoskeletal care, which will include the observation of advanced orthopaedic and sports medicine procedures.

"Preventing injuries, treating and caring for our youth is essential to ensure they do not develop ongoing physical issues that will hinder their present and future day activities,” said Garren Colvin, executive vice president and chief operating officer at St. Elizabeth Healthcare.

Healthcare providers at the institute will have direct access to electronic consults with subspecialists at the Mayo Clinic for highly complex or unusual cases.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1nXrdNm