By Jason Hart | Ohio Watchdog

Ohio Gov. John Kasich is visiting New Hampshire to promote an “Ohio Story” of hope, economic growth and fiscal responsibility.

Is his tale true?

To hear Kasich and the Ohio Republican Party tell it, Kasich would make a great presidential candidate because his fiscal restraint has jump-started Ohio’s job creation and allowed the state to care for drug addicts and the mentally ill.

Job growth and spending data show parts of Kasich’s narrative are somewhat true, while others are false.

Although Kasich is prodding fellow governors to follow his lead, Ohio’s job growth during Kasich’s first term didn’t rank in the top five, the top 10 or even the top 20. From January 2011 through January 2015, Ohio’s job creation rate ranked 21st of the 50 states.

Ohio’s unemployment rate has improved under Kasich in large part because the state’s labor force shrank by 34,910 during Kasich’s first term, based on data from the U.S. Department of Labor.

The state’s economy has been rebounding slowly since 2010, but Kasich has dramatically expanded government since taking office in 2011. Ohio General Revenue Fund spending for the 2015 fiscal year ending June 30 is expected to be $5 billion higher than it was just four years earlier.

What about the Ohioans getting medical care thanks to Kasich’s stewardship of state funds? Kasich has taken more than $2.7 billion in federal money to put 510,000 working-age, able-bodied Ohioans on Medicaid.

Kasich’s insistence the Obamacare Medicaid expansion is paid for with state money has been debunked by the Congressional Research Service, but his administration has not replied to multiple Ohio Watchdog requests for comment.

The governor’s spokesmen tout his landslide reelection win — against a wreck of a Democrat candidate — as proof Kasich’s “Ohio Story” resonates throughout the state. However, Kasich’s policies and temperament have turned many former supporters against him.

“Sadly, Governor Kasich’s ‘Ohio Story’ looks very similar to President Obama’s ‘Federal Story,'” Toledo Tea Party president John McAvoy said in an email to Ohio Watchdog.

“Gov. Kasich introduced the Ohio version of ‘Redistribution of Wealth’ with his proposed taxes cuts to one group and tax increases to another with the end result an increase in Ohio’s budget,” McAvoy said.

“Kasich used his pen to bypass the state legislature when he implemented Obamacare Medicaid Expansion,” McAvoy said. “This move garnered the praise of President Obama.”

Westerville TEA Party director Jim Burgess suggested New Hampshire Republicans should be wary of Kasich’s approach to his policy priorities.

“When it comes to John Kasich, just think ‘Big Government,’ Obama, and televangelist,” Burgess told Ohio Watchdog via email. “He bypassed the legislature, just like Obama, when he implemented Obamacare in Ohio.”

“Kasich supports Common Core while berating parents who are against it,” Burgess said. “He picks winners in business. He has done all of this while charismatically misusing scripture to support his actions. Restoring hope should mean government assistance drops, not increases at out-of-control rates.”

Tom Zawistowski, executive director of the Portage County TEA Party and president of We the People Convention, expressed similar concerns in an email to Ohio Watchdog.

“Kasich supports Common Core against the wishes of parents and members of his own party and he went to court to impose an irresponsible Medicaid Expansion, against the wishes of both the Republican House and Senate, after personally signing the Ohio Health Care Freedom Amendment that was intended to stop Obamacare in Ohio,” Zawistowski said.

“The real Ohio Story is that John Kasich is a big government liberal who could not win Ohio if he ran for president, let alone win nationally.”

Unlike Ohio’s conservative grassroots, most political observers outside Ohio still rely on the Ohio Republican Party and Kasich staffers for perspective on Kasich.

In a Thursday piece, The New York Times added to national buzz about how Kasich’s “Ohio Story” could help if he runs for president in 2016.

“He’s proven the Republican philosophy that lower taxes and reduction in spending levels lead to private sector job creation,” David Avella, chairman of Virginia-based Republican training organization GOPAC, told Times reporter Sheryl Gay Stolberg.

Avella also repeated the assertion Kasich’s fiscal responsibility “puts more money in the state bank account, which allows you to do more for the poor and the less fortunate.”