Conservative activist Ben Carson didn't back down Saturday on any of his previous controversial remarks, announcing to the Conservative Political Action Conference that he "will continue to defy the PC police" in the media who have twisted his words on same-sex marriage and Obamacare.

Carson had a long list of claims to explain, including the time he said Obamacare was the worst thing since slavery.

"Of course they said, "Carson says that slavery and Obamacare are the same thing,'" he said of the media. "Of course they are not the same thing. Slavery is much worse, but bear in mind what happens with Obamacare. We, the American people, have with that program shifted the power that was given to us by the Constitution and by the founders to the government. It's the most massive shift of power in America that has ever occurred."

He also said that liberals had misconstrued his opposition to same-sex marriage into a claim that it was like bestiality. Carson said last year that marriage is “a well-established, fundamental pillar of society and no group, be they gays, be they NAMBLA, be they people who believe in bestiality -- it doesn't matter what they are, they don't get to change the definition." He quickly claimed that his comments were taken out of context, and did so again at CPAC.

"You know, because I happen to mention that nobody gets to change the definition of marriage and mention some other categories, they said, 'Carson said that gay marriage and bestiality are the same thing,'" he said. "Well that's preposterous. Of course they are not the same thing. Anybody who believes that is a dummy, but anybody who believes somebody who says that somebody said that is a dummy. That's the problem, OK?"

"Of course gay people should have the same rights as everyone else, but they don't get extra rights," he continued. "They do not get to redefine marriage."

Carson also took issue with the interpretation of his comments on progressives and Nazi Germany. Earlier this year in a speech criticizing progressives, Carson talked about the need to stand up against people trying to change the country.

"There comes a time when people with values simply have to stand up. Think about Nazi Germany," he said in that speech. "Most of those people did not believe in what Hitler was doing. But did they speak up? Did they stand up for what they believe in? They did not, and you saw what happened."

At CPAC, Carson said the left had wrongly claimed that he said "progressives are Nazis and that they are changing America into Nazi Germany."

"Of course that is not the case, but that is what they do," he said. "They repeat these lies over and over again because they cannot argue the actual facts."

Also on HuffPost: Conservatives Pointing Fingers Conservatives Pointing Fingers

1 of 35 Rep. John Boehner (R-Ohio) (AP Photo/J. Scott Applewhite, File) Share this slide:

AP