SPOKANE, Wash. -

n inconvenient side effect of the Affordable Care Act now affecting patients in Spokane, is that there aren't enough primary care physicians to meet the demand of the newly insured.

According to the American Medical Association the national average of physicians per 10,000 people is 24; for nearly half of the counties in Washington that number is 10 or less. If you've ever tried to get in to see a doctor you know you it might take some time to get an appointment.

he wait time is increasing and it really reflects that we have a group of primary care doctors that are getting to be a smaller group,” Providence Medical Group Chief Medical Officer Kirk Rowbotham said.

Rowbothan added the problem is the number of primary doctors available is decreasing.

“We are actively recruiting primary care doctors. It is a challenge really across the nation,” he said.

What he's seeing right now is not a new problem to Spokane.

e've been talking about this in health care for two decades now, that there is a looming shortage of primary care physicians,” Rockwood Clinic CEO Dr. Michael Patmas said, adding that the issue has been compounded by the Affordable Care Act.

ashington has had the greatest expansion of medicaid of any of the states, we have really expanded medicaid coverage and it has really resulted in hundreds of thousands of people having coverage now who didn't have it before,” Patmas explained.

He says its great people now have coverage, but the demand is overwhelming the supply.

There are, however, some solutions available for patients. For example, if you have a short-term medical problem, they suggest you go to Urgent Care. They're making it easier for those centers to share information with primary doctors. At Providence and Rockwood, primary physicians are also now working in teams to manage the added workload..

omething that might be appropriate for an RN to manage and make sure this patient gets these, you know their pneumonia vaccine and their colonoscopy and all of that stuff, maybe that's all that's needing to be driven by the physician,” Rowbothan said.

Providers say they are working to patch up a much bigger problem, but assure they will get you seen by a doctor … it just might take some time.

To fix the long term problem with not enough doctors, more medical schools are needed within the state. Right now there is just one that serves the entire Pacific Northwest, which is one thing Washington State University hopes to change by opening a medical school here in Spokane.