Buy Photo Republican Ted Cruz, a U.S. senator from Texas (center), talks with a staff member before taking control of a M&P 15 from range master Sheena Green Saturday, June 20, 2015, at he CrossRoads Shooting Sports indoor gun range in Johnston. (Photo: Michael Zamora/The Register)Buy Photo

Sen. Ted Cruz recently headed to a shooting range in Johnston to announce the formation of a “Second Amendment Coalition” made up of his campaign supporters. The Republican presidential candidate deserves a jab for the timing of the announcement, which was within days of two high-profile shootings in Colorado and California. (In June, he demonstrated his lack of tact by holding a “Celebrate the Second Amendment” gathering three days after nine churchgoers in South Carolina were killed by a gunman). Cruz earns a thistle, however, for his lack of originality. Perhaps he doesn’t realize a coalition of Second Amendment enthusiasts already exists. It’s called the National Rifle Association. A one-year membership is $25 and right now comes with a free “heavy duty” camouflage duffel bag that appears roomy enough to hold a lot of hot air.

Arose to the Wellmark Foundationfor giving back to Iowa communities by funding efforts to improve the health of residents. Its first year of “community kickstarter” grants provides nearly $300,000 to 32 projects, including a playground in West Point, a park renovation in Leon, and an ice rink in Prairie City. The foundation, affiliated with Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Iowa, is also providing $75,000 in grants for six “complete streets” projects in central Iowa. Working with the Des Moines Area Metropolitan Planning Organization, residents will find it easier to use city streets with the addition of bike racks, trail connections, bike lanes and an expanded bicycle-share program.

A rose to Cyclones fans for remembering their team's opponents are real people. As the men's basketball team took on Buffalo on Monday night, Crystal Oats, wife of first-year head coach Nate Oats, was back home in New York fighting double-hit lymphoma, a rare and difficult to treat form of cancer. An ESPN article last month reported the family's insurance didn't cover Crystal's alternative therapy. Insurance also doesn't cover the full-time nanny the family hired to help Crystal care for their three children. Cyclone fans made sure Oats walked away from Ames with something. An online fundraiser started by Cyclone Fanatic publisher Chris Williams has raised more than $12,500 to help the family.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1QFvoyl