Apparently, people aren’t Ready For Palin.

Following Palin’s confusing speech at a Tea Party conference in Iowa Saturday, the pro-Hillary Clinton political action committee Ready For Hillary used the former governor of Alaska’s remarks to raise a whopping $25,000.

According to the Huffington Post, Ready For Hillary sent an e-mail to supporters asking for money after Palin proclaimed herself “ready for Hillary” during her Iowa speech.

“It’s going to take more than a village to beat Hillary,” Palin declared Saturday. “I’m ready for Hillary. Are you coming?”

A donation page on the Ready For Hillary website reads, “Sarah Palin says Republicans will be ready for Hillary. Let’s show her she’s wrong.” It asks for contributions upwards of $20.16.

In a second e-mail sent to backers Tuesday, Ready For Hillary claimed that the group had raised over $25,000 from the Palin statement.

This amount of money is actually sufficient to make Palin a co-chair of Ready For Hillary, but the PAC insisted in the e-mail it wouldn’t give the former GOP vice presidential candidate the title without receiving confirmation from her first.

Palin’s speech at the Iowa Freedom Summit Saturday raised a lot of eyebrows, particularly because of its disjointed nature.

The former Republican governor had a few things to say about Hillary Clinton, two of which didn’t make much sense.

“What will they do to stop causing our pain and start feeling it again,” Palin said while remarking on Obamacare. “Well, in other words, um — Is Hillary a new Democrat or an old one?”

“Now the press asks, the press asks, ‘Can anyone stop Hillary?'” she said later. “Again, this is to forego a conclusion, right? It’s to scare us off, to convince us that — a pantsuit can crush patriots.”

In a statement following Palin’s speech, Democratic National Committee communications director Mo Elleithee said plainly, “Thank you!”

Palin, who is “seriously interested” in running for president in 2016, has likely singled out Hillary as her Democratic competition.