ATLANTA, Oct. 9, 2013 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Ebix, Inc. (Nasdaq:EBIX), a leading international supplier of On-Demand software and E-commerce services to the insurance industry, today announced that the Company's A.D.A.M. Health Content Exchange will be exhibiting at the 2013 National Users Conference in San Antonio, which will bring eClinicalWorks customers together for networking and training. During the event, A.D.A.M. will showcase how its clinical content works within eClinicalWorks comprehensive electronic health records (EHR) solution to aid medical providers.

eClinicalWorks® is one of the largest ambulatory healthcare IT solution providers in the United States, with more than 236,000 providers and 472,000 healthcare professionals across all 50 states using its solutions. As a part of its solution set, the Company provides comprehensive electronic health records (EHR) solutions to more than 80,000 physician users.

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), also known as the Affordable Care Act (ACA), is a United States federal statute signed into law on March 23, 2010. A new electronic health records (EHR) mandate was added to PPACA to ensure the protection of privacy while streamlining the medical record system. This electronic records mandate is set to take effect in 2014. Currently the ACA requires that clinicians provide patients with "Patient-Specific education" with the inclusion of this capability being a must for an EHR vendor to be certified.

Girish Kumar Navani, CEO and co-founder of eClinicalWorks, said, "A.D.A.M.'s on-Demand patient education content will aid our network of clinicians to educate their patients on complex medical subjects in an interactive easy to understand manner. This partnership makes it easier for our network of physician users to connect with their patients and further improve healthcare in the country. eClinicalWorks is pleased to be A.D.A.M.'s partner in this initiative."

Soula Chronopoulos, Vice President of A.D.A.M., said, "We have created an affordable patient education solution for integration into the eClinicalWorks' electronic medical record, available on an on-Demand subscription basis for each clinician. We intend to work closely with eCW in this endeavor to provide each of these clinicians access to our rich interactive content. A.D.A.M. has expanded its relationship with eClinicalWorks to offer its next generation of Clinical content to the more than 80,000 current eClinicalWorks physician EHR users. This partnership is targeted at aiding eClinicalWorks physician users to meet meaningful use as defined in the Affordable care act, while providing them with the ability to offer comprehensive health education to their patients."

As the Healthcare Industry continues to implement the Affordable Care Act, EHRs have become the cornerstone in managing a patient's health, not just documenting it. To that end, A.D.A.M. has created robust patient interactive content that helps the clinician manage and coordinate the patient's care and helps the patient understand how to better comply with their own care. A.D.A.M.'s comprehensive content coupled with its contemporary technology and easy-to-use interface has proven to be a leader in assisting clinicians in educating patients on complex Medical subjects, while providing them with a better understanding of how and what they should do to increase positive outcomes.

With its team of in-house educators, medical writers, editors, programmers, and medical illustrators, A.D.A.M. develops exciting interactive solutions for educators, health professionals, pharmaceutical representatives, medical students, search engines, media, hospitals, insurance companies, patients & consumers etc. on an on-Demand basis.

About eClinicalWorks

eClinicalWorks® is a privately held leader in ambulatory healthcare IT solutions. With more than 236,000 providers and 472,000 healthcare professionals across all 50 states using its solutions, customers include ACOs, physician practices, out-patient departments of hospitals, health centers, departments of health and convenient care clinics. Nine eClinicalWorks customers have received the prestigious HIMSS Davies Awards during the past six years, honoring excellence in electronic health record implementation. The company is second largest vendor in the country for e-prescribing. Based in Westborough, Mass., eClinicalWorks has additional offices in New York City, Chicago, California and Georgia. For more information, please visit www.eclinicalworks.com or Facebook, Twitter or call 866-888-6929.

About Ebix, Inc.

A leading international supplier of On-Demand software and E-commerce services to the insurance industry, Ebix, Inc., (Nasdaq:EBIX) provides end-to-end solutions ranging from infrastructure exchanges, carrier systems, agency systems and BPO services to custom software development for all entities involved in the insurance industry.

With 30+ offices across Brazil, Singapore, Australia, the U.S., UK, New Zealand, India and Canada, Ebix powers multiple exchanges across the world in the field of life, annuity, health and property & casualty insurance. Through its various SaaS-based software platforms, Ebix employs hundreds of insurance and technology professionals to provide products, support and consultancy to thousands of customers on six continents. Ebix's focus on quality has enabled it to be awarded Level 5 status of the Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering Institute's Capability Maturity Model (CMM). With a recent ISO 27001-security certification, the Company also has an ISO 9001:2000 certification for both its development and BPO units in India. For more information, visit the Company's website at www.ebix.com

Investors Steven Barlow, 678-281-2043 or steve.barlow@ebix.com Aaron Tikkoo, 678-281-2027 or atikkoo@ebix.com Media Andy Brimmer / Tim Lynch / Andrew Siegel Joele Frank, Wilkinson Brimmer Katcher 212-355-4449