The Kaiser Family Foundation survey completed after the second open-enrollment period shows satisfaction among consumers who purchase their own health insurance, but future financial protection from healthcare and high deductibles continue to be a concern.

Following the Affordable Care Act’s second open-enrollment period, most people enrolled in marketplace plans report being satisfied with a wide range of their plan’s coverage and features, finds a new Kaiser Family Foundation survey of people who buy their own health insurance.

A large majority (74 percent) of those in marketplace plans rate their coverage as excellent or good, according to a news release on the survey. Most (59 percent) also say their plan is an excellent or good value for what they pay for it, though the share rating the value as “excellent” declined somewhat from 23 percent last year to 15 percent in the current survey.

Source: Kaiser Family Foundation Survey of Non-Group Health Insurance Enrollees, Wave 2.



Majorities also say they are “very” or “somewhat” satisfied with seven different features of their plans, including their choice of primary-care doctors (75 percent), hospitals (75 percent) and specialists (64 percent); what they have to pay out of pocket for doctor visits (73 percent), prescription drugs (70 percent) and annual deductible (60 percent); and their monthly premiums (65 percent).

Compared to those with older, non-Affordable Care Act compliant nongroup plans, enrollees in marketplace plans are less likely to say they are satisfied with their plan’s choice of primary care doctors and hospitals, but somewhat more likely to express satisfaction with their monthly premiums and annual deductibles.

This is likely because many are receiving premium tax credits and cost-sharing subsidies that are not available in noncompliant plans, according to the news release. Noncompliant plans are those that were purchased before the Affordable Care Act was enacted in 2010 and grandfathered in under the law.

However, there are variations in opinions on coverage among those who are in the nongroup market, those who have high deductibles and those who have employer-sponsored coverage.

Breaking down the nongroup market as a whole, approximately 59 percent said they have marketplace plans under the Affordable Care Act (which includes those bought from a marketplace and marketplace plans bought through an insurance company or an insurance agent), according to the survey. That is an increase from 48 percent in 2014 after the first Affordable Care Act enrollment period ended.

According to the survey, “Satisfaction rates are generally lower among nongroup plan enrollees compared to those with employer-sponsored insurance interviewed as part of a separate survey.”

Findings for nongroup plan enrollees, a majority that do not have access to employer-sponsored coverage, are consistent with the 2014 survey results.

More than half of nongroup plan enrollees are not employed (29 percent) or self-employed (28 percent.) An additional 16 percent have a part-time job and likely do not have the option for health insurance, according to the survey.

Source: Kaiser Family Foundation Survey of Non-Group Health Insurance Enrollees, Wave 2.



Overall, consumers are satisfied with the value of their health insurance plans.

More than 50 percent reported their plan is an “excellent or good value” for the cost, however about four in 10 say the value is only “fair or poor,” according to the survey.

Those with marketplace coverage specifically reporting similar ratings of the value of their plans to last year; however the percentage reporting their plan has an excellent value declined slightly from 23 percent to 15 percent, according to the survey.

“Although not a large decrease, further changes in how marketplace enrollees are assessing their plans’ value should be watched closely in the coming years,” the survey states.

Financial Protection and High-Deductible Plans

“Despite relatively high plan ratings and satisfaction levels, many nongroup enrollees report feeling vulnerable to high medical bills and say they have encountered problems with healthcare costs,” according to the survey.

Additional findings include:

57 percent of consumers with Affordable Care Act-compliant plans (purchased after in 2010 or later) report they feel well-protected by their plan, but 38 percent said they feel vulnerable to high medical bills, which is similar to last year.

A similar percentage of consumers with noncompliant plans also feel vulnerable to high medical bills (34 percent)

A separate survey by the foundation shows 28 percent of consumers with employer-sponsored coverage feel they could have high medical bills.

Results also show many consumers also have concerns about future healthcare costs. For example, 56 percent of Affordable Care Act-compliant plans report being at least somewhat concerned about not being able to afford healthcare they need. And, 57 percent of noncompliant plan holders have the same concern as consumers with the newer plans.

Finally, the survey reports on the overall benefits from the Affordable Care Act on consumers and their families. There is an even divide in opinion on benefits of the law because it “allowed someone in their family to get or keep health coverage, lowed their healthcare or insurance costs, or made it easier to get needed healthcare.”

However, 33 percent of consumers in nongroup plans who purchase their own insurance report a negative impact from the healthcare law. Most of that group report it is because of increased costs, difficulty in access to care or because someone in their family was not able to keep their insurance, according to the survey.

Follow ACA on Twitter @ACAIntl or Facebook for news and event updates. ACA’s LinkedIn Group includes news updates, member discussions, event promotions, jobs and more. Visit the group page and request to join today.