Change: A new congressional study suggests that massive immigration increases in recent decades have hammered middle-class wages. Whether through taking jobs or casting votes, hyper-immigration is revolutionizing the U.S.

We are a nation of immigrants, it is often reflexively said. But it is a little-known fact that our foreign-born population dropped more than 11% in the quarter century after World War II.

Since 1970, however, we have become an irrational nation of hyper-immigration, as the foreign-born among us have exploded from fewer than 10 million to more than 41 million as of 2013 — a staggering 324.5% increase.

Pure political motivation is at the root of this ongoing revolution. The 1965 Immigration Act, pushed hard by Democrat Sen. Ted Kennedy, took effect in 1968. Speaking at the signing ceremony at the foot of the Statue of Liberty, President Johnson assured the country it was “not a revolutionary bill. It does not affect the lives of millions,” and “will not reshape the structure of our daily lives.”

Before that act, as Johnson pointed out, “only three countries were allowed to supply 70% of all the immigrants.”

A new analysis from the nonpartisan Congressional Research Service for the Senate Judiciary Committee finds that during this hyper-immigration, incomes of the bottom 90% of Americans flat-lined, then dropped starting in 2000. By comparison, middle-class wages increased between 1945 and 1970.

Last year, Karen Zeigler and Steven Camarota of the Center for Immigration Studies found that, according to federal government data, “since 2000 all of the net gain in the number of working-age (16 to 65) people holding a job has gone to immigrants (legal and illegal).”

And the politics behind all this continues. Homeland Security Department sources tell PJ Media’s J. Christian Adams that the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services is “sending letters to all 9 million green card holders urging them to naturalize prior to the 2016 election.”

On top of that, as the Washington Times’ Stephen Dinan reported last week, deportations of illegals “have plummeted by another 25% so far this year,” with just 117,181 immigrants deported in the six months since October.

As a landmark report from Phyllis Schlafly’s Eagle Forum last year concluded, the annual flow of 1.1 million legal immigrants under the current system means more than 5 million new potential voters by 2024, and more than 8 million by 2028.

Since most who vote support Democrats, “the influx of these new voters would reduce or eliminate Republicans’ ability to offer an alternative to big government, to increased government spending, to higher taxes, and to favorite liberal policies such as ObamaCare and gun control,” Schlafly has warned.

She further argues that “there is nothing controversial about the report’s conclusion that both Hispanics and Asians, who account for about three-fourths of today’s immigrants, generally agree with the Democrats’ big-government agenda,” and therefore “vote two-to-one for Democrats.”

As Cuban-American GOP Sen. Marco Rubio finds that his recognition of the threat of hyper-immigration has helped propel him to the head of the party’s presidential pack, Republicans now have new political ammo: a government report confirming that for 50 years the huddled masses have been trampling the middle class.