Unlike Aretha Franklin and Bruce Springsteen, employers are not thrilled at the possibility of a Cadillac — even if it is pink.

The Affordable Care Act’s excise tax, more commonly referred to as the “Cadillac tax,” is slated to go into effect in 2018. No regulations have been issued at this point, but according to what is written in the Affordable Care Act, employers that provide high-cost benefits to their employees will be subject to a 40 percent, nondeductible tax on excess benefits.

Per the law, employers are subject to the tax on individual plans that are valued at more than $10,200 and family plans valued at more than $27,500.

Unfortunately, based on current trajectories, the majority of large employers will end up having to pay.

According to a recent study from global professional services company Towers Watson & Co., 48 percent of employers with 5,000 or more employees are expected to be subject to the tax in 2018, with 82 percent of employers triggering the tax by 2023.

The solution is not to rock out to soulful tunes and hope the tax is magically dissolved before 2018. Employers should take a three-step approach to avoid taking a cruise on the freeway toward high tax rates, said Randall Abbott, a senior health strategist at Towers Watson.

Step one: Accept the fact that the tax will likely go into effect.

“There are those who started taking action on the excise tax risk several years ago and are on a multiyear path to mitigate it,” Abbott said. “There are others who are choosing to wait until 2017 with an eye toward the possibility that that the excise tax will go away. We think the probability of that is very low.”

After that, employers must work to understand what factors are driving the excise tax impact at their organizations. This is where the majority of the misunderstanding comes into play, Abbott said. Contrary to popular belief, medical coverage is not the only driver.

“The actual definition is very broad,” Abbott said. “It not only covers medical and drug coverage, which is what we typically think about as a medical benefits plan, but it can also include things like self-funded dental and vision care, contributions to a health savings account, EAP programs as well as executive physicals.”

If the sum total of both the employer and employee premium contributions to these benefits selections exceeds the above-mentioned thresholds of $10,200 for an individual plan and $27,500 for a family plan, the employer is subject to the 40 percent excise tax.

It is important to note that the tax is applied on a plan-by-plan basis. One employee can make benefits selections that exceed the threshold and cause that worker’s employer to be subject to the tax, while another employee’s selections could remain under the threshold and therefore go untaxed, Abbott said.

“The plans that are subject to the tax are then aggregated, and that is the amount which is payable by the employer,” Abbott said.

Once employers understand how the tax is being assessed, they can begin to adjust their benefits offerings to keep employees below the prescribed thresholds.

“Employers should look for an opportunity to change their benefits design to bring the plan value down somewhat,” Abbott said. “They must do this in the context of considering the benefit adequacy for their employees. They don’t want to alter the organizational culture. They want to maintain a competitive advantage to attract and retain employees.”

Some possible solutions include putting a cap on how much employees can contribute to their HSAs through salary reductions each month, as well as possibly eliminating dental and vision benefits.

Employers should also consider ways to make employees healthier so they don’t have to buy into such expensive health care plans.

Regardless of the solution employers come up with, they should know that the threat of high tax rates is not going to stop being a problem any time soon.

“The excise tax is going to continue to be out there,” Abbott said. “Health care costs typically escalate at a rate that is 2.5 times greater than the indexing factor on the excise tax. This means that over time employers really have to continually work to bring their rate of annual cost trend down.”