AFTERNOON UPDATE

For the rest of today, expect a mostly cloudy sky with temperatures getting close to or even topping 40 degrees (a little cool for this time of year).

Tomorrow will feature a chance for scattered showers, especially from mid-day through the evening hours. Then a better chance for a steadier rain comes later Wednesday with a storm system that will pass to our north, keeping us on the mild side (so temperatures will go up). As it exits Thursday morning, any lingering precipitation will come to an end... it could do so in the NW hills as a quick snow shower as some colder air works into Southern New England). Thereafter, the work-week ends with a brighter sky, but on a windy note.

For the weekend, as of now, the weather looks to be quiet/dry/sunny... with a warming trend that takes us back into the 50s!

Meteorologist Mark Dixon

PREVIOUS DISCUSSION

CHILLY SUN TODAY

You’ll need the sun glasses again today! High pressure will be in control of the weather all day, pushing away storminess. Highs will be in the 40s this afternoon, which is pretty close to normal for this time of year!

TURNING UNSETTLED TUESDAY & WEDNESDAY

You will need your umbrella handy beginning tomorrow afternoon. Showers and periods of steady rain will come to Connecticut by late in the day, lasting through Wednesday. The high pressure center providing us with great weather today will be well east of New England by this point. At the same time, an upper level low pressure system will be coming into northern New England while, at the same time, a compact coastal storm will be rolling into New England from the Del-Mar-Va. These two storms are not forecast to completely develop into one big storm, but they are expected to give us a few chances for rain as they try to get together. The scattered showers arriving tomorrow afternoon and evening, will be mainly due to the coastal storm as it passes well to our southeast.

We will receive most of the rain from the upper level low that will be moving into the area from the Great Lakes. It's still difficult to pinpoint when the times of rain will occur, but the models are consistent in showing a period of steady, heavy rain Wednesday afternoon and evening. It is conceivable that parts of the state could receive an inch or more of rain by Wednesday night.

MAINLY DRY THURSDAY AND FRIDAY

Most of the rain will move out Wednesday night and skies will start to clear, allowing for a chilly night and Thursday morning. Moisture still trailing behind Wednesday’s storm will be enhanced by colder air streaming over the Great Lakes. These factors may be just enough to touch off a sprinkle or flurry during the morning Thursday. The sunshine will ultimately rule out and offer a pleasant experience, with highs in the 40s. A stiff gradient from the storm’s departure will keep the wind strong all day.

Friday is looking good with partly to mostly sunny skies! Highs will be in the 40s and all in all, it's looking like a pretty good day to get that Connecticut grown Christmas Tree! Can't get it Friday? No worries, the weekend is looking great!

SUNNY & MILD NEXT WEEKEND

All models come into agreement Saturday and Sunday, saying that high pressure will dominate and make the weekend weather outstanding. The air will be exceedingly dry, with warming forecast to come into the air aloft. These features will bring cold nights and mild days. Highs will be in the 50s after lows in the 20s, which is truly spectacular for early December!

Meteorologist Mike Cameron with Scot Haney

NOAA’s WINTER OUTLOOK

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) released their winter outlook for meteorological winter, December through February. The agency is forecasting a wet and mild winter for southern New England, courtesy of the near-record El Nino.

The forecast is all about probability. For much of Connecticut, NOAA is forecasting a greater than 33% chance for a mild winter. For northern portions of Connecticut and the rest of New England, they give a greater than 40% chance for a mild winter. The chance for a wetter than normal winter is greater than 33% for most of Connecticut, but greater than 40% for extreme southeastern Connecticut.

As you likely understand, long-range forecasting on the order of months in advance is very tricky and there are a number of other forces at work such as the Arctic Oscillation, the North Atlantic Oscillation, and the Snow Advance Index, (accounts for advancing snow cover early in the season). And, these forecasts do not give any detail about the sensible weather on any particular day. Even though the winter may average warmer than normal, there can always be severe cold snaps as part of the season’s make-up.

“Copyright 2015 WFSB (Meredith Corporation). All rights reserved.”