As a physician, I read with interest "The Medicaid Debate" in the Tribune last Sunday. I appreciated Rep. Chris Kelly's and Sen. Kurt Schaefer's extensive comments as well as reporter Rudi Keller's pointed questions. Given the legislators' contrasting opinions regarding the expansion of Missouri Medicaid to cover the working poor, however, one of them must be wrong.

The two critical issues in this debate are: 1) what fiscal effect would expansion have on the state budget — i.e. is expansion the "fiscally responsible" thing to do — and 2) is Missouri Medicaid a sufficiently effective public health insurance program in its current form to justify expansion to more than 300,000 individuals?

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

To the first point, Rep. Kelly referenced multiple independent studies that predict by creating jobs, growing the state economy and shifting costs to the federal level, Medicaid expansion would not only pay for itself but also increase general revenue for the state budget by tens of millions of dollars per year, revenue that could fund needs such as education.

In contrast, Sen. Schaefer believes Medicaid expansion would not pay for itself, requiring the state to find a source for the eventual 10 percent annual contribution. He believes this can be accomplished only by cutting education funding. Sen. Schaefer, however, cites no studies to support his position, whereas earlier this year the Missouri budget director predicted the fiscal benefits of expansion would be realized even beyond 2020, more than paying for the 10 percent contribution. Moreover, when the Missouri legislature removed Medicaid expansion from the current budget, it was forced to cut $14 million from a planned expansion of higher education that would have been funded by the surplus revenue from expanding Medicaid.

The senator also worries the federal government will eventually cut its support of Medicaid expansion, causing the state to be on the hook for more than 10 percent. The federal government, however, has never backed off a Medicaid obligation to this or any state since it created the program in 1965. And Sen. Schaefer freely admits not expanding Medicaid will weaken hospitals and the economies of their respective communities, including Columbia. Rep. Kelly has multiple studies to support his position; Schaefer has none. Round 1 goes to Rep. Kelly.

As a public insurance program, Medicaid is not perfect, but I challenge anyone to show me a U.S. health insurance program that is. Schaefer believes that "if you are on Medicaid, everything that you need, you are going to get," which some might view as the mark of an effective program, but in reality his statement is false. Medicaid has a strict prescription drug formulary, limited coverage for services such as dental care and physical therapy, and limited access to private providers because of low reimbursement rates. However, these low provider rates and limited services, plus low (2 percent) overhead expenses, allow Medicaid to spend less each year on each covered person than do commercial plans with 15 percent or higher overhead expenses.

Sen. Schaefer suggests the uninsured should simply go to their nearest Federally Qualified Health Center and "get everything from dental to chemotherapy." He implies this option is free, but patients actually pay on a sliding scale according to their income. Services and resources are limited — for example, patients can't get chemotherapy at these centers — and waiting times can be long for certain services.

Sen. Schaefer bemoans that "we" (the legislature) cannot do anything about the Medicaid recipient who smokes three packs a day. Using an insurance program to control behavior, however, can become a slippery slope. For instance, "we" can't do anything about the cost of caring for the tobacco-using and/or obese legislators who also receive publically funded health insurance.

Bottom line: Medicaid isn't any more "broken" than other health plans, and having Medicaid coverage in its current form is far better than being uninsured.

Sen. Schaefer complains that "no one is willing to have "a public debate about the cost of" Medicaid expansion "and how the program works," yet the House held several "listening" sessions this summer throughout Missouri.

Schaefer would be wise to avoid dismissing all emotional arguments, as he seemed to last Sunday. Emotional arguments are often based in truth. In my 25 years as a physician, I've seen untold stories of unnecessary suffering for patients and excessive costs to society for medical problems that could have been prevented by adequate insurance coverage and access to primary care. So excuse me when I become a bit "emotional" when my uninsured diabetic patient develops kidney failure because of his inability to pay for preventive care services and subsequently loses his job because he has to spend three days a week at dialysis. Excuse me when I become even angrier from the realization that his dialysis care and kidney transplant will cost hundreds of thousands of dollars of public funds while preventive care to keep his kidneys healthy would have been a fraction of the cost. And excuse me for becoming even more emotional last week while consoling a patient whose previously healthy 28-year-old son died earlier this month from influenza because he couldn't afford to go to the emergency room as his mom, my patient, had urged him to do. This family's scenario is not an anomaly. About one of every thousand uninsured adults needlessly dies each year, which equates to hundreds of working Missourians dying each year without this expansion.

This is fact, not emotion.