Larry Wheeler

November 25, 2014

Editor’s note: This post is part of an ongoing “Exhibit of the Month” series. Readers who’d like to highlight other noteworthy exhibits from the same issue are encouraged to make their pitch in the comments section below.

Maps and health have been powerfully intertwined since nineteenth-century British physician John Snow produced a hand-drawn map that famously showed a correlation between the locations where cholera was killing hundreds of Londoners during an 1854 epidemic and the Broad Street pump where locals unknowingly drew water contaminated with the deadly bacterium.

Fast-forward to the twenty-first century, and maps that tell compelling stories about health, policy, and place are ubiquitous. If Snow were alive today, no doubt his stethoscope would be spinning.

The power and art of mapping, geospatial analysis, and health policy research are regularly featured in Health Affairs, but never before to the extent in the journal’s November issue. Four research papers give readers five maps that depict meaningful findings about children, low-income neighborhoods, and other local characteristics that affect health and offer valuable insights for policy makers.

In “A Health-In-All Policies Approach Addresses Many of Richmond, California’s Place-Based Hazards, Stressors,” authors Jason Corburn et al. use San Francisco Census tract and other data to show that “an African American child born in West Oakland will die, on average, fifteen years earlier than a white child born just a few miles away in Walnut Creek” (Exhibit 1).

Exhibit 1

In “The Child Opportunity Index: Improving Collaboration Between Community Development And Public Health,” authors Dolores Acevedo-Garcia et al. use Milwaukee, Wisconsin, as an example of how their Child Opportunity Index can produce maps showing where children face low levels of “neighborhood opportunity” and where populations of children are concentrated by race/ethnicity (Exhibit 2).

Exhibit 2

In “‘Pharmacy Deserts’ Are Prevalent In Chicago’s Predominantly Minority Communities, Raising Medication Access Concerns,” authors Dima Qato et al. use Census and Illinois regulatory data to show that “pharmacy deserts” are clustered primarily on the south and west sides of Chicago, in low-income neighborhoods where at least 50 percent of neighborhood populations are non-Hispanic black or Hispanic (Exhibit 3).

Exhibit 3

Anyone familiar with Cincinnati, Ohio, will recognize the city’s contours along the Ohio River in Exhibit 2 of “Housing Code Violation Density Associated With Emergency Department And Hospital Use By Children With Asthma,” by Andrew Beck et al. The map shows concentrations of asthma-related housing code violations and rates of asthma-related emergency department visits or hospitalizations at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center. The article’s Exhibit 3 zooms in on the neighborhoods near the medical center and adds emergency department revisits and rehospitalizations.

Exhibit 2

Exhibit 3