This week brought the good news that 16.4 million Americans have gained coverage under the Affordable Care Act — taking a 35% bite out of the ranks of the uninsured.

Last week, the Congressional Budget Office calculated that the law’s tax subsidies are costing 20% less than projected five years ago, when it was passed.

And in December, the feds reported that the once-ruinous spiral of spending on medical care slowed to just 3.6% for 2013 — “the lowest increase on record in the national health expenditures going back to 1960,” according one of the report’s authors.

It’s increasingly obvious, in other words, that the ACA, aka Obamacare, is beating expectations — not just of its critics, but also its supporters — and moving the country toward the sanity and security of universal health coverage.

So who will be the first major Republican to admit that Obamacare is working?

Who among the GOP’s brain trust is intellectually honest enough, or brave enough, to follow the developing facts instead of talking points and opinion polls?

Don’t look to Congress, where, despite the evidence, the law remains a favorite whipping boy of Republicans.

New Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has vowed to make “every effort” to repeal the law. And wiping out Obamacare featured prominently in the budget proposal rolled out Tuesday by House Speaker John Boehner.

When Boehner called his umpteenth repeal vote last month, freshman Syracuse-area Rep. John Katko was one of only three Republicans who bucked the party line by voting “no.”

Nor are profiles in courage arising among the Republican field for President.

Jeb Bush — who has stood up to his party’s base by advocating comprehensive immigration reform and defending the Common Core standards — still panders to it by labeling Obamacare a “monstrosity.”

He should have known better, having served on the board of Tenet Healthcare, which actively encouraged people to enroll in Obamacare and credited the law for dramatically boosting its revenues.

Also predictably in the anti-Obamacare camp is early front-runner Scott Walker of Wisconsin, one of the many Republican governors who turned down the chance to expand his state’s Medicaid plan for the poor at federal expense.

In fact, Walker rolled back eligibility to push thousands of Wisconsinites off the Medicaid rolls — arguing they could now afford to buy their own coverage through Obamacare. How’s that for having it both ways?

At least this isn’t 2009, when Sarah Palin spouted off about “death panels” — which was her purely demagogic spin on an ACA provision that sensibly encouraged doctors to talk to their patients about end-of-life issues, such as living wills and advance directives.

And at least this isn’t 2010, when McConnell, John McCain and others were ranting about 16,500 agents the IRS would supposedly be hiring to enforce the law — which some in the conservative media ominously portrayed as a paramilitary force.

At least this isn’t 2012, when GOP presidential candidate Mitt Romney campaigned against the health law — even though Obama had modeled it on one Romney proudly pioneered as governor of Massachusetts.

Yes, Obama spread misinformation about the law, too — by repeatedly vowing that, “If you like your health plan, you can keep it.” That wasn’t true for some percentage of Americans, and he knew it.

But his far more important promise — to make affordable health coverage available to those who need it without breaking the bank — is being kept.

To be fair to doubters of good faith, the odds were long.

It’s succeeding in spite of the ugly sausage-making of its trip through Congress.

It’s succeeding in spite of the hash job that the Obama administration made with its original website.

It’s succeeding in spite of Republican rhetoric that stoked fear and misunderstanding in the public.

It’s succeeding in spite of Congress’ perverse refusal to fix technical glitches large or small — including the ambiguous wording behind an opportunistic legal challenge currently before the Supreme Court.

Barring a bad ruling from the court — which could deal a huge setback — the ACA’s much-mocked hundreds of pages of legislation and thousands of pages of regulations are working better than Obama himself had any right to expect.

Republicans used to support the goal of universal coverage. Some of them used to support the ACA’s core concept of requiring Americans to be insured — the so-called individual mandate — as a market-based way to move toward universal coverage .

Now they only seem know what they’re against.