Photo

Anne-Marie Slaughter has noted that while everybody asks expectant moms how they’re going to balance work and family, few think to ask the same of dads. But now that may be changing — and dads’ answers reveal a lot about American culture at home and at the office.

For a study recently published in the Journal of Business and Psychology, Beth Humberd, Jamie J. Ladge and Brad Harrington interviewed 31 men about their experiences as workers and fathers. They chose college-educated professionals with working spouses, because they wanted to focus on dads effected most by the old ideal of the totally committed worker and the newer one of the highly involved dad. They found that, rather than choosing to see themselves either as traditional breadwinner dads or as hands-on types who were home for dinner, most fathers in their sample saw themselves as both.

One man’s definition of an ideal father is telling. He told the researchers a good dad was someone who could “be there for their kids every day when they need to be, and as much as they can be. And does their best to make sure that their spouse and kids understand the times that they can’t be there, why that is, to make sure that they understand that it is not a matter of one priority is more important than the other.”

The dads in the sample weren’t necessarily bothered by fulfilling multiple roles. But the fact that they have to do so may reveal bigger problems. Ms. Humberd told Op-Talk her research showed dads weren’t really discarding more traditional expectations (like the idea that they should work as much as possible), even as they added on new ones: “It’s kind of status quo. There’s this more involved narrative, that we need and want and desire to be more involved fathers. But in order to live up to the demands of an outdated workplace, they haven’t really shifted there yet.”

“When women become mothers,” she noted, “a lot changes for them on the work front, and perhaps too much” — they can be passed over for promotions or big assignments. “Yet when men become fathers, little seems to change in terms of others’ expectations.”

“They’re still rewarded and expected to be ideal workers,” she said, “and it has trickle-down effects on their spouses. It leaves men largely unable to adapt their work demands in order to meet family needs.”

Essentially, though men may spend more time with their kids than dads of decades past did, they may also have to uphold an older model of manhood — which can leave their partners stuck in the past, too, forced to do more at home even if they’re also working.

The research resonated with dads. Dana H. Glazer, director of the documentary “The Evolution of Dad” and a participant in a recent White House event on working fathers, told Op-Talk: “Most people are very confused about the role of fatherhood in our culture, because we’re given mixed messages about it. We’re told on the one hand that fatherhood is very important, and we’re told on the other hand that your value as a father is how much time you spend at work.”

He explained why men might feel they had to be ideal employees even after having kids: “It’s because the corporate mentality doesn’t leave any room for being involved with the family.” Corporate culture, he said, is “about maximizing profits to the detriment of dads.”

Kipp Jarecke-Cheng, a father and blogger who also spoke at the White House event, told Op-Talk, “I think a lot of companies kind of have an expectation that men don’t need to be engaged the same way that mothers are traditionally expected to be engaged with their children.”

Mr. Jarecke-Cheng’s partner is male, and he said being a two-dad family has “challenges and benefits within the context of work-life balance.” He explained that “there aren’t expectations about gender roles, there isn’t a female or mom in the equation that an employer would immediately assume is going to take care of all of the logistics.” So he and his partner have been able to define their roles based on what works for them.

But getting employers to support his role as an involved dad hasn’t always been easy — one boss told him that if he wanted a flexible schedule to care for his child, he’d have to take a pay cut. He wasn’t paid during his paternity leave and had to pay for his health insurance out of pocket then, too.

When it comes to helping dads resolve their double roles, Ms. Humberd says, “formalized work programs and benefits are hugely important, but so are the cultures that underlie them.” In their research, she said, “we really saw the power of the informal context: the interactions these men have, the expectations on them, how they negotiate with their boss.” For companies, she said, “it’s about creating a culture in which men can be fathers and workers.”

Mr. Jarecke-Cheng offered a similar prescription: Often, he said, “there are policies in place but the culture doesn’t support that.” Your company may offer paternity leave, he said, “but you may work in an environment where your colleagues or your boss are going to look sideways at you.” He argued that bosses had to lead the way in encouraging workers to actually take the benefits they deserved: “Policy is the talking the talk, but walking the walk from a cultural standpoint is important.”