Nancy Pelosi is in the market for a new successor.

The California Democrat had a favored recruit in Rep. Chris Van Hollen, but his decision to run for retiring Sen. Barbara Mikulski’s Senate seat has opened a power vacuum in the caucus.

Story Continued Below

While Pelosi has given no sign she’s relinquishing her 12-year reign as House Democratic leader anytime soon, Van Hollen’s exit means that more than a dozen members who’ve languished on the second and third tiers of influence can begin jockeying for promotions.

Looking at the contenders, it’s a good bet the next-generation leadership team will be more diverse, younger and more willing to split with Democratic traditions like the rigid adherence to seniority.

“Nothing is automatic when Nancy leaves,” Rep. Raúl Grijalva of Arizona said. “Nothing.”

With an eye to his future, Rep. Joe Crowley has been burnishing his liberal bona fides after getting dinged for being too moderate early in his career. The New York Democrat has also won support from key members of the Congressional Black Caucus, and he’s raised millions in campaign money for colleagues in tight races.

Meanwhile, Reps. Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona and Terri Sewell of Alabama, both relative moderates in the caucus, have already started moving up the ladder. Sinema, the first openly bisexual member of Congress, cut an unconventional path to the upper echelon, calling on the president to delay parts of Obamacare and voting against Pelosi on a number of controversial bills.

Sewell is known for her sprawling network in D.C., and has earned a reputation within the CBC as a team player who can advance the caucus’ agenda within the party. She’s well-liked by the current African-American leaders and has struck up a friendship with Pelosi since being elected in 2010.

The coming succession could also be a prime opportunity for Rep. Elijah Cummings, a respected and senior member of the CBC, to move up. He’s battled firebrand Republicans like Darrell Issa of California on national TV, while staunchly defending the administration from attacks. And in a party that still favors seniority, Cummings could have an edge.

As leader, Pelosi has run a tight operation and built a large network of allies and donors, which gives her substantial sway with members. She’s shaken off any challenges to her leadership, and even after the 2014 midterm elections, which proved disastrous for Democrats, she’s given no sign that her tenure is winding down.

For months, Pelosi had positioned Van Hollen as the top contender to move up in House leadership. He was the go-to policy leader on economic issues, and her allies hosted intimate dinners for the Maryland Democrat with key African-American and Latino members.

His Senate run, though, has intensified the behind-the-scenes scheming over who will take over when she leaves and other senior leaders, such as South Carolina Rep. Jim Clyburn, the assistant Democratic leader, retire. Interviews with more than three dozen lawmakers and senior staffers reveal a Democratic Caucus rife with ambitious newcomers eager to move up the ranks — and prepared to battle it out if a leadership post opens up.

“There is a pretty large talent pool … in the Democratic Caucus that could emerge whenever the next generation of leadership is called upon. There is a lot of talent,” Virginia Rep. Gerry Connolly said.

Hoyer likely to be challenged

House Minority Whip Steny Hoyer is next in line to replace Pelosi, but he’s sure to be challenged by younger members when Pelosi steps aside, given that it will be the first time the position will have been open in more than a decade.

If Hoyer successfully replaces Pelosi, it’s unclear how long he would retain the minority leader post. The 75-year-old could be close to 80 by the time the job becomes available, if Pelosi holds on for even a few more years.

And Hoyer would almost surely have to weather challenges from another Democrat. That’s one of the reasons he’s been cultivating allies within the junior ranks. He’s tapped three rising stars — Sinema, Sewell and Rep. Joaquin Castro of Texas — as chief deputy whips and is helping newer members win leadership posts. He was a driving force behind Washington Rep. Denny Heck being named the recruitment chairman for the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee.

Experience is also on Hoyer’s side — he served as majority leader from 2007 to 2011 and took over the minority whip post in 2003. And members privately acknowledge that few members are prepared to match Pelosi’s fundraising prowess.

Last cycle, Pelosi raised more than $67 million for the DCCC — a mammoth amount compared with Hoyer’s $3.9 million or the $18 million raised by New York Rep. Steve Israel, another member often cited as a potential heir to Pelosi.

She tapped the New York Democrat to lead the party’s intrachamber evaluation of its message — and with the departure of Van Hollen, Israel is one of her closest allies in the mix of would-be leaders. But to move up, the former DCCC chairman would have to overcome criticisms that he failed to push Democrats into the majority twice when he led the campaign arm.

There also will be criticism that Israel is too tight with Pelosi and fresh blood is needed atop the caucus.

A senior staffer close to Israel said the New York Democrat is focused on his new role as the messaging guru for Democrats and isn’t yet actively seeking out a new, more senior post.

“He’s in this place where he is really happy about his new position and hasn’t really gotten beyond that,” the aide said. “There is not anything specific at this point he is doing to prepare. It’s early.”

CORRECTION: Corrected by: Terry Mulcahy @ 03/25/2015 12:38 PM Correction: a previous version of this story misstated Rep. Grijalva’s position in the Hispanic Caucus.