Wait time drops while patient volumes increase this year

Third grade students tour a patient room in the Sterling Regional MedCenter emergency department earlier this year. The hospital reports shorter wait times in 2015, despite an increased patient load for their emergency department. ( Callie Jones / Journal-Advocate file photo )

Changes implemented over the last 15 months have yielded positive results in the emergency department of Sterling Regional MedCenter, Banner Health officials say.

"Sweeping changes" made in response to patient satisfaction surveys helped increase the number of patients served, while at the same time patients are waiting less time to be seen by a provider, a release from the hospital states. The changes were part of a larger push by Banner Health to improve patient satisfaction scores as well as overall emergency department performance.

"We're focused on the patient experience," said Jeff Shelton, CEO of Sterling Regional MedCenter. "Operational efficiency, direct communication, individual accountability and daily call backs done by nurses are some of the best practices being emphasized here to improve each patient's individual experience."

In September 2014, Banner Health contracted with TeamHealth to staff the emergency department at SRM and several other Banner Health facilities. According to Emergency Physicians Monthly, the nation's average Door-to-Doctor time (the number of minutes from patient arrival to seeing a doctor) is 40 minutes. With a significantly faster average time of 17 minutes in 2015, Sterling Regional MedCenter reported an average daily volume of 27 patients, only 0.6 percent of those who left without being seen.

"After partnering with Banner Health, we saw the opportunity to expedite care at Sterling Regional MedCenter by removing barriers that caused longer wait times to see a doctor," said Matthew Ledges, MD, Regional Medical Director at TeamHealth. "Since implementing new systems that streamline the process, we have seen a 30 percent decrease in wait time, even though there has also been a 30 percent increase in patient volume."

Advertisement

To accomplish these improvements, Sterling Regional MedCenter has increased provider staffing with eight regular physicians, PRN assistance (employees that only work when needed), daily back up schedules, and the addition of a tech shift and swing shift nurse. Additionally, the use of temporary physicians was discontinued.

To continue the improvements, Sterling Regional MedCenter is now in the process of implementing joint assessments in which patients are seen by a doctor and a nurse at the same time, a surge plan to regulate departmental flow, direct bedding, increased staffing and an upcoming ED redesign. SRM is one of only two Level 3 trauma centers serving northeast Colorado.

Sterling Regional MedCenter has provided medical care to residents of northeastern Colorado and the surrounding area since 1938. The hospital offers a full range of health care services and a staff dedicated to providing our patients with excellent care. Sterling also is home to the David Walsh Cancer Center, which offers an unprecedented level of cancer care to region. For more information, visit www.BannerHealth.com/Sterling.