Justice Antonin Scalia Bloomberg News

The Supreme Court’s decision to uphold Affordable Care Act health-insurance subsidies purchased by lower-income Americans across the country drew a scathing response from Justice Antonin Scalia.

In a 21-page dissenting opinion, which was joined by Justices Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito, Justice Scalia said the high court’s 6-3 ruling reinforces the “discouraging truth that the Supreme Court of the United States favors some laws over others.”

Here are some key excerpts from his dissent:

Justice Scalia faults the majority for not focusing on the plain meaning of the words in the law (page 2):

Words no longer have meaning if an Exchange that is not established by a State is “established by the State.” It is hard to come up with a clearer way to limit tax credits to state Exchanges than to use the words “established by the State.” And it is hard to come up with a reason to include the words “by the State” other than the purpose of limiting credits to state Exchanges…Under all the usual rules of interpretation, in short, the Government should lose this case.

On the majority’s “flawed” reading of contextual clues (pages 3, 4, 12):

I wholeheartedly agree with the Court that sound interpretation requires paying attention to the whole law, not homing in on isolated words or even isolated sections. Context always matters. Let us not forget, however, why context matters: It is a tool for understanding the terms of the law, not an excuse for rewriting them… Far from offering the overwhelming evidence of meaning needed to justify the Court’s interpretation, other contextual clues undermine it at every turn. To begin with, other parts of the Act sharply distinguish between the establishment of an Exchange by a State and the establishment of an Exchange by the Federal Government….Provisions such as these destroy any pretense that a federal Exchange is in some sense also established by a State…

The Court has not come close to presenting the compelling contextual case necessary to justify departing from the ordinary meaning of the terms of the law. Quite the contrary, context only underscores the outlandishness of the Court’s interpretation. Reading the Act as a whole leaves no doubt about the matter: “Exchange established by the State” means what it looks like it means.

Justice Scalia says it was the job of Congress to fix the law, not the court’s (pages 19, 20):

Rather than rewriting the law under the pretense of interpreting it, the Court should have left it to Congress to decide what to do about the Act’s limitation of tax credits to state Exchanges…The Court’s insistence on making a choice that should be made by Congress both aggrandizes judicial power and encourages congressional lassitude.

On the consequences of the court’s decision (page 20):

Just ponder the significance of the Court’s decision to take matters into its own hands. The Court’s revision of the law authorizes the Internal Revenue Service to spend tens of billions of dollars every year in tax credits on federal Exchanges. It affects the price of insurance for millions of Americans. It diminishes the participation of the States in the implementation of the Act. It vastly expands the reach of the Act’s individual mandate, whose scope depends in part on the availability of credits….

The dissent accuses the majority of playing favorites with the law (pages 20, 21):