OFF TO THE RACES: Four things we learned from Trump's DC visit

NBC's Perry Bacon Jr. outlines four things we learned from Donald Trump's trip to the Hill.

From the Washington Post: "The roiling feud between presumptive GOP nominee Donald Trump and reluctant Republican leaders reached a turning point Thursday as the two sides declared their willingness to gloss over substantive policy differences and work together to defeat probable Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton in November."

From the New York Times: The GOP convention could still be contentious. Here's why.

David Petraeus in the Washington Post (without naming names): "Setting aside moral considerations, those who flirt with hate speech against Muslims should realize they are playing directly into the hands of al-Qaeda and the Islamic State. The terrorists' explicit hope has been to try to provoke a clash of civilizations — telling Muslims that the United States is at war with them and their religion. When Western politicians propose blanket discrimination against Islam, they bolster the terrorists' propaganda. At the same time, such statements directly undermine our ability to defeat Islamist extremists by alienating and undermining the allies whose help we most need to win this fight: namely, Muslims."

CLINTON: From the Wall Street Journal: "The Clinton Global Initiative, which arranges donations to help solve the world's problems, set up a financial commitment that benefited a for-profit company part-owned by people with ties to the Clintons, including a current and a former Democratic official and a close friend of former President Bill Clinton. The $2 million commitment was placed on the agenda for a September 2010 conference of the Clinton Global Initiative at Mr. Clinton's urging, according to a document from the period and people familiar with the matter."

She's getting ready to expand the electoral map in the race against Trump.

And she says she'll support a big change to the Federal Reserve that's backed by many liberals

SANDERS: More Democrats are pressuring Bernie Sanders to get out of the race amid concerns about undermining the race to beat Donald Trump, the AP writes.

Senators are surprised by how their colleague Bernie Sanders has pressed on in the Democratic race.

TRUMP: His longtime butler told NBC News that Obama should be "hung ... from the portico of the White Mosque — it used to be the White House."

Ari Melber notes that Trump has not ruled out the possibility of reimbursing himself for campaign loans with new donations.

The Washington Post shoots down the argument that Trump is softening his stance on a ban on Muslim immigration.

Speaking of the Washington Post, Trump says owner Jeff Bezos is using the publication to avoid taxes.

His backers are building their fundraising efforts.

Sheldon Adelson endorses him in a Washington Post op-ed: "I've spent time talking to Donald Trump. Do I agree with him on every issue? No. But it's unlikely that any American agrees with his or her preferred candidate on every issue...Republicans have the candidate who the people decided is our winner from a field of 17 viable contenders. It's time for all Republicans to mount up and back our nominee."

Trump seems to be moving towards a proposal to privatize the VA.

Trump's campaign is considering a blacklist for groups that backed the #NeverTrump movement.

John Boehner thinks that Trump can win.

And here's a Wall Street Journal op-ed from Michael Bloomberg and Charles Koch: "Why Free Speech Matters on Campus."

OBAMA AGENDA: Directive on transgender bathroom use

Breaking overnight: "Public schools must permit transgender students to use bathrooms and locker rooms consistent with their chosen gender identity, according to an Obama administration directive issued amid a court fight between the federal government and North Carolina," writes the AP. "The guidance from leaders at the departments of Education and Justice says public schools are obligated to treat transgender students in a way that matches their gender identity, even if their education records or identity documents indicate a different sex."

And don't miss this development, via the Washington Post: "A federal judge struck down a portion of President Obama's signature Affordable Care Act health law Thursday, ruling that Obama exceeded his authority in unilaterally funding a provision that sent billions of dollars in subsidies to health insurers."