DESTIN, Fla., Jan. 21, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Watertree Health, a leading provider of free prescription discount cards, today announced that their cardholders across the country saved more than $52 million on their medications in 2014 – nearly doubling savings from the previous year.

The drastic increase in savings is a direct result of more people using the Watertree Health card as a means to better afford their medications. Recent reports have shown the costs of medication are increasing and becoming a larger portion of household budgets.

"Every day we read about the rising costs of prescription drugs and the financial burden they are placing on people," said Watertree Health President Shane Power. "These numbers clearly indicate that people need help and we are happy to play our part to ensure more access to affordable medicine."

In addition, Power noted that, while millions are signing up for health coverage during the open enrollment period for the Affordable Care Act, many of the most popular plans do not offer affordable, adequate prescription drug coverage.

"More people are finding that the Watertree Health Prescription Discount Card perfectly complements the plans obtained through the ACA, as well as those provided by employers," Power said.

The Watertree Health Prescription Discount Card is free and available to everybody, accepted at 60,000 pharmacies across the country (including major chains, such as CVS, Walmart and Walgreens), and reduces the price of prescriptions by as much as 75 percent. The versatile card can be used by people with a health plan, or by individuals who do not have health coverage.

Cardiac, flu, asthma and migraine medications are among the many commonly-prescribed drugs that can be discounted by using the Watertree Health Prescription Discount Card. To obtain a card, visit www.watertreehealthcard.com or text CARD to 95577.

About Watertree Health:



Watertree Health was founded in 2010 to address the growing need for accessible health care products and services in America. The Company's mission is to help people improve their lives by improving their health. Watertree Health's founders believe everyone should be able to afford their medicines. The Company launched the free prescription discount card in 2011 to help the tens of millions of people in America who didn't have adequate prescription coverage.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130318/NY78695LOGO

Contact: Michael Loughran, 212-981-5258, michael_loughran@dkcnews.com

SOURCE Watertree Health