John Kasich is the current governor of Ohio and one of three remaining Republican presidential candidates. He has focused his campaign on creating "a positive vision for America." People have been quick to label Kasich as the moderate on the Republican side of this election season, but as his stances on these 14 issues show, he leans more to the right than to the middle.

Health Care

Kasich wants to take to a more conservative approach to health care that includes patient-centered health-care services and paying physicians more when they provide high-quality care at a low cost. He plans to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act to lower the associated health-care costs. In Ohio, Kasich has expanded Medicaid to increase coverage and to provide more treatment for those with mental illness .

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Reproductive Rights

Throughout his time in Congress, as governor of his state, and as a current presidential candidate, Kasich has maintained his pro-life position . Kasich has signed bills to defund Planned Parenthood in Ohio and to ban late-term abortions ; eight of Ohio's 16 abortion clinics have closed since 2011, Kasich's first year in office. Although Kasich is pro-life, he believes in the exceptions for mother's health, rape, and incest. Kasich has said he would sign a bill banning abortions in cases of Down syndrome.

National Security

Kasich supports a more proactive and involved approach to national security ; he has outlined a complex plan to defeat ISIS, expand military operations and spending by $102 billion, and strengthen our relationships with our overseas allies. In order to truly destroy ISIS, Kasich has said that it is necessary to have boots on the ground and to increase support to the Kurdish military in Syria and Iraq. As for confronting Russian President Vladimir Putin, Kasich proposed a strategy during a CNN debate in December.

And for the Russians, frankly, it's time that we punched the Russians in the nose. They've gotten away with too much in this world, and we need to stand up against them, not just there, but also in Eastern Europe where they threaten some of our most precious allies.

Jobs

When Kasich took office in 2011, he brought back hundreds of thousands of jobs in the private sector to help Ohio's then-declining economy. Kasich created JobsOhio , a program that focused on improving the state's economy through expanding private sector work. Kasich uses his experience in Ohio to outline how he will create jobs for the rest of America — by balancing the budget and cutting taxes. (Kasich cut nearly $5 billion in taxes in Ohio in five years, and the state was ranked among the top five states with the largest income tax cuts.) Although he hasn't given a specific number, Kasich supports a "reasonable" and gradual increase to the minimum wage.

Criminal Justice

In 2011, Kasich signed a prison sentencing reform bill aimed to help nonviolent offenders go to halfway-house facilities instead of prison. However, like the other Republican presidential candidates, Kasich has offered little on his views of the criminal justice system and whether it needs to be changed. The most substantive criminal justice reform answer Kasich gave was during the GOP debate in New Hampshire in February: "We love the police, but we've got to be responsible to the people in the community."

As the governor of Ohio, where 12-year-old Tamir Rice was shot and killed by police in 2014, Kasich created a task force to bring together the community and local law enforcement to prevent incidents like this from happening in the future. The task force returned with suggestions to invest more in police hiring, recruiting, and training to improve the way police handle interactions with the community; Kasich implemented these policies across the state of Ohio. However, during the GOP debate in South Carolina, Kasich seemed to take a diplomatic approach to the relationship between police and the community.

Community has to understand that that police officer wants to get home at night, and not — not to lose their life. Their family is waiting for them. At the same time, law enforcement understands there are people in the community who not only think that the system doesn't work for them but works against them.

Wage Gap

In Kasich's office in Ohio, women earn nearly $10 less per hour than the male employees. Kasich has tried to argue that the gender wage gap is based on a lack of skills and experience, asking if those getting paid less (women) "have the skills to be able to compete?"

Gun Control

Kasich is a strong supporter and defender of the Second Amendment . He has signed pro-gun reform laws in Ohio to protect concealed carry laws. He once argued that the National Rifle Association (NRA) is a popular organization because "people feel like they have a right to protect themselves and their families."

Student Loans

When it comes to education , Kasich says that the government should have little involvement. He has proposed making college more affordable by keeping tuition rates consistent and allowing students to earn college credit while they are still in high school. As for loans, Kasich has said that students should be able to negotiate how much they pay back on their loans based on their job and their income. But he does not support free college and he made that clear when addressing a group of students at Kennesaw State University in Georgia.