From her book tour to the birth of her granddaughter to her outrageously expensive private plane flights during the midterm election, Hillary Clinton has pretty much been everywhere this year.

She’s expected to announce whether or not she will seek the 2016 Democratic nomination for president sometime next spring, so to help the former secretary of State decide on her bid for the Oval Office, I’ve made a very convenient list of all the hilarious (yes, HILLARY-lous) moments that 2014 has thrown at her.

Perhaps looking back on a year’s worth of ill-advised comments, negative media coverage and rather unflattering photographs will help Hillary figure out whether or not she can take another several years of the limelight.

Though there were many Hillary gems in 2014, here are 10 of the most funny and cringeworthy, in no particular order (although I did save the best for last):

1) When Hillary, adopting the voice of a character from “Poltergeist,” shouted, “Hello, Iowa. I’m baaack!”

2) When Hillary confessed to ABC News host Diane Sawyer that she and Bill were “dead broke” upon leaving the White House.

3) When Hillary backtracked on her “dead broke” comment and described herself as merely “not truly well off” in an interview with the Guardian.

4) When, in its third week of sales, Hillary’s memoir “Hard Choices” dropped just above a book called “Potty” on Amazon’s best sellers list.

5) When Hillary claimed at a Democratic campaign rally in Massachusetts that businesses and corporations don’t really create jobs (and that “trickle-down economics” doesn’t actually work).

6) When the former secretary of State suggested that the United States must “respect” and “empathize with” our enemies.

7) When Hillary charged the University of Nevada-Las Vegas an enormous $225,000 to deliver a speech at the school’s foundation dinner and then complained about student debt and the high cost of college tuition during said speech.

8) When Hillary was photographed walking on the beach in the Hamptons during her summer vacation wearing what appeared to be a “muumuu,” as the Washington Free Beacon so eloquently pointed out.

9) When Hillary and daughter Chelsea crashed New York Fashion Week (and, more specifically, Oscar de la Renta’s show) with a herd of plush elephants. I’m still upset Hil didn’t show up wearing her signature look:

10) And, finally, I couldn’t resist: That awesomely bad pro-Hillary country song. You might just feel compelled to “stand” up … and walk away from your computer when you hear it. Sure, Mrs. Clinton didn’t directly contribute to this, but she sure did inspire it!