OBAMACARE WIN

In a victory for President Barack Obama, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in favor of tax subsidies in states that did not create their own insurance marketplaces—ending uncertainty over the Affordable Care Act. Although the decision did not affect consumers in New York, which runs its own exchange, local health leaders were pleased.

WHOLE FOODS PRICE PROBE

The city's Department of Consumer Affairs accused Whole Foods of overcharging customers for prepackaged products. Tests on 80 different items purchased at nine New York locations revealed that they were all labeled ­incorrectly. Following the claim, a group of customers sued the high-end grocer. Last year, Whole Foods paid California an $800,000 fine for similar charges.

MATCH.COM IPO

The Match Group, which includes IAC/InteractiveCorp's dating site Match.com and other sites, will become a publicly traded company in the fourth quarter. The group will sell less than 20% of its common stock. Separately, Barry Diller-owned IAC promoted Joey Levin to CEO. He had been head of the company's search and applications business. He was also a Crain's 40 Under 40 honoree in 2014.

WEWORK VALUED AT $10 BILLION

Manhattan-based office-suite provider WeWork was reportedly valued at $10 billion after Fidelity Management & Research Co. and existing investors poured $400 million into the startup—a huge leap from the $1.5 billion valuation it scored early last year.

'TAXI OF TOMORROW' GETS GREEN LIGHT

New York state's highest court upheld the city's decision to replace some yellow cabs with a new fleet of Nissan minivans. An association of medallion owners argued that the Taxi & Limousine Commission does not have the authority to choose a specific vehicle.

HISTORIC SITES

The South Street Seaport was deemed one of the nation's most endangered historic sites by the National Trust for Historic Preservation, citing the tall residential building that will be erected on the waterfront. The designation comes as the tower's developer, the Howard Hughes Corp., agreed to reconsider the structure's height. Meanwhile, the city landmarked the Stonewall Inn, the famed Greenwich Village bar that spurred the gay-rights movement.

YOU'RE FIRED: UNIVISION CUTS TRUMP'S BEAUTY PAGEANT

The Spanish-language TV network dropped its coverage of the Miss USA pageant following comments that Donald Trump made about Mexican immigrants in his presidential campaign kickoff speech. The real estate mogul co-owns the Miss Universe Organization. NBC still plans to air the show.

MARTHA STILL ON THE BLOCK?

Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia may not be sold to Sequential Brands, a retail consolidator, for $353 million after all. The deal was prematurely leaked to the public, and the home-goods maven is entertaining higher bids from other suitors such as publisher Meredith Corp. and Iconix Brand Group, a licensing firm.

Get Crain's Morning Insider Sign up for the Morning Insider email and receive political news and musings every morning at 6 a.m. More Newsletters ›

Comments