The Deep Fried Cuban Roll and Fried Thanksgiving Dinner took home top honors this morning at the ninth annual Big Tex Choice Awards at Fair Park.

The Cuban Roll, invented by Isaac Rousso, took home Best Taste and the Fried Thanksgiving Dinner, created by Justin and Rudy Martinez, took home most creative.

The two winners faced some stiff competition from other contenders like Deep Fried Nutella and Fernie’s Deep Fried King Ranch Casserole.

First-time winner Rousso had made the top eight the last three years with his deep fried Pop-Tart, deep fried salsa ball and fried pork wing.

But to win, Rousso took inspiration from what he knows. His family immigrated to the U.S. from Cuba in 1962, and the Cuban sandwich is the staple of his Taste of Cuba booth at the fair.

Rousso said his winning creation takes the best of that sandwich — roasted pork, ham, pickles and Swiss cheese — and adds a side of mojo sauce.

“Put that all together and what you get is an explosion of flavor,” Rousso said. “It’s amazing.”

Justin Martinez won previously for Most Creative in 2011 with Deep Fried Bubble Gum, but said he wanted to break from sweet to try a savory invention. The idea, he said, hit him that Thanksgiving.

“I remember loading up my plate, and actually looking at my plate saying, ‘Oh my God, how can I fry Thanksgiving?’” Justin Martinez said.

But it took Justin Martinez nearly two years to perfect his recipe, he said, even withholding it from last year’s competition because he didn’t feel comfortable with it. His Fried Thanksgiving Dinner combines stuffing, turkey and southern cream corn, with gravy and orange cranberry sauce on the side.

“It’s more like comfort,” Justin Martinez said. “It seems like it brings people together. It creates a happy feeling, so that’s always a plus.”

The judges included Dallas Morning News columnist Jacquielynn Floyd, editorial writer Mike Hashimoto and The Ticket’s Corby Davidson.

Try them out for yourself when the State Fair of Texas opens on Sept. 27.

The winners:

Deep Fried Cuban Roll: A filling of slow-cooked pork shoulder, chopped ham, Swiss cheese, pickles and secret sauce spread on a slice of Swiss cheese, rolled in pastry dough and deep-fried. Served with mojo sauce.

Fried Thanksgiving Dinner: Homemade stuffing and diced roasted turkey rolled in a ball, then dipped in southern cream corn, covered in seasoned corn meal and deep fried. Served with orange cranberry sauce and giblet gravy.