The crowd at last night’s Reformed Whores performance seemed pretty loose, and the Southern duo — Marie Cecile Anderson and Katy Frame — did, too. On stage were the two women and their instruments, equipped with two open beers snug inside bright pink koozies.

The concept of this hilarious show is simple: Anderson and Frame portray two former prostitutes who sing about issues, such as birth control and sexual hangups, that most people (even those not in the sex industry) can relate to.

The scandalous duo dominated the stage for their hour set, part of the Piccolo Fringe Festival at Theatre 99, 280 Meeting St. Though the Reformed Whores are no strangers to Charleston, their lyrics and commentary still seemed to register as refreshingly raunchy. The crowd was howling from start to finish, as Marie and Katy sang about condoms, online dating and sexual experimentation. It seems these two very naughty girls are not afraid to go there... about anything... ever.

All of Reformed Whores’ songs were delivered with a Southern twang, as if Dolly Parton had given whiskey-fueled vocal lessons to Scarlet O’Hara in a brothel of the Wild West.

The duo was hilarious, but that’s not to say that they lacked depth. Many of their songs have sexually empowered feminist messages. In “Waxing Lesson,” the girls draw attention to the widespread double standard of down-under grooming. In “Girls Poop Too” they challenge men’s reluctance to associate women with the bathrooms they surely use.

Not only are Anderson and Frame comically entertaining, they are musically talented as well. The women play guitar, accordion and ukulele as they sing along with powerful voices.

For those who “just like to watch,” be sure to sit a few rows away from the stage: “Just like an orgy we need everyone to participate,” they say as they ask the crowd to stomp their feet and clap to form a beat over which they rap about — well, perhaps it’s best left unsaid.

The Reformed Whores perform again at 6 p.m. Monday, 8 p.m. Tuesday and 7 p.m. Wednesday. Tickets are $16. Go to www.piccolospoleto.com.

Seamus Kirst is a Goldring Arts Journalist from Syracuse University.