OZARK, Mo. -- The debate of same-sex marriage equality continues while another deadline looms just months away.



According to the Affordable Care Act, insurance companies have until January 2015 to offer the same benefits to gay couples as others.



While Missouri doesn't recognize same-sex marriages yet, a longtime firefighter with the Ozark Fire District wants insurance for her partner. It's a process that's much harder for her than a heterosexual couple, however.



When a fire breaks out, minutes count for firefighters arriving on the scene.



Fire Captain Andi Mooneyham is one of those firefighters.



Mooneyham and her wife married in California a year ago. When she came back to the Ozarks, they began looking for equality for same-sex couples, starting with her health benefits.



"In March of this past year, the Obama Administration mandated that health insurance companies have to offer the same rights and benefits to same-sex couples as they do straight couples," says Mooneyham.



Currently, the district's policy offers family insurance for heterosexual couples. Chief Darren White says the discussions are new to the district.



"This topic was brought up about basically defining a spouse and what a spouse is," White says.



Mooneyham proposed a change to the recognition of marriage licenses and the definition of a spouse.



"That's going to help me and my partner out financially and stress-wise too to know that I work for a district that supports us," she says.



The district is insured through Anthem, a spokeswoman says in an email.



"We refer to it as a domestic partner, as we don't really get into whether it is marriage or not and we do permit either same sex or opposite sex domestic partner coverage, as elected by the group," the statement reads.



The decision is left in the hands of the board.



"There were some in favor of this and they voiced their opinion as to why and there some opposed and likewise," White says.



Captain Mooneyham says whether she's gay or straight doesn't determine how she fights a fire and she's proven that over the last eight years she's been with the district.



Eleazar Soto is a firefighter on Mooneyham's shift and says no matter who she loves, they are a family.



"If I were to get hurt, she would have my back," Soto says. "Its back and forth, I'm her spine, she's my spine."



Chief White says districts handle plenty of issues professionally and avoid distractions.. This is no different.



"The citizens should feel comfortable that these people here, these firefighters, these driver operators, these captains, they will continue to do the same work they have always done," he says.



In the end, Mooneyham is a firefighter at heart and says that'll never change.



"I love where I work and my family and friends that I have there," she says.



The board approved the first change to recognize marriage licenses from other states.



Members chose to table the change of definition of a spouse and dependent until their next meeting on September 2.



In states where same-sex marriage is legal, insurance companies have four months to become compliant with the act.





Copyright 2016 Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.