Joe and Jacki Stevens founded Joppa Outreach five years ago and today have a growing office and warehouse in the East Village. (Photo: Special to the Register)

Carl froze to death. Alan fell in the river. Daniel was stabbed to death …

Homeless friends and volunteers lifted candles when they heard the names read on the Iowa State Capitol grounds last Sunday night. Many of the Iowa homeless had died without obituaries or funerals.

Tommy Hayton once lived among them, but his name wasn't among the grim roll call heard on the longest night of the year, by people who want to help shorten the list.

Hayton survived after one of those people, a short man with a ponytail, approached his secluded camp in the woods three years ago.

The man knew it was an uphill climb to help the homeless out of the woods, with precious few victories and too many deaths, but he kept walking forward.

Hayton snapped off a tree branch to club him.

Teachers in the small school in Leon, in southern Iowa, told him they had never seen so many scabs and scars, but it was in the days before they routinely reported such things, Hayton said.

His father was violent, and he figures that's where he got his violence from. After his mom found evidence of a beating and got upset, Hayton went to school and started a fight. He was only 119 pounds, but he bulked up, got an attitude and soon whipped people. He even fought the principal, he said, toppling him down two flights of stairs, and that was it. He left home.

He began a violent, drug-filled life, although he held down concrete jobs for 25 years.

"The crank will ruin anybody," said Hayton, 55. "It will take a PTA mom, and you won't see her for a week."

But it wasn't the drugs that led him to the woods.

"I got to the point where I didn't have any faith in humanity anymore. I hadn't been around any decent people in years," he said. "I had anger issues. I knew if I wasn't around people anymore, there wouldn't be trouble with anybody."

He walked away from failed relationships and a job and picked a secluded spot on a wooded bluff near Broadlawns Medical Center in Des Moines. He didn't have money to buy drugs, but at least he was away. He built a tent camp around a tree, keeping his eye peeled for people invading his spot.

He figured it was too steep a climb for invaders.

Then along came Joe Stevens, the guy with the ponytail. Hayton snapped off a 5-foot hickory stick and came down the hill at him.

"Joe is not a big fella, but he is brave," Hayton said. "He pretended like I was just a buddy. That rubs off after a minute."

Joe Stevens was urged on by his wife, Jacki, to bring food to the camping homeless in the late 1990s. But life for the Polk City couple got busy. His business helping tech startups was rolling, and they had a son, Caleb.

But they never forgot the feeling of helping those people. After the recession of 2008 cut into his work, Joe said he ran out of excuses not to. Jacki wanted to teach Caleb about giving and serving.

"So on Sept. 5, 2008, we went out as a family," said Joe, 52.

"We told Caleb, 'Don't tell your grandparents.' "

Any fear of the homeless quickly subsided. "They were people just like everybody else, but down and out," Joe said. "Most couldn't afford guns or meth. They had just given up."

The Stevens family began talking to the men and women and heard their stories. They resisted the urge to judge or instantly change them, or scorn them for drunkenness or bad behavior.

They just offered them food, a friendly conversation, a hug.

"How long do you hold them to their bad decisions?" Joe asked. "Often they are holding those bad decisions against themselves and punishing themselves. We can't change their choices — only try to help with their circumstances."

It became addicting, Jacki said, and she couldn't wait to get out again. By the next year, the Stevenses decided to incorporate and form a nonprofit called Joppa Outreach. In the Bible, Joppa was a place where all were welcome.

The Stevenses didn't outwardly push religion. They didn't align the group with any church because they didn't want to push any one denomination. They didn't seek huge government grants. They quietly gathered private donations and prayed with the homeless.

They recruited volunteers to go out every Sunday, hike through the woods, and find the hundred homeless who needed food or supplies or propane tanks for heaters to stay warm. Joe kept working full time and provided Joppa his organizational skills as the mission expanded to helping the homeless find jobs or housing. Jacki, a tiny blonde, was the heart, her vast empathy leading her to shed fears and discard steady disappointments.

She met people like Doug Fields who needed help.

"He really wanted to work, get into a home and get back into society, but partly it was alcoholism that kept him down," she said.

Joppa volunteers lined up a job for Fields at a body shop. Volunteers liked him, and one volunteer was determined to get him the eyeglasses he so sorely needed.

He wouldn't be among the 158 that Joppa helped off the streets, but Tommy Hayton was.

Jacki Stevens, far left, and her son, Caleb, lead a group of volunteers on snowy expeditions to the woods to help warm up the homeless. (Photo: Special to the Register)

Hayton was dumbfounded. He had been up in those woods "all squinty-eyed and angry" and screaming into the night at God or Satan: "Show yourself. Let me know you are real."

But here were these people who showed up with Joe, and he couldn't scare them off. They talked to him like he was a friend.

"They didn't seem in a big hurry to leave. I'd never met any people like that in my adult life," he said. "It sounds corny, but it's probably the most wonderful thing that happened in my life, meeting these people. It helped me re-establish my faith in humanity."

He found Joe intelligent, thought Jacki had a heart of gold, and saw their son as a combination of them both.

It was Caleb who first asked his piano teacher, Susan Cooper, to join the group helping people in the woods. "Every week," Susan recalled, "he would ask me to check out Joppa."

Finally, she agreed, and in November 2010, she attended a fundraiser. The stories of the homeless touched her. She committed to going out every Sunday to deliver meals, and her ideas about the homeless changed.

"I had a brother who was a fireman for 35 years, and they would get called out to the homeless camps. He had a negative view, that they were all drunks and bad people," she said. "I had to get beyond those preconceived notions."

Among the people she met was Hayton.

"He didn't seem like a typical homeless person without hopes and dreams," she said. "He was searching to be a better person."

In fact, Hayton had been so moved by receiving help with nothing asked in return that he also began delivering Joppa meals to his friends in the woods.

The warm blankets and groceries were important, he said, but what he saw Joppa giving him and others was self-worth. "They helped people realize they are worth the time, that they are more than just a mangy dog in a gutter. Sure, some get drunk and freeze in the woods. When they realize they are worth something, they don't always make it back to the top, but they drink less, and maybe their life becomes steadier and safer. Their camp gets cleaned up. They start getting some self-respect."

And that's how Susan Cooper and Tommy Hayton found themselves together on Sunday mornings.

He would watch out for her in the woods while making Joppa deliveries. They would talk about faith and life. She led him to believe in God. His bitterness began to subside.

"I saw him flirting with her," Jacki Stevens said, "and at first I was concerned for Susan. He better back off."

By the next year, they told Jacki they were engaged to get married. Marrying a homeless guy? Members of Susan's family were upset, and she hasn't talked to some of them since.

Tommy and Susan Hayton now try to help those less fortunate at the Rosebud Indian Reservation in South Dakota. (Photo: Special to the Register)

Tommy and Susan got married Aug. 4, 2012, in a civil ceremony, then decided to hold a public wedding at the Joppa warehouse in the East Village among the stockrooms of coolers and supplies that are assembled for 300 volunteers to deliver.

When they looked down the hallway, they were astounded. More than 100 people had arrived, even homeless folks from the suburbs.

"There were people that walked all the way from West Des Moines," Susan said. "They didn't have a ride, but it was important for them to walk half the day to be a part of it."

While dining on food from Joppa's big donors, Whole Foods and Trader Joe's, the gathering became more than a wedding. It represented hope that people can come out of the woods.

Tommy and Susan soon came to believe they were meant to do more. They researched places to help folks in even tougher spots, and found the Rosebud Indian Reservation in South Dakota. A portion of it sits in Todd County, the second-poorest in the United States. Nearly half of the 10,000 people on the reservation live below the poverty line.

The reservation had made the New York Times for its high suicide rate among teens. Drug use is rampant, Susan said. "Most of the kids live in nightmarish conditions at home. It's a forgotten place."

A few months ago, they decided to pick up and move there to help. She gave up her job as a full-time piano teacher. They moved into a home outside the reservation, in nearby Valentine, Neb.

"Indians are killed up here all the time," Tommy said. "If it doesn't happen to a white person, no one cares. Our best hope is to train up the kids to get a better life. There is a better life, just like I found out. There is a better world."

Today, they are working to give the kids that world.

Doug Fields really cared about people. He was upbeat. He was trying hard at his new job. Jacki thought Joppa had maybe helped another man break free of the woods. But the alcohol kept him from succeeding, and he couldn't keep his job.

During the cold snap in October, he fell down some concrete steps near a downtown condo, hit his head, and later died at age 51.

"We think he was trying to get warm," Jacki said. "They try hard, but sometimes it just doesn't work, no matter how hard you try."

So she read his name Sunday night.

Douglas Ray Fields died of a serious brain injury. Doug worked for Maytag until it closed, and was everyone's friend.

A homeless man murmured his name, lifting his candle.

Joppa showed him love and honored him. Sometimes, that's all you can do for the homeless, and what has inspired hundreds to help the group.

That influence has spread all the way to South Dakota. Susan Hayton, 60, is today a classroom assistant in the Littleburg school on the Sioux reservation. She started an after-school spelling bee because the children are behind, so often coming to school shell-shocked after volatile weekends at home. Tommy and Susan also started a Sunday school for kids.

They hope to do more. If they get approval from the tribe, they want to run a reservation community center, set up as a safe place for kids to gather.

Just a few days before Christmas, one of those kids asked Susan why the sign on the school wall, "Peace on Earth," had been hung for Christmas. Susan told them to imagine no more meanness, anger and hate. "Wouldn't that be the best Christmas present ever?"

"Yeah," said a girl who rarely spoke, "I wish my parents would stop fighting all the time and stop breaking doors."

The Haytons are trying to give her the peace that Tommy discovered one day in the Des Moines woods.

"When I think about how my life was going and what Christ and Susan and Joppa did for me — giving me grace — I better spend my life doing what I can."

How to help

Joppa is a nonprofit community of volunteers whose mission is to supply unconditional love, support and hope for the homeless in Polk County. You can learn more about the organization and donate online at joppaoutreach.org.

To volunteer for food delivery and transportation, or to donate food, tents, sleeping bags, drinking water or personal supplies, go to Joppa Center, 118 SE Fourth St., Des Moines, from noon to 4 p.m. Mondays through Thursdays, or call 515-288-5699.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1AVEyis