Oregon’s 5th congressional district sprawls from Mount Hood to the central coast. It’s closely divided between the two major parties. Three-term incumbent Democrat Kurt Schrader’s biggest rival is another Clackamas County resident, Republican Tootie Smith.

Schrader and his Republican challenger, have at least one thing in common. They both split their time between official and campaign duties. Both had official reasons for being in Oregon City last week.

Rob Manning/OPB

Smith was on the dais for a Clackamas County commission meeting. She was one of several board members explaining the complex considerations in raising local revenue:

“If we put out a proposal to the voters, and it fails, then we will go without. Gee, what are my decisions? I can take some officers off the highway. I can do less mental health. I can cut back on our clinics…”

Hours before that, Kurt Schrader had toured Benchmade Knife Company. He asked where the company got its steel. Vice president David Fee said some of it has to be imported from Austria. Fee says that affects his company’s ability to use the “Made In America” label.

[We’re] “trying to struggle right now with the Federal Trade Commission and try to determine whether or not we can use that label,” Fee said.

Schrader told him, “well, check with our office - we’re big on making it in America. Our problem - if sometimes the problem is if you can’t get raw material or whatever, we’ve got to make sure that folks like you who are trying to do the right thing, don’t get penalized. We want to encourage this.”

“Yeah,”said Fee. “I’ll take you up on that. So we’re going to head out this door right here….”

But if Schrader and Smith both juggle official and campaign duties, their similarities mostly end there.

Rob Manning/OPB

Before Schrader toured the knife factory in Oregon City, he was locking horns with Smith, at a debate in Happy Valley where the two staked out very different ground on a number of issues.

Take the Affordable Care Act, for instance.

“The President gave exemptions to huge big blocks of people - to the unions, and as a matter of fact, Congress even exempted themselves from healthcare,” said Smith at the debate. She continued, “as a Clackamas County commissioner, I have the exact same healthcare that all 2,800 of our employees do.”

Schrader came back with, “for the record, most of what my opponent said about the health care bill, of course, is totally inaccurate.” He generally defended the health care act, though not everything about it:

“Don’t confuse the debacle with Cover Oregon with promoting health care. The doctors, the hospitals, the health care organizations - the coordinated care organizations we have here in Oregon - have signed up a bunch of people.”

And the two disagreed about what a U.S. representative should be: a fighter or a team player.

Schrader presented himself as the latter. “If you want someone who knows how to work with both sides of the aisle to get it done, you want me to be there.”

Smith highlighted her willingness to battle - even with her own party. “I think it’s very obvious that Washington, DC is not working for the people,” she said. “Seventy percent say that they feel government is dysfunctional, and they don’t know what they’re doing. Don’t get me wrong, I don’t like the Republican leadership any more than some of you do.”

Smith kept her focus at the chamber of commerce debate on economic issues facing businesses and families, like hers. When student debt came up, she reacted as a mother.

“So where in the world, on this earth, can I get a three percent loan for my daughter, who is a college graduate?” she asked. “She’s working in her field as an accountant. But guess what, she’s still living at home, trying to save money, so she can be independent. That is not prosperity.”

Schrader agreed with Smith’s worries about student loans, calling debt levels “unconscionable.”

That’s not the only time the two candidates seemed aligned. The candidates took turns blasting the Environmental Protection Agency. Schrader said he read the agency the “riot act” recently. “I’m actually the lead Democrat in Washington, DC, in the House of Representatives in fighting the expansion of the Clean Water Act, as suggested by the EPA. It’s a vast, huge overreach.”

Smith contended environmental rules are wrecking local economies, and Schrader just hasn’t done enough.

There are three minor-party candidates in the race - Ray Baldwin for the Constitution Party, Independent Party candidate Marvin Sannes, and Libertarian, Daniel Souza.

Schrader is leading the money race by a mile. He’s raised nearly $1.5 million. Smith is the only other candidate who’s actively raised money, and she has raised a little more than $50,000.