All you President Obama lovers better step back and consider what you’ve uncorked. Obama and his ilk are succeeding in changing America’s basic values. When Obama adorers see what this country will become, they may regret their vote. The realization may dawn that Obama’s agenda will diminish America.

After five years of Obama appointees polluting our way of life, three out of four Americans now are dissatisfied with the country’s direction. According to last week’s Gallup poll, nearly half of Americans no longer see the United States as a land of opportunity.

Here is where we are:

Tax revenues are threatened because higher tax rates wound or kill the golden geese that push the tax base higher. American families’ median income has been steadily dropping since 2008. Welfare expenditures and government debt have risen to record levels. Private-sector jobs are barely growing because job creators — mostly businesses and wealthy employers — are being penalized. Obamacare will cut the 40-hour work week to 29 hours, hitting the middle class hard. This means we will live mostly in a part-time nation.

Deficit spending only works for short periods, then its usefulness lapses into a liability. Forty cents of every dollar we spend is borrowed. The Federal Reserve’s attempts at a repair job have left working Americans no better off and savers worse off, with financial bubbles that the feds blame on Wall Street. Americans already work half the year for governments, not for themselves. Fifty years of remarkable achievements in technology will not be repeated because the rewards for innovation and entrepreneurialism are disappearing.

Safety nets have proliferated. There’s little reason for Americans to save if safety nets take care of every social need. But even the nets are now starting to fray because of costs — entitlement spending in our “handout nation” now amounts to about two-thirds of federal spending. Ninety million Americans are not working. Food stamp costs are now $83 billion, double what they were in 2008.

The benefits of education may be outweighed by the costs, and feel-good degrees like anthropology and humanities are near-worthless in today’s job market. The government has loaned a trillion dollars we don’t have to kids who can’t pay it back, and who were schooled for jobs that no longer exist.

Our young are being cannibalized and ripped off to take care of baby boomers. The only way government can give one American a dollar is to first confiscate that dollar from another American, often through a coercive and extortionist tax code and fines. Governments increase deficits and are looking for new money, including a possible 1 percent tax on the net wealth of affluent households.

The National Security Agency’s surveillance of communications of tens of millions of Americans apparently is not enough. The feds now want black boxes in automobiles, so they can track your location and calculate how much you should pay in new road taxes.

Your access to health care will be controlled, and healthy people will now pay for unhealthy people’s medical costs, even those who are unhealthy by their own hand. Obamacare is presented as an act of charity, but its actual goal is “single-payer government healthcare,” an instrument that begins the national transformation to socialist control.

Patriotism among the Obama crowd in Washington D.C. is laughed at, because this alienated coterie considers themselves “citizens of the world” first, and Americans second.

America has mortal enemies within Syria, Iran and terrorist groups, all of whom declare openly that they must erase us from the face of the Earth. And yet Obama chooses to appease such enemies while snubbing Israel.

Obama and the left regard the American past with contempt, a fallen world corrupted by wealth, in need of profound income redistribution. He called the U.S. Constitution “deeply-flawed” in 2008. Obama’s intellectually dishonest re-writers of history are especially busy these days, peddling the fictional narrative that government played only a small part in America’s financial crisis.

The result of the administration’s destructive politics is either a permanently weakened America or ultimate institutional collapse. Reversing that threat will require confrontation and fighting fire with fire, but if Obama’s policies become permanent, the America we knew is lost.