This week, The Hill reported that D.C.’s delegate in Congress, Eleanor Holmes Norton, is preparing for another fight over the District’s ability to govern itself. This time, the issue is the legalization of marijuana.

The D.C. Board of Elections has just certified that there are enough signatures to put legalization of marijuana on the ballot in November. Earlier this year, during consideration of the House appropriations measure that funds D.C., a congressman from Maryland successfully attached a provision to block funding for implementation of a D.C. law that significantly lowered penalties in the city for marijuana possession. He has promised to fight marijuana legalization in the city as well.

Congress has the ability to take these actions because of provisions in the Constitution which give Congress the ability to “exercise exclusive Legislation in all Cases whatsoever, over such District (not exceeding ten Miles square) as may, by Cession of particular States, and the Acceptance of Congress, become the Seat of the Gov­ernment of the United States.” In 1973, Congress passed the Home Rule Act, which provided the District with the ability to elect a mayor and city council and allowed the city a bit more self-governance. However, the Home Rule Act contains significant limitations, and Congress still retains significant oversight over D.C. For instance, Congress can block measures passed by the D.C. government and also maintains control over D.C.’s budget.

[GALLERY: Cartoons on Pot Legalization]

Further, the Home Rule Act specifically states that Congress can, at any time, enact legislation for the District on any matter.The rationale behind Congress’s role in the affairs of the District, as explained by James Madison in Federalist Paper number 43, was the need to protect D.C. as the capital of the nation. As resident of D.C., I happen to find the entire arrangement rather annoying.

The issue at hand isn’t about the legalization of marijuana per se. Rather, it’s about the ability of a member of Congress who is not a resident of the District to reverse a decision reached by the voters of D.C. because it makes for good politics in his or her home state. There has been similar interference on other issues. A few weeks ago, a member of Congress from Mississippi tried to blocking funding for enforcement of D.C.’s gun laws. There have also been attempts to restrict District actions on matters related to abortion, needle distribution and medical marijuana. These are all hot button issues that allow members of Congress the opportunity to make a political statement that will resonate with voters in their own Congressional districts. Unfortunately, their actions do not take in to account what D.C. itself has determined it needs.

D.C. is unique among American cities. Because of the significant role the city plays in the function of the federal government, some Congressional oversight and involvement is appropriate. However, members of Congress should use this oversight function wisely and stop overruling District voters for their own political gain.