The HBO comedian and commentator returned to a familiar attack on religion for sitting on billions in property without paying taxes

After citing giant U.S. corporations like GM and United Airlines that paid zero federal taxes last year, Bill Maher called out some other “deadbeats” on his Friday HBO show “Real Time”: religious institutions.

“There are 300,000 religious congregations in this country that pay no tax — no federal state or local, no income, sales or property,” Maher began. “And they own $600 billion in property.”

He cited the example of St. Patrick’s Cathedral in Manhattan. “If you sell cheap sweaters like they do across the street at Forever 21, you pay taxes,” he said. “But if you’re selling the invisible product of eternal whatever — no taxes.”

Also Read: Watch Bill Maher Call Donald Trump a Kid Kicking Your Seat on an Airplane (Video)

Naturally, Maher mentioned Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard, who “once said the only way to make any real money in this world was to start a religion.” While there are only about 30,000 Scientologists, the comic added, “it owns billions in real estate tax-scot-free.”

Since the Supreme Court last took up a case about taxing religious organizations in 1970, Maher added, more Americans have abandoned organized faith.

“The atheists, agnostics and anti-religionists are now the second-biggest denomination in America, right behind evangelicals. We’re 22.8 percent,” he said. “That means almost a quarter of us in America are being forced to subsidize a myth that we’re not buying into.”

Maher, who wrote and produced the pro-atheism documentary “Religulous,” dismissed religion as a “sexist, homophobic magic act that’s been used to justify everything from genital mutilation to genocide.”

Watch the full video above.

Ted Cruz v Donald Trump Timeline: Their Insults About Wives and Rat Sex (Photos) This week began with nude pictures of Donald Trump's wife, Melania Trump, and ended with Ted Cruz calling Trump a rat and just barely avoiding the word "ratfucking." Let's review. Getty Images

It all started with an anti-Trump Facebook ad targeted at Mormons from the super PAC America Awesome, which featured a photo of Melania Trump posing naked for GQ. Getty Images

Taking offense to the perceived slight, Trump threatened to "spill the beans" on Cruz's wife Heidi. "Be careful, Lyin' Ted," he warned on Twitter. "Pic of your wife not from us. Donald, if you try to attack Heidi, you're more of a coward than I thought. #classless," responded Cruz. Getty Images

On Wednesday, a story accusing Cruz of having affairs with five women appeared in The National Enquirer. Cruz denied the story, calling it "complete and utter lies" and "a smear that has come from Donald Trump and his henchmen." Getty Images

While accusing Trump of planting the story, Cruz tried to talk around the word "ratfucking," derogatory slang for an especially dirty kind of political sabotage. “He’s a man for whom a term was coined for copulating with a rodent,” Cruz said of a former Trump ally. “Well let me be clear, Mr. Trump may be a rat but I have no desire to copulate with him. And this garbage does not belong in politics.” Getty Images

On Friday, Trump issued a statement on Facebook, denying the accusation that he planted the Enquirer story. "While [The National Enquirer was] right about O.J. Simpson, John Edwards, and many others, I certainly hope they are not right about Lyin’ Ted Cruz," he wrote. Getty Images Previous ; Next 1 of 6 This week in disgusting presidential politics This week began with nude pictures of Donald Trump's wife, Melania Trump, and ended with Ted Cruz calling Trump a rat and just barely avoiding the word "ratfucking." Let's review.