In the final part of John McPhee’s 1971 classic, “Encounters with the Archdruid,” David Brower and Floyd Dominy raft the Grand Canyon together.

Dominy, then commissioner of the Bureau of Reclamation, had proposed a series of dams throughout the canyon. Brower, executive director of the Sierra Club, had done everything he could to stop him. And yet the book, a true story, begins with the two adversaries together on a boat, enjoying a beer between rapids.

I’ve been drawn to this story for years. Two of the great rivals in the history of the environmental movement, together in the exact place they’re fighting over.

It was the inspiration for a trip my family and I took in early August: two days, one night on the Green River in Lodore Canyon, in Dinosaur National Monument. This is where Brower and Dominy’s Bureau of Reclamation battled over the proposed, but never built, Echo Park Dam.

More recently, Dinosaur and the surrounding desert have been the subject of a series of debates epitomizing the challenges that Colorado faces: energy development vs. conservation and recreation; Western Slope water vs. Front Range water diversions; land development vs. species protection. We invited people to the raft trip who represented all of these angles and more, including representatives of the oil and gas industry, conservationists, hunters, and water managers. Leaders as diverse as Brad Miller, general manager of Anadarko Petroleum; Tim Sullivan, Colorado director of The Nature Conservancy; and Anne Castle, assistant Interior Department secretary for water and science.

Other than the 21 river miles before us and a cooler full of steaks, there was no set agenda.

The trip began as we all waded waist-deep into the water to drag the heavy boats off a sandbar. We worked together to scout upcoming rapids, and load and unload our gear. With no meeting times, objectives or talking points, we talked not as adversaries, but as companions.

As the trip wound on, people started discussing some polarizing issues — like whether the Colorado Bureau of Land Management should embark upon master leasing plans for oil and gas drilling, and about the merits of maintaining instream flows for endangered fish versus other uses of that water.

A consensus emerged that we’d avoid ideological standoffs, no matter how much we disagreed. It made for good discussions — and might even make a good model for statehouses and the nation.

We were all on the river because of our connection to the Colorado landscape. Regardless of our land-use preferences, we know that we rely on that land now, and will need to do so for a long time, for food, for energy, for wildlife habitat, or simply to enjoy the beauty of an undeveloped place.

All of our discussions took place with this shared understanding and appreciation in mind. By establishing our mutual priorities, we could begin by moving forward together, instead of immediately pushing apart.

People in Washington are far better at yelling past each other than at sitting down and talking through differences. Fortunately, this trip was a refreshing reminder that at the end of the day, there’s nowhere to go but downriver, and everybody’s help is needed to get there.

During our trip we started plenty of debates that will continue long after the river season is over. Perhaps it’s naïve, but I hope we set the table for future policy conversations built around trust and mutual respect. Above all, we proved something on our trip, something many of our leaders seem to have forgotten since the battle over Echo Park: When it comes to our natural resources, we’re all in the same boat.

Sen. Michael F. Bennet wrote this for Writers on the Range, a service of High Country News (hcn.org) in Paonia. He represents Colorado in the U.S. Senate and is a Democrat.