Topics: Ben Carson, ben carson pyramids, fruit salad, wtf, Elections News, Politics News

In an attempt to unravel Ben Carson’s strangest statements, Salon dove deeper into the mind of Carson than anyone really should. Here’s our best effort to explain what the GOP presidential contender really meant:

1. On choosing a Supreme Court nominee: “The fruit salad of their life is what I would look at.”

This is a clear case of Dr. Carson getting a bad rap from an inept mainstream media with no sense of historical context. We imagine that in Carson’s mind, he was simply adopting a presidential tone by harkening back to the (questionably accurate) tradition of fruit salad in American politics.

Here’s a little revisionist history lesson (that we kinda wish was actual reality) that Carson might have schooled us with if we’d only given him the chance:

“Though historians have traced this thread all the way back to the fruit salad shared by pilgrims and Native Americans at the first Thanksgiving, the first president to invoke the delicacy was James Monroe. In 1821, Monroe issued a controversial executive order that banned cantaloupe from inclusion in fruit salad and described the melon as ‘fucking gross.’ The order (later overshadowed by the more famous Monroe Doctrine) was subsequently overturned by Andrew Jackson.

Other notable historical examples include William Jennings Bryan’s famous ‘crucified upon a bowl of fruit salad’ speech and Dwight Eisenhower’s farewell address, in which he warned of the growing influence of the military-industrial and fruit salad lobbies.”

2. “Can somebody attack me please?”

Like a world-class judoka or a counter puncher à la Sugar Ray Robinson, Dr. Carson is looking to use his opponents’ momentum to his advantage. Carson lures in would-be attackers with his cucumber-cool facade only to strike back with his sharp wit. Admittedly, the strategy is less effective when no one ever attacks you because you’re polling in single digits.

3. On the American people: “Many of them are stupid.”

Well, Ben Carson did lead in the polls for the GOP presidential nomination at one point…

4. “My own personal theory is that Joseph built the pyramids in order to store grain.”

Another case of the lamestream media making a mountain out of a molehill. Dr. Carson clearly misspoke. Simply replace “Joseph” with “Egyptians” and “grain” with “the mummified remains of dead pharaohs” and this quote makes total sense. Just an innocent slip of the tongue.