​By Linda Gittleman

lgittleman@michigannewspapers.com

In one sense, state Sen. John Moolenaar, R-Midland and Dr. Jeff Holmes, his Democratic opponent from Alma, did have a debate Monday night.

Only thing was, Holmes spoke in Alma and Moolenaar spoke in Cadillac.

A debate between the two who are running to replace U.S. Rep. Dave Camp in the 4th district was planned by students at Alma College. But five days before the debate, Moolenaar withdrew and went to Cadillac for a meet and greet sponsored by the Cadillac Area Chamber of Commerce and the Northern Michigan Chamber Alliance.

Advertisement

Holmes kept to his commitment in Alma and spoke before a good sized group of mostly Democrats at the Alma College Heritage Center.

He sent his son C. J. to speak at the Cadillac event at Baker College.

The event in Alma was sponsored by the students’ Democratic party organization and Holmes was introduced by Professor Joanne Gilbert.

After outlining a bit of his history as an Alma physician for 26 years and a member of the school board for 10 years, Holmes said he is a proponent of the Affordable Care Act or Obamacare.

“It has increased taxes, saved money and saved lives,” he said. “The savings have been better than expected.”

He cited one patient of his, age 26, who was kept under her parents plan due to Obamacare and had a routine check up. Although she had no symptoms, a disease was discovered - and treated early - that might have been missed altogether if she’d had to wait until she had a job that provided her with insurance coverage.

“It was dramatically important to her,” he said.

He also noted that the ACA needs improvement.

On the topic of business and economy, Holmes said he would like to see the colleges and universities in the area provide the research and “push it out” to local entrepreneurs.

He said he wants to see sustainable, renewable energy and, he said, the country needs a tax reform.

“It should be fair, simple, and business taxes should be reduced, removing loopholes,” he said, adding that businesses should not be given incentives to move jobs overseas.

Later, Holmes said that he was impressed with Camp’s tax reform proposal, although he would change some of the things in it.

Ironically, according to the Cadillac News, Moolenaar said much the same thing about tax reform at Baker College.

Moolenaar said that the government should be kept within its limits, giving Americans the opportunity to create jobs.

“Part of that would be tax policy, under which he would pursue lowering individual and corporate rates by closing loopholes, discouraging corporations from keeping profits offshore and instead investing in the United States,” the Cadillac News reported.

Back in Alma, Holmes was asked what he thought about Common Core.

He said it was a program designed to help bridge the gap between the disadvantaged students from the rest and was created by school superintendents and governors.

“The federal government wasn’t involved,” he said. “But it needs improvement.”

He added that one of the ways it could be improved is to eliminate some of the tests and assessments at the beginning of the school year.

Holmes was asked too, what he thinks about medical marijuana.

“Colorado and Washington have it right,” he said. ‘Legalize it.”

He told of patients that he hasn’t seen in 20 years who call him telling him that their back hurts.

If marijuana helps, it helps, but without treating the patients in 20 years, he said he couldn’t document how other treatments had failed and how marijuana would be beneficial.

“Don’t put me in the middle,” he said.

He was also asked how he could help end the stalemate in Washington.

Holmes said he would be respectful, listen and build relationships.

“A good idea is a good idea,” no matter what side of the aisle it comes from, he said.

And, he was asked if the mid Michigan area should be concerned about Ebola.

He said it should, since several people from the area visit Sierra Leone each year (although not since the Ebola epidemic has spread.)

But closing the borders?

He said he was reminded of Edgar Allen Poe’s, “The Mask of the Red Death,” in which the castle doors are closed to keep out the plague and everyone dies anyway.

He is however, in favor of screening patients who are coming from countries where Ebola is present and taking temperatures.

And, he pointed out that a service learning program on protecting patients and hospital workers was planned for Tuesday at the Alma hospital.

In Cadillac on the topic of Ebola, the Cadillac News reported that Moolenaar told his audience that he believed travel restrictions should be enacted and travel visas from West Africa should not be granted.

Moolenaar spoke on Obamacare as well.

He said the ACA makes life more difficult for lower income Americans by encouraging the cut back of full time jobs to 30 hours to avoid the requirement of paying benefits, the Cadillac News reported.

Moolenaar’s withdrawal from the Heritage Center debate was not taken lightly in Alma.

Ginna Holmes, wife of the Democratic candidate, spoke about how disappointing it was that the candidates could not debate. It is after all, she said, an important part of the political process.

“It’s sad for all of us,” she said. “By not showing up, (Moolenaar) is saying that we don’t matter.”

For his part, Moolenaar noted in Cadillac that he had taken part in a forum Sept. 30 at Alma College and that he and Holmes had appeared together at a number of events, the Cadillac News said.

“It was less important to debate Holmes a second time, Moolenaar said,” the Cadillac News reported

Ginna Holmes also told the Alma audience that running for national office was not something decided upon only recently. Holmes had been considering a run for several years.so She said that in order to compete in this cammpaign, they were told a candidate has to raise $1.25 million.

“We’re not in that ball park,” she said.

An appeal was made by the Alma Democratic students to help in Holmes’ grass roots campaign.