We all have to die, but if I never again hear Chris Christie talk about his Sicilian mother then I will die a happier man.

Uh-oh. He did it again.

Chris Christie, that is. He can't seem to get up before an audience without once again launching into that tedious tale about his upbringing in New Jersey with the Irish father and the Sicilian mother.

That's the sort of thing that's interesting the first time you hear it. But the entire nation, or at least the entire Republican Party, heard it back in 2012 when Christie gave the keynote speech at the Republican National Convention. (See video at bottom)



Even then, critics were commenting that the governor might have considered talking more about Mitt Romney and less about himself. Romney was, after all, running for president and needed all the help he could get.

But Christie keeps recycling the story. He did so on his last two trips to Iowa.



Go to the lower video here and you'll see the most recent recycling, which was at a small gathering in Dallas County, Iowa.

And then there was this clip from the Iowa Freedom Summit in Des Moines last month. Go to the 20-minute mark:

This is getting old. In fact it was already old last year when Christie gave a version of the Sicilian-mom story at the Conservative Political Action Conference.

Here's what I wrote from the convention:





From time to time a politician comes along and steals the national spotlight. That described Christie when, shortly after becoming governor in 2010, he became the star of a number of videos that went viral. Since then, however, Christie has taken to repeating some of the same lines over and over and over. If I never again hear Chris Christie talk about his Sicilian mother, I will die a happier man. I had a mother, too. She was a wonderful woman. But somehow I can get through a week without reminding everyone within earshot of that. That stuff about the Sicilian mother who was the "enforcer" in the family goes over good the first time you hear it. But by the time he incorporated it into his keynote speech at the Republican Convention, it was starting to sound like a piece of self-promotion for a self-obsessed politician. Here we were going into an election in which Obamacare was going to be a prime issue. Presidential nominee Mitt Romney couldn't talk about it, for the rather obvious reason that he pretty much invented Obamacare. So Christie should have used his time to promote the party's interest in pointing out all the many ways it would adversely affect Americans. Instead we heard for the hundredth time about his Sicilian mother.



I don't know who his advisers are - or even if he has any. But someone needs to tell him that the audience in Iowa wants to hear about their lives, not his.

When I covered the South Carolina primary back in 2012, I got a good look at Newt Gingrich in action. As you probably know, Gingrich became just another Beltway hack after his term as House Speaker. But I had to admire a professional in action.

In speech after speech, Gingrich showed he was up on the issues most important to South Carolinians, such as the efforts by Washington bureaucrats to prevent the badly needed dredging of the state's harbor.

Romney was not nearly as good when it came to local issues. It showed in the result, with Gingrich winning handily.

There's a lesson in that for Christie. I have no idea what the big issues are for Iowa voters at the moment. But neither does he apparently.

And when it comes to the term "Sicilian," I suspect half his audience thinks that's a kind of pizza with a thick crust - not the ancestry of a certain politician with a thin skin.

I suspect "Italian" is probably exotic enough for that crowd, assuming they're interested in that sort of thing.

That is not a safe assumption. At a certain point people are going to conclude he just keeps repeating this spiel because he has no idea about how to run the country.

What's his position on immigration? Obamacare? Anything?

So far the American people haven't heard it - and they've been waiting since 2012.