Sterling senior running back Zach Brammer expected to only miss a few weeks with knee injury

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

»

The Sterling football team received some time off this week as, after opening up its 2014 season on Aug. 22 in what is commonly known as "zero week," the Tigers enjoyed a bye on Friday. It can be looked at as good news for players anxious for the rest, or bad news for the players anxious to get on back on the field and hit people.

But there is at least one Sterling player who was especially excited to see a bye week on the schedule and that player is running back Zach Brammer.

Brammer, who had his junior season abruptly ended by a left-knee injury, looked to be in danger of losing his senior year to another left-knee injury after taking a direct hit to his left leg during last week's game against Wray.

Fortunately for Brammer and for the Tigers, the tailback received good news this week when he was told he had dislocated his knee cap and did not re-injure his left quad or ACL that he tore last season. Brammer is expected to make a return to the Sterling lineup in 2-3 weeks, possibly by the Tigers' homecoming game against Valley on Oct. 3, which would mean he could only miss one game thanks to the bye week.

"Until we see what the official MRI says, we won't know 100 percent for sure, but from what we've heard, he (Brammer) is projected to be back in a couple of weeks," said Sterling head coach Rob Busmente. "From a team standpoint, it's great to hear. He is a guy who was with us all summer and really stepped up into a leadership role. He is well liked by his teammates and there is not a guy here who doesn't like him or a guy here who isn't pulling for him. The guys were tore up, even after the win (against Wray), because of the potential of Zach not being back."

Advertisement

When the play happened, even Brammer doubted that a return this season would be possible.

"It was just a normal dive up the middle and I saw an opening and went for it. Then a (Wray player) hit me in the side of the knee and it just kind of popped," Brammer said. "It hurt really bad and I went straight to the ground. I fumbled the ball, too, which was really unfortunate. But when I got hit, I just thought 'Oh my god, I did it again. I'm going to be out the rest of the season.'"

Brammer is currently Sterling's second leading rusher this season, behind senior quarterback James Skerjanec, and has two touchdowns to his credit.

In his absence, Busmente said the Tigers are looking at using a running back by committee system as they head into their road game on Friday against University.

"We've have some guys who are capable of stepping in, like Austin Burkholder, Peyton Kloberdanz and even Michael Mitchek, who has been playing tight end for us, can step in at tailback," Busmente said. "You don't want to look at an injury as an opportunity, so to speak, but that's what it is because it gives kids the chance to step up."

And while the next few weeks will be tough for Brammer to sit and watch as his teammates take the field without him, it'll be a much easier situation to stomach than the prognosis feared last Friday when he and his teammates were consoling each other on the sidelines.

"It's really relieving," said Brammer when asked how it feels knowing he'll be back this year. "I'm pumped to get back on the field and it's great knowing I'll be able to do that soon."

Contact David Wilson at 970-526-9285 or dwilson@journal-advocate.com