Within 20 minutes of going on sale in January, tickets were scarce as concert-goers couldn't buy two seats together for one of the musical headliners of this year's Jones County fair.

As of Thursday, more than 600 seats were available for the more-popular of the two musical headliners for the Dubuque County Fair.

In northeast Iowa, recognizable musicians performing at county fairs are as commonplace as carnival rides and funnel cake, but not all fairs have equal offerings.

Fueled by an entertainment budget that's 20 times larger than some of its neighboring counties and more than 10 times the size of Dubuque County's, the Great Jones County Fair and Food Fest has the capital to land big-name talents with big price tags -- including country star Luke Bryan, whose July 18 concert now is sold out. It's a recipe that still usually churns out a profit, organizers say.

Unable to compete with Jones County's $2 million entertainment budget, other area fairs take a different approach. They try to land up-and-coming country artists and classic rock 'n' roll stars that are not nearly as costly but who still will draw in concert-goers.

"If you have your group that have their big hits and are well-known, chances are people are going to buy the tickets. But if the prices are too high, they may choose not to attend," said Jamie Blum, Dubuque County Fair manager. "Then again, if you bring in an up-and-coming act, people going might not be sure who they are and might not attend because of that.

"Your biggest hope is you secure a group that's coming up the charts, and they break right before your event."

KEEPING UP WITH JONES

The Dubuque County Fair budget is just a fraction of Jones County's.

This year's entertainment budget is about $180,000, including funds to run the lights, sound and stage. That total is $125,000 less than 2013, and it does not include money for hospitality and meals for the entertainment acts.

With that budget, Dubuque County's fair can't compete for the superstars that perform in Monticello.

"We don't have the funds to do it, basically is what it comes down to," Blum said.

The Dubuque County Board of Supervisors designates funding for the county fair annually, but fair organizers earmark those funds for capital-improvement projects. The money used to line up fair entertainment is a combination of sponsorship dollars and ticket sales.

Blum recently came before county supervisors to request financial assistance for the fair, saying it was needed to help cover losses of $111,570 over the past four years due to higher energy costs and less-than-expected attendance.

BACK TO COUNTRY

The Dubuque County Fair's up-and-comer this year is Scotty McCreery, owner of several country hits and also known for winning "American Idol" in 2011. He is the headliner July 26.

About 4,000 to 5,000 people are expected to attend his concert, Blum said, though more than 600 tickets still were available last week, according to the fair's ticket website.

"I think the people in this area like country, they support country, so we try to do a country act," Blum said.

The fair in Dubuque was known for its three- and four-day country lineups for years, but that emphasis gradually was reduced and shifted. Blum said the fair started hiring alternative rock acts in 2007 when it was unable to book an affordable country act.

Since 2007, the fair has brought in acts such as Hinder, Buckcherry and Papa Roach in an attempt to introduce new audiences to the fair.

"A lot of fairs are experiencing that younger people aren't coming to the fair as much as they used to," Blum said. "By bringing in an act like that, you're appealing to a younger demographic."

However, last summer's All-American Rejects performance fell short of expectations. The band performed on a cold, rainy night when the temperature dropped to 51 degrees, and only 1,000 people were in the crowd.

The other weekend headliner, Daughtry, enjoyed more success, drawing a couple thousand. But the fair's most-popular concert in 2013 was a Tuesday night performance by Disney Channel star Bridgit Mendler, with more than 3,300 tickets sold.

Fair officials said last year that attendance at both the Thursday night tractor pull and the Sunday demolition derby each topped the attendance at any of the concerts.

Overall fair attendance totaled just 58,000, better than the 55,000 in 2012 but down from the 60,000 to 70,000 organizers expect during a good year.

GROWING BUDGET, STREAM OF STARS

The Jones County fair's success is evident in the office of General Manager John Harms, where pictures of famous entertainers who have played in Monticello fill a wall.

"We surrounded ourselves with some really good people in the right places," Harms said.

Twenty years ago, the music budget for the Jones County fair was $250,000. It has increased every year since, and 2015's budget likely will surpass that of this year.

About $100,000 of this year's budget is allocated just to lights, sound and the stage. The fair also added four LED screens this year.

Harms attributes the fair's ever-climbing entertainment budget to inflation, concert-goers' willingness to pay more for tickets and an increase in performance prices of musicians.

He referenced country artist Miranda Lambert, this year's Thursday night headliner.

In 2005, she opened for Rascal Flatts at the fair and was paid $5,000. In 2008, she co-headlined a night of entertainment at the fair along with Dierks Bentley and was paid $50,000.

This year, she will be paid $500,000 for her show.

"She's worth every penny," Harms said. "She is a fireball. Her career just keeps going up and up. Everything she touches is working."

The same could be said of Bryan. Two of his singles were among the seven most-downloaded country songs through the first six months of this year.

BIG NAMES, BIG CROWDS

"The lineup is amazing for this year," said Jolene Kramer, of Monticello, who will be among those in attendance.

Kramer, 39, has attended the fair for at least 30 years. She has track-level and grandstand tickets for all three of the large Jones County concerts this year and has had reserved seating since college, Over the years, she frequently attended other county fairs, including those in Dubuque and Jackson counties. But Jones remains her favorite.

"It's affordable entertainment," she said. "I've been to other outdoor venues, and nothing really compares to the atmosphere and crowds you get there."

Danielle Schmitt, 19, travels from Farley, Iowa, to attend the fairs in Dubuque and Monticello but for different reasons. She heads to Jones County for the concerts and Dubuque County for the dairy exhibits.

She has track-level tickets to both the Lambert and Bryan concerts, but she said she has never bought tickets for a Dubuque County Fair concert.

"Dubuque doesn't really draw me to it because they don't have the concerts there like Jones does," Schmitt said.

Last year, the Jones County Fair featured Sheryl Crow, Motley Crue and Keith Urban. Harms estimates the crowds for those concerts ranged from 10,000 to 25,000.

The largest concerts can draw up to 30,000 people -- more than the population of Jones County -- though the fair only sells 11,500 tickets on the track or in the stands, he said. The rest of the attendees watch from nearby hillsides, having paid only the $10 general admission.

In all, the fair usually draws 80,000 to 100,000 people.

ADVANCE PLANNING

Fairs typically start looking for entertainment in September the year before. Budget and genre are considered in making a wish list that's sent to an agent, who gathers a list of available talent. Acts are typically booked by the end of the winter, although rock artists might not have their tours decided until February.

In Jones County, the fair starts looking for talent more than a year in advance to be ready to announce next year's entertainment at this year's fair.

The fair has used Variety Attractions, of Zanesville, Ohio, one of the largest outdoor booking companies in the country, to book acts for more than 40 years. Bill Magann, an entertainment consultant and concert producer with the company, has worked with Jones County since 1975 and speaks to what it takes to bring in big acts.

"It's routing and relationships and money," Magann said. "You got to have a committed buyer."

Magann said country acts will book shows for a weekend and return to Nashville. Acts can take a dozen trucks and a crew of 75 to 100 on the road, placing an emphasis on lining up performances along routes. For example, Lambert will perform in Monticello on Thursday, in Cleveland on Friday, Cincinnati on Saturday and Brooklyn, Mich., on Sunday.

"You have got to have somebody in the venues that understands how to promote shows and understand the business atmosphere of it all because the cost of these shows today and the cost of the ticket prices can indicate to the audiences these shows are not cheap to stage," he said.

But one of the most crucial aspects of booking an act is relationships.

"These artists, they won't just work anywhere," Magann said. "The people who put the deals together have to have a solid reputation."

The fair's stage also is part of the sales pitch. At 100 feet wide, 75 feet deep and 55 feet from the deck to the steel roof and with a deck resting 6 feet from the ground, the Jones County stage has the capacity to hold more than 120,000 pounds of lights, speakers and gear from the roof. Major acts don't have to set up when they come to town.

MONEYMAKER

The Jones County fair typically makes money, but that revenue comes from more than just concerts, even with the large crowds the acts draw. The bottom line is bolstered by sponsorships and additional revenue from sources like food sales.

This year is expected to be a record-setting one, already passing benchmarks before the fair has started.

"We can't depend on the ticket revenue for the seats to pay for the acts because I can count on one hand the number of times that has been successful, and they have been acts that have been very low budget that click at the right time," Harms said.

One example was country artist LeAnn Rimes in 1997, who exploded on the national scene near fair time. However, with big names, luck and timing has less of a role.

"When you get into spending multiples of hundreds of thousands of dollars for one night of entertainment, there's not a whole lot of explosion left," Harms said.

But the entertainment budget can't continue to grow forever and still enable the fair to earn a profit, he acknowledged.

The fair nearly suffered devastating losses in 2010, when flooding halted performances. The fair was aided when two out of three headliners waived their fees when their concerts were canceled.

With outdoor entertainment, weather can play a crucial role.

"We kept our financial head out of the water that year -- at least we didn't lose as much as we expected to," Harms said.

The fair has turned down acts that are too expensive, and organizers might be saying "no" more in the future.

"I don't know where the peak is, but it's getting close to a million (dollars), and that's scary when you don't have any real guarantees on things," Harms said.

COUNTRY AND ROCK

In Delaware County, the fair has followed the trend of pairing country acts with classic rockers.

Madd Hoss Jackson will open for country act Easton Corbin on July 10, with George Thorogood performing the following night.

Fair Manager Jeannie Domeyer said the fair prefers to book a younger, up-and-coming act that has established music on the airwaves. The fair then holds its VIP Night, a popular, all-you-can-eat-and-drink event, paired with a rock act.

"Typically, the country crowd draws more than classic rock," Domeyer said. "With country concerts, we have more current music and a lot of times try to get someone who is friendly with the younger crowds."

This year, Corbin fills the role of connecting with a younger audience. Domeyer said Corbin was chosen because he had consecutive No. 1 singles. Fair officials also knew he had a single, "Clockwork," planned for a January release, making it likely it would be on the charts come fair time. (The song had been on Billboard's top country airplay chart for 22 weeks as of last week.)

The formula appears to be working. It's seen a 3 percent increase in attendance each year for three consecutive years.

CHANGE OF PLANS

Even after an act is booked and contracts are signed, there's no guarantee the show will go on. The Jackson County Fair booked country acts Gloriana and Gretchen Wilson in December for this year's fair. Then, Gloriana got booked on a national tour, and the fair had to scramble to book county musician Chris Cagle.

The fair's musical woes didn't end there. A few months ago, Gretchen Wilson backed out for health reasons.

"Then we said, 'OK, who can you beg, borrow, steal or bribe?'" recalled Lanny Simpson, fair manager.

Agents talked Brian Howe, former lead singer of Bad Company, into canceling a show in Indiana.

Simpson said losing a musical act is rare, but it has happened to the fair in two of the past eight years.

"There's contracts, but in the case of health, what can you do?" Simpson asked.

While landing a new act is paramount, not just anyone will do.

"Rappers will not work here. Soul music will not work profitably here," Simpson said. "Even with the people they say they're going to bring to us, if they're not going to appeal to our audience, there's no use in saying yes."

Depending on the agent, the fair's deposit will either be returned or transferred to the new act.

The fair had record attendance last year at a concert by the Charlie Daniels Band, which drew 5,700 people. However, even that success was overshadowed by the 8,300 people who turned out for the Night of Destruction demolition derby.

"By history, the engines make more money than the music does," Simpson said.

Simpson said funding for entertainment will remain strong.

"There are those people who don't really care for the engines that do love music," Simpson said. "Because we're a county fair, we want to provide for all tastes of entertainment."