Topics: Army, confederate flag, Fort Bragg, Fort Lee, GlobalPost, U.S. Military, Politics News

This article originally appeared on GlobalPost

Lovers of the Confederacy, we’ve got some bad news for you. But there’s some good news, too.

Here’s the bad news for people who wish to honor a secessionist army that killed and died for the right to own other human beings: The South Carolina House voted early Thursday morning to remove the Confederate battle flag from South Carolina State House grounds. Republican Gov. Nikki Haley has promised to sign the bill.

But there’s also good news for Americans who wish to remember traitorous champions of slavery: There are still 10 US Army bases in the United States named for Confederate generals, and military officials have no plans to change the names.

South Carolina’s momentous decision to remove the Confederate flag came three weeks after Dylann Roof, a young white supremacist who appeared in several photographs holding the Confederate flag, shot and killed 9 African American parishioners at a historic black church in Charleston, South Carolina. Many people were outraged when a photograph taken at the state house showed the American flag flying at half-staff in mourning while the Confederate flag continued to fly at full-staff.

The mass shooting led to an aggressive and effective backlash against the continued presence of Confederate battle flags in American society. Major retailers — including Wal-Mart, Amazon, eBay, and Sears — announced they’d stop selling the flags. Officials in Virginia, Maryland, North Carolina, and Tennessee promised it would no longer be allowed on license plates.

More from GlobalPost: Turns out people get angry when you say white Americans are terrorists, too

Other symbols of the Confederacy are also being targeted. Alaska just changed a census area named for a Confederate general and plantation owner. In Tennessee there’s been a bipartisan call to remove from the state house a bust of Nathan Bedford Forrest, a Confederate general and leading figure in the Ku Klux Klan. And folks are beginning to talk about the fact that the US Capitol’s National Statuary Hall Collection features many Confederate leaders, including President of the Confederacy Jefferson Davis.

There’s definitely a national conversation happening around symbols of the Confederacy.

The Pentagon is staying out of it.

While the Confederate flag is falling in South Carolina — an act whose symbolic importance can’t be overstated — US Army soldiers continue to train at bases named for Confederate leaders that waged civil war against the Union Army, which, you’ll recall, included the US Army:

Fort Lee (Virginia)

Fort Hood

Fort Benning (Georgia)

Fort Gordon (Georgia)

Fort Bragg (North Carolina)

Fort Polk (Louisiana)

Fort Pickett (Virginia)

Fort A.P. Hill (Virginia)

Fort Rucker (Alabama)

Camp Beuregard (Louisiana)