Trump lawsuit threat backfires

THE CLOCK: 334 days until Election Day 2016 …

THE DEBATE CLOCK: Republican debate again in 7 days. Democrats do it again in 11 days.

Story Continued Below

TRUMP LAWSUIT THREAT BACKFIRES: POLITICO’s Isaac Arnsdorf reports: DONALD TRUMP's threats to sue just sparked a bigger legal fight. Charlie Spies, the Republican campaign-finance whiz who counsels PACs supporting JEB BUSH, is alleging that Trump illegally mixed business and politics when his corporate attorney warned the billionaire's opponents that attack ads could trigger defamation lawsuits. The claim comes in a complaint filed Wednesday with the Federal Election Commission that was obtained exclusively by POLITICO.

Alan Garten, general counsel of the Trump Organization, FedEx'ed bombastic cease-and-desist letters on company letterhead to the Club for Growth, the Right to Rise leadership PAC, and Mike Fernandez, one of Bush's biggest donors. Spies is alleging that Trump crossed a line by using corporate resources to do his campaign's "dirty work."

In a snarky return salvo, Spies quipped about Trump's bankruptcies, reality show fame, plan to build a wall on the Mexican border and past donations to Democrats. He also questioned Garten's grasp of election law, noting that he addressed his threat to the Right to Rise leadership PAC, which contributes to candidates but doesn't make ads, instead of the well-funded super PAC by the same name.

Spies called on the FEC to investigate immediately and to make a referral to the Justice Department. A Trump campaign spokeswoman didn't immediately answer a request for comment. Read more at POLITICO http://politi.co/1QfUw08

Happy Wednesday evening, here’s your 2016 Blast. Henry C. Jackson (@henrycjjackson) is here to guide you through today’s campaign news. Send your tips, complaints and hottest hot takes to: hjackson@politico.com.

TRAIL MIX: Here’s what’s popping on the campaign trail

In today’s campaign news, HILLARY CLINTON wants to avert companies inverting. BERNIE SANDERS lights up Google’s algorithms. DONALD TRUMP gives the Hill heartburn. TED CRUZ consolidates evangelicals, MARCO RUBIO has some Iowa issues, JEB BUSH offers a guarantee and MIKE HUCKABEE makes a credulous claim about his rap skills.

THE DAILY CLINTON

AVERTING INVERTING: The Wall Street Journal: HILLARY CLINTON on Wednesday rolled out a plan that promises “to use executive authority, if needed, to crack down on corporate maneuvers that shift profits out of the U.S. Her aim ... is to punish companies that engage in what’s known as 'earnings stripping,' a common tactic by companies after they move their tax addresses outside the U.S. through so-called inversions. These tax benefits aren’t available to U.S.-based companies.” http://on.wsj.com/1luWkpv

A PLAN: She chose to roll out in … Iowa, naturally.

MINER PROBLEM: The Associated Press: “As secretary of state, HILLARY CLINTON intervened in a request forwarded by her son-in-law on behalf of a deep-sea mining firm to meet with her or other State Department officials after one of the firm's investors asked Chelsea Clinton's husband for help setting up such contacts, according to the most recently released Clinton emails. The lobbying effort on behalf of Neptune Minerals Inc. came while Clinton — now the leading Democratic presidential candidate — was advocating for an Obama administration push to win Senate approval for a sweeping Law of the Sea Treaty.” http://fxn.ws/1NUP2rl

TAKE THE QUIZ: Building on an effort to tie Republicans to DONALD TRUMP, HillaryClinton.com is running a “Trump or Not” quiz that challenges visitors to determine whether it’s something the Republican front-runner or one of the other GOP contenders said: http://bit.ly/1QwsyLZ

THE PROGRESSIVE RESISTANCE

GOOGLE BERNS: The Washington Post looks at how Google subtly steers you toward BERNIE SANDERS. “[L]ike any information source, Google's algorithm-driven search results aren't 100 percent neutral. Its search engine produces more favorable results for some candidates than others, new research has found.” http://wapo.st/1lOZd3K

HOLLYWOOD MARVEL: Fox looks at BERNIE SANDERS' celebrity appeal and notes that while “HILLARY CLINTON is extremely popular in Hollywood, having raised millions of dollars and been invited to the homes of Christina Aguilera, Tobey Maguire and Barbra Streisand ... another group of A-listers including Will Ferrell, Danny DeVito and Mark Ruffalo are backing her rival, Vermont Senator BERNIE SANDERS.” http://fxn.ws/1Y2O9MO

TRUMP ON THE STUMP

WHAT A DRAG: POLITICO’s Jake Sherman and Anna Palmer report Republicans on the Hill fret that DONALD TRUMP could undo years of hard won gains in the House and Senate. “With the Iowa caucuses just 55 days away, Republicans are beginning to see Trump as a dire threat to their majorities on Capitol Hill. And they’re warning that the GOP poll leader, who this week called for a ban on Muslims entering the country, will cause irreparable harm to the party. From vulnerable senators to top party officials, the fear is palpable and bursting into public view.” http://politi.co/1NGC3rk

GLOBAL LEADER: The New York Times looks at global reaction to DONALD TRUMP’s call to stop Muslims from entering the United States, which included, “a mix of befuddlement and despair. How is it, many wondered, that the same nation that twice put the black son of a Kenyan in the White House could now be flirting with Mr. Trump and his divisive, exclusionary stances?” http://nyti.ms/1lPEaOw

BIBI MEETING: POLITICO’s Nick Gass reports DONALD TRUMP will meet with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu during a visit to Israel later this month. http://politi.co/1U3fs9m

‘WILL. NEVER. LEAVE.’: In an interview from earlier this month with The Washington Post, DONALD TRUMP pledges not to get out of the presidential race, no matter the circumstances. “Are you ready? [He waves one arm over his head, as if to clear away everything and remove all doubt.] I. Will. Never. Leave. This. Race.” http://wapo.st/1READiO

CONSERVATIVE TREPIDATION: Washington Post looks at conservatives who have generally praised DONALD TRUMP — but seem to be dancing around him now that he has proposed a ban on all Muslims entering the United States. “They've call him 'the leader' on immigration. They've said he adds 'immeasurably' to GOP debates. They've drawn parallels between Trump and their own campaigns. But after DONALD TRUMP suggested temporarily banning Muslims from entering the United States, some of Washington's most conservative lawmakers who had previously expressed support for the GOP front-runner are saying something else: Absolutely nothing.” http://wapo.st/1XWPiL6

** A message from Qualcomm: The car of the future will be full of exciting and useful technology. Enhanced safety, in-car wireless charging, 3D navigation, and improved infotainment options are just some of the ways Qualcomm is already making the fully connected car a reality. Why Wait™. http://bit.ly/1Gw9FCU **

TED’S TRIP

BUILDING A FLOCK: POLITICO’s Katie Glueck reports TED CRUZ is mimicking his Iowa blueprint in the also-oh-so-critical early state of South Carolina. “He’s locking down pastors in every county, has held a rally to celebrate religious liberty and is methodically courting Christian grass-roots leaders … and conservative leaders in the state say that it’s starting to work.” http://politi.co/1OTFzO0

TIM’S TAKE: “TED CRUZ has done perhaps the best job in the state, frankly,” unaligned South Carolina Sen. Tim Scott said of the Texas senator’s organization, going on to add, “It’s not going to help my friends who are serving with me, but the truth is the truth. He’s done a really good job laying the foundation for a really long time.”

REAGAN-ESQUE?: POLITICO’s Eliza Collins reports: “Richard A. Viguerie is endorsing Ted Cruz for president and asks other conservatives why they haven’t yet. ‘To conservatives who continue to window shop I say, 'What are you waiting for? In TED CRUZ conservatives have a candidate that’s everything we want,’ the Conservative Headquarters chairman said ... the Texas senator is the ‘best presidential candidate since Ronald Reagan.’” http://politi.co/1U4oPFP

BLURRED LINES: The Wall Street Journal: “A Wednesday fundraising luncheon for Republican presidential hopeful TED CRUZ’s campaign will have an unusual co-host: the head of a super PAC backing the Texas senator … Kellyanne Conway, a Republican strategist who is heading Keep the Promise I — one of four super PACs backing Mr. Cruz. Ms. Conway’s husband is also a co-host.” http://on.wsj.com/1PZn8L2

RUBIO’S RACE

IOWA DIVIDE: National Review: Looks at MARCO RUBIO’s early state problems. “In a place where retail politicking remains paramount, conservative and evangelical leaders are complaining that the Florida senator hasn’t given them enough attention since launching his White House campaign. While he has begun to attend their events and engage with their constituents, they say his team has not followed up to deepen relationships or organize additional meetings with them. Establishment Republicans, meanwhile, have the same concerns about Rubio’s organization, but worry that Rubio is flirting too aggressively with Iowa’s social conservatives.” http://bit.ly/1QfyfPV

OOF: “It doesn’t seem like he really wants to win Iowa,” says Craig Robinson, the state party’s former executive director, who is now editor of The Iowa Republican. “Of all the campaigns, he’s probably done the least of getting around the state.”

COMMONWEALTH ELIGIBLE: Washington Post: “With the filing deadline looming, Sen. MARCO RUBIO of Florida on Wednesday will become the last major GOP presidential contender to submit signatures to qualify for the Virginia ballot. Rubio will submit more than 9,300 signatures — far more than the 5,000 necessary and all of them collected by volunteer signature gatherers, according to his campaign.” http://wapo.st/1XWzHLv

SURVEYING THE 2016 LANDSCAPE

FEDERALIZED: Washington Times: JEB BUSH “on Wednesday rolled out his plan to shift more power from Washington back to the states … 'The federal government is amassing power at the states’ expense, despite the fact that state leaders are closer to the schools our children attend, the hospitals that care for our sick and the water we drink. HILLARY CLINTON is offering more of the same,' the former Florida governor said in an op-ed article published on the Fox News website. 'As a former governor, I know that many problems, even some that are of national scope, do not call for federal solutions.'" http://bit.ly/1OTry2V

RIGHT CALL: Bloomberg: In an interview, JOE BIDEN says of his decision to take a pass on the 2016 race, “My decision, I know, was the right decision.” He said he “believed I could win, but that’s not enough.” http://politi.co/1NiP3zL

PAGING POLITIFACT: In People’s new 2016 focused spread, MIKE HUCKABEE offers this when asked his secret talent: “I'm a gifted rap artist … and I make amazing chili with deer that I kill.” Another take away: Most of the presidential candidates eat some form of egg for breakfast; CHRIS CHRISTIE tends to skip it. http://bit.ly/1NVGXTh

CARSON CARE: Time: BEN CARSON “released a brief health care plan Wednesday, which promises to allow people to return to their pre-Affordable Care Act plans, constrains Medicare, and moves Medicaid from the federal government to the states. The plan hinges on repealing Obamacare and creating individual health care accounts for each citizen at birth. The value of those accounts could accumulate over time and be transferred to others as if they were checking accounts.” http://ti.me/1OTRgnX

RUSSIA BRAG: BuzzFeed: JOHN KASICH said he would have no problem shooting down a Russian jet if it violated a no-fly zone in Syria. “I’d create a no-fly zone, is what I would do, and I would provide sanctuaries and have people that want to be there be protected. I think in that case you should probably get the Kurds to protect them,” said Kasich on FM NewsTalk 97.1. “That’s what I would do.” http://bzfd.it/1ORdNDJ

NEXT NEWS CYCLE

HILLARY CLINTON raises money in New York.

BERNIE SANDERS is in Washington.

MARCO RUBIO campaigns in Iowa.

DONALD TRUMP has a rally in New Hampshire.

JOHN KASICH and CARLY FIORINA hit New Hampshire, too.

THE DAILY NUMBER

63. That’s the percentage of Hispanic voters who say they’re still open to voting for a Republican candidate — hope for the GOP and perhaps a warning sign for HILLARY CLINTON. http://politi.co/1ORe3Cy

FOLLOW @POLITICO’S politics team: @PoliticoCharlie, @POLITICO_Steve, @PoliticoAlex, @anniekarini, @GlennThrush, @EliStokols, @katieglueck, @shreckreports, @gdebenedetti, @Hadas_Gold, @ec_schneider, @kyledcheney , @theodoricmeyer, @MarcACaputo, @PoliticoKevin,@mikeallen, @dlippman, @Danielstrauss4, @henrycjjackson , @shanegoldmacher,@KristinPolitico, @PoliticoScott

** A message from Qualcomm: When will the future arrive? While the rest of the world wonders when, Qualcomm is at work developing cutting-edge wireless technologies today. We are the inventors, the restless innovators continually pushing forward. When Qualcomm connected the phone to the Internet, the phone became smart. When we connect billions more things, our lives will be even smarter. Why Wait™. http://bit.ly/1Gw9FCU **