It’s been weeks since the U.S. Supreme Court handed down its decision in the contraception-mandate case Burwell v. Hobby Lobby, but the pace of urgent fundraising appeals has barely slackened. Several times a day, another pops up in my email inbox. Some are from politicians; some are from advocacy groups; some are from various organs of the Democratic Party.

So far, the number of emails accurately describing the decision is, as my physics professors used to say, arbitrarily close to zero. But there’s one underlying fact they all get right: the justices ruled in favor of a “for-profit” employer. This little hyphenated term appears in email after email, suggesting that it’s the for-profitness that creates the perniciousness.

Now, don’t worry. I’m not going to use this column to add to the flood of arguments about whether Hobby Lobby was rightly or wrongly decided. What interests me is why exactly fundraisers believe that including the term “for-profit” will raise the ire of their contributors.

The only reasonable interpretation is that the fundraisers believe — or believe that their targets believe — that there is something wrong with profit, that the proprietors of a for-profit firm are less admirable than those who run companies pursuing other goals. True, the various religious universities whose lawsuit challenging Obamacare’s contraception mandate will be before the Supreme Court next year certainly have their critics, but they somehow don’t manage to excite the same degree of disdain as a profit-making firm. And although the National Organization for Women gamely included the Little Sisters of the Poor in its list of the “Dirty 100” seeking exemptions from the mandate, all it garnered was well-earned ridicule.

That’s why the fundraisers have been so careful to remind their targets that Hobby Lobby is a for-profit company. They are hinting that profit is different from other motivations. Less noble. Maybe even wicked.

A small story: A few years back I was at a reception for the opening of a new play. The TV in the corner was tuned to one of the news channels, and the anchor was saying that one of the oil companies had just announced record profits. The response among the attendees was . . . anger. Somebody said that such profits shouldn’t be allowed. Another voice chimed in to suggest that the company should be punished. Yet another summed up the reaction: “They should be in jail.”

I didn’t do any political polling, but I’m willing to bet that the people at the reception represent the target audience for those fundraising emails — people the mere suggestion of profit sends into a frenzy.

I really don’t get the profit-is-evil meme. It’s true that Aristotle famously argued that selling goods and services for profit was unnatural. But I’d like to think we’ve reached a point in our ethical evolution when we can all agree that he was wrong. Profit is a signal to financial markets that helps businesses raise capital. Higher profits mean higher tax revenues. Stocks rise, raising the value of individual retirement accounts. Absent monopoly, or other forms of illegal activity, profit would seem to be an unalloyed social good. Not by any means the only or chief social good — but certainly an important one.

Yet the intrepid anti-Hobby Lobby fundraisers are on to something. The anti-profit instinct not only continues to exist, but actually can guide policy.