As debate intensifies over the prices for prescription medicines, a new study suggests that 10 so-called breakthrough drugs – including some that have not yet been approved by the FDA – will cost the U.S. government nearly $50 billion over the next decade.

Specifically, Medicare would absorb the largest expense at $31.3 billion, followed by an estimated $15.8 billion in Medicaid spending and another $2.1 billion in spending as a result of subsidies provided through health exchange plans created under the Affordable Care Act.

The study focused on breakthrough drugs, because these are designated by the FDA for faster development and regulatory review to treat serious or life-threatening conditions. Among the drugs that were analyzed are treatments for hepatitis C, leukemia, breast and lung cancer, and cystic fibrosis.

Moreover, many of these medicines are expected to command high prices and, therefore, are also expected to generate the highest potential revenue between now and 2024, according to Avalere Health, a consulting firm that conducted the study for America’s Health Insurance plans, a trade group.

“There is a tremendous amount of innovation in the pipeline,” says Elizabeth Carpenter, a director at Avalere. But “government programs need insight into what is coming so they can successfully balance budgets with patient access.”

The report represents the latest effort by payers to push back against the pharmaceutical industry over the cost of medicines. Over the past year, in particular, insurers and pharmacy benefit managers have sought to draw more attention to price tags as a way of placing pressure on drug makers.

Prices for various medicines – notably, new specialty treatments for hepatitis C and some forms of cancer – have generated substantial controversy as payers, both public and private, complain the drugs are budget busters. Avalere points to IMS Health data showing specialty medicines accounted for 78% of the $20.2 billion increase in new spending on brand-named drugs in 2014.

The report was chastised by Robert Zirkelbach of the Pharmaceutical Research & Manufacturers of America, the trade group. “They are cherry picking a handful of examples to push a false narrative about the cost of medicines,” he says.

“And they’re not looking at the potential costs savings that can be achieved by preventing other health care services, such as hospitalizations and surgery. Nor does it to take into account the offset of existing medicines going off patent, which frees up resources to pay for the breakthroughs.”

A study published last fall in Health Affairs found that specialty meds conferred greater value based on a metric called quality-adjusted life year, or QALY, which considers both the quantity and quality of life generated by healthcare interventions.

Among the drugs that Avalere cites in its report are three that are currently available: Viekera Pak, a hepatitis C treatment sold by AbbVie; Ibrance, a Pfizer breast cancer medicine, and Eylea, a treatment for diabetic retinopathy in patients with diabetic macular edema that is marketed by Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. All three became available for these indications over the past few months.

The other seven drugs in the Avalere study include a cystic fibrosis treatment that combines Kalydeco and another compound from Vertex Pharmaceuticals; a Merck drug called Keytruda, which is already approved to fight melanoma, but is awaiting approval for combating lung cancer; hepatitis C drugs from Merck and Bristol-Myers Squibb; as well as drugs for breast cancer and acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Avalere estimated that the combination of Medicare, Medicaid and ACA exchanges will be responsible for a “significant portion” of people projected to use the drugs, ranging from nearly 47% for Kalydeco to 77% for Keytruda.

We should note that the analysis does not include the impact on other government programs or evaluate the potential impact on commercial payers or patient out-of-pocket costs. Avalere adds that off-label use is also not considered.