The scientists revealed that just a single dose of anti-depressant is sufficient to make spectacular alterations in the functional structural design of the human brain.

Researchers stated that, we have taken brain scans of people before and after taking the dose of a usually approved anti-depressant SSRI (serotonin reuptake inhibitor), which demonstrated drastic changes in connectivity in 3-hours.

Julia Sacher of the Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences in Germany stated that, “Though, we are not actually expecting such an immediate effect of SSRI in this much shorter time period or for the ensuing gesture to cover the entire brain.”

Although SSRIs anti-depressants are the most widely studied and prescribed medicine globally, however it’s still not clear yet how it works.

Certainly, there are drugs available in the market today that are believed to change the brain connectivity in a significant way, although those results had normally been achieved in several weeks, not in hours.

There are some other findings that showed the action is immediate.

Sacher stated that, there are people whom we call medication-free individuals, who actually never had the anti-depressants in their lifetime, might be an early sign of brain reformation.

The participants of the study wandered their minds for about 15mins in a brain scanner which measures the oxygenation of blood flow in the human brain.

During the study, scientists have characterized 3-dimenasional images of every human brain by measuring the number of connections among small blocks known as voxels which seems similar to the pixels in an image and observed the variation in those connections with a single dose of Lexapro (escitalopram).

Then results have shown that, one dose of SSRI helps to reduce the intensity of built-in connectivity in most sections of the brain. Although, Sacher along with his colleagues found that, there is an increase in connectivity in the 2-regions of the brain, particularly cerebellum and thalamus.

Furthermore, the researchers claimed that, the new findings symbolize a vital first-step to clinical studies in patients affecting from depression.

This study is published in the Cell Press journal Current Biology.