She is nearly as well known as her iconic husband, WCBD-TV Chief meteorologist Rob Fowler, but Cara is usually standing in his shadow. However, the spotlight turned toward Cara as she publicly talked about finding a malignant tumor in her breast.Six months after the discovery and diagnosis Cara said she is doing well. “I’m doing great…i really cant complain” Cara said

Approximately 6 weeks after chemotherapy Cara says she has many reasons to smile. “I have some bad days and good days but i really have nothing to complain about. I have been really blessed so i really have no reason to complain.” Cara said. It ts not in her genes to complain. Cara is a hard-working Midwesterner by birth turned southerner through her nearly 30 year marriage to Rob. It’s overwhelming but the local community and the outpouring its overwhelming.” Cara said

She found the small lump in her breast in April of 2015.It was the same day she was scheduled to undergo a mammogram, “There was no history of cancer of any kind in my family. I have no a large family and no one has cancer.”Cancer is never convenient. And when Cara discovered her breast cancer, she was in the middle of life. “Our son was graduating from pharmacy school a week later he was getting married.” Cara said.

But after 3 months of chemotherapy,she finished her treatment. Her family and friends surprised her with a celebration at the “Fowler’s special spot” Chic-fil-a.

“It was like 50 people there, there were balloons and the cow. Everybody was there to celebrate my last chemo it was more overwhelming the more I saw the different people in my life even my surgeon was there. I get emotional talking about it.”

Cara also describes a flood of emotions about losing her hair. “You look in the mirror and you are looking at someone you don’t know”, Cara said. Family and friends remind her of her beauty–but for the woman who lost her hair to cancer, what is on her head is still a daily battle. “I wear a scarf, I wear a wig, I wear a baseball caps. Baseball caps are my ‘go to’ ” Cara said.

Radiation and reconstruction are still in the future for Cara. She says she is read because she has a powerful team of supporters: family, friends and physicians. “We appreciate all the prayers because it’s the power of prayers that is helping me.”

Almost everyone has been touched by breast cancer in some way, so Cara is participating in the “Making Strides Against Breast Cancer” event.

Join Cara and WCBD on Saturday, October 31st at 9:30 am at North Charleston Riverfront Park.