As ISIS continues its savagery throughout Iraq, the government of Iraq (GoI) has recently transitioned its leadership with Prime Minister al-Abadi replacing al-Maliki. Many hope that al-Abadi will create an inclusive national government that bridges Iraq’s diverse sects. New leadership offers Iraq a chance at democracy, and also provides the GoI the opportunity to make amends with the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) by addressing the serious grievances the KRG has endured under the predecessor government.



The KRG has suffered grievances at the hands of the GoI since Saddam Hussein’s regime, predominantly during Saddam’s genocide campaign, when over 200,000 Kurdish civilians were slaughtered. One would have hoped, post-Saddam, for complete redress of wrongs to the Kurdish people. Instead, Iraqi leadership persists in ignoring Iraq’s 2005 Constitution and advancing its non-inclusive political agenda.





ADVERTISEMENT

The GoI’s disregard for the lawful rights of the Kurds has resulted in an outbreak of violence within the disputed areas of Iraq. To date, the GoI has made no effort to honor Article 140 of the Iraqi Constitution, which mandated that the political status of Kirkuk and other disputed areas be resolved by December 2007. This has spawned violence between Kurds and Arabs in the disputed areas, leaving Kirkuk as one of Iraq’s more unstable governorates. Regrettably, Article 140 is not the only constitutional mandate the GoI has ignored.The GoI’s refusal to honor its Constitution has also thrown the Kurdistan Region into economic crisis. The Iraqi Constitution entitles the KRG to 17 percent of Iraq’s annual oil revenue. For the past year, Iraq has illegally withheld these payments (about $1 billion monthly). Even before this budget cut, Iraq disbursed less than the 17 percent due, depriving the KRG of over $30 billion and forcing them to become heavily indebted.The GoI persists in other ways to block the KRG’s efforts to make ends meet by accessing strategic sources of revenue from a KRG pipeline – principally, by threatening all potential buyers of Kurdish oil with sanctions, and by suing the KRG in the United States for selling Kurdish oil. The GoI’s efforts to financially strangle the KRG are deliberate, and they have had their intended effect. Unconstitutionally withholding the KRG’s share of the national budget has not only deepened the KRG’s debt and grievously affected the public sector, it also has devastated the KRG’s attempts to provide aid to the rapidly deteriorating refugee crisis in the Kurdistan Region.Currently, the Kurdistan Region is a safe haven for over 1.3 million refugees, including a million Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) who have fled to the Kurdistan Region from elsewhere in Iraq, following the ISIS violence. While the KRG hosts 97 percent of Iraq’s refugees and IDPs, the GoI refuses to honor its constitutional duty of fair distribution of revenues. The KRG has still managed to provide millions of dollars in assistance and support to the ongoing refugee crisis, but with no financial help from Iraq, the KRG now faces a breaking-point.By withholding the KRG’s financial dues and failing to help cover any part of the KRG’s burden to house and protect the refugee/IDP population, the GoI at some point begins to resemble the British Empire, when it imposed crippling taxes against the American colonies, ultimately giving rise to the U.S. Declaration of Independence. It was the unaddressed grievances of the colonists that led our nation to independence, free from tyranny and injustice, to prosper and protect our natural rights as citizens.As a first generation American, I take pride in our nation’s history and am proud of her accomplishments. As a Kurd, I hope the same path lies ahead for the Kurdish people. I remain optimistic that America’s founding ideology can be a guide for Kurdistan as she seeks peace, prosperity, and, if warranted, even independence. Like the British Empire, the GoI demands that KRG remains intact with Iraq. But, if the newly-formed government under the leadership of al-Abadi also fails the Kurds, I just wonder if the Kurdish people will finally be fully justified in making a clean break with what increasingly appears to be tyrannical disregard for their best interest and rights.Ghaderi is a Kurdish-American JD/MA candidate at American University.