For locals, the annual Holly Fair is one sign the holiday season has officially arrived.

More than 7,000 people visited the Boardwalk Beach Resort this weekend for the event.

And for more than 80 vendors and local business owners, the annual Junior League of Panama City event is a chance to show off their hand-made work.

The ladies of Coco's Creations and Two Friends Closet don't have storefronts. They don't even have online shops.

"Our amazing customers have just grown it for us. Word of mouth, and return customers are our favorites," Co-Founder of Two Friends Closet Krista Chapman said.

They say they rely on the Panama City Beach community of both locals and tourists.

"It's super important to support local businesses, because they are the people who make our community," Chapman said. "If they can't do what they love and make a living off of doing what they love, then what's the point of having that community?"

"Even though we're a tourist area we still have that home town feeling, I think. Most of the tourists that visit us, they come back every year, so we make new friends," Coco Howell, of Coco's Creations, said.

Both businesses paid a fee to set up shop, but they'll keep 100 percent of their sales.

The Junior League will donate money they raised to clothing kids in the Bay District school system.

"It all stays right here in Bay County, and we couldn't do it without the people coming to support us and come to support the merchants," Holly Fair Chair Anna-Lee Atkinson said.

For both women, events like the Holly Fair are opportunities to do what they love.

"We just do this for fun. It's just a bonus and it brings it income. This is literally just something that we like doing," Chapman said.

"What woman doesn't love chocolate?" Howell said.

The Holly Fair has raised more than $3 million for the Junior League's charities in the past 26 years.

You can connect with Krista and Two Friends Closet on Facebook at https://www.facebook.com/pages/Twofriendscloset/139881802824836?sk=info.