Buy Photo Incoming IU Health CEO Dennis Murphy joined IU Health in 2013 as chief operating officer. (Photo: Matt Kryger/IndyStar)Buy Photo

Dennis Murphy might be losing some sleep this month. But if he is, he says, it's not because he is one week away from becoming the top executive at Indiana's largest health system.

It's just who he is.

"I think I'm a worrier by nature, so I'm not sure I sleep a lot to begin with," said Murphy, 52, who is set to succeed Daniel Evans as CEO of Indiana University Health on May 1. "If you don't have some level of anxiety about, 'Am I doing a good job?' and 'Am I being clear to people about the goals?' and 'Are we delivering on the mission that we set out for ourselves?' I'm not sure you're a good leader."

There are plenty of reasons for Murphy to be anxious. He is taking the top job at a health system that has been seeking to cut $1 billion in operating expenses, leading to layoffs, uncertainty and at times poor morale among staff. Those changes come as the Affordable Care Act, including Indiana's Medicaid expansion, is shaking up how hospitals get paid for their services. And IU Health is planning to consolidate its Downtown adult hospitals, causing concerns about jobs and how operations could change.

Murphy's challenges are a big departure from those faced by Evans, 67, who over 13 years turned Clarian Health Partners' three hospitals into a sprawling health system with 15 hospitals, nearly $6 billion in revenue and a strong affiliation with IU.

People who know Murphy, including Evans, say he is prepared for the challenges.

Evans chose Murphy as a possible successor in 2013. Evans drove up to Chicago during a blizzard to meet Murphy at a Capital Grille just steps away from Northwestern Memorial HealthCare, where Murphy was the chief operating officer. A recruiter who was supposed to join them missed the meeting because of the snow. But Evans and Murphy talked for three hours, Murphy said, finding common ground on their values and priorities in health care.

"That was what made me say I'm willing to come down to Indianapolis and talk to more people," Murphy said. "Dan was very compelling."

Daniel Evans, IU Health’s chief executive officer and president, will retire in May 2016. He has led the health-care system through unprecedented growth for the past 13 years. (Photo: Provided by IU Health.)

Evans made it clear to Murphy that his time as IU Health CEO was nearing an end.

"It was our agreement I would be a candidate (to succeed Evans), but this wasn't a slam dunk when I was hired," Murphy said. "It would be a job that I would have to earn."

Anne Nobles, chair of the IU Health board, said she quickly saw that Murphy would be the right choice when Evans decided to move on.

"I think that as soon as Dennis came in, his leadership on the operational side became apparent — and his ability to work with the very large leadership team that Dan had built," Nobles said.

Murphy's succession signals a maturation for IU Health, which became the health system's brand just five years ago. Murphy's health-care background — which also includes stints at University of Chicago Hospitals and Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore — is a contrast to Evans, who built IU Health through mergers and acquisitions after having been a partner at the law firm Baker & Daniels.

Murphy, who said he's "kind of a geek" about health system operations, will lead IU Health into a new era of organic growth through existing programs.

"I don't think you have an environment where it's black and white, where we had growth before and no growth now," Nobles said. "But I think what we have is a desire at this point to consolidate and create that system and alignment across the state."

There already have been changes at IU Health during Murphy's tenure, some of which have caused unrest among the health system's physicians and nurses. The health system has been seeking to cut operating expenses since 2013, with executives citing operational inefficiencies. It now has nearly 30,000 employees, down from about 36,000 in 2013.

Partly as a result, there was an effort last year to unionize Downtown nurses amid complaints over low staffing levels and low pay, but it never went up for a vote. Although it's unclear whether IU Health's nurses are more satisfied than they were a year ago, Murphy said the health system has tried to improve its engagement with the nurses, in part by hiring Michelle Janney as chief nurse executive and spending more time listening to their concerns.

"These things don't get that way in a day and they don't change in a day, but I think we're on a different trajectory than we were 10 months ago, 12 months ago," Murphy said.

IU Health earlier this month faced criticism from Dr. Joseph Tector, its former chief of transplant surgery, who blasted the health system as he left for a job at the University of Alabama at Birmingham. Tector claimed in a written statement that IU Health — and Murphy in particular — "made aggressive moves to hinder" his research into xenotransplantation, the process of transplanting organs or tissues from animals to humans.

"There is little interest in innovation and IU Health now looks for physicians who are willing to function as robots responsible for generating revenue for the institution and not as caregivers," Tector's statement said.

Tector declined an interview request through his spokesman, Bill Broydrick.

Murphy called Tector's criticism "the sentiment of one individual who has chosen to leave the organization." And he declined to discuss how Tector's complaints were handled internally before Tector left IU Health. "It's probably not productive at this point," he said.

Larry Cripe, president of the IU Health medical staff, said he thinks Tector's frustrations pertain to broader challenges facing health systems.

"I have the world of respect for (Tector) and I would say I disagree with him," Cripe said. "I think it's more difficult to focus on innovation in academic medicine than it used to be. We're challenged. Funding levels are lower. The competitiveness of grants is higher. I just think it's a more difficult world."

Cripe described Murphy as a straight-shooter who will "calm a lot of waters by his methodical approach."

"I think Dennis Murphy is probably the right person at this point in time," Cripe said. "Sometimes, the person who articulates the first idea can't get us as far as we need to go."

Murphy said IU Health will continue to work on employee engagement, but that he doesn't think the health system has any unusual cultural problems.

"Probably like most big health systems, there are micro environments that are either healthy or not healthy and you have to try to manage all of those so they get to a really good place," Murphy said. "You have to find out where those places are that are underperforming in terms of employee engagement and physician engagement and actually work to understand the issues and improve it."

Buy Photo Incoming IU Health CEO Dennis Murphy will lead development of a $1 billion medical center in Downtown Indianapolis. (Photo: Matt Kryger/IndyStar)

A big piece of Murphy's vision for IU Health will become apparent in the coming months as he plans a $1 billion Downtown medical center that will consolidate Methodist and University hospitals within the next five to seven years. Because a medical center is expected to operate for 75 years or more, Murphy must try to anticipate decades of changes in how health care is provided.

"It really is about our capacity to care for patients, and I think we're planning on seeing the ability to care for more patients (at the new medical center) — but they may not be in beds," Murphy said.

Murphy noted that when he started out in health care, a joint replacement would require a 14-day hospital stay. Now it can be an outpatient procedure.

"The way that health care is moving is more and more to alternative care settings, whether that's ambulatory surgery facilities, outpatient facilities, homes, telemedicine, those types of things," Murphy said. "I think the challenge for us is how we have a workforce that's adaptable to that. I don't think we'll have fewer employees over time, but I think we'll be asking them to do different things than they're doing today because health care has evolved tremendously."

Toby Gordon, a professor at the Johns Hopkins Carey Business School in Baltimore, met Murphy in 1988 when she was the administrator for surgical sciences at Johns Hopkins Hospital and Murphy was a management resident. She recalled many of his skills and qualities, but said there are two that especially should be mentioned when discussing Murphy.

"It's important to reference his humility and compassion," she said.

Murphy is a "natural leader," she added.

"He seemed so professional," Gordon said. "He just had that presence. He was very quietly confident, but not at all in an arrogant way. In a way, 'I'm just going to knuckle down and do the work.'"

Now, ambitious health-care leaders come to Murphy for mentoring and ask how they can carve out a similar career path. His message: Don't think so far ahead.

"I think what I always wanted to do was be good at (the) job I was asked to do," Murphy said. "I view this very much the same. I was completely content doing what I was doing and I was challenged on a daily basis in my COO role here. And I feel fortunate that people thought enough of my work that they tapped me on the shoulder and said, 'We think you can do more and take on some new challenges.'"

Call IndyStar reporter James Briggs at (317) 444-6307. Follow him on Twitter: @JamesEBriggs.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1WgZXNR